THE CHRISTIANS FREEDOM, Wherein is fully expressed the Doctrine of CHRISTIAN
LIBERTY.

By the Rt. Reverend Father in God, GEORGE DOWNEHAM, Doctor of Divinity and Ld.
Bp. of Derry.

THE SECOND EDITION, OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD for WILLIAM WE^^. An.
Dom. M.DC.XXXV.

TO THE GODLY AND CHRISTIAN READER GRACE MERCY AND PEACE.
Godliness and Christianity are the sure Grounds of Salvation, I have here in
this treatise following given thee the true Pattern of a godly life which I
desire thee to peruse daily, to practice faithfully, and hold on constantly,
and thou shall be sure to have blessings in this world and everlasting
happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven. When thou have attained to live well and
feel the comfort of godliness in thy heart, then be sure to set down thy
resolution never to fall into the snare of ungodliness any more.

Be sure not to faint in well-doing, 1 These. 6.
because the reward is not promised to him that does but to him that continues
to do* A three fold blessing of God, vp^n those which seek him he promises
(...) will awake unto them, and for those which pray unto him, He will make the
righteousness of their habitation prosperous. And to those which are pure and
upright, He will make their latter end increase exceedingly: Yea though their
beginning be but small.

But defer not, put not of thy amendment from time to time least thou art
sorry for thy misspent lewd life when thou shall not have time to repent.
Therefore know o man what soever thou art, that Godliness* will crown thee
with honor and glory and furnish thee with true godliness and perfect felicity
and exalt thee unto the Heavens and co-vnite thee and thy soul with God.

The many excellent (...). ^erkins. Rogers. Bolton.
treatises and larger discourses concer^ing, the power of Godliness, which it
has pleased the Lord of glory to furnish his Church withal in these last
days; as they have made good the faithfulness of our God unto us of this
Church of England, so if they shall not be a witness against us, they do
necessarily require the right use thereof, that we be transformed into the
same image from glory to glory. And therefore howsoever it may seem both
needless and pre^udiciall after so many grave, and experimental rules
concerning sanctification, to add any more in this kind: yet seeing it has
pleased God in direct me to a further labor herein, weigh with me I pray
thee in equity these reasons thereof.

1. I do hereby profess my thankfulness unto God for those excellent labors
of his Saints that now rest from their labors and their fruits foll^w them.

2. I wo^ld have thee know that I am not ashamed of this foolishness of
preaching and practicke Divinity, which is such a mystery to the world, and
stumbling block unto the wisdom thereof.

3. Howsoever I do profess that I am not able to attain such perfection, as
I have herein conceived, yet I would have thee know farther, that I would
rather have a rule to condemn sin in the flesh, and so c^nf^und the old man,
that thereby the new man may follow hard after the mark, then not to give
testimony to that light which has shined so graciously unto me, or to conceal
my judgment, though it may condemn the practice.

4. May it please thee to consider with me: Can a man walk in the Sun, and
not be warm, and where two lie together, will there not be heat? and can
the light be ^idden, nay, ought it to be ^idden?

5. Can we do less in these days then convince a profane world?

6. Can we do better then strengthen that which is ready to die?

7. Shall not Gods remembrancers renew their strength, when the Devils
Instruments (...) so rage with all licentiousness?

8. Do we not justify the Good by seeking out their ways?

9. Should we not discourage the wicked by making a good profession?

10. Owe we not duty to our Mother?

11. Shall not this redound to the Glory of God. Let this content thee: and
provoke thee to make use of these labors, and the Lord give thee understanding
in all things: that thou may try the Spirits, and hereby thine own,
whether thou art in the faith or no, and so for ever may follow the true
Shepherd. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to preserve
you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy I heartily
commend you desiring that this weak labor may be carefully read, and
diligently practiced, that so your souls may be eternally saved in that great
and dreadful day of his visitation.

THE DOCTRINE OF CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.
JOHN 8. 36. If therefore the Son shall make you free, you shall be free
indeed.
THESE words are a conclusion of the verses going before.. Sect. 1. The context.
For whereas our Savior CHRIST having promised some of the hearers, who, Verse.
3^.
whiles he was yet speaking of his person and office, began to believe in him,
that if they did approve themselves to be his Verse. 31.
true disciples, by their perseverance and constant abiding in his word, they
Verse. 32.
should know the truth, (that is he would more fully manifest himself unto
them, as he speaks Ioh. 14. 21.) and this truth, (which is himself, Ioh* 14.
6. ^^hn 14. 6. 21.
should make them free; the captious Jews (pretending that they understood him
as speaking of a corporal or civil liberty) Verse. 33.
cauilled at this promise, which indeed did not belong unto them, as if he had
offered them great indignity, by promising them liberty, to presuppose their
servitude; alleging that they were already free, and therefore scorned his
promised liberty, which they needed not, being neither servants by nature or
birth, for they were Abraham's seed, nor yet by their fortune or personal
condition, for they never served any. Our Savior therefore, both to refute
their cavil, and also to justify his promise, proves these four things unto
them: 1. That they were servants. 2. That they had great need to be made free.
3. That this freedom must come by him. 4. That being freed by him, they should
be free indeed.

The first he proves thus: Verse. 34.
whosoever commits sin, that is, in whomsoever sin reigns, he is the
servant of sin; but such he insinuates they were, yea such are all men Tit.
3. 3.
by nature, until they be ingrafted into Christ by faith, and renewed by the
holy Ghost; and therefore he would have them to conclude, that for all their
bragges, they were the miserable servants of sin, and consequently the
slaves of Satan 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
, subject to the curse of the law, and to eternal damnation.

2. That they had great need to be made free, he shows both by the
inconvenience of their servitude; for being Verse. 35.
servants, and not sons, howsoever now they had a place in the house of God, as
Ismael Genesis 21. 10.
had, yet the time should come, that they should be cast out;) and also by the
benefit which should accompany their freedom, that being made the sons of
God, they should as heirs of eternal life, abide, not only to the end of
their days in the Church militant Tim. 3. 15.
(which is the house of God upon earth) but also for ever in the Church
triumphant, which is Gods Job. 14. 1.
house in heaven.

3. That the faithful attain to this freedom by adoption in Christ. For, to
so Job. 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26.
m any as receive him by faith, he has given this liberty or power to be the
sons of God. And, Romans 8. 17. Gal. 47.
if sons, then also heirs. This a^^ertion is presupposed in this place, as
being the hypothesis whereupon this inference is grounded. Those that be the
sons of God, abide in the house of God for ever; therefore if the Son shall
make you free, etc. presupposing that men attain to the freedom of Gods
sons, by the benefit of Christ, the only begotten Son of God.

Whereupon, as I said, is inferred the fourth thing, which is my text; If the
Son therefore shall make you free, you shall be free indeed.

As if he had said: you have no cause to cauil at the promise of liberty,
which I make to all them which truly believe in me. For I tell you upon my
word, which is Amen (that is, true and infallible) that both you, and all men
by nature, though the seed of Abraham (as you are), though living (as you do)
in the visible Church of God, are the very servants of sin; that being
servants and not sons, they must not look to inherit Galath. 4. 28
with the sons of the promise, or to abide in the house for ever; but when the
time of separation comes, they shall as Matthew. 3. 12. 13. 30. 25. 33
chafe be severed from the wheat; as tares, from the corn; as goats, from
the sheep; as Genesis 21. 10. Galath. 4. 30.
Hagar and Ismael, from Isaak the son of the promise. Therefore, though your
pride will not suffer you to see and acknowledge thus much: yet certainly great
need have you to be made free; that of the servants of sin, you may become
the sons of God. But you, who are (as all Ephesians. 2. 3.
men by nature are) the children of wrath, cannot possibly be the sons of
God, except you believe in me, who am the only begotten Son of God; that I may
by the grace of adoption communicate that unto you, which I my self am by
nature and eternal generation. So shall you, of the servants of sin, sons of
Satan, and heirs of Hell and damnation, be made the sons of God, heirs of
eternal life, citizens and free denizens of the kingdom of heaven. Whereas
now therefore you are miserable servants, notwithstanding your corporal and
carnal liberty, whereof you vaunt, which is not a true liberty, but a
voluntary service of sin: if you shall believe in me, and approve your selves
to be my true disciples, by abiding in my words; I, who am the truth, will make
you free, not with a counterfeit or imaginary freedom, such as is your
liberty, but with a true and spiritual freedom, which is the gracious, and
the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

Thus have you heard the context, or coherence of these words with the former,
(whereunto we are referred by this word of inference, therefore) wherein
diverse things might profitablie be observed, but that the text calls me unto
it, as containing matter of greatest importance.

For Christian liberty,. Sect. 2. The text. The argument whereof is Christian
liberty.
which is the argument of my text, is, as the Apostle ^aith, Romans 14. 16.
(...) the very good of Christians; which Christ our Savior, taking upon him
the form of a servant, has purchased with his own most precious 1. Pe^. 1.
18.
blood; which is the benefit of the Messiah, whereunto we are called Gal. 5.
13.
, Galath. 5. 13. which he has promised as a reward to his true disciples
John. 8. 32.
, verse. 32. which as himself came to preach Luke. 4. 18.
, Luke 4. 18. so does he send us his Ambassadors to the same end, viz. to
preach the Gospel, which is the James. 1. 25. 2. 12.
law of liberty, and the doctrine of redemption and freedom by him: that by
our Ministry Act. 26. 18.
men may be brought out of spiritual bondage, unto the liberty of Gods
children. The consideration whereof, as it binds me with all reverent care
and intention of mind, to entreat of this argument; so ought it to move you to
hear the same with great diligence and attention. And the rather, not only
because among us, who profess the Gospel, many do not know the Christian
liberty, and more do abuse it to their own perdition; but also because the
Papists are both enemies of the liberty it self, endeavoring by their
Antichristian doctrine, to bereave us of the chief parts thereof, and also
malicious standeres of the most Christian and comfortable doctrine of our
Churches concerning the same.

But to come to the words of my text, The explication of the text.
the sum and effect whereof is this: that Christ the Son of God, is the
author of true liberty, to all those that truly believe in him. For the
explication whereof, we are first to speak of this liberty in general, and
afterward to descend unto the particulars. The general doctrine of Christian
li^ertie.
In the general doctrine we are to consider these four things. 1. What it
is, and wherein generally it does consist. 2. Who is the author of this
liberty, which in the text is expressed to be the only begotten Son of
God. 3. The subject or the parties on whom this liberty is conferred, which is
plainly gathered out of the context or in^erence of these words upon the
former, to be all the sons of God by adoption. 4. The general property of
this liberty, that it is not a counterfeit or imagina^y, but a true liberty. Of
all which points, I will speak very briefly.

As touching the first: for as much as Logicians teach,. Sect. 3. The
definition of Christian liberty.
Arist. Poster. 1. 14.
that the definition of the special, is to be ^etched from the distribution
of the general; for which cause, the Plato in Sophista.
divine Philosopher calls a distribution (...), as being the ready, and as it
were the Kings way to a definition: we will therefore take a survey of the
diverse sorts of liberty. For there is an outward or external liberty, and
there is an inward or internal libe^ty. The former, is the liberty of the
outward man from external or bodily servitude; which may be called the
corporal or civil liberty. Of this our Savior speaks not, though the Jews
would seem so to understand him; but of the internal, which may well stand
with the outward or civil bondage. For as our Savior Christ noted them, John.
^. 33. 34.
though outwardly free, to be in spiritual bondage: so contrariwise, those
who in respect of the inner man are free, may notwithstanding be subject to
the external or civil servitude; which nothing impeacheth or impaireth the
liberty of the soul and conscience before God. In which regard the Apostle
says; 1. Cor. 7. 21.
He that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lords freeman. So that
the liberty whereof we speak, is a liberty of the soul, or inner man. Wicked
therefore is the doctrine of the Anabaptists, who thereby exempt themselves from
all subjection to the civil Magistrate, under pretense of Christian liberty. I
call their doctrine wicked, because the Apostle Peter 1. Pet. 2. 16.
says; that they who under pretense of Christian liberty deny obedience to the
Magistrate in lawful things, do use their liberty for a cloak to cover their
wickedness.

Again, the inward liberty is either a carnal, or spiritual liberty. The
carnal liberty is that, whereby the soul of man is free from righteousness:
which indeed is a voluntary service of sin. For when men be free from
righteousness, they are servants of sin, and contrariwise; as the Apostle
Romans 6. 20.
shows. But our Savior speaks of a liberty, which, as it freeth men from
the servitude of sin, and all the spiritual yokes of bondage, which
accompany the same; so it makes them the servants of righteousness. For when
we are Romans 6. 18.
made free from sin, we are made the servants of righteousness. Wherefore, as
in respect of the former, we say with the Apostle; He that is called, being a
servant, is the freeman of Christ: so in respect of this latter, 1. Cor. 7. 22.
he that is called being free, is the servant of Christ. Devilish therefore is
the Doctrine of the Libertines, who under pretense of Christian liberty,
discharge Christians from all obedience to the law of God, setting them free to
do whatsoever themselves think good. And such is the slander of the Papists,
laying that doctrine to our charge, who notwithstanding are further from it
then themselves. For by the Popes indulgences and pardons, and the Priests
absolutions, setting men free from sin for small, and often times for
ridiculous penances, what do they else but teach men to make but a sport of
sin? Of such Libertines the Apostle Peter 2. Pet. 2. 19.
speaks, that whilst they promise liberty to others, themselves are the
servants of corruption.

It remains therefore, that Christian liberty is a spiritual liberty,
freeing the true Christian from the servitude of sin, and from all other
yokes of spiritual bondage, wherewith sin had entangled us.

Neither is Christian liberty only privative, as being a freedom and immunity
from bondage; as though this were all, that by it we are not servants: but as
appears by this Scripture, it is also positive, as being a liberty, power,
right, and interest to the privileges of Gods children, who are also heirs of
God, and coheires with Christ. For when he had said that servants abide not in
the house for ever, but that such as be sons, abide in the house of God for
ever, he infers, If therefore the son shall make you free, you shall be
free indeed. Giving us to understand, that those whom he freeth, he does not
only make them not servants, viz. of sin, but also sons and heirs of God,
and citizens of heaven. Even as they who are made freemen of London, or any
other terrestrial City, are not only exempted from being servants or
apprentises; but also are endowed with the liberties and privileges of free
Burgesses and Citizens. So says the Apostle, Gal 4. 5. 6. 7
Gal. 4. 5. that Christ has redeemed those who were under the law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons, etc.

Christian liberty therefore is a spiritual liberty, which as the Galath. 2.
4. (...) The partition.
Apostlo speaks, the faithful have in Christ Jesus. That is the definition.

The essential parts whereof generally it consists, are two. For partly it is
privative, as being an immunity from all spiritual bondage; in which respect
it is called in the Scripture Heb. 9. 12. Luk 2. 38.
(...) and Romans 3. 24. Colos. 1. 14.
(...), that is redemption, and is sometimes expressed by the verbes Heb. 2. 15.
(...) and (...), Col. 1. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10
signifying deliverance: and partly it is positive, as being a right, title,
and interest to the privileges and prerogatives of Gods adopted children in
Christ, the citiziens of the Celestial Jerusalem: and in this respect it is
called (...), as Ioh. 1. 12. to those that receive Christ by faith, he has
given (...), liberty, right or power to be the sons of God, 1. Cor. 8. 9.
1. Cor. 8. 9. Take heed, lest (...) your liberty, right or power, be not an
offense to the weak. Thus you see what this liberty is, and wherein generally
it does consist.

The author of this liberty is Christ the Son of God, The efficient or
author of this liberty.
as it is here said: If the Son therefore shall make you free, etc. so the
Apostle calls it Galath. 2. 4.
the liberty with we have in and by Christ: and again. Galath. 5. 1
the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. For he is (...), Romans 11. 26.
that Deliverer which should come out of Sion, who delivers us 1 Thessalonians. 1.
10.
from the wrath of God, from the tyranny of Satan, 1. John 3. 8.
dissoluing the works of the devil, Mat. 12. 29
binding the strong man and casting him out, Colos. 2. 15.
spoiling principalities and powers, and Ephesians. 4. 8.
leading captivity captive; from the bondage of sin, for he is the John 1.
7.
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, whose blood does 1.
John 1. 7. Hib. 9. 14. 1. Pet. 1. 18.
cleanse us both from the guilt of sin, and also from the corruption: for
therefore he Tit. 2. 14.
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and might
purge us to be a peculiar people to himself, Zealous of good works. And he is
that perfect Savior, out of whose side did issue both Ioh. 19. 34. 35. 1. Ioh.
5. 6
blood and water; the blood of redemption, to free us from the guilt of sin;
and the water of ablution, to cleanse us from the corruption. From the law Gal.
4. 4.
, for therefore was he borne of a woman, and made under the law, that he might
redeem them that were under the law. From death and damnation; for therefore
he became a Gal. 3. 13.
curse, that we might be freed from the curse; therefore he died, that
through Heb. 2. 14. 15.
death he might vanquish him, who had the power of death, that is, the devil;
and that he might deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their
life time subject to bondage.

But this needs no proof; for in that we profess him to be our redeemer,
by whom we have Ephesians. 1. 7. 1. Cor. 1. 30.
redemption, we all acknowledge him to be the author of our liberty. Let us
rather consider, how he procures this liberty unto us. This he does two
ways; both meritoriously, and effectually. By his merit, in 1. Tim. 2. 6.
giving himself to be a price of ransom for us. For, as Peter 1. Pet. 1. 18.
19.
says, we are redeemed not with any corruptible things, as silver and gold,
but with the precious blood of Christ, by Heb. 9. 12.
which blood he is entered once into the holy place, having procured an
eternal redemption for us. Secondly, by the efficacy of his spirit, for we
are not to imagine, that Christ has only merited and purchased this liberty
for us; but that also he does confer, apply, and bestow it upon us: which he
does by giving unto us his Romans 8. 9. 19 Gal. 4. 6.
Spirit. For, as in the natural body, the animal spirit, which causes sense
and motion, is from the head sent into all the members of the body; so in the
mystical body of Christ, the Spirit of Psalm. 51. 14.
liberty is communicated to all his members; by which spirit he dwells in
us, and effectually works this liberty, in the degrees of our salvation,
viz. vocation, justification, sanctification, glorification, (as you shall
hear anon) and by the means of our salvation. The principal where of is the
preaching of the Gospel, which is the Law (...) 1. 25.
, or doctrine of liberty, the ministerle where of was ordained to this end, to
A^t. 26. 18.
open men's eyes, to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that by faith in Christ, they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance with them that be sanctified.

This teaches us, The use of this doctrine concerning the author of our
liberty.
that in our selves we are servants, (for else we needed not a redeemer) and
of our selves not able to free us out of bondage: that there was no means to
set us at liberty, but the most precious ransom, which Christ our blessed
Savior paid for us. That we should acknowledge the infinite love of God Ioh.
3. 16. 1. Ioh. 4. 10.
the Father, who gave his Son, and of the Son Ioh. 15. 13
who gave himself to be a ransom for us. That we may acknowledge our selves
bound to be thankful Psalm. 107. 20. Col. 1. 12. 13. 14. Romans 7. 25. 1. Cor.
15. 57.
unto him, for let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed. That we may
highly esteem of this liberty, which cost so dear a price: that with all
diligence we use the means to obtain it, and never be at rest until we be
made partakers of it: when we have obtained it, to Galath. 5. 1.
stand fast in it; not to abuse it to licentiousnes, but to use it to the
glory of our Redeemer, who has freed us from the spiritual bondage of sin
and Satan, not that we might sin freely, but that we might Luke 1. 74.
serve God without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days
of our life. We must remember, that being 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20.
bought with a price, we are not our own, but his that bought us: and
therefore should not seek our selves, or serve our own lusts, but should
glorify him both in our souls and bodies, which are not ours, but his that
has bought us, etc. and so much of the author of this liberty.

Now follows the subject or parties to whom this liberty belongs, which by
the context appears to be those, who by the grace of adoption and
regeneration,. 5. The subject of this liberty, or parties on who^ it is
conferred.
are made the sons of God in Christ. For naturally we are all servants,
serving a most servile and slavish servitude under sin and Satan; which must
seriously be acknowledged of us, before we will either truly desire to be
made partakers of this liberty, (for none need to be freed, but those that
are in bondage) or will profit by this doctrine, as appertaining unto us. Our
Savior therefore, according to the Esaias. 61. 1
prophecy of Esaias, says, Luke 4. 1^
that he was sent to preach liberty and deliverance to the captives, and to
set at liberty the broken hearted. He came to seek and to save Mat. 18. 11.
that which was lost: neither came he to Matthew. 9. 13.
call the righteous (in their own conceits) but sinners unto repentance: to
fill the Matthew. 5. 3. 6.
poor and the hungry Luke 1. 53.
with good things, whilst the rich are sent empty away.

Neither must we deceive our selves with this conceit, that because we
profess our selves to be redeemed; and do live in the house of God which is
his visible Church, therefore we have all attained this liberty already. For
in the house of God, there be as well 2. Tim. 2. 20.
vessels of dishonor, as vessels of honor; in the Matthew. 3. 12.
floor of God, as well chafe as wheat; in the Matthew. 13. 47.
net of God, as well bad fish as that which is good; in the Matthew. 13. 24.
field of God, as well tares as corn; in the family or house of God as well
Job. 8. 34. 31.
servants as sons; in the flock of God, as well Matthew. 25. 32. 33.
goats as sheep. Unless therefore you be the sons of God by faith, truly
called, engrafted into Christ as his members, regenerated by the Spirit of God,
this liberty as yet does not belong unto you. For it is a liberty, as the
Apostle says, Galath. 2. 4.
which we have in Christ, that is, which we being in Christ have by him, as
after we shall hear: (which also) is conferred upon us, in and by our
vocation, justification and sanctification; and therefore none enjoy it, as
actually made free, but such as are sanctified, justified and called.

But here some will object: Are not we the Church of God, and is not the
Church a company of men called? have we not been baptized, and by baptism
regenerated, made the members of Christ, and children of God? How then do you
say, we are not free? Beloved, as this objection is not unlike the cavil of
the captious Jews in this place; so must it receive the like answer. Verily,
verily I say unto you, says our Savior, he that commits sin is the
servant of sin, and the servant shall not abide in the house, etc. I know
that you are the Church of God, as these Jews were; and that you have been
baptized, as they had been circumcised. But you must distinguish, first, of
the Church; that there is a Church visible, and a Church invisible, which is
the mystical body of Christ. And you are to know, that there be many in the
Church visible, which are not 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
of the Church invisible; many in the house of God, which be servants and not
sons. Secondly, of calling; that there is an outward calling by the Word,
which is common to all in the Church, of which it is said, Matthew. 20. 16. and
22. 14.
many called, and few chosen. And there is an inward and effectual calling,
according to Gods purpose, of which it is said, Romans 8. 28. 30
whom he elected, he called. Thirdly, of Baptism; there is an outward
Baptism, which is the sprinkling of the 1. Pet. 3. 21.
flesh with water, and an inward Baptism, wherein the soul is Heb. 12. 24.
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and with the water of the holy Ghost,
whereof the outward is a sign. Fourthly, of union with Christ, for there is a
sacramental union in Baptism, and a spiritual by the 1. Cor. 12. 13
holy Ghost and by faith. Lastly, of Christians, members of Christ, sons of
God. For as the Apostle distinguishes the Romans 2. 28. 29.
Jews, that they were either outwardly Jews and in show, or inwardly and in
truth; and our Savior in the next Ioh. 8. 37. etc.
words, the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, and according to the
promise. For as Paul also says, they Gal. 3. 7.
which be of faith, are the sons of Abraham: so men are called Christians,
members of Christ, sons of God, not only who are such indeed and in truth;
but also such as are Christians only in profession, members of Christ in
appearance, Ezech. 16. 20. 21.
sons of God in respect of the outward covenant. Matthew. 8. 12.
Wherefore though you live in the visible Church, though you be called, though
you have been baptized, and by baptism sacramentally united to the body of
Christ, which is his Church; though in your own profession, and in the
reputation of others, who conceive of you (as they ought) according to the
judgment of charity, you are Christians, members of Christ, and sons of the
kingdom: notwithstanding, if you do not truly believe in Christ and
unfeignedly repent of your sins, you are servants and not sons. Yea, so
far shall these outward privileges be from exempting you from damnation,
that they shall greatly aggrauate your judgment. For has God called us, and
we are not called? has he invited us to turn unto him, and we are not
converted? has he by his Ministers 2. Cor. 5. 20.
entreated us, that we would be reconciled unto him, and we will not be
reconciled? has he offered us infinite mercy in the mystery of our salvation
by Christ, and we have despised the same, not caring to apprehend the mercies
of God and merits of Christ, but suffering his precious blood to be spilt as
it were on the ground in vain? has he often sought Matthew. 23. 37.
togather us unto him, as the Hen gathered the Chickens under her wings, and
we would not? Then have the means of salvation been the means of obduration
unto us; and the Word, which to the faithful is the 2. Cor. 2. 16.
savor of life unto life, unto us is become come a savor of death unto death.
Yea, for this contempt of the Gospel, if we persist in it, our estate in the
day of judgment shall be more Matthew. 10. 15.
intolerable, then theirs of Sodom and Gomorah. And unto us belongs that
fearful woe denounced by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 11. 21. 23.
Woe to thee Bethsaida, woe to thee Capernaum: for if the means which you have
had, had been vouchsafed to them of Tyrus and Sidon, yea to them of Sodom,
they would have turned unto God, but I say unto you, it shall be easier for
them in the day of judgment, then for you. Again, has the Lord sent his
Son to redeem us, given us means to apply Christ unto us, has he
entreated us to believe and repent, and put to his seal in Baptisine, thereby
assuring us, that if we believe and repent, our souls are washed with the
blood of Christ, that we are ingrafted into him, and in him are made the sons
of God, and heirs of eternal life? Shall not we therefore most worthily
perish in our sins, if notwithstanding we will not believe and repent;
especially having in our Baptism by a solemn vow bound our selves thereto?
The consideration whereof must force men, who are not yet regenerated,
unfeignedly to turn unto God, and to lay hold upon Christ by faith. For it is
most certain, though they live in the house of God, which is his Church, yet
until they truly believe and repent, they are servants and not sons: and
such servants as are held under the most miserable and bafest slavery of sin
and Satan: being not only bound hand and foot, yea in heart and mind, so that
they can neither do nor think that which is spiritually good; but are also
carried away 2. Tim. 2. 26 Titus 3. 3.
captive, to perform the will of Satan, and the lusts of the flesh; whereby it
comes to pass, that as they can do no good, so can they do nothing but sin.

The next thing to be considered,. 6. The quality or property of this liberty.
is the quality of this liberty, viz. that it is a true liberty. For neither is
it an imaginary liberty, as in the paradox of the Stoics, who held that wise
men of the world were only free, when they also, being not freed by Christ,
were and are no better but servants; or in the secure imaginations of carnal
men, who with these Jews, though being in bondage think themselves free.
Neither is it a loose liberty or licentiousness, such as Libertines assume to
themselves, but a true and a holy liberty, whereby we being freed from sin,
become servants of righteousness, and being delivered from the hands of our
spiritual enemies, are enabled to worship God with willing minds, and
cheerful hearts: for that is the only true liberty: and such is the liberty
of the Saints in heaven, and of the blessed Angels, who count it not only their
liberty, but also their happiness, willingly and cheerfully to serve the
Lord. For if the Son, who is the truth, shall make you free, then shall you
be free (...), in deed, and in truth.

This therefore, as it serves for the comfort of the godly; so also for the
terror of the wicked. For, from this speech of our Savior, we may conclude
both ways. 1. Whosoever are made free by Christ, they are free indeed: but all
the faithful are made free by Christ; therefore (whatsoever the devil or
their own corruption can object to the contrary) they are free indeed.

Again, If the Son make you free, says Christ, then are you free indeed; but
you (say I to unbelievers and impenitent sinners,) are not free indeed: For he
that commits sin, is the servant of sin; therefore, howsoever you profess
your selves redeemed by Christ, and howsoever also it be most true, that
Christ has paid a ransom sufficient for the redemption of all; yet are you
not actually redeemed, nor the benefit of redemption applied unto you, until
you be ingrafted into Christ by faith, and renewed by the holy Ghost. And the
same may be confirmed by the oath of the Lord, ( wherein Heb. 6. 18.
it is impossible that he should lie,) the oath which he swear to our father
Abraham, that he would give us, both that we should be delivered from the
hand, that is, the power and dominion of our spiritual enemies; and Luke (...)
being delivered, should also have grace to worship God without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life. If therefore
we do not endeavor to worship God in holiness and righteousness, with
willing minds and upright hearts; it is as sure as the oath of the Lord is
true, that as yet we are not actually freed and redeemed by Christ. For if the
Son make you free, you shall be free indeed.

And thus much of the general doctrine of Christian liberty: wherein I have
been the shorter, because all these points, whereof I have thus generally and
briefly spoken, viz. that Christian liberty is a spiritual liberty, which the
faithful have in and by Christ Jesus* that it consists on two parts, an
immunity and freedom from all spiritual bondage, and an (...), and right to
the privileges and liberties of Gods children: that Christ our redeemer is the
author of this liberty, both in respect of his merit and efficacy: that it is
bestowed only upon the faithful, who are the sons of God and members of
Christ: and lastly, that this liberty of Christians is a true liberty; all
these points, I say, will more plainly and fully appear in the particulars,
whereunto we are now to descend.

Christian liberty thererfore is either libertas
Viae,. T.
of this life, The special^ doctrine of Christian liberty.
such as is incident unto us whiles we are in the way, whereof Luke 12. 58.
some not unfitly understand our Savior to speak, Luke 12. 58. Give diligence
to be delivered from thy adversary, whiles thou art in the way, etc.
understanding by the Governor, God; by the Judge, Christ; by the adversary,
the devil, sin, a guilty conscience, the sentence of the law; by the way, this
life; by the officer the Angels; by prison, hell, etc. Patriae, of the life to
come, which we shall enjoy, when being come to the end of our way, we shall
have the 1. (...). 1. 9.
end of our faith, which is the salvation of our souls.
The former is freedom from the bondage of sin, the other from the Romans 8.
21.
bondage of corruption. The former is simply called (...), Ephesians. 1. 7. 14.
redemption, the latter (...), the redemption of possession: for by the former
we are heirs, spe, in hope and expectation; by the latter, re, in deed and
possession; the one is begun and in part, the other perfect and complete: the
one, the liberty of grace, the other, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 21.
(...), the liberty of glory.

Of these in order: The liberty of grace.
And first of the liberty of grace, which even in this life the faithful do
enjoy in and by Christ. And it is either common to all the faithful, as well
of the old Testament as of the new; or peculiar to the faithful under the
Gospel. The faithful under both Testaments were and are sons; who as they
have the same (...) 1. 4.
common faith; so have they the same (...). 3.
common salvation, and therefore the same liberty and right, in respect of the
inheritance it self, and all the degrees thereof. Notwithstanding there is
difference between sons under age, and in their minority, in respect of
discipline and government, and those who are come to years: the former being
nurtured by schoolemasters, and governed by tutors, as the Apostle says Gal.
4. ^. 3. and 3. 24.
of the faithful before the incarnation of Christ; the latter set at liberty
from such discicipline and government. Otherwise, as they had the same faith,
and the same justification (for all the faithful both before Christ and after,
were and are justified by faith, as Abraham Romans 4. 23. 24.
was, Romans 4. and by such Iam. 2. 20. 21.
a faith, Iam. 2.) so have they the same liberty which is obtained by faith,
and in some chief points thereof is, as Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19.. 1.
Calvin says, an appendix of justification.

The common liberty of grace, The liberty of saving grace.
which may fitly be called the liberty of saving grace, contains many
particulars; which, for your easiest remembrance, may be reduced to these three
heads.

For it is a liberty which we have in and by our Vocation. Justification.
Sanctification.
For, although these three concur in time, because a man is no sooner
effectually called, but he is also justified before God, and no sooner
justified, but he begins also to be sanctified (which is duly to be
observed of those, who presuming, and that perhaps for a long time, that they
be called and justified, do still remain unsanctified) notwithstanding in
order of nature Romans 8. 30.
vocation goes before justification, and justification before sanctification.
And let this also by the way be observed for the comfort of the godly. For
whosoever, professing the true faith, has a true purpose and unfeigned desire
to walk before God in the obedience of his will, making conscience of all his
ways: that man, howsoever besides his general purpose he may fail ( (...) 3.
2.
as we all do) in many particulars; yet he is sanctified, and from his
sanctification may certainly conclude, that he is justified, that he is
called, that he is elected, that he shall be saved. For the fruit could not be
good, unless the tree or the branch that bears it were good, and the branch
cannot be good, unless it be ingrafted into Christ, (...) 15. 1. 5.
the only true vine: that is to say, a man's conversation is never acceptable
unto God, before his person be accepted; and his person is not accepted, until
he be united unto Christ. For the better understanding of this point, we must
remember, that Christ at a dear price has long since purchased this liberty
for us, and has meritoriously wrought our freedom. But none are actually and
effectually set at liberty, but those alone, who have actual union and
communion with Christ. Now in our effectual vocation, we have union with
Christ; and in our justification and sanctification, communion with him. In the
former, in respect of his merits apprehended by faith, and communicated unto us
by imputation; in the other, in respect of his graces, which being in him
without measure, are by his spirit from (...).
him derived, and in some measure communicated unto us by infusion.

But let us speak of them severally* And first,. ^.
as ^ouching our vocation, (...).
I say with the Apostle, (...).
Gal. 5. Brethren, you are called unto liberty: which words we are thus to
understand, that by our calling we are not only invited unto Christian liberty
in general, as a maine benefit of our Christian profession; but also by it are
enfranchised, being thereby put into possession of a good part of it, and
entitled to the rest. For whereas naturally we are wholly, and not only in
part (for that may be verified of the faithful, Romans 7. 14.) carnal, sold
under sin; by our calling we are first made spiritual, being in some
measure endued with the spirit of Christ. Now the spirit of Christ, being the
spirit of liberty, as David speaks, Psalm. 51. 14.
Psalm. 51. we may resolve with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3. 17
that where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

But the liberty which we have by our calling stands on these degrees.
First, as it is an immunity; our minds are therein freed from the servitude of
blindness and incredulity, our hearts and wills from the bondage of that,
which the Apostle calls Romans 11. 32
(...), (under which all men naturally are concluded) that is, disobedience and
infidelity; our selves, from the servitude of Satan, being called and as it
were culled out of the world, whereby is meant the company of worldly men,
which is the kingdom of the devil, (who is the John. 12. 31.
Prince, yea the God 2. Cor. 4. 4.
of the world, working effectually (...), Ephesians. 2. 2.
in the children of infidelity and disobedience, blinding their understandings,
and 2. Tim. 2. 26.
captivating their wills:) and lastly translated from the most slavish estate
of damnation, being Apoc. 14. 4.
redeemed from among men, and delivered out of the Gal. 1. 4.
world, which because it wholly, as Saint John 1. John. 5. 19
says, (...), lies under the subjection of the devil, For he it (...) of
whom he had spoken, verse. 18.
(who has the Heb. 2. 15*
power of death) is also subject to death and damnation.

As it is (...), that is, a power and interest; we are in our calling endued,
as I said, with the spirit of liberty, which freeth our souls by enlightening
our minds, persuading our judgments, and softening our hearts, enspiring
thereinto godly desires and gracious resolutions; whereby he beginning the
grace of faith in us, does regenerate us and unite us unto Christ. So that by
our effectual calling, in regard that therein the spirit of liberty is
communicated unto us, and the saving grace of faith is therein begotten in us,
we are made the sons of God and members of Christ, and are not only entitled
to all the rights and privileges of the children of God, and members of
Christ; but also are presently John. 5. 24.
translated, as it were from death to life, and from the state of damnation
unto the state of grace and salvation.

But these things do need some farther explanation. First, therefore in the
ministry of the Gospel, which is the ministry 2. Cor. 3. 8. 1. P^t. 1. 23.
of the spirit, the word of faith, Romans 10. 8.
the seed of regeneration, the Iam. 1. 18. 25
law or doctrine of liberty, and the ordinary means of our 2. These. 2. 14
vocation, the lord, preventing us with his grace, sends the spirit of his
son into our hearts; which being, as I said, the spirit of liberty; first,
freeth our minds from the bondage of ignorance, incredulity and vanity,
wherein until then we are held captive, not onceable of our selves to
entertain a 2. Cor. 3. 5.
good thought, the whole frame of our thoughts being Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21.
only evil continually; the wisdom of our flesh, Romans 8. 7.
or that which our flesh minds, being enmity against God; our selves, not
only not perceiving, but being 1. Cor. 2. 14.
not able to perceive the things which are of the spirit of God, and much less
able to give assent unto them (for no man can say that 1. Cor. 12. 3.
Jesus is Christ but by the holy Ghost) and much less to assent effectually,
or by a lively faith. The spirit of God therefore by the ministry of the word
(which is a Psalm. 119. 105.
light unto our feet) as the means, and by the Ministers of the Gospel as
his instruments (who are therefore called the Mat. 5. 14.
light of the world, and are sent by Christ to Acts 26. 1^.
open our eyes, and to give light to them that sit in Luke 1. 79.
darkness, and in the shadow of death) enlighteneth our minds to understand,
and opens our hearts as he did the heart of Lydia, persuading our souls
Act. 16. 14.
(...), that is, not only to attend, but as the word also signifies, to assent
to those things which are spoken by the Ministers; and thereby makes us
unfeignedly to acknowledge and seriously to consider, both our miserable
servitude, and damnable estate in our selves, and also the gracious liberty and
saving grace of God offered in Christ. And this is the first degree of the
liberty which we have in our calling, that therein we are called out of 1. Pet.
2. 9.
darkness into light. Of this liberty the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 3. 2. Cor.
3. 15. 16. 17.
that whereas there is naturally a veil over men's hearts, that they cannot
understand the word; this veil is taken away by the spirit of God, when they
turn unto the Lord. Now the Lord (says he) is the spirit, and where the
spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. In this regard the spirit is compared
to an Apoc. 3. 18.
eye-salue, and is called that 1. Ioh. 2. 27.
anointing, which, being received from Christ, teaches us all things.

Having thus revealed unto us both our own miserable estate in our selves, and
the infinite mercies of God in Christ, and moved us truly to assent thereto; in
the next place he touches our hearts with a sense of our misery, and with a
hatred of sin, which has brought us into that miserable estate, and by the
ministry of the Word, which is his Romans 1. 16.
power to our salvation, and his Esai. 53. 1.
arm to draw us unto him, he turns our will and affections from darkness
(which naturally Ioh. 3. 19. Act. 26. 18.
we love) unto light, not only working in us hearty desires, to come out of
that damnable estate, and to be made partakers of Christ (which desires also he
being the Zac. 12. 10. Romans 8. 26.
Spirit of supplication, helps us to express in hearty prayer;) but also
inspiring into us a settled resolution, that for as much as liberty and
salvation is promised to all that receive Christ by faith; we will therefore
resolve undoubtedly to acknowledge him to be our only Savior, and to rest upon
him alone for salvation. Thus by working, 1. In our minds an effectual assent
to the promise of the Gospel. 2. In our hearts an earnest desire to be made
partakers of Christ's merits, and 3. In our will a settled resolution, to
acknowledge him to be the Messiah and to rely upon the mercies of God and
merits of Christ, for justification and salvation, (by which three we do John
1. 12.
receive Christ,) the spirit of God begets the grace of justifying faith in
us. In the begetting whereof, he does not only A^t. 26* 1^.
turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Sa^an unto God; but
also regenerateth them, and unites them unto Christ, making them of the
children of wrath, the sons of God; of the impes of the old Adam, members of
Christ; and of the-subiects of Satan in the kingdom of (...). 1. 13.
darkness, fellow Ephesians. 2. 19.
citizens with the Saints in the kingdom of God. And this is the liberty
which we have by our calling. As for the teachers of free will, and the
magnifiers of our pure naturals; they neither acknowledge the woeful bondage
wherein we are by nature, nor the happy liberty, whereunto we are, not borne,
but called. For this is a liberty, ad quam non nati, sed renati sumus; which we
have not by generation, but by regeneration. Neither is it a common liberty of
all, but a liberty peculiar to the people of God, who are a people ^. (...). 2.
9.
set at liberty, peculiar to the sons of God, and members of Christ. But it
will be said, if there be no freedom in our wills before we be called, then
belike we are called and saved against our wills, and we must look with the
Enthusiasts for violent raptures. I answer, that there is in our wills a
freedom of nature, whereby it is free from compulsion. For, that the will
should be forced, it implies a contradiction: for then it should both will
and nill the same thing at one time. Notwithstanding this freedom of the will,
until it be freed by grace, is a voluntary service of sin; voluntarily and
with greediness, willing that which is evil, although it can will nothing
else. But the preventing grace of God, whereby we are called; is perswasiue,
and not ordinarily by the Word; drawing us indeed, and so of unwilling making
us willing, but this is by persuasion, and not by compulsion. For although our
wills in the first act of our conversion be merely passive, and none can
come to Christ unless the Ioh. 6* 4^
Father draw him, yet we can no sooner conceive a man to be effectually called,
then that he is made willing. For in the very act of our calling, of unwilling
we are made willing; and no sooner are we effectually drawn but we willingly
come: in which sense true is that saying of Chrysostom, (...), God indeed
draws, but he draws him that is willing. Wherefore though our wills do
not concur, ad vocationem, unto our calling; yet they concur, in vocatione,
in our calling, being therein made free.. 9.


Now we are to entreat of the liberty which we have both in our justification,
Justification and sanctification not to be confounded.
and also in our sanctification. For howsoever these graces do always so
concur, as that whosoever has the one, has the other; and whosoever has
not both, has neither; yet are we carefully to distinguish them. For the
Papists in not distinguishing them, confound the Law and the Gospel, abolish
the maine benefit of Christ, which in the Scriptures goes under the name of
justification, and with it the liberty which we have by it; and lastly, by
their Antichristian doctrine teach men to place the matter of their
justification, and the merit of salvation in themselves. For they do teach,
that a man is justified, when he is made righteous by righteousness inherent
in himself, and performed by himself, and accordingly make two degrees of
justification: The one, which they call the first justification, when a man of
a sinner is made just, by the infusion of faith, hope, and charity; the other,
which they call the second justification, when a man of a just man is made more
just by bringing forth good works. So that according to their doctrine, the
righteousness of the first justification, is habitual and inherent in
themselves; of the second, actual, and performed by themselves. And whereas
justification stands on two parts, viz. remission of sin, and the making,
or, as the Romans 5. 1^.
Apostle speaks, constituting of us righteous; as they teach, that we are
made righteous, not by imputation, but by infusion of righteousness: so they
teach, that remission of sin is the deletion of sin, and that sins are
then pardoned, when by infusion of the contrary graces they are expelled. Even
as water is then said to be warmed, when by the accession of heat the cold is
expelled. Again, where the Scripture says, Romans 3. 14.
that we are justified by grace, that is, by the mere favor of God in Christ,
by faith without works, by the righteousness of God, which without the law is
manifested in the Gospel; they by grace understand the graces of God in us,
which they say concur with faith unto justification; by righteousness, not
the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, but a righteousness from
Christ infused into us, etc. Which doctrines, being understood of
sanctification, are for the most part true. For we do not deny, but that the
matter of our sanctification is inherent in us, and performed by us; and that
it is partly habitual, and partly actual; that it consists in our dying
unto sin, which is called mortification, and living unto righteousness, which
is called vivification: that there be degrees thereof, according to the measure
of grace received: that we are sanctified by the grace, or rather graces of
God in us* and that thereunto not faith alone, but hope and charity, and other
both inward graces and outward obedience do concur, etc.

But if the justification which the Papists teach, be nothing else but
sanctification; what then is become of that, which in the Scriptures goes
under the name of justification, and is the maine benefit of the Messiah,
whereby we are not only freed from the guilt of sin, which bound us over to
death and damnation; but also are in Christ accepted as righteous, and made
heirs of eternal life; by which we are freed from the fear of damnation,
and are entitled unto the kingdom of heaven? Surely by the Popish doctrine it
is in a manner abolished, and with it the liberty which we have by it, which
is no less then our deliverance from hell, and our title to the kingdom of
heaven, which if we have not by Christ, we have no salvation by him. For it is
certain, that whereby we are justified, thereby we are saved.

This most pre^ious and Antichristian error they seek to justify by the like
notation of the Latin words. For as to be sanctified, is to be made holy, by
holiness wrought in us; so to be justified, in their conceit, is to be made
just, by righteousness wrought in us.

Whereunto I answer, that if the Latin notation were to be respected, it
would not hinder our cause. For, we do freely confess, that whom the Lord
justifies, he makes just. But then the question is, whether by imputation, or
by infusion. By imputation, we say, as he justifies; by infusion, not as he
justifies, but as he sanctifies. But the Latin word is no farther to be
urged, then as it is the translation of the Hebrew word in the old Testament,
and of the Greek in the new, which signifies to justify. Now it is plain,
that both the Hebrew (...), and the greek (...), is verbum forese, a judicial
word ascribed unto God, as the Judge; to teach us, when we think of
justification, to summon our selves before the judgment seat of God. And in
this sense it is opposed to condemning, as in the Deuteronomy. 25. 1. Prove. 17. 15.
judgments of men, Deuteronomy. 25. 1. Prove. 17. 15. so in the Mat. 12. 37.
judgment of God, Mat. 12. 37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by
thy words thou shall be condemned; 1. King. 8. 32. Romans 5. 16. 18. and Romans 8.
33. 1. King. 8. 32. Romans 5. 16. 18. Romans 8. 33.
Hereby then appears, both what justification is, and wherein it differs
from sanctification. For the contrary to sanctifying, is polluting; but the
contrary to justifying, is condemning. Wherefore as sanctifying being the
contrary to polluting, does signify making holy; so justifying being the
contrary to condemning, does signify absoluing, acquitting, pronouncing just.
And in this sense evermore, in the question of justification, it is used when
it is ascribed unto God. Neither are the Papists able to produce any one
testimony, where justification being ascribed to God, (as Romans 3. 26. and 8. 33.
It is God that does justify) does signify making righteous by infusion. This
then is the first note of difference, whereunto others may be added. For in
justification, with Christ in respect of his graces, which being in him without
measure, are by his spirit derived to us in measure, and communicated by
infusion, to free us from the corruption and dominion of sin, and to prepare
and fit us for the kingdom of heaven.

The matter therefore of Justification, or that whereby we are absolved, and in
respect whereof, God does acquit us from our sins, and accepting us as just,
does so pronounce of us, is the merits, righteousness, and obedience of Christ
our Savior. For by what we are redeemed, by that we have Eph^s. 1. 7. Colos.
1. 14.
remission of sins, or justification; but we are redeemed only by the merits
and righteousness of Christ, and not by our own; and therefore we are
justified by the righteousness of Christ, and not by that which is inherent in
us, or performed by us: but our sanctification consists in the graces of Gods
spirit inherent in us, and the new obedience performed by us.

to a belieuer the righteousness of Christ, and accepting of it in the
believers behalf, as if he had performed it in his own person, does not only
acquit him from his sins, but also accepts of him as righteous in Christ,
and as an heir of eternal life. For as Christ was made a sinner for us, so
are we made 2. Cor. 5. 21.
righteous before God in him: Christ was made a sinner for us, by imputation of
our sins to him: therefore we are made righteous before God in him, by
imputation of his righteousness unto us. Again, as we were made ^inners, that
is, guilty of the first Adams transgression; Romans 5. 18. 9.
so are we justified by the obedience of the second Adam. But we are guilty of
the first Adams transgression by imputation. For how should that being an
action, and therefore transrent, be communicated unto us? Let Bellarmine
answer: It is communicated to us, says he, Ado peccatis nobis communicatur
per generationem o modo, quo communic^^^ potest idquo^ transit, nimirum per
imputationem.
as transient things use to be communicated, that is to say, by imputation.
Omnibus enim imputatur, qu^ ex Adamo nascuntur, quoniam omnes in lumbi^ Adami
existentes, in e^ et per eum peccauimus, cum ipse peccauit. Bellarm. tom. 3 de
amiss. gra^. and stat. pe^. li^ 5. cap 17.
Therefore we are justified by imputation of the obedience of the second Adam.
For the obedience of Christ which he performed on earth, being transient, how
could it be communicated unto us, but as Bellarmine says, all transient
things are communicated, viz. by imputation? The reason of which imputation is
this. For as all men being in Adam as the root of mankind, originally, are
guilty of his sin, it being imputed unto them, because in him and by him, by
reason of their union with him, all sinned: so the faithful being in Christ as
their head or root, are justified by his obedience, if being imputed to them,
because in him, and by him, by reason of our union with him, we fulfilled the
Law, and in him, and by him we satisfied the justice of God. But we are
sanctified by the infusion of grace wrought in us by the holy Ghost.

Act. 26. 18. and 20. 32.
saved, and the fitting and preparing of us to that kingdom, whereinto no
unclean thing shall enter.

The righteousness of justification is

We are both justified and sanctified obedience: but we are not sanctified by
it alone, because not only other graces inherent, but also outward obedience
concur thereto.

These things thus premised,. 10
let us consider what that liberty is, The liberty of justification.
which we have both in our justification, and also in our sanctification. In
both (as our freedom is an immunity) we are freed from sin, and from the
Law, which is the strength of sin, though in different respects, which will
be so many more differences betwixt justification and sanctification. In sin
there are two things, the guilt thereof, and the corruption. In justification
we are freed wholly from the guilt of sin: for to be justified, is to have
remission of sin, Romans 4. 6. 7. Freedom from guilt of ^inne.
Romans 4. 6. 7. or which is all one, to be freed, or absolved from the guilt of
it. And so certain it is, that in justification we have this freedom, that to
be justified, is to be freed, according to the Scriptures phrase, Romans 6. 7.
Romans 6. 7. he that is dead is freed from sin: the Greek is (...). See Act.
13. 38. ^9.
Act. 13. 38. 39. Be it known unto you, that through Christ is preached unto
you forgiveness of sins. And from all things, from which you could be
justified by the law of Moses, by him every one that believes is justified.
Where, to be justified, is to have pardon of sin, or freedom from the guilt
of it.

The guilt of sin is the obligation or binding over of the sinner unto
punishment: and this bond is partly in the Law, As the (...) or proposition.
which is the handwriting or obligation that is against us, binding over the
transgressor of it, to the punishment threatened in it; and partly in the (...)
or assumption
conscience, applying the Law, moral or natural, to the sinner, and from
thence (...), or conclusion.
pronouncing him subject to punishment. From this obligation or guilt we are
freed before God, and as it were in the court of heaven, so soon as we
believe: and we are freed from the same in the court of conscience, when we
know that we believe, and are assured of our justification. For, Act. 26. 18.
by faith we have remission of sin: and whosoever Act. 13. 38. 39.
believes in Christ, he is justified from the guilt thereof.

This our freedom contains in it happiness, for as their estate is
miserable, whose sins are not forgiven, because by their sins they are
debtors unto God, owing in respect thereof eternal death and damnation (though
they only feel this burden, whose conscience is thoroughly touched, of whom it
is said, (...) 1^ 14.
A wounded spirit who is able to bear?) so their estate is happy, who are
freed from the guilt of sin. David, though a King, flourishing in great
honor, wealth, and delights; notwithstanding he reposeth his felicity in the
forgiveness of sin, (...) 32. 1. 2. (...). 4. 6.
Psalm. 32. Blessed is the man whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered, blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. Which
should move us above all things to labor for the forgiveness of sin, and for
the assurance thereof. If thou believe in Christ, and withal confess thy sin
1. Ioh. 1. 9.
and forsake Prove. ^8. 13.
it, thou may be sure that it is pardoned.

Secondly,. 11.
in our justification we are freed from the Gal. 4. 4. 5 (...).
law, and that in two respects. First, from the malediction or condemnation of
it: secondly, from the laws exaction of inherent and that perfect
righteousness unto justification. Under which double yoke of bondage all men
are, that are not justified by faith in Christ: that is, all men in them selves
are subject to the curse Gal. 3. 1^.
who in the least degree do at any time in their whole life transgress any
part of the law, as all men oftentimes do; and again, no man who is not in
Christ, can be exempted from the curse, and attain to justification, unless
he continue in all the things which are written in the book of the law to do
them; which no man is able to do, the law by reason of the flesh being Romans 8.
3.
impossible unto us. Let natural or unconverted men apply this to themselves.
Can thou not by the sentence of the law be exempted from the curse, unless
thou do not only not commit the things forbidden, but also do the duties
commanded; unless thou do all, and unless thou continuest in doing all,
never failing in any one particular; and finally, unless thou continuest in
doing all, and every thing commanded in that perfect manner and measure which
the law prescribes? Alas then, how will thou escape the dreadful curse, who
in stead of doing the duties commanded, have done the vices forbidden; who in
stead of keeping all the commandments, have broken them all; and in stead of
continuing in a total perpetual and perfect obedience of the law, have
continued in the disobedience thereof? Hence we may conclude with the Apostle,
that all men in themselves, even those Gal. 3. 10.
who seek to be justified by the law, be concluded under sin, and
consequently under the curse: and therefore have extreme need to seek unto
Christ, that by him they may be set free from this twofold bondage; which is,
to be under the curse of the law if we break it, when we can do nothing else
but break it; and to be excluded from justification, if we do not continue in
the perfect performance of the law, when we are not able so much as to ^ Cor.
4. 5. Freedom from the curse of the Law.
think a good thought, or once to will that which is spiritually good. But by
Christ we are freed from both. Frst from the curse, as the Apostle in express
terms teaches: Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse
for us. He has freed us from the punishment of sin, by undergoing the
punishment for us, he has acvs quitted from our debts by discharging them for
us. For as Esaias Esa. 53. 3.
says, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace (that is, which was to procure us
peace and reconsiliation with God) was laid upon him, and by his stripes we
are healed. And again, Ve^s. 6.
The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, that is, the punishment
of all our sins. And, Verse. 11.
My righteous servant by his knowledge, that is, by the knowledge of him, or
faith in him, shall justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.

Now, by the curse of the law from which Christ does free us, we are to
understand all evil Psalm. 9^. 10.
of punishment, as well temporal as eternal: for it is absurd to imagine with
the Papists, that Christ having freed us from the eternal punishment, has not
freed us from the temporal. By temporal, we mean the evils both of this
life, whether corporal or spiritual (which are innumerable) and also in the
end of this life, viz. an evil death. Against both these it will be objected,
and first against the former; that notwithstanding their justification, the
faithful are as subject to afflictions and calamities of this life as others,
and therefore to punishment. But I deny that consequence, if you speak of
punishments properly, which be the curses of the law afflicted upon men by way
of vengeance, to satisfy the justice of God. * For the Lord has imposed the
punishment of all our sins upon Christ; who has fully satisfied the justice
of his Father for them. And therefore as there is no condermnation, so no
punishment (properly understood) to them that are in Christ Jesus. Neither can
it stand with the justice of God (who is not only merciful, but also Romans 3.
25. 26.
just in justifying of us) to exact a punishment of the faithful for the
satisfying of his justice, 1. John. 1. 9.
for whom Christ has already fully satisfied his justice by bearing the
punishment: this were to punish the same sins twice, once in Christ, and
again in us. Indeed the faithful are subject to crosses and afflictions: but
all the afflictions of the godly are either trials for their good, or such
judgments as are simply fatherly chastisements proceeding from love, and
merely respecting the good of the party chastised, whereof the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 11. 32. 1. Cor. 11. 32.
When we are judged we are chastised of of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world, or else they be also (...) (according to the Of (...)
honor and (...) care.
erymoligie of the word which by some is given) when God besides the
chastisment of the party, has also care to his own honor, which would
beimpeached, if he should seem to wink at the scandalous offenses of his
children, as though he would maintain them in their sins. In which regard
judgment, as Peter 1 Pet. ^. 17
says, begineth at the house of God. For the Lord many times corrects those
sins in the Godly, both for his own honor, and their good, which he seems
to pass by in the wicked. Of this kind we have an example in David, to whom
the Lord upon his submission forgave his grievous sins of murder and
adultery, notwithstanding both for David's chastisement, and for the example of
others, but chiefly for the maintenance of his own glory (which by the
scandalous offenses of Gods children, is by the wicked blasphemed, as though
such sins were the fruits of the religion and service of God,) he would not
suffer the child begotten in adultery to live. Why? because by that sin
David had 2. Sam. 12. 14.
caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. The use which we are to make
hereof, is not with the Papists, to teach men to make satisfaction to God for
their sins, as though Christ had not fully satisfied for them already: but to
teach men, both to beware that they do not commit sin, especially scandalous
sins; because thereby they displease and dishonor God their merciful Father,
provoking him to power his judgments upon them, for their amendment, that they
be not condemned with the world, and for the maintenance of his own honor: and
also that having sinned, we do A^os 4. 12
meet the Lord in his judgments, by humbling our selves before him,
confessing our fault, and craving pardon, that 1. Cor. 11. 31
judging our selves, we may not be judged of the Lord.

Against the second it is also objected, that notwithstanding their
justification, the godly die as well as the wicked. I answer, that as of all
afflictions, so also of death, the nature is changed in respect of the
faithful; to whom death it self, though brought in by the malice of the
devil, is not a curse or punishment properly. I do not deny, but that many
times in respect of the time and manner of death, the godly judged and
chastised, the Lord in mercy killing their bodies, that he many 1. Cor. 11.
30. 32.
save their souls; but from the evil of death they are wholly freed, for to
them it is the end of sin, and is therefore inflicted upon us, that sin
might die with us, as Methodius Apud Epiphan. hares. 64
says, and being the end of sin unto us, it is also the end of misery, the
haven of rest, a happy passage out of this veil of misery unto the kingdom of
glory; and so not only no curse, but also a blessing, no loss, but an
advantage, as after we shall show. For yet we speak but of the immunities of
justification, the principal whereof yet remains to be spoken of; that is,
freedom from subjection to damnation, to everlasting death, to the eternal
wrath of God, which is the most miserable bondage and subjection of all those,
who are not justified by faith in Christ. But from this curse also Christ has
freed the faithful. For this is the immunitie which we have by him; that Ioh.
3. 16.
whosoever believes in him shall not perish, that there is Romans 8. 1.
no condemnation to them that be in Christ Jesus; that by his death H^b. 2. 15.
he has destroyed him that had the power of death, that he might deliver
them all, which for fear of death, were all their life time subject to
bondage; that Jesus our Savior delivers us from the 2 These. 1. 10
wrath to come.

And thus we have heard of two immunities, which we have in our
justification: that we are freed from the guilt of sin, and from the curse
of the Law whereto our sin had made us subject. And from hence arises
unspeakable peace and liberty to the distressed conscience, terrified with the
guilt of sin, the curse of the Law, and fear of damnation; when it receiving
Christ by faith, has immunity and freedom from them all.

Now follows the other immunity from the law,. 12*
in respect of the exaction or perfect righteousness to be inherent in us, and
perfect obedience to be performed by us, Freedom from the laws exaction of
inherent righteousness, to iusti^^cation.
unto our justification and salvation: unto which yoke of bondage, as I said,
all men by nature are subject. For it is sure and certain, that without
righteousness, and such a righteousness, as is fully answerable to the perfect
law of God, no man can be justified.

Now, this righteousness must either be inherent in our selves, which is the
righteousness that the Law requires unto justification; or being performed by
another, (which is Christ) for us, must be imputed unto us: and that is the
righteousness which the Gospel propounds unto justification.

A third righteousness, whereby we should be justified, cannot be named. If
therefore we be not partakers of Christ's righteousness apprehended by faith,
we must stand to the sentence of the Law; which is, either to perform perfect
and perpetual obedience, or not to be justified. But if Christ's righteousness
be imputed unto us (as it is to all that apprehend it by faith) then are we
justified, notwithstanding the sentence of the Law, by Romans 3. 28. Galath. 2.
16.
faith, (that is, by the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith) without
the works of the Law, that is, without any respect of obedience performed by
our selves. And in this liberty from the Law, stands the chief comfort and
stay of a Christian, when he summoning himself, as it were in the court of
his conscience before the judgment seat of God, to be justified, or
condemned, shall consider that by Christ he is freed, both from the
condemnation of the Law, and from the exaction of inherent righteousness to
justification: so that he shall not need to stand to the sentence of the Law,
or to trust to any obedience performed by himself, as it were to a broken
staff, wherein there can be no comfort, (for if God should enter into Psalm.
143. ^.
judgment with us according thereto, no man living could be justified) but may
safely and freely, without respect, either of his own obedience, or of the
sentence of the law, rely upon the mercies of God, and merits of Christ; that
for as much as the Lord has given him grace to believe, and by that faith has
Hos. 2. 20.
espoused him to Christ, and united him unto him as his member; he has also
communion in Christ's merits, whereby without regard to any righteousness of
his own, he is justified before God.

Against this part of Christian liberty, which is most comfortable, the Church
of Rome (as it well becomes the synagogue of Antichrist) does by might and
maine oppose it self: contending not only that we are justified by
righteousness inherent; but also that the same obedience, which the Law
prescribes, is in greater perfection required in the Gospel unto
justification. By which doctrine of thei^s, they con^ound the Law of the
Gospel, and in so doing abolish the covenant of grace, annihilate the maine
promise of the Gospel, which is the charter of our liberty, the ground of our
faith, the foundation of all our assurance for justification and salvation. For
if the Gospel promise and propound justification and salvation, upon the
condition of our own obedience, and that in more perfection then the law it
self required: then is it not only a covenant of works, as well as the law,
but also imposes a heavier yoke upon men's consciences, then the Law did. But
it is manifest that the Gospel is the covenant of grace made with Abraham
Galath. 3. 8. 16. 17.
, concerning justification by faith in Christ; whereas the Law contrariwise is
the covenant of works, which 430. years after was delivered by Moses, and did
not disanull the former promise, concerning justification by faith. The
condition whereon the Gospel promises justification, is faith in Christ; the
condition of the Law, our own perfect and perpetual obedience. For the
Gospel Romans 10. 5. etc.
says; If thou believe in Christ, thou art justified and shall be saved: the
Law, If thou do these things, thou shall live thereby. The righteousness
exacted in the law to justification, is a righteousness both habitual inherent
in our selves, and actual performed by our selves. The righteousness Romans 3.
^1. 22
which without the Law is revealed in the Gospel, is the Righteousness of God,
that is, of Christ who is God, (for he is Ierem. 23. 6.
Iehova, our righteousness, and was given unto us of God 1. Cor. 1. 30.
to be our righteousness) by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all
that believe, that is, the righteousness of Christ, who is God (though not the
righteousness of the Deity, as O siander thought, but the righteousness both
inherent in him, as he was man, as his innocence and holiness, and also
performed by him, as his passive and active obedience) being apprehended by
faith, is according to the doctrine of the Gospel, imputed to every believer
unto justification.

That Christ is our righteousness, and the Romans 10. 4.
end of the Law unto righteousness to all that believe, that whosoever Ioh. 3.
16. Mark. 16. 16.
believes in Christ shall be saved, it is the maine doctrine of the Gospel,
the chief article of our religion, the charter of our inheritance, the
assurance which we have of salvation: which we are so to hold, as that if an
Galath. 1. 8. 9
Angel from heaven should teach us another Gospel, or propound unto us
another way of justification, (as namely by inherent righteousness, and our
own obedience) we ought to hold him accursed, and our selves also, if we
yield to him. For whosoever look to be justified by the obedience which the
Law prescribes, they Galath. 5. 4.
are separated from Christ, and fallen from grace.

We do not deny, but that the Gospel teaches repentance as well as faith;
and commends the duties of sanctification, as well as it promises
justification. Yea, as it promises the grace of justification to those that
believe; so to them that are justified and redeemed, it promises the Luke 1.
74. Ier. 31. 33. 34.
grace of sanctification by the spirit, whereby they are enabled in some
measure to worship God in honesse and righteousness. We do also confess,
that a greater measure of knowledge and obedience is required of the faithful
under the Gospel, then was under the Law; because to whom more is given, of
them more is required, and the greater benefit requires the greater duties of
thankfulness. But when the question is of the matter of our justification, and
merit of our salvation, whereby we being sinners and lost in our selves,
should be justified before God, and entitled unto the kingdom of heaven;
what that is, whereby we are absolved from our sins, and accepted as
righteous, and as heirs of eternal life; what that is, which will stand in
judgment before God, and which we may trust unto, when we appear before the
iudgemens seat of God, why the sentence of condemnation should not be
pronounced againstvs; what that is, whereby we are re^eemed from death, and
reconciled unto God, or, as the Scripture utters the same thing in other
terms* 2. Cor. 5. 19. Ephesians. ^. 7.
whereby we have remission of sins: it is most plain, that the doctrine of
the Gospel places the whole matter of justification, and merit of salvation
in the righteousness and obedience of Christ alone; by whose blood, as the
Apostle R^^. 5. 9. 18. 19.
speaks, and by whose obedience, we are justified. As for that
righteousness which is inherent in our selves, though infused of God, and that
obedience which is performed by our selves, though proceeding from grace; the
Gospel teaches us, in the question of justification, Philip. 3. 8. 9.
to esteem it as dross and dung, yea as loss, that we may gain Christ, and
may be found in him, not having our own righteousness, which is prescribed in
the law, but that which is through the law of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God through faith.

This therefore is the liberty which we have by the grace of justification,
that we are freed from that miserable bondage of the law, which exacteth an
obedience and righteousness inherent unto justification, which no man is able
to perform, and therefore holds men in (...) to damnation, engendring with
Agar Gal. 4. 24. etc.
as the Apostle speaks, none but servants which shall not inherit with the
children of the free woman, that is, who are begotten by the Gospel, to be the
heirs of that righteousness which is by faith.

And thus much of the liberty of justification as it is an immunity.. 13.
For as it is (...), The liberty of iustif^cati^^ as it is a right. with the
(...) ledges thereof.
or right; it also contains many notable privileges.

First that we are not only freed from the guilt of sin, but also are
accepted pronounced just, and by imputation of Christ's, both Romans 5. 9. 19.
passive and active obedience made rihgteous, which Romans ^. 6. 7. 2. Cor. 5. 21.
immediately follows upon the former, so that by our justification we are not
only made not guilty, but also stand righteous before God, and that, by the
righteousness of Christ.

Secondly, what we are not only freed from the curse of the law, but also are
made pa^takers of the Gal. 3. 13. 14. 16.
blessedness promised to Abraham viz. that in h^s Genesis 22. 18.
seed, which is Christ, the faithful of all nations should be blessed. But
this will best appear in the particulars: for the faithful are not only
freed from the evils of this life, whether corporal or spiritual, as they be
curses; but they are all turned into blessings unto them. For this is the
privilege of the faithful, that the Lord causes all things, whether good or
bad, Romans 8. 28.
To work together for the good of those that do love him. In which sense
David says, Psalm. 1. 3.
that all things succeed well with the righteous man. As for afflictons, he
both professes in particular of himself, Psalm. 119. 71
that it was good for him that he had been afflicted; and also in general
pronounces the man Psalm. 94. 12. 13.
blessed, whom the Lord does chastise and teach in his law.

Again, corporal death is not only no loss to the faithful; but also an
advantage; because in it they change a sinful and mortal life, for a life
blessed and immortal. It is not only no curse, but also a blessing: for it is
not only the end of sin and misery, but the beginning of perfect and
everlasting happiness; whereupon the holy Ghost Apec. 14. 13
pronounces them all Blessed that die in the Lord.

Neither are the faithful only freed fom fear of damnation, but also are put
in assurance of everlasting life, being Romans 8. 24.
saved in hope, which is the chief happiness that can be enjoyed in this life.

Thirdly we are not only freed from the sentence of the law, exacting of us
perfect obedience unto justification, but we have also liberty to plead the
righteousness propounded in the covenant of grace; and to appeal from the
sentence of the law, to the promise of the Gospel; from the tribunal of
justice to the the one of grace; and in the question of justification not at
all to regard our own obedience, but wholly to rest upon the mercies of God
and merits of Christ our Savior.

Upon this liberty of justification follow other privileges. For first,
whereas by nature we are the children of wrath; now, Romans 5. 1.
being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has Colos. 1. 20. 21.
reconciled us to

2 Whereas sin makes a Esaias. 59. 2.
separation between God and us, so that naturally we shun the presence of
God, as of a severe Judge; being justified by the righteousness of Christ, we
also have free Romans 5. 2. Eph^s. 3. 12. 1. Ioh. 5. 14.
access unto God by faith, and have liberty with boldness and assurance that
we shall be heard, to make our requests to God in the name of Christ.

3 Upon our justification by faith, Romans 5. 5. Ephesians. 1. 13. Romans 8. 15. 16.
Gal. 4. 6. Ephesians. 4. 30.
we are endued with the spirit of adoption, which assures us of Gods fatherly
love toward us, teaching us to cry in our hearts, Abba Father; by which,
being the earnest of our inheritance, we are sealed up unto the day of our full
redemption.

4 With the hope of salvation, which is Romans 8. 23. Tit. 2. 13.
a companion of justifying faith, and a consequent of justification, whereby we
live in expectation of everlasting happiness.

5 With joy Romans 5. 2. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 8.
in the holy Ghost, which Peter calls joy unspeakable and glorious. For the
Apostle denying that the liberty of Christians does chiefly stand in Romans 14.
17.
meat and drink, and in the free use of outward things; shows also wherein
it principally does consist. For the kingdom of God (says he) is not meat and
drink but righteousness, which is the privilege of justification it self,
and peace and joy in the holy Ghost, which are consequents of the former.

Lastly, Iohm 8 35.
with perseverance. For as the Son abides in the house for ever, being 1.
Pet. 1. 5. (...).
safely kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. For if Romans 8.
17.
sons, then heirs, heirs of God, and coheires with Christ, etc,

Now I come to the liberty which we have in our sanctification,. 14
and so far forth as we are sanctified. The liberty of sanctification. 1.
From the dominion of sin.
Now our sanctification in this life being but in part, so is this liberty:
which, as it is an immunity, is also a freedom from the bondage of sin, and
of the law; though in other respects, then those that have been mentioned in
the liberty of justification.

For, in justification we are freed from the guilt of sin, in sanctification,
from the corruption of sin. But here we are to consider, how far forth we
are set free therefrom. For the Hypocritall Papists teach, that when a man is
regenerated, or as they also speak, justified, original sin is so
abolished, as that it does not only not reign, but not so much as remain or
live in the party sanctified. By which doctrine they teach men to be
desperate hypocrites, either searing their conscience, that they may have no
sense of sin, and may please themselves with this conceit, that they have no
sin* in which respect the saying of Peter 2. Pet. 2. 19.
is verified of them, that whiles they promise liberty to themselves and
others, they are indeed servants of corruption: or if they have any sense of
sin dwelling in them, they must persuade themselves they are not sanctified,
nor justified, and therefore not to be saved: such miserable comforters they
are of poor sinners, as to persuade them that they have not remission of
sin, until sin be quite abolished in them. But this doctrine they teach
contrary to the evident testimonies of Scripture, contrary to the perpetual
experience of the faithful, contrary to the light of their own conscience;
that they might thereby uphold their Antichristian doctrine of justification by
inherent righteousness, and of the merit of good works, which otherwise would
fall to the ground. For, if in respect of original sin, remaining and
dwelling in us, we be in our selves sinners: how can we be justified by
inherent righteousness? If our best actions be stained with the flesh, and our
righteousness Esaias. 64. 6.
be like polluted clouts; how should they merit eternal life?

We are therefore to hold, that in regeneration we are freed from the corruption
of sin; not wholly, and at once, but in part, and by degrees; that sin
(though mortified in part, and we freed from the tyranny of it, that it reign
no more with full swinge and authority in us) still remains and dwells in
us, hindering us from good, provoking us unto evil, defiling and cotaminating
our best actions, never suffering us with the full consent of Galath. 5. 17.
will, to perform or desire that which is good. As the Apostle plainly
shows by his own example, Romans 7. Romans 7. 14. etc.
where the concupiscence remaining in him, is not only plainly called a sin,
but described as a sin, and as an (...), or a repugnancie to the law of God:
the sense whereof (though the Papists have no sense of it) made the holy
Apostle cry out, Romans 7. 24.
Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Accursed therefore was the counsel of Trent Sess. 5.
which confessing that the Apostle calls it a sin; notwithstanding
pronounces them accursed, that shall say it is a sin. But if we say we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, says S. John. 1. John. 18.
, and there is no truth in us.

The freedom therefore which we have in our sanctification, which as Augustine
says, is but begun in this life, is not from the being of sin in us
altogether and at once, though we be freed from it, in part and by degrees, but
from the dominion of it, that we should no more be servants of sin, but being
freed from sin, might become servants of righteousness, Romans 6. 6. 18. which
Augustine ^^ Ioh. tract. 41.
did well observe out of the words of the Apostle, dehorting us that sin
should not remain in our mortal bodies. He does not say, let it not be; but,
let it not reign: for whiles thou live, it cannot be avoided, but that sin
will be in thy members; nevertheless let dominion be taken from it, etc. Of
this liberty the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. Romans 8. 2.
the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ, has made me free from the
law of sin and of death. That is, the power of the quickening Spirit, which
being in Christ our head, and from him communicated unto us, does rule in us as
a law, does free us from the power of sin which works death, that it no more
have dominion (as it were a law) in us. And Romans 6. Romans 6. 2. etc (...) 12.
having proved, that sin neither does, nor can any more reign in the
faithful, because after the similitude of Christ's death and resurrection, they
are dead to sin and risen again; and therefore, as death can no more have
dominion over Christ, being (...) from death, no more can sin have dominion
over the faithful being once risen from the grave of sin: afterward verse. 14.
he assures the faithful, that sin shall Romans 6. 14.
not have dominion over them, because they be not under the Law, but under
grace. Likewise Saint John (...)
says, He that is borne of God, does not commit sin, namely, as a servant of
sin: yea, he adds, that he cannot sin, namely, with full swinge and consent
of will, as those which be servants of sin; because the seed of God remains
in him, whereby he is partly spirit, and not only flesh. And therefore as he
cannot perfectly will that which is good, because of the reluctation of the
flesh; so can he not will with full consent, that which is evil, because of
the reluctation of the spirit.

Secondly,. 15. 2. Freedom from the dominion of the law.
we are in our sanctification freed from the Law. But we are here also to
consider, quatenus, now far forth. For the Bellarm. de iusti^. lib. 4. cap.
5. etc. 1.
Papists charge us, that we place Christian liberty in this, that we are
subject to no law in our conscience, and before God; and that we are free from
all necessity of doing good works: which is a most divelish slander. For
although they absurdly confound justification and fanctification; yet they know
we do not: neither are they ignorant, but that we put a great difference
between them in this respect. For though we teach that the obedience of the
Law is not required in us to justification, but that we are freed from the
exaction of the Law in that behalf: yet we deny not* but that unto
sanctification the obedience of the law is required, and we by necessity of
duty, bound to the observation thereof. We confess that to be free from
obedience, is to be the servants of sin, and the willing and cheerful worship
of God, in Luke 174^
holiness and righteousness without fear, to be true liberty. We acknowledge
that the moral law of God is perpetual and immutable; and that this is an
everlasting truth, that the creature is bound to worship and obey his Creator,
and so much the more bound, as he has received greater benefits. Indeed we
say with Luther De li^^rt, Christ.
, that in our justification we are restored to a state of justice, from which
Adam fell; but yet, as we teach that we are no more bound to obedience, that
thereby we might be justified, then Adam who was already just; so we profess,
that in allegiance and thankfulness, we are more bound to obey then he, yea,
we profess that God does therefore free us from the curse, and the bondage of
the law, that we might be enabled with freedom of spirit to obey it; and that
being freed from sin Romans 6. 18.
, we are made the servants of righteousness. We teach, that God having sworn
Luke 173. 74.
, that to those whom he justifies, he will give grace to worship him in
holiness and righteousness; no man can be assured of his justification without
obedience: that sanctification being the end of our Ephesians. 1. 4. 1. These. 4. 7.
Titus. 2. 14. Ephesians. 2. 10.
election, calling, redemption and regeneration, it is a necessary consequent
of saving grace. We teach and profess, that howsoever good works do not
concur with faith, unto the act of iustifica^^on, as a cause thereof; yet
they con^^^re in the party justified, as necessary fruits of faith, and
testimonies of justification. And as we teach with Paul Romans 3. 28. G^l. 2. 16.
, that faith alone does justify; so with James Iam. 2. 14. etc.
, that the ^aith which is alone does not justify. We teach, that the blood of
Christ, as it acquitteth us from the guilt of sin; so does it also purge Heb.
9. 14.
our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God; that he bare 1.
Pet. 2. 24.
in his body upon the cross our sins, that we being delivered from sin,
should live in righteousness: that whom Christ does justify by faith, them
he does sanctify by his Spirit; that whosoever ^. Cor. 5. 17.
is in Christ he is a new creature, Gal. 5. 24.
crucifying the flesh with the lusts thereof, and Romans 8. 1;
walking not after the flesh, but after the spirit. We profess that good
works are necessary to salvation, though not necessitate efficientiae, as
causing it as the Papists teach; yet necessitate praesentiae, as necessary
fruits of our faith, whereby we are to glorify God, and to testify our
thankfulness, to do good to our brethren, and to make sure 2. Pe^. 1. (...).
our election, calling and justification unto our selves; as necessary
forerunners of salvation, being the undoubted badges of them that shall be
saved; being the way wherein we are to Ephesians. 2. (...).
walk to everlasting life, being the evidence according to which God will
judge us at the last day. And lastly, that as by justification God does entitle
us unto his kingdom; so by sanctification he does sit and prepare us thereto.

We do not therefore by the doctrine of justification through faith, abolish
the Law, but rather as the Apostle says Romans 3. 31.
, stablish it. For the more a man is assured of his free justification, the
better he is enabled, and the more he is bound to obey it.

But although we be bound to obey the Law, as the subjects of God, and
servants of (...); and although the Law (...) in those that are iusti^^^d, as
being a rule of direction for our obedience, in the per^ormance of the duties
or piety toward God, of justice toward our neighbor, of sobriety toward
ourselves; and a glass of detection to manifest the imperfections of our
obedience, to keep us from Phari^^^sme: and lastly, a rod of correction, in
respect of flesh or the old man yet remaining in us, that by precepts, by
exhortations and comminations, it more and more may be mortified in us, and we
kept from the spirit of slumber and security:) yet notwithstanding we are not
under the law, as the Romans 6. 14.
Apostle says, but under grace. We are therefore in our sanctification freed,
though not from the obedience, yet from the servitude and bondage of the law,
and that in three respects:

First,. 16. Freedom from the irritation of the law.
in respect of the irritation of it. In which regard especially the law is
called the 1. Cor. 15. 56
strength of sin: not that the law causes or provoke sin properly, for
the Romans 7. 12.
law is holy, just and good; but only by accident, and occasionally. For such
is the corruption of our untamed nature until we be renewed by the spirit of
God; Nitimur in vetitum s^mper cupimu (...) negata. Gens human^ ruit in
vetitun^ ne^as. qu^d ^on lic^t, acrius vrit.
that when the law, which is holy and good, forbids sin, seeking to stop
the course of our concupiscences, and to bridle our sinful affections; thereby
our untamed corruption rebelleth so much the more; and that it might appear
Romans 7. 13. 8.
(...), exceedingly sinful, by occasion of the law works in us all manner of
concupiscence. Even, as a deep river, when nothing hinders his course, has a
still, and as it were a dead motion; but if you seek to restrain or stop
his course, he will sinell and ouerflow all, now disdaining, as it were, a
bridge: so our corruption, when it freely takes his own course, seems to be
quiet, and as it were dead: but when the commandment comes, Romans 7. (...).
^aith the Apostle, as it were to dam it up, sin reuiueth and rises against
it, swelling and ouerflowing as it were, his wonted banks. In this respect,
the law (says the Master of the Lib. 3. dict. (...). ^.
Sentences) is called a killing letter, because forbidding sin, it increases
concupiscence, and adds transgression until grace do free us. But we are
regenerated by the spirit of sanctification, and by the bond of the same spirit
coupled unto Christ; we are freed from this bondage, even as the wife is freed
from the dominion of her husband by his death. For even as whilst we were in
the flesh altogether unregenerate, the law, as it were our husbands,
occasionally and by accident begot in our souls, wholly corrupted with sin,
evil motions and concupiscences, as the fruits and issue of our flesh tending
unto death: so we being regenerated, and after a sort dead unto this
corruption, and consequently being mortified to the law in respect of the
irritation thereof, and the law in that regard dead unto us, the spirit of
Christ, who has united us unto him as our second husband, begets good
motions in us as the fruits of the spirit, acceptable unto ^od. This is that
which the Apost. teaches, Romans 7. ^ etc.
Romans 7. for having said chap. 6. 14. that sin shall not have dominion over
us, because we are not under the law but under grace, after he had answered an
objection, and prevented the abuse of this Doctrine, which carnal men would
make thereof, as though they might sin freely, because they are not under the
law: in the beginning of the seventh chapter he proves, that we are not under
the Law, but under grace, by that similitude which even now I mentioned:
because being regenerated and dead unto sin, we are mortified to the law, and
the law to us in respect of the irritation thereof, caused by our corruption;
and consequently are delivered from the power of it, as a wife is freed from
the dominion of her husband, when he is dead.

Secondly in our sanctification we are freed from the coaction and terror of
the law, Freedom from the terror or (...) of the L^w.
breeding servile fear in men unregenerate; whereby, as bon-servants or
gally-slaues by the whip, they are enforced to the performance of some outward
duties, which otherwise they are unwilling to do. For those who are under the
Law, as all men are by nature, are like bond-slaues; who for avoiding of
punishment, are by terror drawn to do some forced service, which is so much
the more unwilling, because they look for no reward. This in the Scripture is
called sometimes (...), Romans 8. 15.
the spirit of bondage, and sometimes (...), (...). 1. 7.
the spirit of fear, from which we are delivered, when we receive the spirit
of adoption and sanctification; whereby we are enabled to worship God in
holiness and righteousness, (...), without servile fear, according to the
covenant of grace made with Abraham, Luke I. (...). 1 74.
And in this sense it is said, that the Law ^. Tim. 1. 9.
is not imposed on the just, to whom, being as it were a law unto themselves,
and willingly performing that which is right, the terror and coaction of the
Law, so far fo^^^ (...) they are regenerate, is needless.

Thirdly as we are freed from the coaction and terror of the Law, Freedom from
the rigor or exaction of the law.
so also from the exaction and rigor of the Law, which they call (...): which
though it be a liberty of sanctification, and appertaining to our new
obedience; yet it depends on the liberty of justification. For as there we
were freed from the Laws exaction of inherent righteousness, to the
acceptance of our persons: so here we are freed from the laws exaction of
perfect obedience, to the acceptance of our actions. So that whereas the law
condemns every the least imperfection or defect, not agreeing with that
perfection of justice, which it prescribes, as a sin, or (...), and
pronounces the party in whom that defect or imperfection is, accursed:
notwithstanding the new obedience of Gods children, wrought in them by the
spirit of God, and performed according to the measure of grace received; though
defective in it self, and stained with the flesh, is accepted of God; who
covers their imperfections with the perfect obedience of Christ, and not so
much respects the perfection of the outward act, which he does not expect
from such weakness, as the integrity of the heart, the uprightness of the
will and desire, the sincerity of the endeavor; which if it be not wanting,
the Lord 2. Cor. 8. 12.
accepts the will for the deed, and true endeavor striving ^ Phil. 3. 14.
15.
toward perfection, for the perfect performance. In which respect, the Lord
according to his gracious promise, Malac. 3. 17 Psalm. 103. 13.
uses clemency toward us, as a tender father uses clemency toward his
son, taking in good part the childish endeavor of his children, proceeding
from an unfeigned desire to please him.

But our liberty in sanctification is not only an immunity,. 17. The liberty of
sanctification as it is a right, with the privileges thereof.
but also an (...), or right, consisting of great privileges. For, first we
are not only freed in part from the corruption of sin, which we call
mortification; but are also positiuely made righteous, being, as the Apostle
Peter speaks, made partakers 2. Pet. 1. 4.
of the divine nature, in that flying from the corruption which is in the world
by lust, we are renewed according to the Ephesians. 1. 24.
image of God, in holiness and righteousness. For as the sacred oil being
powered on the head of Psalm. 133.
Aron (who was a type of Christ) distilled unto his lower parts: so the Psalm.
45. 8.
oil of grace wherewith Christ our head was anointed John. 3. 34.
without measure, is derived even to his inferior members here on earth, who
are also therewith 2. Cor. 1. 21. 1. John. 2. 20. 27.
anointed, John. 1. 16.
receiving of his fullness, even grace for grace. Neither are we only freed
from the servitude of sin, Satan, and the world, but in Christ our King, who
has overcome Ioh. 16. 33. Coloss. 2. 15.
the world, and triumphed over sin and Satan, we are also made Kings Apocal.
^1. 6^ Romans 16. 20. 2. Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8. 37.
with assurance to be co^querers of all the enemies of our salvation.

And as touching the Law, we are not only freed from the irritation thereof,
whereunto our own corruption did make us subject, as unto a husband, who begot
foul issue of us tending to death, and so left at large: but we are also
joined to another husband which is Christ, by his Spirit, whereby Romans 7. 4.
he produces in us the fruits of the spirit, to the glory of God. Neither does
the law only cease to provoke us unto sin; but, when we are once sanctified,
it becomes, as David Psalm. 119. 24.
speaks, a counselor unto us, and a directour unto good things.

Neither are we freed only from the spirit of bondage and fear, but are also
endued with the spirit of liberty and grace, the spirit Romans ^^ 15.
of adoption, the spirit of 2. Tim. 1. 7.
power and of love, and of sobriety: which spirit having shed Romans 5. 5.
abroad the love of God in our hearts, testifying unto us our adoption, and as
an Ephesians. 1. ^4.
earnest assuring us of our inheritance, and enflaming our hearts with a
reciprocal love of God, and of our neighbor for his sake: we begin to delight
Romans 7. 22. Psalm. 1. 2. 119. 24.
in the law of God, as concerning the inner man, neither are the commandments
of God 1. John. 5. 3.
grievous unto us, and we begin to serve the Lord not only without fear, but
also with ^. Chron. 28. ^.
willing minds and upright hearts. For those who are redeemed and sanctified
by Christ, are (...), Psalm 110. 3.
a people of willingness, (...). 2. 14.
a people peculiar to himself, zealous of good works.

And lastly, concerning the rigor of the Law; we have not only this immunity,
that the imperfections of our sincere obedience are not imputed to us; but also
this privilege, that our imperfect obedience, which in it self is worthy to
be rejected, notwithstanding is both accepted of God, and rewarded. For Christ
having washed us with his blood, and sanctified us by his spirit, has made us
both kings, as I said before, and also Apocal. 1. 6.
Priests, or as Peter speaks, 1. Pet. 2. 5. ^^
a royal and holy Priest hood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ: the sacrifice of obedience whereby we offer our selves
Romans 12. ^.
as a lively, holy and acceptable sacrifice unto God, which is our reasonable
service: the sacrifice of alms, whereby we offer our goods, with which Heb.
13. 16.
sacrifices God is well pleased: the sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart
Psalm. 51. 19.
, which is to God in stead of all sacrifices: the sacrifice of prayer, which is
accepted Psalm. 141. ^.
as incense, and as the evening sacrifice: the sacrifice of praise, that is,
the Heb. 13. 15.
fruit, or as Hosea ^^os. 14. 3.
speaks, the calves of our lips, which the Lord prefers Psalm. 50. 13. 14.
23.
before the sacrifices of goats and bulls: all which, though in themselves
defective and imperfect* are notwithstanding acceptable unto God, through the
mediation of Christ; who, making intercession for us, per^umeth Apo^. 8. 3. 4.
all these sacrifices of ours, with the odours of his own sacrifice, that so
they may be acceptable, and sweet smelling favors unto God.

Neither are they only accepted, but also rewarded. For our Prou. 11. 18. Psalm.
19. 11.
obedience, our Heb. 10. 35. James. 1. 12.
confidence, our patience, our Mat. 6. 4. 6. 18.
prai^er, fasting, alms, and Luke 6. 35.
charitable deeds have their rewards, in so much that Mat. 10. 4^.
a cup of cold water given in charity, shall not lose his reward. In respect
whereof, we may well say with David Psalm. 62. 13.
, unto thee Lord, mercy: for thou rewardest a man according to his work. Which
plainly proves, that the reward of our obedience is not to be ascribed to the
merit of our works, (which in themselves cannot stant in judgment) but to the
mercies of God in Christ. For there is greater mercy in not imputing unto us
the imperfections of our works; greater in accepting of them as if they were
perfect; but greatest of all in rewarding them. The consideration whereof,
ought to animate and stir us up with willing and cheerful minds, to obey
God, to serve him, to call upon him, and to perform such duties as he
requires of us; because we are to be assured, that he does not impute unto us
our wants, but accept our imperfect obedience, and not only favorably accept
it, but also graciously reward it.

Hitherto we have spoken of the common liberty of Christians:. 18. The special
liberty of Christians, or that which is peculitar to the faithful under the
Gospel.
which being (as we have heard) conferred upon us in our vocation,
justification, and sanctification; we are to be exhorted to give all diligence,
both that we may be called, justified, and sanctified, and that our caling,
justification, ^and sanctification may be made sure unto us, by leading a godly
life. For if we be not sanctified, nor justified, nor called, then are we
(whatsoever we are, rich or poor, noble or base, learned or unlearned) the
most miserable bond-slaues of sin and Satan; and being servants, howsoever
for a time we retain a place in the house of God, yet we shall not abide for
ever, but when the time of separation comes, we shall be cast out: whereas
contrariwise being made free by our calling, justification, sanification, as
the sons of God, we shall have the privilege of sons, which is, John. 8. 35.
to abide in the house of God for ever.

Now follows the Christian liberty, which is peculiar to the faithful under
the Gospel. For the faithful under the old Testament, though they were sons
and heirs, and therefore enjoyed the former liberties by Christ, in whom they
believed: notwitstanding until the fullness of time came, which was the full
age of the Church, they were under years; and therefore as sons during their
minority, were subject to Gal. 4. 1. (...) 3. 24.
schoolemasters and Tutors, whereby are meant the peadagogy and government of
the typical Church of the Jews, contained in the ceremonial and judicial
laws of Moses; in which regard, they, though sons, seemed little to differ
from servants. Both these laws were appendices of the law moral: the
ceremonial, of the first table, determining the particulars of that peculiar
worship which he prescribed to the typical Church, until the coming of
Christ. The judicial, of the second, determining the particulars of the
peculiar policy which he prescribed to the Common wealth of the Jews. So that
the ceremonial, were the Ecclesiastical laws of that Church; the judicial,
the civil laws of that Common wealth. Both were yokes of bondage, as the
Apostle speaks Gal. 5. ^.
, in respect of the Jews, on whose consciences these laws were imposed,
binding them to the strict observation thereof; in regard whereof, they are
called an Act. 15. 10.
unsupportable yoke, under which notwithstanding, the faithful were (...),
Gal. 4. 3.
held in bondage. And as touching the Gentiles, they were as a Ephesians. 2. 1^
wall of separation between the^ and the Jews, and as the door of Noah's Arc,
excluding all from salvation that were not of that Church, either as borne
Jews, or as proselytes. For the rest were without Ephesians. 2. 1^
Christ, aliants from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the
covenants of promise, having no hope, living without God in the world. This
wall of partition Ephesians. 2. 14. etc.
our Savior Christ by his death has dissolved, taking away all difference
Act. 15. 9.
between Jews and Gentiles, freeing and exempting both the one and the other,
from the obedience both of the judicial and ceremonial law, which were given
to put a difference between the Jews and the Gentiles, until the fullness of
time, Gal. 4. 4.
Gal. 4. 4. the time Heb. 9. 10.
of reformation, that is, until the coming of the Messiah, by whose death
they were to be 2. Cor. 3. 11. 13.
abrogated. For howsoever the faithful, before the Church came to full age,
were in bondage under the ceremonial, and judicial law, as under
schoolemasters and Tutors; yet^, when Gal. 4. 3. 4. 5^
the fullness of time came, God sent his Son borne of a woman, and borne
under the law, that he might redeem them that were under the law: meaning that
we are redeemed, not only from the moral law, in the respects before named;
but also from the ceremonial and judicial, even in respect of obedience.

For as touching the ceremonial law, as it was an Coloss. 2. 14. (...), Ephesians.
2. 15.
handwriting of ordinances which was (though underhand) against us; Christ
has cancelled it, and nailed it to his cross. As it was a Heb. 10. 1. Coloss.
2. 17^ John. 1. 17^
shadow and figure of things to come, Christ has abollished it, by performing
that indeed, which it did but shadow and prefigure: for the law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth by Christ. For as grace is opposed to the curse, so
truth to figures: the ceremonies therefore of the law gave place as shadows to
the body, and as figures to the truth.

The civil or judicial law, being the positive laws of that people, Christ
abrogated, when according to the prophecy of Daniel Dan. 9. 26^ 27.
, he destroying the Commonwealth of the Jews, their city and temple, did
withal abollish their policy and laws. For the very city, temple, and whole
state of the Jews, being types and shadows of Christ and his Church, were,
when Christ was exhibited, and his universal Church by preaching the Gospel
to all nations, planted Mat. 2^. (...).
, to give place; and with them, their laws; which were to hold but till the
fullness of time. For as the Apostle says, the Priesthood (namely, of Aaron)
being translated, Heb. 7. 1^.
the law (namely of Moses) is also translated.

Howbeit there is some difference between the abrogating of the Ceremonial,
and of the judicial law: the ceremonial rites, because they were principally
ordained to prefigure Christ, are so abollished, that it is not lawful for
Christians to observe them, for that were to deny that Christ is come. Ea non
obseruant Christiani (says Contra Fanstum M^ich. lib. 19. cap. 18.
Augustine) per quae Christus promittebatur; nec adhuc promittuntur, quiaiam
impleta sunt: Christians do not observe those things, by which Christ was
promised; neither are they still promised, because they are already fulfilled.
The judicial ordinances, because they principally tended to the observation of
justice and equity, may be used, so they be not imposed or observed by virtue
of the judicial law: for that were, though indirectly, to deny that the
Messiah is already come. Both laws were dead with Christ, though they were not
buried, but as it were kept above ground, even by Christians among the Jews,
until the dissolution of the temple and city of Jerusalem. After which time,
the ceremonial precepts were not only dead, as Tho. 1. 2. quaest. 104.
one says, but also deadly to the obseruers of them,. 19. Peculiar Christian
libe^ty, as it is an immunity.
but the judicials not so.

Now, this Christian liberty as it is an immunity, is a freedom from from all
bond of conscience, in respect of outward things, which are neither commanded
nor forbidden in the eternal law of God. Of which there are two sorts, the
ordinances of men concerning things indifferent, and the creatures of God.

For as touching the former, seeing there is no law that binds the conscience
properly, but only the law of God, in which sense he is called Iame. 4. 12.
our only Lawgiver, and seeing we are freed from those laws of God, which
determined those particulars, which are neither commanded nor forbidden in the
moral law of God: it is plain therefore, that our conscience is free in
respect of these things. As for the laws of men, whether they be
ecclesiastical or civil, they do not properly bind the conscience; because
neither is simple obedience due unto them, neither can they make any
particular, which in respect of the moral law, is indifferent, as being
neither commanded nor forbidden, to be simply necessary. The conscience of a
Christian is exempted from humane power, and cannot be bound, but where God
does bind it. And therefore the Apostle, as he charge the Corinthians, that,
seeing they were 1. Cor. ^. 23.
bought with a price, they should not be the servants of men, (which is not to
be understood of external servitude, but of the bondage of the conscience) and
likewise the Colossians, Coloss. 2. 16.
that no man should condemn them, (that is, take upon him to bind the
conscience with guilt of sin) in respect of meat and drink, or holy days:
so he reproves the Coloss. 2. 20. 21. ^^^^^^.
Colossans, for observing the traditions of men, with opinion of necessity, as
if the conscience were bound by them, or religion were to be placed in them.

Herein therefore the Church of Rome is also an enemy to Christian liberty, not
only in burthening Christians with an heap of innumerable traditions and
ceremonies; but chiefly, in imposing them upon the conscience: teaching, that
the traditions of the Church are with like Conc. Trid. Sess. 4.
reverence, and equal affection of piety to be received, as the written word
of God; and that the commandments of the Church, even concerning outward
things, do bind the conscience, And although many of their ceremonies be
wicked; more, ridiculous; most of them, superfluous; yet so absurd they are, as
to impose them to be observed, not only with opinion of necessity, as binding
the conscience, but also of worship, of perfecton, of merit, of spiritual
efficacy.

Secondly, by this liberty we are freed from scrupulosity of conscience, in
respect of the creatures, which are ordained for our use; the difference of
clean and unclean (which was made by the ceremonial law) being taken away.
Nothing, ^aith our Savior Christ, Mat. 15. 11.
that goes into the mouth, de^ileth a man. And Paul, Romans 14. 14.
I know, says he, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
common or unclean of it self.

But this liberty is not only an immunity,. 20 span^
but also an (...) or power, both in respect of the ordinances of men, and also
of the creatures of God. For, being freed from the ceremonial, and judicial
laws of God, and therefore not tied to any particular or certain laws, which
should determine the particulars not mentioned in the word of God: hereupon
arises a liberty, both to law-giuers, and those who are subject to laws. The
Law-giuers are not restrained to any particulars, but have liberty to ordain
such wholesome, either constitutions Ecclesiastical, or laws civil, as are not
repugnant to the word of God. Laws there must be, to determine the particulars
not mentioned in the general law of God: for they are the very bond of humane
societyes, necessary for the execution of the laws of God, and for the
maintenance of peace and order among men. Neither can it be denied, but that as
the judicial law being abollished, it is lawful for Law-giuers to ordain
civil laws; so likewise the ceremonial law being abrogated, to establish
laws Ecclesiastical. Only the question is, who must be these Law-giuers.
Surely, not the Presbyteries of every parish, which never were in use in the
Primitive Church, but Synodes; as appears by the perpetual practice of the
Church, both in the Apostles times, and ever since. Synodes, I say, either
provincial, or national; and those assembled, either out of some nation, or
out of some more then one, which some call Consilia media, or lastly general.
The authority of Synodes provincial and national has always been of great
regard, though there want a Christian Magistrate to second and confirm them,
being both assembled and moderated by the authority of Metropolitanes and
Archbishops: but when both national Synodes are assembled, and the Synodall
constitutions ratified by the authority of the Sovereign, and that according
to the positive laws of the land, authorizing him so to do; I see not, why
men should not as well think themselves bound to observe laws
Ecclesiastical, as Civil. For though some make a difference between them in
this behalf, because civil laws determining particulars belonging to the
second table, cannot be violated without breaking the second table, whereas
ecclesiastical laws determining particulars appertaining to the first table,
may be broken without transgressing of the first table; yet, who sees not the
weakness of this distinction? Seeing the second table is broken by disobeying
the lawful authority of superiors (which we ought to obey for conscience
sake) as well by transgressing the one, as the other. Superiors in the Church
are to be honored and obeyed by the fifth commandment, and other Scriptures
Heb. 13. 17.
, as well as superiors, in the commonwealth. And if their constitutions, when
they wanted the concurrence of a Christian Magistrate, were of force in the
Primitive Church; then much greater is their validity, being confirmed by the
authority of the Sovereign, and the Sovereign authorized thereunto by Law.

The freedom of the subject is, that being freed from the yoke of the
judicial and ceremonial law he may with a free conscience obey any other
laws whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, which being not dissonant from the
word of God, are or shall be imposed upon him. Which, though it be a plain and
evident truth, yet by some men it is not observed.

And as touching the use of the creatures, and of all things indifferent, we
are to know, that the right and dominion we had over the creatures, which was
lost in Adam, is restored in Christ, (for all are yours, says the Apostle 1.
Cor. 3. 21.
, and you are Christ's) and that not only for Christians under the Gospel, but
also for all the faithful from the beginning. For we read, Genesis 9. Genesis 9. 2.
3.
that to Noah, who was the heir Heb. 11. 7.
of the righteousness, which is by faith, the grant was renewed, and free use
of the creatures permitted. Howbeit this freedom was by the ceremonial law
restrained, not only after the giving of the law of Moses; but also before, a
difference being put Genesis 7. 2. 9. 4
between things clean and unclean: which difference by Christ is taken away.
For, no Romans 14. 14.
creature is unclean of it self, but every 1. Tim. 4. 4.
creature is good, and nothing to be refused, but may be received with
thanksgiving. Yea of all outward things, not forbidden of God, which commonly
are called things indifferent, the Apostle affirms in general, that 1. Cor.
6. 12.
all things are lawful, and Tit. 1. 15.
to the pure all things are pure. By this liberty therefore the faithful are
privileged, with freedom of conscience, to use or forbear any of the
creatures of God created for our use, or things indifferent, without opinion of
necessity to be brought 1. Cor. 6. 11.
under the power thereof, or placing religion therein. In which respect, Basil
fitly calls things indifferent, (...), things in our power or left to our
liberty.

But here for avoiding of error, three things are from the general doctrine to
be repeated. First, that this also is a liberty. 21. Application of the
general doctrine to this particular. 1. That this also is a liberty of the
sons of God.
of the sons of God: secondly, that it is spiritual: and thirdly, that it is
a true liberty. For as touching the first; though all things be pure to the
pure; yet Tit. 1. 15.
to them that are unclean and unbelieving, nothing is clean. Though to Cor.
6. 12. 1. Tim. 4. 3.
the faithful all these outward things are lawful; yet to the wicked and
unbelievers nothing is lawful, yea, those actions, which are materially good
as being commanded of God, as they proceed from them, are turned into sin.
Which is spoken, not to this end, to derive me^ into desperate courses; but to
force them, without farther delays, to break off the course of their sins
by speedy and unfeigned repentance, and to sue unto God for mercy and pardon in
Christ; because this is the only thing which they may lawfully do and without
sin, and which until they do, they do nothing else but sin, and by sin
hoord up wrath against the day of wrath, etc.

Secondly, 2. That this (...) is a spiritual liberty.
though this liberty concern outward things; yet it self is inward and
spiritual, as being a liberty of the conscience. Now the conscience respects
God, as our outward actions and the external fruits of our conscience respect
men; who may moderate or restrain the external actions, wherein the outward
use of our liberty consists; the inward liberty notwithstanding of the
conscience before God, remaining entire. They greatly err, Instit. Lib. 3.
^ap. 19.. 10.
faith Calvin, who think that their Christian liberty is nothing, unless they
use it before men. But they ought to think, that by their liberty they obtain
no new thing in the sight of men, but before God; and that their liberty
consists as well in abstaining, as using. If they know, that it is a thing
indifferent before God, whether they eat flesh or eggs, put on red or black
apparel: it is enough and more then enough. The conscience is now loose,
whereto the benefit of this liberty does appertain: therefore, though
hereafter they abstain from flesh all their life, and always wear one
color; they are nevertheless free. Yea therefore because they are free, they
do with a free conscience abstain.

Thirdly, 3. That this also is a true liberty.
as this liberty is spiritual, so also a true liberty. Now all true and
lawful liberty of creatures, is limited and bounded: the liberty of the
Creator alone, being uncircumcised. Wherefore if any arrogate to themselves
an unbounded liberty, it is a licentiousness, and not a true liberty. As
first, in regard of laws and commandments of men; there are bounds set, first
to the lawgivers, in respect both of the things commanded, and also of the
manner of commanding. For, lawgiuers may not assume unto them a liberty to
command what they list, but only such things as they know, not to be repugnant
to the law of God. For they must know, that all their laws are limited by the
law of God, and themselves upon pain of damnation, restrained from commanding
that which God forbids, and from forbidding that which God commands. For
by wicked laws, they make themselves like Jeroboam, who caused all Israel to
sin. Moreover, they must be careful, not only to command that which is
lawful; but also in civil laws, those things which be expedient, and
profitable for the weal public; and in laws Ecclesiastical, such things as
tend 1. Cor. 14. 26. 40.
to decency, to order, and edification. Otherwise, though the subject may
lawfully obey, in such cases; yet the Lawgiuer offends in abusing his
authority, which was given him for the good of the inferiors.

Again, in respect of the manner, superiors must keep them within their
bounds, and not take upon them the authority of our James. 4. 1^
one only Lawgiuer, who has power to save, and to destroy; which is, to bind
the consciences of men, as, by imposing that upon the conscience as simply
necessary, which God by his law has left indifferent; or by teaching Man. 15.
2. 9.
men to place religion in the observation of their traditions. For this is the
practice of the Antichrist of Rome; who, usurping the authority of God, and
challenging to himself a boundless power, sits in the consci^nces of men,
as God.

Likewise to the subject; for as he may not think, that he has liberty to
obey any laws of men, though unlawful, and much less to place religion or
perfection in the observation of them, as the Papists do: so on the other
side, he may not think, that he has liberty to break the laws of men,
though not unlawful, and much less to place religion or perfection therein;
as they seem to do; who use to be opposite to the Papists in the contrary
extreme. For, I beseech you, do not many among us, think themselves the more
religious, for refusing obedience and conformity to the laws, and censure
others as formalists and time-servers? But beloved, as we are not to judge
Romans 14. ^^* etc.
those, who out of weakness refuse conformity; so those which be refractary
should not think, either the better of themselves for not conforming, or the
worse of others for conforming. The kingdom Romans 14. 1^.
of God does not stand in these things. And ce^tainly, if Gal. 5. 6. and. 6. 15.
neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision avail any thing; then much less the
use or forbearance of those ceremonies, which are in controversy among us. Does
not the Apostle plainly tell us, 1. Cor. 8. ^.
that these outward things do not commend us unto God, and that neither the
use or forbearance of them in it self does make us either better, or worse
before God? But when they be used or forborne with disobedience to lawful
authority, without due regard of avoiding scandal, with uncharitable censuring
and judging one of another, with alienation of the affection of one brother
from another; doubtless there is fault committed. And who sees not, that
while contentions grow hot about these things, both charity and piety waxes
cold?

Secondly in respect of the creatures and things indifferent, though we have
free liberty to use or forbear them; yet it is not a boundless liberty. For
the law of God has set it four bounds, viz. piety, loialty, charity, and
sobriety. Piety, respecting Gods glory and worship: Loialty, having reference
to superiors; Charity, to all men; Sobriety to our selves. Can thou not use
thy liberty in some particular, without Gods dishonor, or neglect of his
service? Remember, that whether 1. Cor. 10. 31
you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, you must do all to the glory of
God. Cannot thy liberty be used, without contempt of the Magistrates lawful
authority? Remember, that God has commanded thee to obey thy superiors in all
lawful things, as 1. Cor. 6. 12.
all things (not forbidden by God) are lawful; that all authority is Romans 13.
1. 2. 5.
from God, and that, he which resists lawful authority resists God; that
they which resist, shall receive to themselves judgment; and that thou must
obey not only for fear, but also for conscience sake. Remember what S. Peter
says, 1. Pet. 2. 13 16.
Be subject to all humane ordinance, whether the sovereign, or subordinate
governors. But how? As free, and not as having the liberty for a cloak of
naughtiness, but as the servants of God. Can it not be used without the
offense of thy weak brother? Take heed, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 8. 9. 10.
24. Romans 14. 15. 16.
lest thy liberty be an offense to the weak. For he that scandalizeth his
brother, sins against Christ. Wherefore if meat offend my brother, I will
not eat flesh whiles the world stands, rather then I will offend him.
Lastly, can it not be used in some particular, unless thou shall pass the
bounds of sobriety, temperance, humility, modesty, frugality, etc. Remember,
what the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 13.
Brethren you are called to liberty, only use not your liberty, as an occasion
to the flesh.

But here arises a doubtful question,. 22. Decision of a doubtful question,
what is to be done, when we seem to be in a strait between disobedience to
the Magistrate, and offense to the weak.
the explication whereof is needful for these times. For sometimes there
seems to be a conflict between the law of loyalty, and the law of charity;
as when that which the Magistrate commands, cannot (as we think) be
observed without the offense or scandal of the weak, In which case of
Antinomy (which some say is our case) diverse know not which way to turn them,
and others erroneously choose to disobey the Magistrate, rather then seem to
offend their weak brethren.

Consider therefore uprightly what I shall say, and the Lord give you
understanding minds, and tractable hearts, to see and embrace the truth.

First therefore understand, that we are never cast into such an exigent
between two sins not yet committed; but there is an issue from them both
without a third. Suppose therefore, that in this case there were an Antimony,
or such an opposition between the two laws of loyalty and charity, as that
the one could not be observed, without the neglect of the other. In such cases
of Antimony, we are to know, that if we obey the superior law, unto which we
are more bound, as having higher and more principal ends; the inferior Mat.
12. 7. Ierem. 7. 22. Luke 14. 26.
(which gives place unto it) is not broken. Now, the supreme end is the glory
of God; then, the common salvation of the Church; then, every man's own
salvation; then, the salvation of his neighbor; then, the common outward good
of the Church, or Commonwealth; then, our own; then, our neighbors. So that
public and common goods are to be preferred before private, and spiritual
before corporal, and the glory of God before all. Well then, thou say thou
may not yield to the ceremonies, as namely, the Surplice, the Cross, and
kneeling at communion; because these things cannot be done without
scandalizing of thy brother. Suppose it were so, and remember that I do but
suppose it. But on the other side, thou refusing the use of indifferent things,
whereunto thy Christian liberty extends, being enjoined by lawful authority,
with such conditions as these are enjoined; I say unto thee without
supposition, that besides thy disobeying the lawful authority of a Christian
Church, and of a Christian Magistrate, whom thou ought to obey even for
conscience sake; thou do scandalize, first, thy weak brethren being affected
as thy self, who by thine example, for which thou perhaps think thou have
good ground, are animated, or, as the Apostle 1. Cor. 8. 10.
speaks, edified, without ground, to contemn In this scandal they are
deepest, who are of greatest note.
the authority of the Magistrate, and of the Church; and from that contempt do
many of them proceed to mislike of the State; and from mislike, either to
separation, or to some degree of disloyal coffeehouse. Besides those of
thine own disposition, thou do offend them who are more loyally affected;
who, if they be not the better grounded in our Iud. 20.
most holy faith, do stumble at your practice, and begin to stagger in the
profession and practice of religion, when they see men seeming most zealous in
our religion, and professing, (as they pretend) the cause of sincerity, upon no
just cause to abandon their ministry, to oppose themselves against authority,
to maintain a faction in the Church, and wilfully (for any thing that they can
see) to persist in a bad course. And hereupon many take occasion to rest in
outward civility, without grace, and to mislike all forwardness in religion
for your sakes, etc.

Now here seems to be (...) a sca^dall falling two ways; indeed a single
supposed offense, opposed to a double scandal, joined with disobedience. If no
more could be said, who could doubt on which side rather to incline? But to
these I add other respects, that ought to be regarded more then a supposed
sca^dall. The question is not, as many would seem to understand it, whether,
it being a thing arbitrary, and merely left unto our own choice, either to
use these ceremonies, or to forbear them, (as it was in the Apostles question
of eating flesh) whether (I say) we ought to abstain, if we understood that a
brother would be offended at the use of them, or not: for then there were no
question, but that for avoiding of scandal, we ought to abstain. But these
things are not arbitrary, in our choice; but imposed by lawful authority, and
that with such condition, as that the observation of these things being
indifferent in themselves, becomes respectively necessary. First in respect
of authority, which not only for fear, but also for conscience (...). 13. 5.
sake, we are bound to obey in all lawful things. This one necessity of
obedience is sufficient to excuse me from scandal, especially if I do my
endeavor to prevent it, as after shall be showed. Secondly in respect of the
conditions wherewith they are imposed; as, not to receive the communion unless
we kneel; not to go on in our ministry, unless we conform. For, care of
avoiding scandal respects arbitrary matters, and not necessary duties
appertaining to Gods glory, and our salvation: which we must perform, though
all the world would be offended thereat. The care of thine own salvation must
be preferred to the supposed danger of another man's fall: the care of the
Churches salvation, much more, the glory of God, most of all. Well then, may
thou not receive the Communion, being a duty appertaining to thine own
salvation, to the edificatio^ of the Church, and communion of Saints, to the
glory of God, unless thou will receive it upon thy knees? (it being a gesture
not only lawful, but most convenient to be used in such a part of Gods worship,
as is performed with invocation I mean not only prayer, but also with
thanksegiuing in regard whereof it is called the Eucharist.
on the name of God; especially seeing the gesture used at meals is not to be
urged, unless the Sacrament were with our meals, as at the first institution
with Christ last supper, and in the primitive Church with their love feasts,
received; for the cause of the gesture being worthily taken away, the So the
cause of standing at the Passover ceassing, the gesture it self was altered
by the Church, and that alterati^ confirmed by the practice of Christ, (who
notwithstanding perfectly fulfilled the Law.) Luke. 22. 14.
reason of retaining it ceasseth; for which cause the Council of Laod. c. 28.
Et Council. Constantinop. in Trullo. c. 74
as it forbad loue-feasts the Church: so also accubitus, the gesture used at
feasts.) I say unto thee confidently, if thou may not receive it, unless
thou do kneel; thou ought to receive it kneeling, though another would
be offended thereat.

May thou not preach the word (to omit other parts of the ministerial
function, the necessity whereof should prevail with us more then a supposed
scandal, for it shall suffice to insist in this one particular) may thou
not, I say, preach the Gospel of Christ, being a duty whereof necessity is
imposed upon thee, and 1. Cor. 9. 16.
Woe be unto thee if thou preach not the Gospel; a duty whereby thou art bound
in especial manner to edify the Church, and to glorify God; unless thou yield
to the use of such things, as are neither in themselves unlawful (I mean the
Surplice and the Cross, whereof the one in the judgment of the Church serves
for decency, and the other rightly understood tends to edification,) neither
as they are used in our Church, being neither imposed nor observed with
superstition, or opinion of necessity in themselves, or of worship, as though
we placed religion in them, and much less with the other popish conceits of
merit, with which they observe all their traditions, or efficacy, which they
ascribe especially to the Cross? Thou ought to prefer the glory of God in
the salvation of his people by thy ministry, before the supposed, and perhaps
but pretended scandal of others.

Object. Yea but Romans 3. 8.
we may not do evil, that good may come of it.

Answ The question is of things indifferent. For though we may and must obey
Magistrates, though they be evil; yet we must obey neither good nor bad unto
evil. For we must obey, Ephesians. 5. 25.
only, in the Lord.

Object. But though the things be indifferent in themselves, yet their use may
be unlawful.

Answ. That is, when they be imposed either with opinion of necessity in
themselves, of religion to be placed in the^, of perfection or merit to be
attained by them, (all which conceits our Church detesteth, as is manifest by
the doctrine, whereby ceremonies are to be weighed:) or with scandal (I do
not say taken, but) given to others.

Object. Yea but it is evil to offend my weak brother, that evil I may not
do, that good may come of it.

I answer, in not yielding to conformity, thou both disobeyest the Magestrate,
and offendest thy weak brother too. So that when thou seem loath to do that
which is lawful and good, for fear of an imagined evil; thou addest evil to
evil, that is, to disobedience, scandal; and besides, to the most necessary
duties of Gods worship, preferrest the avoiding of a supposed scandal.

For all this while I speak but by supposition. For here is a supposall of
Antinomie or opposition of the two laws of loyalty and charity, as though the
one could not be observed without the breach of the other; which is not so.
For where the Magistrate enioyneth the use of an indifferent thing, whereat it
is feared some will take offense; his duty is, for preventing the scandal, to
give some time of information; that the weak may be instructed, as touching
the indifferency of the thing, and the sufficiency of his authority to command
it, and of their duty in submitting themselves to the observation thereof. It
is also the duty of the Minister, to endeavor to prevent the scandal, by
informing his hearers, that those things which God has neither commanded nor
forbidden, are things indifferent; that no such thing is unclean in it self;
that all such things are lawful: and such as whereunto Christian liberty does
extend; that in all lawful things the Magistrate is to be obeyed; and
therefore that these things being enjoined, they not only may, in respect of
their Christian liberty, with free conscience use them; but also must, in
respect of Gods commandment requiring obedience, yield to the observation of
them. Which course having been taken (as it has among us) if any will still
be offended, it is peevishness and obstinacy, rather then weakness; and an
offense taken, but not given: in which case, the law of charity it self does
not bind us: and that, in two respects, not yet mentioned. The one, in respect
of God; the other, in respect of his truth. For, I may not offend God, not to
offend my brother. And it is Gods truth, that Christian liberty priviledgeth
both Christian Lawgiuers (with such cautions as before have bin mentioned) to
ordain such laws concerning outward things, as they shall judge expedient:
and also the subjects, without scrupulosity of conscience to observe them. Now,
it is a principle, Satius est nasci scandalum quam deseri verum: It is better a
scandal should arise, then the truth to be forsaken or betrayed. Is our
Christian liberty in this point called into question, whether Magistrates may
command such things, and whether subjects may obey? We must maintain our
liberty, though others would be offended thereat. The Apostles, though for a
time they yielded much to the weakness of the Jews, doing and forbearing many
things, to avoid their offense; yet when their liberty (...). 2. 3* 4.
was called into question, they resolutely maintained it, not regarding their
offense. And when as by Peter's withdrawing himself from the Gentiles, for
fear of offending the Jews, the liberty of Christians was called into
question; Gal. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14.
Paul withstood him to his face, and reproved him before them all, as halting
in the profession of the Gospel. And so must they be content to be used, who
follow Peter's example in this behalf. Thus much by the way to persuade the
people to obedience and loialty, and the Ministers to conformity; which I
beseech God to effect for his Christ's sake.

These things thus premised concerning the nature and quality of this peculiar
liberty of Christians,. 23. Objections concerning Chistian liberty in outward
things answered.
it will not be hard to answer the objections of those, who run into
contrary extremes concerning the same.

Object. 1. For first, on the one side, it is objected; that seeing Christ has
set us free concerning things indifferent, no man ought to restrain us; and
therefore the laws commanding or forbidding the use of indifferent things, are
against Christian liberty.

Whereunto I answer, first: that Christian liberty is wholly spiritual, being
a liberty of the conscience and inner man, which may stand with the outward
servitude of z bondslaues, much more with the subjection and obedience of free
subjects. For though the outward use of the liberty be moderated by the
Magistrate, and confined; yet the inward liberty of the conscience is not
impaired, so long as the subject may obey with free conscience before God; that
is, so long as the Magistrate seeks not to bind the conscience, and to
impose things not commanded of God as necessary in themselves, and as matters
of religion before God, etc.

Secondly, that the liberty of Christians is a true, and therefore not an
unbounded liberty. Now, one of the bounds and limits which God has set it,
is, as you have heard, the law of loyalty, requiring obedience to superiors.
Wherefore a Christian man, though in respect of the inward man he be free, as
being the son of God by adoption in Christ; yet in respect of the outward
man, he ought to be a servant not only to his 1. Pet. 2. 13. 16.
superiors, in loyalty and obedience; but also to Gal. 5. 13. 1. Cor. 9. 19.
etc.
all, in benevolence and charity.

Object. 2. On the other side, it is objected. 1. That for conscience Romans 13.
5.
sake we are to obey the Magistrate; that is, that we are bound in conscience
so to do; therefore the laws and commandments of the Magistrate do bind
the conscience.

Answ. It follows not, for although we are bound in conscience, to obey the
lawful commandments and laws of superiors; yet that bond is not in the
particular laws of men, but in the general commandment of God.

Object. 3. Again: A thing indifferent enjoined by the Magistrate, becomes
necessary, Romans 13. ^.
for Paul says, (...), it is necessary that you be subject: therefore the
commandment of the Magistrate does bind the conscience.

Answ. Neither does this follow. For it becomes necessary, not by the
particular commandment of man, but by the general commandment of God. For,
notwithstanding the commandment of the Magistrate, the thing commanded
remains indifferent in it self, and before God; and so to be used with free
conscience, without placing any religion therein; howsoever it becomes
necessary so far forth as by the general commandment of God, I am bound
thereto. And this is that which Peter (...) 2. 16.
says, that we must obey Magistrates, as free, and yet as the servants of
God. Free, in respect of our consciences exempted from humane power; and yet as
servants of God bound in conscience to obey him in obeying them, so far forth
as he does command us to obey them.

The truth of these answers shall not only be demonstrated as it were before
your eyes by a syllogism, wherein is concluded the bond of conscience, and
necessity of duty in obeying the commandments of men, but also by other
reasons proved.

The Syllogism.
All lawful commandments of Magistrates thou art bound in conscience by the
law of God to obey, so far forth as he requires such commandments to be
obeyed:

This or that particular is a lawful commandment of the Magistrate:

Therefore this or that particular thou art bound in conscience by the law of
God to obey, so far forth as God requires such commandments to be obeyed.

By which argumentation we may conceive, that the distinction of necessity
used in schools, viz. that there is necessit as consequentis, which is simple
or absolute, and necessitas consequentiae, which is not simple, but upon
condition of other things presupposed, may not unfitly be applied to the
necessity of duty imposed by the laws, either of God, or man. For Gods
commandment imposes the necessity as it were of the consequent, (without
presupposing other things) requiring simple and absolute obedience. The law of
man does not impose the necessity of the consequent* or require simple
obedience; but it imposes only a necessity of the consequence, that is, such
a necessity and no other, as may soundly be concluded from the law of God, and
so far forth as it may be concluded thence. Or to speak more plainly: in a
simple sentence without interpositing any condition, or presupposing any
anteceden^ whereupon it is to be inferred, I may say, either particularly this
commandment of God is necessarily, or by necessity of duty to be obeyed, or
generally, all Gods commandments are necessarily to be observed. And this
speech is of necessary truth. But concerning men's commandments, If I shall
say in the general, All the commandments of men are necessarily to be
observed, the speech will be false and absurd: if in particular, this
commandment of the Magistrate is necessarily to be observed this speech
cannot be necessary simply, or by the necessity of the consequent, or (to
speak more plainly for the explicating of that phrase) by the necessity of a
simpl^ sentence, wherein the consequent (or predicat) is both simply and
necessarily affirmed of the antecedent or subject; it cannot, I say, be simply
necessary, because (as you heard) the general is false. Notwithstanding if you
presuppose these two things: first, that all lawful commandments of
Magistrates are by the commandment of God necessarily to be observed, so
far forth as he commands them to be observed: secondly, that this
particular is a lawful commandment of the Magistrate; upon these premises
you may prove that speech to be true by necessity of consequence, viz. that
this particular commandment of the Magistrate is necessarily to be observed,
etc.

But some sophister will object, that I might as well conclude thus;

Propos. All lawful commandments of the Magistrate must necessarily be
obeyed:

Ass. This or that particular is a lawful commandment of the Magistrate:

Concl. Therefore necessarily to be obeyed.

I answer, that the proposition of this syllogism needs proof, as not
being manifest of it self. You will say, it may thus be proved.

Propos. What is commanded of God, must necessarily be performed.

Ass. Obedience to all law full commandments of Magistrates is commanded of
God.

Concl. Therefore obedience to all lawful commandments of Magistrates, is
necessarily to be performed.

But I say again the assumption of this syllogism needs some explanation.
For the Lord would have difference put between his own commandments and the
laws of men; and therefore we may not think, that he commands all laws of
men simply to be obeyed: not simply, you must say then, but so far forth as
he requires them to be obeyed.

By which short discourse we learn, that those additions by which I explaned
the proposition of the syllogism, were necessare; and that the bond of
conscience is not the law of man, but of God: that we are bound to obey man's
laws not simply, but so far forth as God requires. And lastly that this
speech, ( All lawful commandments of Magistrates are necessarily to be
obeyed) is true, not by the necessity of the consequent, as an axiom or
principle which is manifest of it self; but by the necessity of consequence,
as a conclusion manifested by discourse.

Now that the laws of men do not bind the conscience, it may further appear
by these reasons: first, because our freedom from the laws judicial and
ceremonial, which in the Scriptures is extolled for so great a b^nefit, would
be a burden rather then a benefit, if we should in like manner be bound to
the ecclesiastical and civil laws of men. Again, if they did bind the
conscience, there would be no difference between Gods laws and man's laws (in
respect of outward actions (and the one sort would require simple obedience as
well as the other, yea unlawful commandments would also bind the conscience.
But it is plain, that simple obedience is to be performed only to the laws
of God. To the laws of men we are bound, not simply, but so far forth as in
obeying them, we also obey God, and no further; thas is, as I said, so far as
God command^th ^s to obey them. Now, how far forth God commands us to obey
the laws of men, will easily appear by this disti^^tion; for either they
command such things as God forbideth, and forbids such things as he
commands, (which kind of commandments are so far from binding our
consciences, as that we are bound by the law of God to obey him in disobeying
them:) or they command such things as God commands, and forbid such things as
he forbids, that by their authority the laws of God may the better be
obseru^d, (to which kind of commandments we are simply bound, because as in
obeying them we obey God, so in breaking them we transgress the law of God: or
lastly, they command such things as God has not forbidden, and forbid such
things as God has not commanded ^^o the particular (...) of this kind we are
not simply bound, but so far forth as God has commanded us to obey them;
that is, as 1. Pet. 2. 16.
free (being not simply bound to those particulars, as necessary in themselves,
but using them with free conscience, as being indifferent, and therefore such,
as whereunto our Christian liberty extends,) and yet as servants of God,
thinking our selves so far bound to observe them, as is necessary for avoiding
of sca^dall or contempt, which God by his law has forbidden. Contempt: for it
is necessary, says the Apostle, Romans 13. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 16
that we should submit our selves to lawful authority, not only for fear of
punishment, but for conscience sake. For although we be free, as concerning the
inner man; yet in respect of the outward man, we must as the servants of God,
submit our selves to such superiors, as God has set over us, and not have our
liberty, as a cloak of naughtiness. Scandal also is to be avoided. First, in
respect of the superior, that by our disobedience we do not scandalize or
offend him. Wherein our Savior has given us a notable example, who, although
he were (as he Matthew 17. 25* 26 27.
says) free; yet was content to pay tribute-money, for avoiding of offense.
Secondly, in respect of the subject; that he stumble not at the example of our
disobedience, being animated thereby to do the like. For whereas some think,
that we are not to obey the Magistrates commandment concerning a thing
indifferent, if we imagine that some weak brother will be offended thereat;
they greatly mistake the rule of Divines, who say these commandments are to be
obeyed for avoiding scandal, and not, that they are to be disobeyed for
avoiding of scandal. For if this were a sufficient reason to excuse our
disobedience, we should not need to obey almost any commandment of this
kind, there being scarce any commandment concerning things indifferent,
wherewith we may not imagine some weak and scrupulous conscience will be
offended. But we must think our selves more bound, for ^uoyding of contempt
and scandal, to obey a lawful commandment, then to disobey, for avoiding a
supposed offense. That which we are to do in this case, is this: If we fear
any will take offense, we must labor to prevent it, by informing the party, as
before has been said. And having so done, we must do our own duty (whether
he will be offended or not) in obeying the lawful commandment of the
Magistrate, so far as it shall be necessary for avoiding of scandal and
contempt.

Hitherto I have entreated of the liberty of grace,. 24. The liberty of Glory.
both that which is common to the faithful in all ages; and also that which is
peculiar to Christians under the Gospel. There remains (in a word to be
spoken of) the liberty of glory; which is not only a perfect deliverance from
sin, misery, and all imperfections, (whereunto because we are subject Romans
7. 24.
in this life, for here is as, Augustine says, inchoata, non perfecta
libertas, we ought to aspire toward this perfection) but also a fruition of
happiness and all the privileges of the citizens of heaven.

This liberty is either of the soul alone, as at our death; when we may
freely and with comfort resign our souls into the hands of God, that he may
commit the same to the Lu^. 16. 22.
blessed Angels to be transpo^^ed into heaven, where we are unto the end of
the world, comfortably to expect our full redemption. Or it is of the body also
at the day of judgment (and is therefore called Romans 8. 23.
the redemption of our body) when it rising unto glory, shall be freed from the
servitude Romans ^. 11.
of corruption, this 1. Cor. 15. 53. 54.
mortal putting on immortality, and this corruptible putting on incorruption;
that death being swallowed up in victory, we may enjoy, both in our bodies and
souls, the Romans 8. 21.
glorious liberty of Gods children in the kingdom of heaven. This ought we
with ear^^^stnesse of desire (...). 22. 23.
to aspire unto, and with (...) of (...). 2. 1^. (...). 21. 2^.
faith to expect; that thereby we may be weaned from the world, having (...)
our conversation in heaven; and not either by the desires of the world (which
are but (...). 1. 2.
vanities) be all^red and ensnarred, or by the terrors thereof, (which are
(...) (...) ^. 12.
worthy the glory that shall be revealed,) drawn into bondage.

Thus have you heard the doctrine of Christian liberty. Now hear the use.

For seeing this liberty is a benefit of so great excellency in it self,. 25.
The application or use.
and of such profit and necessity to us: Our first duty is, to try and examine
our selves by that which has been said, whether we have as yet obtained this
liberty, or not. If not, (as John. 8. 34.
he which commits sin, is the servant of sin) we must labor to
acknowledge and feel that miserable servitude, wherein we are, under sin
and Satan (for he that is not free, and yet feels not his bondage, is
drowned in sin, even as he that is over head and ears in ^he water, feels
no weight thereof) that in the sense of our misery we may not only truly and
earnestly desire; but also carefully use all means to attain this liberty,
and never be at rest, until we have obtained it. It is strange to see what
hard services men will undergo, and what great sums they will forgo, to get
an earthly freedom; whiles this spiritual freedom, which is worth many
worlds, will scarcely be accepted, when men are called and invited unto it.
Which shows, that men naturally, are not only servants, but willingly and
wilfully continue in servitude. But you will say, what means are we to use? I
answer, 1. Diligently and conscionably to hear the Word, as being the means.
which God has ordained to call you to liberty. 2. To ask, seek, knock by
earnest and hearty prayer unto God the author of this liberty, that he would
give you the spirit of liberty. 3. To turn unto God unfeignedly, laying hold
upon Christ by faith, and repenting of your sins. Eris liber, says Augustine
August. in Joan. tract. 41.
si fueris servus, liber peccati, servus iustitiae: You shall be free from
sin, if you will become the servants of righteousness. If God has already
called us unto this liberty, our duty is two fold, both which the Apostle
mentions, Galath. 5. the one, Gal. 5. 1.
that we stand fast in this liberty, wherewith Christ Jesus has made us free,
and not suffer our selves to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. And
the rather we must be careful to stand fast in this liberty, because it is
mightily assaulted by all the enemies of our salvation, the flesh, the world,
the devil. Now, we are to stand steadfast, both in the doctrine of Christian
liberty, which is the doctrine of the Gospel, and not suffer our selves to be
allured, or intoxicated, either with the golden Apoc. 17. 4. 18. 3.
cup of the Babylonian strumpet, the Church of Rome, which does not only
bereave men of Christian liberty, but also draw them into Antichristian
bondage: or with the Cyrcean cup of the Libertines, which transformeth
Christianisme into Epicurisme, and the liberty of the spirit into the liberty
of the flesh. And we are also to be steadfast and resolute in the practice of
Christian liberty: as of vocation, not to be entangled again with the
servitude of sin and Satan, (for, if having professed our selves freed thereof,
we be again entangled therein, our latter end, as S. Peter says 2. (...). 2.
20. 21.
, will be worse then our beginning.) Of justification, as not to subject our
selves to the laws exaction of inherent and perfect righteousness to
justification, (for they which are Gal. 3. 10.
of the works of the law, are under the curse) but without regard of our own
righteousness, to rely wholly for our justification on the mercies of God, and
merits of Christ apprehended by faith; and to hold him Gal. 1. 8.
accursed, though he were an Angel from heaven, that should teach otherwise.
Of sanctification, as not to subject our selves to the dominion Romans 6. 12.
of sin, or to the terror or rigor of the law; but without servile fear,
willingly and cheerfully to serve our heavenly Father, being well assured that
he will cover our wants, and accept of our imperfect endeavors. Of Christian
liberty in respect of outward things; as not to suffer our consciences to be
bound by the authority of any creature, inioyning them as necessary in
themselves, and much less to bind our own consciences, as scrupulosluy and
superstitiously putting religion either in the use or forbearance of them. Of
the glorious liberty, as not to suffer our selves by all the machinations of
the world, the flesh and the devil, to be withdrawn from the hope and
expectation of it; but comfortably to live as men Romans 8. 2^.
saved in hope.

The other duty, is that which the Apostle mentions, Galath. 5. 13.
Brethren, says he, Gal. 5. 13.
you are called to liberty: only use not your liberty as an occasion to the
flesh, but by charity serve one another. That is, that we should be careful,
The abuse of Christian liberty.
both to avoid the abuse of Christian liberty, and also to use it aright. The
abuse is manifold. As first, of the saving grace of God; when men do turn Iud
4.
it into wantonness, their freedom from sin, into a freedom to sin as though
they were so freed from the law, as that they need not to obey it; as though
good works, because they are not exacted to justification, were in no respect
needful to salvation. We are not fr^e, says Luther De liber^ Christ.
, by faith in Christ from works, but from the opinion of works, that is, from
the foolish presumption of justification sought by works. Secondly, of
Christian liberty, in respect of the creatures of God, and the use of things
indifferent; when we do use them without regard of our duty, to God, our
neighbor, or our selves.

The duty which we owe to God, is piety; to our neighbor in general, charity;
and in particular to our superior, obedience and loyalty; to our selves,
sobriety. For these, as I said, are the bounds of our liberty, which if we
pass in the use thereof, we abuse it. The use of our liberty is contrary to
piety: First, when we our selves are impious, and irreligious. For though the
things in themselves be clean, yet the use of them is unclean to them that
are impure. For as Titus 1. 15.
to the pure, all things are pure, so to the unclean nothing is clean.
Secondly, when the use of them is not sanctified unto us, 1. Tim. 4. 5.
either by the Word, as when we make more indifferent things, then God in his
word has made, as drunkenness, fornication, usury, etc. or when we do not
use them in faith and sound persuasion out of the word of God, which is the
charter of our liberty, that we may lawfully and with a good conscience use
them (for though nothing in it self be unclean, yet to him (...)
that thinks or doubts that it is unclean, it is so to him; for as the
Apostle, speaking of this particular, says, Whatsoever is not of says, is
sin:) or by the duties of invocation. As the use of meat and drink, without
either prayer to God for his blessing in the use, or thanksgiving for the same.
Thirdly, we abuse our liberty irreligiously, when we use it to the dishonor of
God, or to the hinderance of his worship and service, as in the immoderate and
unseasonable use of recreations, etc. whereby men show themselves to be (...).
2 Timothy 3. 4.
lovers of pleasures more then of God.

Likewise our use of the creatures, and of things indifferent, is against
charity, when we use them without due regard of avoiding scandal and offense.
Against loyalty, when using our liberty with contempt of lawful authority, we
make it a cloak to cover some naughtines. And lastly, against sobriety, when
under the pretense of Christian liberty, the creatures of God, and other things
indifferent, are used, either as instruments to serve, or as ensigns to
display, our pride or intemperate lusts, as in the excess of meat and drink,
recreations, the use of the marriage bed, apparel, building and such like.

But let us come to the right use of our Christian liberty; 26. The right use
of Christian li^erty.
which is twofold, either the sanctification of our lives, or the pacification
of our consciences. As touching the former: the right use of the liberty of
saving grace is, when it is used to the free, voluntary, and cheerful
worshipp and service of God, in holiness and righteousness, for Luke 1. 74.
75.
that is the end of our liberty and redemption. The right use of Christian
liberty in outward things, is, when it is used to a free and cheerful
serving, both one of Gal. 5. 13.
another in charity, and of the superior in obedience and loialty; that being
free 1. Cor. 9. 19.
from all, we make ourselves servants unto all, for their good. For as Luther
says, De li^ert. Christ.
A Christian in respect of the inner man, is free, but in respect of the
outward man he is (through charity) the servant of all. And herein we are to
imitate the example of Christ; who, Philip* 2. 5.
though he were God, took upon him the form of a servant to make us free;
and though he were the Lord of all, M^t. 2^. 28.
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister. And wise of the blessed
Angels; who, though they be glorious spirits, notwithstanding take no scorn to
be sent forth into the Heb. 1. 14.
ministry and service of our good.

The right use of the doctrine concerning the liberty of glory, is, truly to
believe it, and to live as in expectation of it; knowing, that he which has
this 1. John. 3. 3.
hope, that he shall be like unto Christ at his appearance, will purify
himself, as he is pure; that as he hopes to be like him, in respect of the
liberty of glory, so he may in some measure resemble his gratiousnesse, by the
liberty of grace.

But the chief use of this doctrine, is, to pacify men's consciences; without
which (unless they sleep in carnal security) they are so wonderfully
perplexed, that neither can they live in peace nor attempt any thing almost
with quiet minds. For whereas there befoure things which trouble perplexed
consciences, this doctrine is a sovereign remedy to clear and to appease the
conscience, in respect of them all. The first, is the guilt of sin, and fear
of damnation. For when thy conscience is summoned before the judgment feat of
God, or terrified with the apprehension of his wrath, as in ^ime of temptation,
or affliction, or in the hour of death; when thou do consider the severity
of Gods justice, who will not suffer sin to go unpunished, the rigor of the
law, denouncing the curse of God against eue^y even the least transgression,
the testimony of thine own conscience, which is in stead of a thousand
witnesses, accusing and condemning thee of innumerable transgr^ssions; how
can thou think of appearing before God, who is greater then thy conscience,
to be justified or cond^mned, without horror of conscience, and confusion of
mind? But blessed be God, who has granted us this liberty of grace, that in
the question of ^ustification, whereby in this life we are freed from fear of
damnation, and entitled unto the kingdom of h^^uen, we need not look into
our obedi^nce, or to the sentence of the law; but may b^ assured, if we believe
in Christ, that God does ius^ifie us, being (...) in our selves, without
respect of our (...); that he has freed us from the laws exaction of inherent
righteousness, to the acceptance of our persons; that he imputing the
righteousness of Christ to the believer, accepts of him as righteous in
Christ; that the faithful man has liberty to appeal from the tribunal of
justice, to the throne of grace, from the sentence of the law, to the promise
of the Gospel, and renouncing his own righnesse, yea esteeming it as dung in
the question of justification, to rest alone in the mercyes of God, and merits
of Christ.

But because the world is so apt to abuse this most comfortable doctrine, and
to turn gracious liberty into carnal licentiousness; it shall be needful
to add this caution: That howsoever we are by our iustisication in this life,
entitled unto the kingdom of heaven; and although by the righ^eousnesse and
merits of Christ alone apprehended by faith, we are both iusti^ied and also
saved: yet for as much as many deceive themselves with an idle conceit of
faith, and with a vain presumption that they are justified, when
notwithstanding P. (...)
they remain in their sins: therefore we must think it most necessary,
being once justified by faith, and entitled unto the kingdom of heaven, to
demonstrate our faith, and our justification by a godly life; walking in that
way of good works, which God has Ephesians. 2. 10.
prepared for us to walk in toward our country in heaven. For though we are
justified and saved by the merits of Christ alone apprehended by faith;
notwithstanding sanctification is the Act. 20 32.
cognizance of them that are saved, and good works are the evidence, according
Rom ^. 6.
unto which God will pronounce the sentence of salvation. For as the ^ree is
known by his fruit; so he that (...)
works righteousness, is righteous, and in like manner by sanctification our
justification is manifested. For true ^aith (...)
works by love, and good works are as the breathing of a lively faith. And
therefore though says alone does justify, as Paul (...)
teaches, because it alone does apprehend the righteousness of Christ unto
justification; yet as S. James (...)
teaches, that faith which alone severed from obedience does not justify,
neither alone, nor at all, because it it is not a true faith. For even as the
body without breathing is known to be dead: Iam. 2. 26.
so faith with works is dead. We are therefore justified in this life, and
entitled unto the kingdom of heaven, as to our inheritance, by faith without
Romans 4. ^.
works; but none are actually saved, nor inherit that kingdom in the life to
come, but such as first are sanctified. For as our Savior says, we have
indeed not only remission of sins by faith, but also by faith we have our
inheritance; but yet, as he says, Act. 26. 18.
among them that are sanctified.

The second is the conscience of our manifold wants and imperfections, in those
duties which we do perform. For how can a man be persuaded, that God, to Job.
15. 14. 16. 16.
whom no creature being compared is pure, will allow of his imperfect and
stained obedience. And if he be not persuaded, that his service is acceptable
unto; God with what heart can he perform it? The doctrine therefore of
Christian liberty assures our consciences, that we are freed from the laws
exaction of perfect obedience, to the acceptance of our actions: that, God
covering our imperfections, as an indulgent Father, with the perfect
righteousness and obedience of Christ, imputes not our wants unto us, but
accepts of the truth of our will and desire for the deed, and our sincere
endeavor for the perfect performance. And therefore a Christian may, in respect
of this liberty, with comfort and cheerefulnes perform obedience, according to
the measure of grace received, being assured that our defective and stained
obedience, will be accepted of God through the mediation and intercession of
Jesus Christ.

The third is the s^ruple of conscience, concerning the use of outward things,
how far forth they may be used or forborne. For if a man be not rightly
informed herein, there will be no end Vid^. Cal^in, ^it. lib. 3. cap. 19. 7.
of scrupulosity and superstition. From this scrupi^ also, the doctrine of
Christian liberty does free us: assuring us, that to all these things our
liberty does extend, either to use the^ freely, or freely to forbear them; and
that nothing is vnclear in it self, nor yet unto us, if we be so persuaded;
and that to the clean, all things are clean, provided always, that the use
of this liberty be kept within the bound^ before mentioned, of piety, charity,
loyalty, and sobriety.

The fourth and last is the horror of conscience in the hour or death. For can
a man with co^^ort give up his soul to be severed from the body, when he
knows not, either what will beco^^ of his soul after the separation therec^
from the body, or how, and in what (...) his body shall rise again? But (...)
does assure us, that Chr^^ (...) purchased, not only a liberty of (...) in this
life, but also of glory for (...) souls against the end of our life, and for
our bodies also, against the day of judgment. So that we Heb. 10. 19. 20.
have liberty or boldness, to enter into the holy places by the blood of
Jesus, by the new and living way, which he has prepared for us through the
veil, that is to say, his flesh; being assured, that by reason of our union
with Christ, we are risen Ephesians. 2. 6.
again with Christ, and with him set in the heavenly places, whether he is
ascended John. 14. 2. 3^. and. 17. 24.
to prepare a place for us: Philip. 3. 20. 21.
and from whence he will come again to bring us thither, that where he is,
there we may be also. Wherefore in respect of this liberty, the faithful may
with comfort, both surre^der our souls into the hands of God our merciful
Father, and also bequeath our bodies to the earth, in full assurance that our
souls shall by the Angels be translated into heaven, and that our bodies
shall at the day of judgment, be freed from the servitude of corruption, and
rise again to glory: this mortal having put on immortality, and this
corruptible incorruption, that it being again e^vnited to the soul, we may
for ever and ever, enjoy both in body and soul, the glorious liberty of the
citizens of heaven. Unto which liberty of glory he^ bring us, who has so
dearly purcha^ed it for us, even Christ Jesus the righteous; to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost, be eternal praise and glory. Amen.

FINIS.
2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God, stands sure, having this seal, The
Lord knows them that are his. And let every one that names the Name of
Christ, depart from evil.
FOr the S^luian I^ de (...)
laying the first foundation of Religion (without which all other grounds are
of no effect:) C^el Rho^. ^^^. ^5.
That there is a God omnipo^ent, merciful, and just, Gods works do
sufficiently demonstrate. Genesis 1. 1.
If he build, it is a world: if he be angry for the sins of the world, Genesis
7. 17.
he sends a deluge, V^ncont. ^ Ly. inen^is. Mat. 2. 1.
If he will show the love he bears to the world, he sends his Son, Mat.
27 5^.
and suffers him to die upon the Cross to save the world: if he will reward
the godly, it is L^ke 23. 43.
with Paradise; when he arms the Angels 2 King. 6. 17.
march upon the heads of his Troop (...)
the ^lements are the Marshalls of his Camp, the rocks remove from their
Center, and follow to give it water, Exodus 13. 21.
the Clouds guide by day and the Pillars of fire by night, Exodus 14. 9.
the Sea opens to give them passage, and the Sun Josh. 10. 12.
stays to end their victories. To enlarge the wonderfulnes of his works Number.
22.
Balaams Ass shall speak and reprove his Master Ioh. 2. 9.
, waters turn into wine, the Mat. 9. 22.
dead are raised, Mat. 20. 24.
the blind see Mat. 9. 20.
the d^afe hear Mark. 2. 12.
the Lame go Mat. 14. 19.
and thousands of people are fed with a few loaves and fishes.

If he will show mercy, Mat. 14. 19.
Peter after that he had denied Christ shall weep bitterly, Io. 21. 15.
and be made Pastor of his sheep. Act. 19. 15.
Paul of a persecutor become an elect vessel and faithful preacher of the
Gospel; when he will exalt the humble Sam. 16. 11.
little David shall be taken from the sheep and be made both King Sam. 16.
13.
and Prophet: humble Gen 41. 24.
Joseph from the prison and preferred to be Pharaohs high steward: Dan. 5. 26.
Daniel from the Lions den and clothed with purple. When he will execu^e
justice, Genesis 19. 24.
Sodom is devoured with fire and brimstone: Mat. 27. 45.
Judas hanging himself, confessed that he had betrayed the innocent: Eusebius.
H^st.
Julian the Apostate tearing out his bowels (in the horror of his conscience)
cries out ^icisti tandem Galilaee. When he will humble the proud, Idolatrous,
Dan. 4. 45.
Nabuchadne^ar shall eat Grass among the Beasts of the field; the basest of
Gods creatures shall make hard hearted Exodus 9. 27.
Pharaoh send for Moses and confess the true God. Finally in all his works of
power, mercy and justice, (out of the fiery furnace) Dan. 3. 35
Shadrach Messech and Abednego shall proclaim his glory.

Thus you see that Gods works declare that he is God, powerful, merciful and
just, and that the meanest of these works are of force either (by the least
dram of grace) to convert the most obstinate Atheists, to the true knowledge
of God, or in justice to confo^^^ him.

SECT. II.
Of the knowledge of ^od.
ALthough I do not allow the (...)
curious searching of divine mysteries not revealed, for admitting that in
natures School, we are taught to boult out the truth by logical (...)
reason yet in Gods School, it is quite contrary; he is the best Scholar that
reasons least, and assents most, conceiues so far as humane frailties will
permit, belieues and admires the rest, God loving better a credulous heart then
a curious head: Yet because your duty toward God consists chiefly in the
ardent desire to know God (which is the surest testimony of your love toward
God, and of Gods love toward you) there is a more special knowledge required
of you, which is, that you endeavor your selves to know him, so far as he
has revealed himself in the Scriptures called his Word, as proceeding from
his Spirit, to bring you to this knowledge: he has manifested himself in the
Scriptures by three sort of names.

The first are these that signify his essence. (...) nominibus.


The second, the persons in the Essence.

The third, his essential works.

The names that denote Gods essence, are 5. Ichouah, Eheiech, Iach, Kurios,
Theos.

Jehovah Cyprian. Mart. Arnob. lib. 1. aduersgent. Tertul. lib. 2. de Car.
Christ.
signifies eternal, being of himself without beginning, and end almighty,
both in promising and performing. The second name is Exodus 3. 14.
Eheiech, of that same root of Jehovah signifying, that I am that I am, or I
will be, that I will, Eheiech, Asher, Eheiech, The third name Psalm. 21. 12.
15. 16. 17.
Iach which is Lord is ascribed to God, when any notable deliverance or benefit
comes to pass according to his promise. The fourth name is John, 21. 7. 12.
15. 16. 17.
Kurios used often in the new Testament: when it is absolutely given to God, it
answers the Hebrew name Ieho^ah; for God is so Lord, that he is of himself
Lord, and of all others.

The fifth name is Theos, God, it is derived, (...), because Aug.
he runs through and compasses all things: when it is properly taken, it
signifies the eternal essence of God, being above all things, giving life,
Lips. lib. ^ de constant.
and light to all creatures, preserving and governing them in their wonderful
frame and order, God seeing all, and in all places.

The names that signify the persons in the Es^ence are chiefly one. Ber.
Elohim, signifies the mighty judges. It is a name of the plural number, to
express the Trinity of persons in the unity of the Essence. To this purpose,
the Holy Ghost begins the Bible with this plural Name of God, joined with a
verb of the singular number, as Elohim baradi^ creauit, the mighty Gods, or
all three persons in the Godhead created. When you hear of this name Elohim,
consider that in one divine Essence there are three distinct persons, and that
God Jehovah Eloh^m. The names that signify Gods essential works are five.

El Shaddai, Ado^ai, Helion, Abba.

El, is as much to say, Exodus 24. 6.
as the strong God, shows that God is not only strong and strength it self,
but that it is he that gives all strength to his creatures.

By this name Shaddai which is omnipotent, God styles himself usually to the
Patriarchs, calling himself El Shaddai the strong God, Almighty: this name
belongs only to God, and to none other Creature.

Adonai, my Lord; is found one hundred thirty four times in the old Testament:
by this name we challenge God, to be our God, and with Thomas say, thou art
my Lord and my God.

Luke 1. 32.
Helion which signifies most high, was given unto God by Gabriell, telling the
Virgin Mary that the child that should be borne of her, should be the Son of
the most high.

Abba, a Syriacke name, Mar. 14. v. 36.
signifying Father, Romans 8. 15.
by it remember what you receive from God, proceeds from a Fatherly love and
that you owe him again Filial obedience.

All these sacred names of God, Aug. de De^mis^r^cord. cap. 7.
are as pledges and remembrances of Gods omnipotency and love toward you, and
of your duty toward him.

As the true knowledge of God, is the only inducement to the exercise of your
duty toward him, so the religious practice of that duty is the only rule
whereby you may live reposedly, and die cheerfully.

In this exercise, I do commend four things unto you, Hear, pray, meditate,
and do.

SECT. III.
of Hearing and reading the Scriptures.
THis hearing, whereof I speak consists 1 Timothy 3. 16.
in the reading of Gods sacred word contained in the Books of the old and new
Testament, and hearing it from preachers: For the whole Scripture is (...),
given by inspiration of God and is profitable to teach to improoue, to correct,
and to instruct in righteousness that the man of God may be made perfect in all
good works. The Scriptures are divided into the old and new Testament: (...)
the first is called the the old because it was revealed in the former time,
the other New because it was revealed in the latter time.

The difference between the old and Aug. Tom. 3 d^ Spirit. and let. cap. ^^.
new Testament is only in certain accidents Ceremonies and dispensation of
things, in external form, and difference of time, but in substance all one
and tending to one effect in virtue and efficacy.

In the old, the new is figured and shadowed: in the new, is the declaration
and manifestation of the old.

By Moses was the old Testament revealed and the law given, being holy, just
and good Aug. Tom. 3. ad Marcel. cap. 20.
serving rather to bring us to knowledge of our own insufficiency to fulfill
the same, then for laying upon the corrupted sons of Adam, that which they
were not able to undergo. The new Testament was revealed by Christ, when he
was manifested in the flesh in whom did appear the righteousness of God, or
the goodness that comes from God to us, witnessed by the Law and Prophers.

In the Evangelical dispensation of the Gospel is the deliverance of Gods
people, not from an earthly, Vincentiy Lyrinensis,
but from a spiritual bondage of sin and Satan.

Here is a triumph over the suppressed enemy not Pharaoh, but Satan himself.

Here is an introduction to possess not earthly Canaan but heavenly Jerusalem.

Here is a Law given not in Sinai, but in Sion; not by Angelical ministry but
by the presence of the Lord himself; not after a fearful sort, but with
wonderful lenity and gentleness; not graven in stony tables, but effectually
printed in the hearts of the elect.

In the old testament was bondage and fear; in the new, liberty and glad
tidings, the ministry not of death, but of life; not a rigorous exacter, but a
merciful Savior; not the Sacraments of circumcision and the passover (the
administration whereof was blood) but baptism, and the Lords supper, both
(...), unbloody.

In the new testament is a preisthood, not Aaronicall not external, not tied
to any one nation Family or tribe, but spiritual and common to all the
faithful throughout the world.

In it is a sacrifice and that bloody, but not of beasts but the sweet smelling
sacrifice of the precious blood of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus; not
iterated but finished once for all upon the Cross.

In the new testament are ceremonies few and easy, to wit, the word,
Sacraments and prayers.

(In one word) in the old testament were figures, shadows, and promises; in
the new, the fulfilling and accomplishment of all: this new covenant of grace
shall continue to the worlds end, and shall give place to no other, but to the
eternal fruition of the Kingdom of heaven.

Hereby the excellency of the new testament is manifest and that both the old
and new, differing in accidents and circumstances, are in substance and truth
all one, and that the one is contained in the other, making up an absolute body
Tertull. lib. de prescript. ad^ers. Heret.
containing perfect sufficiency to salvation and whereto we must neither add
nor diminish, neither seek for Christ and salvation else where; for this cause
we are commanded to search the Scriptures.

Therefore would thou know what sin is, and the punishment thereof by the
law? Genesis 50. Exodus 19. Le^it. 29. Deuteronomy. 26.
The ^iue books of Moses shall teach thee the historical parts of these:
Joshua. 29. Iud. 21. 1. 2 Samuel 55. 1. 2 King. 57. 1. 2 Chronicles. 6. 5. Es^a. 10.
Nch. 13. Ester. 10. Job. 42.
the books of the Prophets, Proverbs of Solomon and Ecclesiastes, will let you
see the reward of the godly, and punishment of the wicked, and furnish you with
a rich storehouse of goulden sentences, and divine moral precepts.

The kingly Psalms of David shall plentifully admi^ister unto you heavenly
physic for all spiritual diseases. Psalm. 150. Pro. 31. Eccles. 12. Esai. 66.
Iere. 2. 52. La^. 5. Eze. 48. Dam. 11. Hosea. 14. Joel. 3. Amos. 9. O^^d 1.
(...) 4. M^th 5. Nahum. 3. Abacu^. 3. ^^pha. 3. H^gar. 2. (...). 14. M l. 4.
(...) Luke 24. John 2^.
The four Evangelists shall teach you the life and doctrine, and death of our
Savior.

Acts 28.
The Acts of the Apostles shall acquaint you with the practice of Christ's
doctrine in the Primitive Church.

Romans 16. 1. 2. Co^^^nth. 29. Gal. 6. Ephesians 6. Phi. 4 Col. 4. 1. 1 (...) 1. 2 Timothy 10. (...) 3. Pla^l. 1. Heb. 13. James. 51. 2. Pet. (...) 5. Iu^. 1. Reu.
22.
The Epistles of the Apostles shall train you up particularly in Christ his
School. Make use of the rest of the books called 3 Esd. 4. Esd^a. Tob. ^ud.
Ester. (...) The history of (...). 1. Marc 2 (...)
Apocrypha so far as they agree with the Scripture and no farther. Read the
^crip^ures with a sanctified and chaste heart: for unless they be read by the
inspiration of Gods spirit by the which they were written, with humility, and
desire to know, they remain as a dead letter in the efficacy thereof (as I did
advise you before). Admire reverently such obscure places, as by your weak
capacity you cannot understand, never going farther in the curious search of
divine mysteries, then either by conferring some other place of Scripture, or
by conference with some learned Divine you may be informed: so have they that
easiness, and plainness, that the simple may be comforted and taught,

They are that admirable Rivers (both shallow and deep) wherein as the Lamb
may wade, the Elephant may swim; and it is only the dullness of our capacity,
that makes them hard to us, and the veil of our hearts that cannot be
removed, except by him that has the Key of David that opens where no man
shuts, and shuts where no man opens.

Delight most in such places of Scriptures, Romans 10. (...)
as serve best for your instructions in your own calling; for many men are too
busy in others callings and negl^c^ers of their own.

The hearing of Gods word by the Scriptures and by Pastors, and the practice
there of will give you knowledge, work holiness if you break down your
natural corruptions, and fill you with strength against all assaults.

SECT. IV.
of Prayer with the fruits thereof.
Prayer is a simple, unfeigned, humble and ardent opening of the heart before
God wherein we either ask things needful for our selves and others, or give
thanks for benefits received: it is either Public in the congregation of the
faithful; or private, when we pray alone.

There be four chief reasons that ought to induce us to prayer: first the
commandment of God: Secondly our sins, which drive us of necessity to God
for life, succor, and help; Thirdly, our weak nature, (being of it self
^nable to subsist) requires prayer to strengthen it, as a house pillars to
uphold it.

Lastly the subtilety of the enemy (who ever attends to overthrow us, even in
those things we think to be best done) ought to stir us up vehemently to
prayer.

The excellency of prayer is manifest by the dignity of the commander and the
admirable effects that follow it. The commander is God Lord of heaven and
earth, of our life and death, the fountain of all goodness: the effects there
of are such that (prayer proceeding from a faithful soul, and squared by Gods
word) will stay, the Sun to end our victories, the falling of the rain from
heaven, and at our desire again, send down plenty of it to increase the
fruits of the Earth for our comfort, it will pierce the heavens for mercy, and
pardon for our sins, stay the wrath of God against us for the same, and
obtain whatsoever good thing is needful for us in this life, or in the life
to come.

Let our prayers be daily without intermission: for de^otion that is deferred
upon conceit of present unfitness or worldly respects, at last grows irksome
and altogether neglected: suffer not your heart to entertain the least thought
of lothnesse in the task of devotion, but violently break through such
motions, with a deep check to your self for your backwardness.

And because holiness does not (like Ion. 3 6. 7.
Jonas Gourd) grow up in a day, it is better to go on safe and sure, then for a
hasty ^it, (as many do) run out of wind, and then stand still. Go to
prayer, as you would go to the water to swim, go not hot in, but take a time
to cool your self by meditation, (...).
feeling that your words touch the very depth of your soul.

An. bros. l^b.
Frame not your prayers (as some Hipocritically do^ (according to the
pha^tasies of your own brain; neither (as others superstitiously) think to
move God by iterations and babbling, neither with the proud Pharisee presuming
upon your own worth, but (like the poor Publi^ane* humbly with all reue^ence,
(throwing Exodus 3. 5. Aug. de Ci^^t. Der.
off the shoes of all your corrupt affections) prostrate your self at the
footstool of Gods throne of Grace, demanding nothing that is repugnant to his
will (lest you tempt him) who out of his insearchable wisdom knows best
Mat. 6. ^.
what is good for you.

In your prayers have a special care that you keep ever as a pattern before
you Mat. 6. ^.
that prayer set down by the mercy-Master, Christ Jesus, called the Lords
prayer. It is the pure fountain from whence the rivers of life must flow.

SECT. V.
of Medit^tion.
MEditation is a careful consideration or a devour calling to mind, and
examination both of our spiritual and temporal estate, by a serious
contemplation of Gods goodness toward us what duty he requires of us
toward him; and for his sake to our neighbor, and how we have performed the
same, what reward remains for the godly, and punishment for the wicked that
we have an account to render not only of every mispent-day, but of every
word, in what estate either spiritual or temporal we stand for the present.

This holy meditation stirs us up to a thankfulness for Gods goodness, to
sorrow, and repentance for our bypast offenses, and to a settled resolution of
amendment of our lives in the time to come. Psalm. 49. 3. Ciel. Rod. lib. 25.
Meditation is the most sovereign cure of the soul: in it keep this course;
retire your self every day (at some ^it time) Mat. 6. 6.
to your chamber, study, field, or some secret place; and having prayed to God
for a recalled mind, enter into a consideration of your sinful estate, Cor.
11. 28.
Examine your self, take notise of your passions, disposition and inclination
whereby you may come to the knowledge of your self and by calling for help
from God, resolve Ambrose.
to conquerre your self as a walled city.

Call to mind if any unkindness has passed betwixt you and Romans 3. 10. Mat.
5. 22.
your neighbor, or any other; and if you remember any remnant, or the least
coal of envy or malice (lurking under the ashes of your perverse natures) wipe
away and extinguish them by Ephesians. 4. 26.
not-letting the Sun go down upon your wrath; for he that craves pardon
and will not forgive Mat. 6. 14. 15.
, is like to him that breaks down a bridge, that he must pass over
himself.

In your meditation, inquire dilligently Aug. de Mott.
after the day of your death by setting it before your Eyes, by examining your
selves whether you be prepared, Cor. 5. 54.
and ready, and by encouraging your cowardly soul, to look death in the face,
flying ever in this point to thy Savior for help.

Conclude thy meditation, with thinking upon thy wordly estate: if it prosper,
lay up humility in thy heart; 1 Psalm. 11^.
If poor, pray for supply, and think upon some lawful and honest means.

SECT. VI.
The performance of a godly life.
THe Fourth and most necessary part (belonging to a Christian) is doing, being
the life of all; for it is nothing (and yet usual to Hipocrites) to be
religious in Ceremonies: join therefore (as indiuidui con^ites) the lively
faith of Paul with S. James, good works: Faith without works, makes but a
carnal Gospeller, and works without Faith, a Pharasaicall Hipocrite.

Ever in doing, beware of doing against thy Conscience: for the treasure of a
good consc^ence is the best store you can provide, for a quiet life here, and a
blessed hereafter, when a dram of it shall serve you to better use then
innumerable millio^s of Gold.

Omit neither time, place, nor person, if thou can do good; remember Christ's
last judgment wherein he shows that the best good in the world is compassion
on, alms, and comforting in distress, as in sickness, poverty, and
imprisonment, or banishment; for although God accepts of good thoughts, yet
toward man they are little better then good dreams: exercise therefore thy
charitable office, (as Gods Steward) upon thy brethren. Remember it is now the
time, Sen. de mort.
thy life is short, thy days Heb. 9. 17.
evil, thy death certain, thy Mat. 25. 9.
account most certain; thy joys unspeakable, if thou do well: for this
cause labor to husband the talent that God has put into thy hands, that thou
may return thy soul better then thou did receive it. If that Mat. 25. 30.
servant was condemned as evil, that did give his Master no more but his own?
What will become of him that robs God of his own?

SECT. VII.
Sloth, the mother of evil.
SLoth Pro. 6. 6. 11^. Zenop. de d^et So^.
is the mother of many evils, and the chief corrupter of Christian duty;
banish it by diligence, in all these former exercise, neither Aug.
deferring repentance for thy bypast neglects, neither amendment of thy former
life. Ci^e de sen.
Who knows, but death may shut up thy breath at an unprovided time?
Repentance and amendment being the free gifts of God the tree of Faith (watered
by Gods Grace) only produces (not common in every man's garden) this tree must
be planted in the spring of thy youth and not in the frosty winter when the day
shall come wherein thou shall say I have no pleasure in them. It must be daily
labored, hedged and preserved from the anoyances, Catterpillers, and choking
weeds of the world; by this means it shall produce plentiful store of fruit
in thy life, and at thy death prepare thee, with old Simeon in the peace of a
good conscience to say, Lu. 2. 27.
Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine Eyes have seen
thy Salvation.

I have brief^ly pointed at Gods wonderful works of Power, mercy and justice
at those names, whereby he has chiefly revealed himself in his word, and at
the duties that are required in his service.

Now I will touch something concerning Christian Liberty, the fredome of
Christians from the bondage and tyranny of the law. A point which all would
gladly appropriate to themselves, though the most part fail in the true
understanding of the words of S. Paul, Gal. 3. 13.
That Christ was made a curse for us that he might redeem us from the Curse of
the Law ^. Gal. 1.
and stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free and be not
entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

THE NECESSITY OF HANDLING THE QVESTION Concerning Christian Liberty.
THE declaration whereof he must not omit, whose purpose is to comprehend in
an abridgme^t the sum of the doctrine of the Gospel. For it is a thing
principally necessary, and without the knowledge whereof, consciences dare in a
manner enterprise nothing, without doubting they stumble and start back in
many things, they always stagger^, and tremble: but especially it is an
appendant of justification, and avails not a little to the understanding of
the strength thereof. Yea, they that earnestly fear God, shall hereby receive
an incomparable fruit of that doctrine, which the wicked and Lucinianicall men
do pleasantly taunt with their scoffs because in the spiritual darkness
wherewith they be taken every wanton railing is lawful for them. Wherefore it
shall now come forth in fit season, and it is profitable to defer to this
place, the plainer discoursing of it (for some have already in diverse places
lightly touched it, because so soon as mention is brought in of Christian
liberty; then either filthy lusts do boil, or mad motions do rise unless the
wanton wits be timely met withal which do otherwise most naughtily corrupt
the best things. For some men by pretense of this liberty, shake off all
obedience of God, and break forth into an unbridled licentiousness; and some
men disdain it, thinking that by it all moderation, order, and choice of
things, is taken away. What should we here do, being compassed in such narrow
straights? Shall we bid Christian liberty farewell, and so cut off all fit
occasion for such perils? But as we have said, unless that be fast holden,
neither Christ nor the truth of the Gospel, nor the inward peace of the soul
is rightly known: Rather we must endeavor, that so necessary a part of
doctrine be not suppressed, and yet that in the mean time those found
objections, may be met withal which are wont to rise thereupon.

Christian liberty consists in 3. parts. Part of Christian liberty. The
freedom from the bondage and tir^^ny of the La^.
The first, that the consciences of the faithful, when the affiance of their
justification before God is to be sought, may raise and advance themselves
above the law, and forger the whole righteousness of the Law.

For since the law (as we have already in another place declared) leaves no
man righteous, either we are excluded from all hope of justification, or we
must be loosed from the law, and so that there be no regard at all had of
works. For who so thinks that he must bring somewhat, be it never so little
of good works to obtain righteousness; he cannot appoint any end or measure
of them, but makes himself debtor to the law. Therefore taking away all
mention of the Law, and laying aside all thinking upon works, we must embrace
the only mercy of God when we entreat of justification, and tur^^ing away our
sight from our selves we must behold Christ alone. For there the question is
not how we be righteous, but how although we be unrighteous and unworthy,
we be taken for worthy. Of which thing if Conscience will attain any
certainety, they must give no place to the law. Neither can any man hereby
gather that the Law is superfluous to the faithful, whom it does not therefore
cease to teach, and exhort, and prick forward to goodness, although before the
iudgement-seat of God, it has no place in their consciences. For these two
things, as they are most diverse, so must they be well and diligently
distinguished of us. The whole life of Christians ought to be a certain
meditation of godliness, because they are called into sanctification; herein
stands the office of the Law, that by putting them in mind of their duty, it
should stir them up to the endeavor of holiness, and innocence. But when
consciences are careful how they may have God merciful, what they shall
answer, and upon what affiance they shall stand if they be called to his
judgment; there is not to be reckoned what the law requires, but only
Christ must be set forth for righteousness, which passes all perfection of
the law.

Upon this point hangs almost all The liberty disputed of (...) the Epistle
to the Galathians. Gal. 3. 13. and 5. 1.
the argument of the Epistle to the Galathians. For that they be found
expositors which teach, that Paul there contendeth only for the liberty of
Ceremonies, may be proved by the places of the arguments. Of which sort these.
That Christ was made a curse for us, that he might redeem us from the curse of
the law. Again, stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made you
free, and be not again entangled with the yoke of bondage. Behold, I Paul
say if ye be circumcized, Christ shall nothing profit you. And he which is
circumcisized is debtor of the whole law. Christ is made idle to you whosoever
ye be, that are justified by the law: ye are fallen away from grace. Wherein
truly is contained some higher thing the^ the liberty of Ceremonies. I grant
indeed, that Paul there entreats of Ceremonies, because he contendeth with
the false Apostles which went about to bring again into the Christian Church
the old shadows of the law, which were abolished by the coming of Christ. But
for the discussing of this question, there werehigher places to be disputed, in
which the whole controversy stood. First, because by those Jewish shadows,
the brightness of the Gospel was darkened, he shows that we have in Christ a
full giving indeed, of all those things which we shadowed by the ceremonies of
Moses. Secondly, because these deceivers filled the people with a most naughty
opinion, namely, that this obedience anailed to deserve the favor of God: here
he stands much upon this point, that the faithful should not think that
they can by any works of the law, much less by those little principles,
obtain righteousness before God. And there withal he teaches that they are
by the Cross of Christ, free from the damnation of the law, which otherwise
hangs over all men, that they should with full assurednes rest on Christ
alone. Which place properly pertains to this purpose. Lastly, he maintains
to the consciences of the faithful their liberty, that they should not be
bound with any religion, in things not necessary.

The second part which hangs upon that former part, The second part of
Christ^an liberty free and by the Law unconstrained obedience.
is that consciences obey the law, not as compelled by the necessity of the
same law, but being free from the yoke of the law it self, of their own
accord they obey the will of God. For because they abide in perpetual terrors,
so long as they be under the dominion of the law, they shall never be with
cheerful readiness framed to the obedience of God; unless they have first
this liberty given them. By an example we shall both more briefly, and
plainly perceive what these things mean. The commandment of the law is,
(...). 6 ^.
that we love our God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our
strengths. That this may be done, our soul must be made void of all other
sense and thought, our heart must be cleansed of all desires, all our
strengths must be gathered up and drawn together to this only purpose.

They which have gone most far before other in the way of the Lord, are yet
very far from this mark: For though they love God with their mind, and with
sincere affection of heart, yet they have still a great part of their heart and
soul possessed with the desires of the flesh; by which they are drawn back,
and stayed from going forward with hasty course to God. They do indeed travel
forward with great endeavor, but the flesh partly feebleth their strengths,
and partly draws them to it self. What shall they here do? When they feel
that they do nothing less then perform the law? They will, they coue^, they
endeavor, but nothing with such perfection as ought to be. If thou look upon
the law, they see that whatsoever work they attempt or purpose, is accursed.
Neither is there any cause, why any man should deceive himself with gathering
that the work is therefore not altogether ^uill, because it is imperfect: and
therefore that God does nevertheless accept that good which is in it. For the
law requiring perfect love, condemns all imper^ection unless the rigor of
it be mitigated. Therefore his works should fall to naught, which he would
have to seem partly good, and he shall find that it is a transgression of the
law, even in this* because it is imperfect.

Lo^ ^how all our works are subject to the curse of the law. But how should
then unhappy souls chearefully apply themselves to work, for which they might
not trust that they could get any thing but curse? On the other side, Men freed
from the actions of the law (...) as children ^we^tly wo^ne unto cheerful
obedien^e by the (...) where with they know that (...) to (...) them.
if being delivered from this severe exacting of the law, or rather from the
whole rigor of the law, they hear that they be called of God with fatherly
gentleness, they will merrily and with great chearfulnes answer his calling,
and follow his guiding. In a sum, they which are bound to the yoke of the
law, are like to bondslaues, to whom are appointed by their Lords certain
tasks of work for every day. These servants think that they have done
nothing, nor dare come in the sight of their Lords unless they have performed
that full task of their works; But Children (which are more liberally, and
more freemanlike handled of their Fathers) stick not to present to them their
begun and hal^e-vnperfect works, yea and those having some faults, (...),
that they will accept their obedience and willingness of mind, al^hough they
have not so exactly done so much as their good wills was to do.

So must we be, as we may have sure affiance, that our obediences shall be
allowed of our most kind Father, how little soever, and how rude and imperfect
soever they be. (...)
As also he assures to us by the Prophet: I will spare them (says he) as the
Father is wont to spare his son that serves him. Where this word spare, is
set for the bearing withal, or gently to wink at faults; for as much as he
also makes mention of service. And this affiance is not a little necessary for
us, without which we shall go about all things in vain. For God accounts
himself to be worshipped, with no work of ours; but which is truly done of
us for the worshipping of him. But how can that be done among these terrors,
where it is doubted whether God be offended, or worshipped without our work?

And that is the cause why the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (...)
refers all the good works which are read of in the holy Fathers, to Faith,
and weighs them all by Faith. Touching this liberty there is a place in the
Epistle to the Romans, where Paul reasons that sin ought not to have
dominion over us because we are not under the law, but under grace. For when
he had exhorted the faithful, that sin should not reign in their mortal
bodies, and that they should not give their members to be weapons of
wickedness to sin, but should dedicate themselves to God, Romans 11. 2. Romans
6. 12.
as they that are alive from the dead, and their members weapons of
righteousness to God: and whereas they might on the other side, object that
they do yet carry the flesh full of lusts, and that sin dwells in them,
he adioyneth that comfort by the liberty of the law as if he should say;
Though they do not yet thoroughly feel sin destroyed, and that yet
righteousness yet lives not in them, yet there is no cause why they should
fear, and be discouraged, as though he had been always displeased with them
for the remnants of sin, for as much as they are by grace made free from the
law that their works should not be examined by the rules of the law. As for
them that gather that we may sin because we are not under the Law, let them
know, that this liberty pertains nothing to them, the end whereof is to
encourage us to good.

The third part is, The third part of Christian liberty is freedom of
conscience touching the use of indifferent things, as cloth meat, drink,
wherein it is unnecessary to know how much is permitted us, lest too much
straightness drive us to inconuenien^^.
that we be bound with no conscience before God of outward things, which are
by themselves indifferent, but that we may indifferently sometime use them, and
sometime leave them unused. And the knowledge of this liberty, also is very
necessary for us; for if it shall be absent, there shall be no quiet to our
consciences, no end of superstitions. Many at this day do think us fond to
move disputation, about the free eating of flesh, about the free use of days,
and garments, and such other small trifles, as they indeed think them: but
there is more weight in them then is commonly thought. For when consciences
have once cast themselves into the snare they enter into a long and cumbersome
way, from whence they can afterward find no easy way to get out. If a man
begin to doubt whether he may occupy linen in sheets, shirts,
handkerchei^es, and napkins, neither will he be out of doubt, whether he may
use kempe, and at the last he will also fall in doubt of matters, for he will
weigh with himself, whether he cannot (...) without napkins, whether he way
not be without ha^dkerchi^fes. If any think dainty meat unlawful, atlength
he shall not with quietness before the Lord, eat either brown bread or
common meats; when he remembers that he may yet ^ustaine his body with baser
food. If he doubt of pleasant wine, afterward he will not drink dead wine
with good peace of conscience, last of all, he will not be so bold to touch
sweeter and cleaner water then other. Finally, at the length he will come to
this point, to think it unlawful (as the common saying is) to tred upon a
straw lying a-crosse. For here is begun no light strife, but this is in
question; whether God will have us to use these, or those things whose will
ought to guide all our counsels and doings. Hereby some must needs be carried
with desperation into a confuse devouring yet: some must (despising God, and
casting away his fear (make themselves away through destruction, when they
have no ready way: for whosoever are ^^tangled with such doubting, which way
soever they turn themselves, they see every where present offense of
conscience.

I know S. Paul) that nothing is common (meaning by common unholy) but who so
thinks any thing common, We cannot with thankfulness unto God enjoy the
use of outward things unless the knowledge of our liberty remove all seruple
of conscience and trouble of mind from us
to him it is common. In which words he makes all outward things, subject to
our liberty, provided always, that our minds have the assurance of the liberty
before God. But if any superstitious opinion cast into us any doubt, those
things which of their own nature were clean, are defiled to us. Wherefore he
adds: blessed is he that judges not himself in that which he allows.
But he that judges, if he eat (...) condemned because he eats not of
Faith. And that which is not of Faith, is sin. Among such narrow straights,
who so nevertheless with carelessely venturing on all things, show themsel^es
bolder, do they not as much turn themselves away from God? But they which are
thoroughly peirced with some fear of God, when they themselves also are
compelled to do any thing against their conscience, are discouraged and do
fall down with fear. All that are such do rec^iue none of the gifts of God
with thanksgiving, by which alone yet Paul ^estifieth that they are all
sanctified to our use: I mean the thanksgiving that proceeds from a heart
that acknowledges the liberality, and goodness of God in his gifts. For many
of them indeed, do understand that these are the benefits of God which they
use, and they praise God in his works: but ^ith they are not persuaded, that
they are given to themselves, how should they thank God as the giver of them?
Thus in a sum we see, whereto this liberty tends, namely that we should
use the gifts of God to such use, as he has given them unto us, without any
scruple of conscience, without any trouble of mind, by which confidence our
souls may both have peace with him, and acknowledge his liberality toward us.
For here are comprehended all ceremonies, that are at liberty to be observed,
that our consciences should not be bound with any necessity to keep them, but
should remember that the use of them, is by Gods benefits subject to themselves
unto edification.

But it is diligently to be noted, The use and abuse of doctrine which (...)
Christian l^^bertie.
that Christian liberty is in all the parts of it a spiritual thing, the whole
strength whereof consists in appeasing fearful consciences before God, if
either they be vnqui^ted or careful for the forgiveness of sins, or if
they be pensive, whether our imperfect works, and de^iled with the faults of
our flesh do please God, or if they be troubled about the use of indifferent
things. Wherefore they do wrongfully expound it, which either do make it a
cloak for their own desires, that they may abuse the gifts of God to their
own lust, o^ which do think that there is no liberty but that which is used
before men, and therefore in using it have no regard of the weak brethren. In
the first kind, men do at this day much offend. There is almost no man which
may by his ability of wealth be sumptuous, which delights not in excessive
gorgeousness, in furniture of banquets, in apparel of body, in building of
houses, which has not a will to excel other in all kind of stateliness,
which does not maruailously flatter himself in his ^inenesse. And all these
things are defended under the pretense of Christian liberty. They say that they
are things indifferent, I grant, so that man indifferently use them. But when
they are too greedily coueted, when they are proudly boasted, when they are
wastfully spent: it is certain, that those things which otherwise were of
themselves lawful, are by these faults defiled. This saying of Paul, does very
well put difference between things indifferent, (...) 1. 15. (...) 6. 24. Amos
6. 1. Esaias 5. 8.
All things are clean to the clean, but to the defiled and unbelieving, not
hing is clean because their minds and consciences is defiled. For why are
accursed the rich men, they which have their comfort, which are satisfied with
meat, which do now laugh, which sleep in beds of Iuory, which join land to
land, whose bankets have Lute, Harp, Taber, and wine? Verily both Iuory, and
Gould, and riches are the good creatures of God, permitted; yea and appointed
by the providence of God for men to use. Neither is it any where forbidden,
either to laugh or to be satisfied with meat, or to join new possessions to
their old possessions of their ancestors, or to be delighted with musical
melody, or to drink wine. This is true indeed. But when they have plenty of
things, to wallow in delights, to glut themselves, to make their wit and mind
drunk with present pleasu^es, and always to gape for new: these things are most
far from the lawful use of the gifts of God. Therefore let them take away
unmeasurable desire, let them take away unmeasurable wasting, let them take
away vanity and arrogance, that they may with a pure conscience purely use the
gifts of God. When the mind shall be framed to this sobriety, they shall have
a rule of the lawful use. On the other side let this moderation be wanting,
even base and common delicates are too much. For this is truly said, that
oftentimes in frize and course cloth, dwells a purple heart, and sometime
under silk and purple, lies simple humility. Let every man in his degree so
live, either poorly, or meanly, or plentifully, that they all remember that
they are fed of God to live not to be riotous; and let them think, that this
is the law of Christian liberty: if they have learned with Paul to be
contented with those things which they presently have: (...). 4.
if they can skill both to be humble, and to excel: if they be taught in all
places, and in all things to be both full, and hungry, to have plenty and to
suffer want.

Herein also many men do err, (...) and unseasonable using of liberty.
because as though their liberty should not be sound and safe, unless it had
menwitnesses of it, they do indiscreetly and unwisely use it. By which
unseasonable using, they many times offend the weak brethren. You may see at
this day some which think that their liberty cannot stand, unless they take
possession of it by eating flesh on Friday. I blame not that they eat, but
this false opinion must be driven out of their minds. For they ought to
think, that by their liberty they obtain no new thing in the sight of men,
but before God, and that it stands as well in abstaining as using. If they
understand, that it makes no matter before God, whether they eat flesh, or
eggs, whether they wear red, or black garments, that is enough. The conscience
is now free, to which the benefit of such liberty is due, Therefore although
they do afterward abstain all their life long from flesh, and wear always but
one color, yet they are no less free. Yea therefore because they are free,
they do with a free conscience abstain. But they do most hurtfully offend,
because they nothing regard the weakness of their brethren; which we ought so
to bear with, that we rashly commit nothing with offense of them. But
sometime also, it behooves that our liberty be set forth before men. And this
I grant. But there is a measure most heedefully to be kept, that we cast not
away the care of the weak, of whom the Lord has so earnestly given us charge.

I will in this place therefore speak somewhat of offenses, Of offenses ^ising
unto others in the use of our liberty.
in what difference they are to be taken, which are to be avoided, and which to
be neglected: whereupon we may afterward determine, what place there is for
our liberty amongst men. I like well that common division, which teaches that
there is of offenses one sort given, another taken: for as much as it has a
plain testimony of the Scripture, and does not unfitly express that which it
means. If thou do any thing by unseasonable lightness, or wantonnes^e, or
rashness, not in order, not in fit place, whereby the ignorant and weak are
offended, that same may be called an offense given by thee: because it came to
pass by thy fault that such offense was stirred up. And it is always called an
offense given in any thing, the fault whereof came from the do^r of the thing
it self. It is called an offense taken, when a thing which is otherwise not
euill^ done, nor out of time, is by evil will or by some wrongful
malitiousnesse of mind drawn to occasion of offense. For in this case was not
offense given, but these wrongful construers do without cause take one. With
that first kind of offense, none are offended but the weak. But with the
second kind, sour natures, and pharisaicall scornful heads are offended.
Wherefore we shall call the one the offense of the weak, the other of the
Pharisees: and we shall so temper the use of our liberte, that it ought to give
place to the ignorance of the weak brethren but in no wise to the
rigorousnesse of the Pharisees. For what is to be yielded to weakness, Paul
shows in very many places. Bear (says he) with the weak in Faith. Romans 14.
1. and 1^*
Again let us not hereafter judge one another, but this rather, let there not
be laid before our brother, an offense or occasion of falling: and many other
sayings to the same intent, which are more fit to be read in the place it
self, then here to be rehearsed. The sum is, that we which are strong
should bear with the weakness of our brethren, and not please our selves, but
every one of us please his neighbor unto good for edifying. 1 Cor. 8. 9. 1
Cor. 10. ^5.
In another place But see that your liberty be not in any wise an offense to
them that are weak. Again eat ye all things that are sold in the shambles
asking no question for conscience: of your conscience (I say) not another man's.
Finally be ye such that ye give no offense neither to the Jews nor to the
Greeks nor to the Church of God. Gal. 15. 14.
Also in another place ye are called brethren into liberty; only give not your
liberty to be an occasion to the flesh but by charity serve ye one another.

Thus it is. Our liberty is not given toward our weak neighbors, whose
servants charity makes us in all things: but rather, that having peace with
God in our minds, we may live peaceably among men. As for the offense of the
Pharisees, how much it is to be regarded, we learn by the words of the Lord,
whereby he bids them to be let alone, Mat. 15. 14.
because they are blind and guides of the blind. The disciples had warned him
that the Pharisees were offended with his sayings: he answered that they were
to be neglected, and the offending of them not to be cared for.

But yet still the matter hangs doubtful unless we know who are to be
taken for weak and who for Pharisees: How far our liberty extends in respect
of others whom it may offend.
which difference being taken away, I see not among offenses what use at all of
liberty remains which might never be used without great danger. But it
seems to me that Paul has most plainly declared both by doctrine and by
examples how far our liberty is either to be tempered or to be defended
though with offenses. Act. 16. 3. ^al. 2. 3. Cor. 9. 19. and 21.
When he took Timothy into his company he circumcised him, but he could not
be brought to circumcise Titus; Here were diverse doings and no change of
purpose or of mind: namely in circumcising Timothy when he was free from all
men, he made himself a servant to all men: and he was made to the Jews as a
Jew that he might win the Jews: to them that were under the law as if he
himself were under the law that he might win them that were under the law: all
things to all men that he might save many as he writes in another place. Thus
we have a right moderation of liberty if it may be indifferently restrained
with some profit. What he has respect unto when he stoutly refused to
circumcise Titus he himself testifies writing thus: But neither was Titus
which was with me although he was a Gretian compelled to be circumcised
because of the false brethren which were come in by the way, (...)
which had privily crept in, to espy our liberty which we have in Christ
Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage, to whom we gave no place by
subjection so much as for a time that the truth of the Gospel might continue
with you. There is also a time when we must of necessity defend our liberty if
the same be in weak consci^^ces endangered by the unjust exactings of false
Prophets. We must in every thing study to preserve charity and have regard to
the edifying of our neighbor. 1 Cor. 10. 23.
All things (says he) are lawful for me but not all things are expedient:
all things are lawful for me but all things do not edify. Let no man seek
that which is his own but that which is another. There is nothing now plainer
by this rule then that we must use our liberty if it may turn to the edifying
of our neighbor: but if it be not so expedient for our neighbor, then we
must forbear it. There be some which counterfeit the wisdom of Pa^l in
forbearing of liberty, while they do nothing less then apply the same to the
duties of charity. For so that they may provide for their own quietness, they
wish all mention of liberty to be buried, whereas it is no less behoouefull
for our neighbors, sometime to use liberty for their benefit and edification
then in fit place to restrain it for their commodity. But it is the part of a
godly man to think, that free power in ou^ward things, is therefore granted
him, that he may he the freer to all duties of charity.

But whatsoever I have spoken concerning of avoiding offenses my meaning is
that it be referred to mean and different things. (...)
For those things that are necessary to be done are not to be left undone for
fear of any offense. For as our liberty is to be submitted to charity, so
charity it self likewise ought to be under the pureness of faith. Verily
here ought also to be had regard of charity, but so far as to the altars, that
is, that for our neighbors sake we offend not God. Their intemperance is not
to be allowed, which do nothing but with troublesome turmoiling and which had
rather rashly to rend all things then leasurely to rip them. Neither yet are
they to be harkned to, which when they be leaders of men into a thousand so^t
of ungodliness, yet do feign that they must behave themselves so, that they
be none offense to their neighbors. As though they do not in the mean edify
the consciences of their neighbors to evil specially whereas they stick fast
in the same mire without any hope of getting out. And the pleasant men
forsooth, whether their neighbor be to be instructed with doctrine or
example of life, say that he must be fed with milk, whom they fill with most
evil and poisonous opinions. Paul reported that he fed the Corinthians with
drinking of milk, 1. Cor. 3. 2.
but if the Popish Mass had then been among them, would he have sacrifized to
have given them the drink of milk? No: for milk is not poison. Therefore
they lie in saying that they feed them, whom under a show of flattering
allurements they cruelly kill. But gra^ting that such dissembling for a time is
to be allowed, how long yet will they feed their children with milk. For if
they never grow big that they may at the least be able to bear some light
meat, it is certain that they were never brought up with milk. There are two
reasons that move me, why I do not now more sharply contend with them: first
because their follies are scarcely worthy to be confuted, ^ith they worthily
seem filthy in the sight of all men that have sound wit: secondly because I
have sufficiently done it in peculiar books I will not now do a thing already
done. Only let the reade^s remember this, that with whatsoever offenses Satan
and the world go about to turn us away from the ordinances of God, or to stay
us from following that which he appoints, yet we must nevertheless go
earnestly forward, and then, that whatsoever dangers hang upon it, yet is it
not at our liberty to swerve one hairs breadth from the commandment of the
same God, neither is it lawful by any pretense to attempt any thing but that
which he gives us leave.

Now therefore since faithful consciences, The (...) of faithful men exempted
from humane power.
having received such prerogative of liberty as we have above set forth, have
by the benefit of Christ obtained this, that they be not entangled with any
snares of observations in those things in which the Lord willed that they
should be at liberty: we conclude that they are exempt from all power of men.
For it is unmeet, that either Christ should loose the thank of his so great
liberality, or consciences their profit. Neither ought we to think it a
slight matter which we see to have cost Christ so dear, namely which he
valued not with gold or silver but with his own blood: 1. Pet. 1. 18. Gal. 5.
1. and 4.
so that Paul sticks not to say, that his death is made void if we yield our
souls into subjection to men. For he trauaileth about nothing else in
certain Chapters of the Epistle to the ^alathians, but to show that Christ is
darkened, or rather destroyed to us, unless our consciences stand fast in this
liberty which verily they have lost, if they may at the will of men be snared
with the bonds of laws and ordinances. But as it is a thing most worthy to be
known, so it needs a longer and plainer declaration. For so soon as any
word is spoken of the abrogating of the ordinance of men, by and by great
troubles are raised up: partly by seditious men, partly by slanderers, as
though the whole obedience of men were at once taken away and overthrown.

Therefore that none of us may stumble at this stone, first let us consider
that there are two sorts of government in man: Christians are not therefore
according to the outward behavior of their persons privileged from subjection
to the laws of men, because their cons^iences are at l^berty before God.
the one spiritual, whereby the conscience is framed to godliness, and to the
worship of God: the other civil, whereby man is trained to the duties of
humanity and ciuility which are to be kept among men. They are commonly by not
unfit names called the Spiritual and Temporal jurisdiction, whereby is
signified, that the first of the two forms of government pertains to the
life of the soul, and the later is occupied in the things of this p^esent
life: not only in feeding and clothing, but in setting ^orth of laws whereby
a man may spend his life among men holily, honestly and soberly. For that first
kind has place in the inward mind, this later kind orders only the outward
behauiours. The one we may call the spiritual Kingdom, the other the civil
Kingdom. But these two, as we have divided them, must be either of them always
severally considered by themselves, and when the one is in considering, we
must withdraw and turn away our minds from the thinking upon the other. For
there are in man as it were two worlds, which both diverse Kings and diverse
Laws may govern. By this putting of difference shall come to pass, that that
which the Gospel teaches of the spiritual liberty, we shall not wrongfully
draw to the civil order, as though Christians were according to the outward
government, less subject to the laws of men because their consciences are at
liberty before God: as though they were therefore exempt from all bondage of
the flesh, because they are free according to the spirit. Again, because even
in those ordinances which seem to pertain to the spiritual Kingdom, there
may be some error: we must also put difference between these which are to be
taken for lawful and agreeable to the Word of God: and on the other side which
ought not to have place among the Godly* Of the Civil government as also so of
the Ecclesiastical laws, I omit to speak of at this time, because it has
been discussed sufficiently by learned Authors already. Of this discourse let
this be the conclusion, The question as I have said of it self not being very
dark or en^angled, does for this cause trouble many because they do not
wisely put difference between the outward court as they call it, and the court
of conscience. Moreover this increases the difficulty, (...). 13.
that Paul ^eacheth that the Magistrate ought to be obeyed not only for fear
of punishment but also for conscience sake. Whereupon follows that
consciences are also bound by the civil laws. If it were so, all should come
to naught which we both have spoken, and shall speak of the spiritual
government. For the loosing of this knot, first it is good to know what is
conscience. And the definition thereof is to be fetched from the deriuation of
the word, For as when men do with mind and understanding conceive the
knowledge of things, they are thereby said (...)) to know, whereupon is also
derived the name of science: Knowledge: so when they have a feeling of the
judgment of God, as a witness joined with them, which does not suffer them to
hide their sins, but that they be drawn accused to the judgment seat of
God, that same feeling is called conscience. For it is a certain mean
between God and man, because it suffers not man to suppress in himself,
that which he knows, but pursues him so far till it brings him to
guiltiness.

This is it which Paul means, Romans 2. 17.
where he says, that the conscience does together witness with men, when
their thoughts do accuse or acquit them in the judgment of God. Therefore
this feeling which presents man to the judgment of God, is as a keeper
joined unto man, to mark and epsy all his secrets, that nothing may remain
buried in oblivion. Whereupon also comes that ancient Proverb: Conscience is
a thousand (...). 1 Pet. 3. 21.
And for the same reason, (...)
Pete^ has set the examination of a good conscience for the quietness of mind,
when being persuaded of the grace of Christ, we do without fear present our
selves before God. And the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews sets to
have no more conscience of sin, Heb. 10. 2.
instead of to be delivered or acquitted that sin may no more accuse us.

Therefore as work has respect to men, In what sort the conscience is bound
or fiec.
so conscience is referred to God, so that a good conscience is nothing else
but the inward pureness of the heart. Tim. 1. 5.
In which sense Paul writes that Charity is the fulfilling of the law out of
(...) pure conscience and faith not feigned. Afterward also in the same
chapter, he shows how much it differs from understanding, saying that some
had suffered shipwreck from the faith, because they had forsaken a good
conscience. For in these words he signifies, it is a lively affection to
worship God, and a sincere endeavor to live holily and godlily. Sometime it
extends also to men, as in Luke, Act. 24. 16.
where the same Paul protested, that he endeauored himself to walk with a
good conscience toward God and men. But this was therefore said, because the
fruits of a good conscience, do flow and come even to men. But in speaking
properly, it has respect to God only, as I have already said. Hereby it
comes to pass, that the law is said to bind the Conscience, which simply
binds a man without respect of men; or without having any consideration of
them. As for example: God commands not only to keep the mind chaste, and
pure from all lust; but also forbids all manner of filthiness of words, and
outward wantonness whatsoever it be. To the keeping of this law, my
conscience is subject, although there lived not one man in the world. So he
that behaueth himself intemperately, not only sins in that he gives an
evil example, to the brethren: but also has his conscience bound with
guiltiness before God. In things that are of themselves mean, there is
another consideration. For we ought to abstain from them, if they breed any
offense, but the conscience still being free. So Paul speaks of flesh
consecrate secrate to Idols. If any (says he) move any doubt touch it not for
conscience sake. I say for conscience, not thine own but the others. For a
faithful man does not sin which being first warned should nevertheless eat
such flesh. But howsoever in respect of his brother it is necessary for him to
abstain as it is prescribed of God.

I have delivered you the freedom and liberty of Christians, we are not to
please our selves but edify our neighbor: use it not deceitful, make it not
a cloak to cover your unrighteousness, but rather having peace with God in
our minds, we also may live charitably amongst men. For your liberty avails
nothing if you cast not away your sin God (when the measure of your iniquity is
full) will cast you of for your sin: ^en. 15. 15.
for as he is just, so he has power to kill and cast into Hell all hardened
and ^npenitent sinners. If therefore, you will avoid the cursed effects of
sin in this life, and eternal wrath thereunto in the world to come and be
assured that you are not of the number of those, who are given over to a
reprobate sense, Dan. 4. 24.
Let then my counsel be acceptable to you: break of your sins by
righteousness, and your iniquity by showing mercy to your brethren. O let there
be (at length) an healing of your errors. Nathan used but one parable, 2* Sam.
12. 13.
and David was converted. Jonas preached but once to Niniuy, and the whole
city repented: Christ looked but once on Peter, and he went out and wept
bitterly. And now that you are often, and so lovingly entreated; not by A Prophet
only, but by Christ the Lord of Prophets: 2 Cor. 5. 20
yea, that God himself, by his ambassadors enteates you to be reconciled to
him: leave of your Adulteryes with David, repent of your sins like a true
Niniuite, and weep bitterly for your offenses. Content not your selves with
that formal religion, which unregenerate men have framed to themselves,
instead of sincere devotion: for in the multitude of opinions, most men have
almost lost the practice of Religion. Think not that you are a Christian good
enough, because you do as the most, and are not so bad as the worst. No man is
so wicked, that he is addicted to all kind of vices, (for there is an
Antipathy betwixt some vices) But remember that Christ says; Mat. 5. 20.
Except your righteousness, exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees; ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Consider with your selves, how far you come short of the Pharisees in fasting,
praying, frequenting the Church and in giving of Alms. Think with your
selves, how many Pagans who never knew Baptism, yet in moral virtues, and
honesty of life, do go far beyond you. Where is then the life of Christ your
Master? and how far are you from being true Christians? A true Christian, must
have respect to walk in the truth of his heart; in all the commandments of
God alike, Iam. 2. 10.
for he that shall offend in one point of the law, is guilty of all. 1 Pet. 2.
1.
And Peter bids us, Lay aside, (not some, but) all malice, guile, and
hypocrisies, One sin is enough to damn a man's soul, without Repen^^^ce;
dream not to go to Heaven, by any nearer or easier way then Christ has
trained us in this world. Mat. 7. 14.
The way to Heaven, Mat. 19. 23.
is not easy or common; but straight and narrow, Mat. 7. 14. and 22. 14.
yea so narrow that Christ protests, Luke 13. 24.
that a rich man, shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and that
those who enter are but few: and that those few cannot get in but by striving:
and that some of those who strive to enter in, shall not be able. This all Gods
Saints (whilst they here lived) knew well, when with so often fasting, so
earnest prayers, so frequent hearing the word, and receiving the Sacraments,
and with such abundance of tears, they devoutly begged at the hands of God for
Christ's sake, to be received into his Kingdom.

O then try your spirits whether they are of God, deceive not your selves, by
diffidence, despair, or too much fidelity; dote not too much upon these wodden
cottages, these houses of moulding clay, which are but the tents of
ungodliness, the receptacle, and habitation of sinners, but look rather, and
long for this Heavenly city, whose builder and maker is God: Heb. 11. 10.
which he, (who is not ashamed to be called our God:) has prepared for you.
Heb. 11. 6.


By all these things which have been delivered to you, you may easily
perceive, how destitute and naked, mankind is of all good things: and how he
wants all helps of salvation. Wherefore if he seek for releifes whereby he
may succor his necessity, he must go out of himself, and repair to the
fullness of riches laid up in Christ. This is afterward declared to us, that
the Lord of his own free will and liberality, does give himself to us in
Christ, in whom he offers us, instead of our misery, felicity, instead of our
need, wealthinesse, in whom he opens to us all heavenly and celestial
treasures; that ou^ whole Faith should behold his beloved son, and so be
filled with all manner of divine pleasures, (...). 16. 11. (...) 36. 8.
at his right hand, and drink out of the rivers of pleasures that upon him our
whole expectation should hang, in him our whole hope should rest: This verily
is the secret and hidden Philosophy, which cannot be wrung out with Logical
arguments: but they learn it whose eyes God has opened, that they may see
light in his light. But since we are taught, by faith to acknowledge, that
whatsoever we have need of, whatsoever is wanting in us; the same is
plentifully in God, and in our Lord Jesus Christ, namely in whom the Lord,
willed the whole fullness of his largeness to rest; that from thence we
should all draw, as out of a most plentiful fountain: now it remains that
we seek in him, and with prayers crave of him that, which we have learned to
be in him. Otherwise to know God, to be the Lord, and giver of all good
things, which allureth us to pray to him, and not to go to him and pray to
him; should as little profit us, as if a man should neglect a treasure showed
him buried and dug in the ground. Therefore the Apostle to show that true
Faith cannot be idle from calling upon God, has set this order: Romans 8. 26*
that as of the Gospel springs Faith, so by it our hearts are framed to call
upon the name of God. And this is the same thing which he had a little before
said, that the spirit of Adoption which seals in our hearts the witness of
the Gospel, raises up our spirits, that they dare show forth their desires to
God, and stir up unspeakable groanings, and cry with confidence Abba,
Father: It is meet therefore, that this last point because it was before but
only spoken of, by the way, and as it were lightly touched; should now be
more largely treated of. Wherein I will briefly show you some particular, and
especial commodities; which the faithful by constant, fervent, and earnest
prayer attain at the hands of the Almighty.

This we get by the benefit of prayer, By prayer we are both enriched with
grace and quieted in distresies.
that we attain to those riches with are laid up for us with the heavenly
Father. For there is a certain communicating of men with God whereby they
entering into the sanctuary of God, do in his own presence, call to him
touching his promise; that the same thing which they believed him, affirming
only in word, not to be vain, they may when need^ so requires find in
experience. Therefore we see that there is no thing set forth to us, to be
looked for at the hand of the Lord which we are not commanded to crave with
prayers: for true it is, that by prayers are dug up the treasures which our
faith has looked upon, being showed to it by the Gospel of the Lord. By
prayer we are enriched with all the graces of the Almighty; and in our
distresses, and calamities both quieted and releiued; what blessing soever we
would have, or from what plague, trouble, or necessity soever be delivered, we
may procure from God, by faithful prayer.

By prayer we do as by the hand of Faith, violently seize and take possession
of Heaven, for our inheritance: and make our selves free Citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem, where all the elect shall enjoy, these excellent
prerogatives.

1. They shall be all Kings, Three superexcellent prerog^tiues the Elect e^^oy
in heaven.
and Priests: Spiritual Kings to reign with Christ, and to triumph over
Satan, the world, and Reprobates: and spiritual Priests, to offer unto God
the spiritual Sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
of Praise and Thankesgiuings for evermore. And therefore they are said to
wear both Crowns, and Roabes. Heb. 13. 15.
Oh what a comfort is this to poor Parents, that have many Children, if they
breed them up in the fear of God, to be true Christians: then are they parents
to so many kings and Priests.

2. Their bodies shall shine as the brightness of the Sun in the firmament:
Mat. 13. 43.
like the glorious body of Christ, which shined brighter then the Sun at
Noone, when it appeared to Paul: Act. 12. 6. Phi^. 3. 21.


A glimpse of which glorious brightness, appeared in the bodies of Moses and
Elias, tranfigured with our Lord in the holy Mount. Therefore (says the
Apostle) it shall rise a Glorious Body: Luke 9. 31. Man. 9. 3.
yea, a Spiritual Body, not in Substance, but in quality preserved by
spiritual means, 1 Cor. 15. 43. verse. 44.
and having as (an Angel) agility to descend and ascend. 1 The^^* 4. 1.
What a honor is this? That our bodies (falling more vile then a carrion,)
should thus arise in glory, like unto the Body of the Son of God.

4. Lastly, they (together with all the holy Angels) there, keep (without any
labor to distract them) a perpetual Sabbath, to the glory, honor, and praise
of the all Blessed Trinity, for the Creating, Redeeming, and Sanctifying, of
the Church: and for his Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and goodness, in the
government of Heaven and Earth.

They shall know God with a perfect knowledge so far as creatures can
possibly comprehend the Creator. The effect of those prerogatives.
For there we shall see the Word, 1 Cor. 1 10. Aug. solil^q. cap. 36. Nihil
notum in terra, nihil ignotum in coelo^*
the Creator; and in the Word, all Creatures that by the Word were created,
that we shall not need to learn (of the thing which we made) the knowledge
of him by whom all things were made. The excellentest creatures of this life,
are but a dark veil, drawn betwixt God and us: but when this veil shall be
drawn aside, then shall we see God face to face, and know him as we are
known. We shall know the power of the Father, the Wisdom of the Son, the
grace of the Holy Ghost; and the indivisible nature of the blessed Trinity. 1
Cor. 13. 11.
The greatest knowledge that men can attain unto in this life, comes as far
short of the knowledge which we shall have in Heaven, as the knowledge of a
child that cannot yet speak plain is to the knowledge of the greatest
Philosopher in the world. They who thirst for knowledge, let them long be
Students in this University. Lumen est vmbra Dei, and Deus est. ^umen luminis.
Plato Polib.
For all the light by which we know any thing in this world, is nothing but the
shadow of God. But when we shall know God in heaven, we shall in him, know
the manner of the work of the Creation, the mysteries of the work of our
Redemption. Yea so much knowledge as a Creature can possibly conceive of the
Creator and his works. But whilst we are in this life, we may say with Job,
how little a portion hear we of him? Job. 26. 14.
and assure our selves with Siracides, that there are high yea greater things
then these be, and that we have seen but a few of Gods works.

For so soon as she is admitted into actual fruition of the beatificall
essence of God: she has all the goodness, beauty, glory, and perfection, of
all creatures (in all the world) united together; and at once presented to her,
in the sight of God.

If any be in Love, there they shall enjoy that which is more amiable: If any
delight in fairness; the fairest beauty is but a dusty shadow to that: he
that delights in pleasures, shall there find varieties, without either
interruption of grief, or distraction of pain. He that loves Honor, shall
there enjoy it; without the disgrace of cankered envy: he that loves
treasure, shall there possess it and never be beguiled of it. There they
shall have knowledge, void of all ignorance; health, that no sickness shall
impair; and life, that no death can determine.

By virtue of this; the penitent soul, may bouldly go and say unto Christ (as
Ruth unto Boaz Spread o Christ the wing of thy garment of thy mercy, Ruth. 3. 9*
over thine handmaid: for thou art my kinsma^. Indeed, 1 Cor. 15. 28.
God is all in all to us, in Earth: but by means and in a small measure. But in
heaven, God himself immediately (in fullness of measure, without all means)
will be unto us, all the good things that our souls and bodies can wish and
desire. He himself will be salvation, and joy, to our souls: life, and
health to our bodies: beauty to our Eyes: music to our Ears: honey to our
mouths: perfume to our nostrils: meat to our bellyes: light to our
understandings: contentment to our wills; delight to our hearts: and what can
be lacking, where God himself will be the Soul of our souls? When
therefore we behold any thing that is excellent in any creatures, let us say
to our selves; how much more excellent is he; who gave them this excellency?
When we behold the wisdom of men, who ouerrule creatures stronger then
themselves; outrunne the Sun, and Moon in discourse, Seneca de benefici^s.
lib. 2. cap. 19.
prescribing many years before, in what courses they shall be eclypsed: let us
say to our selves how admirable is the wisdom of God, who made men so wise?
when we consider the streng^^ of Whales, and Elephants, the te^pests of winds,
and terror of Thunder; let us say to our selves, how strong, how mighty, how
terrible, is that God, that makes these mighty and fearful creatures. When we
taste things that are delicately sweet let us say to our selves, O how sweet
is that God from whom all these creatures have received this sweetness. And if
our loving God, has thus provided us so many excellent delights, for our
passage through this Bachin, or valley of tears; Judge. 2. 5.
what are those pleasurs which he has prepared for us, when we shall enter
into the palace of our Masters joy? How shall our souls, be there ravished
with the love of so lovely a God? In a word look how far this wide world,
surpasses for light, pleasures and comfort, the dark and narrow womb, where
in thou wast conceived a child: so much does the world to come, exceed in
joys, solace, and consolation, this present world. How happy then shall we
be, when this life is changed, and we thither translated?

This shall be thine eternal happiness, in the Kingdom of Heaven; where thy
life shall be a communion with the blessed Trinity, thy joy, the presence of the
Lamb: thy exercise singing; thy ditty, Alleluiah; thy consorts, Saints and
Angels; where youth flourishes, that never shall wax old; Beauty Lasts,
that never fades; love abounds, that never cools; health continues, that
never slaketh: and life remains, that never ends.

A Prayer.
O Lord God, heavenly Father; when I do consider how many ways, and by how
many sorts of sins I have offended thee night and day; and do duly call to
mind how graciously thou have kept me this night, and how many blessings and
favors I have received of thee without number: I am even astonished at my
great ingratitude, and do utterly condemn my self of highest rebellion
against thee. Many have been the days, weeks, months and years, that thou
have here afforded me to live; and in all the time of my life hitherunto, thou
have graciously preserved me, plentifully relieved me, and continually kept
me under thy Fatherly protection, in all my nights and days; and have been
evermore watchful over me; that I have from time to time, from night to day,
and from day to night, been ever sustained through thy grace, though I have
sometimes felt thy correcting rod by some crosses for my sins, yet have they
been ever easy, in comparison of my deseruings; and profitable unto me. Lord
pardon and forgive me my sins, forgive my manifold offenses, wash me thoroughly
by the blood of Jesus Christ my Redeemer, and cleanse me from all my
pollutions, for they are many, and I am ashamed that ever I gave way unto them.
But now Lord, now, though late, I pray thee to lead me by thy Spirit in more
obedience; stay me, that I run not this day into any unseemly or ungodly
actions; withhold mine eyes from vanities; keep under the ungodly affections of
my corrupt heart, that though they may begin to work sin in me, Lord
suppress them before they come to execution. Disperse Lord, and dispell all
the clouds of ignorance and errors, that darken mine understanding, and give me
wisdom rightly to know thee, and thy Son Christ, and what he has done for my
soul; and through thy grace restrain me this day from that thou have
commanded me to shun: and let me do nothing but what may please thee, then
whatsoever I shall think, speak or determine, shall be to thine own glory,
profitable to my self and others. Preserve me from the secret and hidden
snares of Satan, who is restless to allure me to sin, enticing me to embrace
the vanities of the world, and to yield to the lusts of mine own corrupt
nature. But Lord, as I have by thy providence, past the darkness of this
night, and do now enjoy the joyful benefit of the light of this day: so let
me this day avoid all the works of darkness; and as the day does administer
light unto my corporal eyes, the better to do the works and offices of my
calling; let the light of thy Spirit, O Lord, shine in my soul, that I may
walk in the light of thy truth in true obedience, to the good example of
others. Thou have allotted me a calling in this life; give me power and wisdom
rightly to perform it: my best endeauours can little prevail without thy
blessing and direction; and therefore I humbly pray thee to prosper whatsoever I
take in hand this day. Bless mine understanding O Lord, that I may rightly
know and be able truly and faithfully to perform what belongs unto my
place and calling. Bless the health of my body, the strength and continual
use of my limbs and senses, which of themselves are weak, and may soon decay
without thy blessing. Increase O Lord, and confirm my faith, grace, wisdom,
and obedience every day more and more, that I may every day more and more dye
unto sin, and be made stronger and more perfect in righteousness. Heal O
Lord, all my corporal and spiritual infirmities, and dispose my heart, that I
may be every day more and more mindful, that this my life is short, and that
this day may be my last day: and let me so walk this day, as if it should
be the last day of this my mortal life; that I may be assured of the
immediate entrance into that life which is eternal with Christ my Redeemer.
And until that last day shall come, O Lord, I entreat thee in the name of
Jesus Christ, that this day and all the rest of my days and nights, may be
prosperous and blessed unto me; the day for the performance of my calling, the
night for my rest, until I come to my final and perpetual rest with thee and
thy Son, to whom with thy blessed Spirit, I ascribe all honor, praise and
glory. Amen.

FINIS.

