A DEFENSE OF THE SERMON Preached at the Consecration of the L. Bishop of Bath
and Welles, against a confutation thereof by a namelesse Author. Divided into
4 Books: The first, proving chiefly that the lay or onely-gouerning Elders
have no warrant either in the Scriptures or other monuments of Antiquity. The
second, showing that the primitive Churches endued with power of
Ecclesiastical government, were not Parishes properly but Dioceses, and
consequently that the Angels of the Churches or ancient Bishops were not
parishionall but Diocesan Bishops. The third, defending the superiority of
Bishops above other Ministers, and proving that Bishops always had a prioritie
not only in order, but also in degree, and a maioritie of power both for
ordination and jurisdiction. The fourth, maintayning that the Episcopal
function is of Apostolical and divine institution.


By GEORGE DOWNAME Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Creed, William Hall, and Thomas Snodham. 1611.

TO THE MOST High and mighty Monarch, James by the grace of God King of great
Britayne, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. All true happiness
and prosperity, in this life, and eternal felicity in the life to come.
THE prudent speech of the politic Historiographer (most gracious and dread
Sovereign) is in some sort verified of us in this Church, Thucydi^
(...), those which be in the midst are slain or at the least wise assailed
on both sides: The Romanists on the one side blaming us for departing too far
from the Church of Rome; our innouatours accusing us on the other side, for
coming too near the same. Which contrary accusations of men being in
contrary extremes, Medium beati.
are a good evidence for us, that we hold the mean. For neither are we
departed further from the now-Roman church, then it has swarued by Apostasy
from the ancient Church of Christ, to which, in departing from them, we are
returned: neither have we retained either for the substance of Doctrine, or
for the form of Discipline any thing almost agreeing with them, which with
them we have not received, either from the doctrine or institution of the
Apostles, or from the approved practice of the Primitive Church. The which, as
it is to be acknowledged to the high praise of God, and to the singular
commendation of your Majesty; so also to the contentation and joy of all your
loving subjects. God having vouchsafed unto us this especial favor, (for
which his name is ever to be praised and magnified among us) that there is not
a Church under the Sun, which both for the substance of Doctrine, and form
of Discipline, does come so near the pattern of the Prime and Apostolical
Churches, as these under your gracious government. Your Majesty also having
been a blessed instrument of God, not only for the retayning of the truly
Catholic and Apostolic doctrine and religion in all your Dominions; but also
for the establishing of the ancient and Apostolical government, where it was
in use before; and likewise for renewing and restoring the same (though to your
great cost and charges) where it was formerly abolished. These inestimable
benefits, if we in this land do not acknowledge and profess our selves to
have received from God by your Majesty we must confess our selves to be not
only unthankful, both to God (who is the gracious Author) and to your
Highness who are the happy means of these benefits) but also unworthy to
enjoy them. If we do (according to our bounden duty) acknowledge so much: it
remains, that we should testify our thankefulnes to GOD Almighty, as in
respect of his true Doctrine and sound religion continued among us, by walking
worthy our calling, Ephesians. 4 Tit. 2.^^
and by adorning the doctrine of God our Savior in all things: so also in
regard of the Apostolical form of government established among us, Phil. 2.^
Heb. 13
by a due and respective countenancing of it on all hands. For howsoever a
great number in these days have thought so much the better of themselves, by
how much they have thought the worse of Bishops: yet is it most certain, that
the contempt of Bishops is the cause, if not of all evil (which
notwithstanding Chrysostom seems to affirm) yet of very much evil among
us. In 2 Ti^
This contempt therefore is diligently to be prevented and avoided, as by the
godly and religious care, both of your Highness in preferring worthy men to this
high and sacred function, and of the reverend Bishops in showing themselves
worthy of that honor whereof they would, and indeed should be accounted
worthy: so also by instructing the people to conceive a right of this holy and
honorable calling. And for as much as the pernicious schism and division,
which is among us, proceeds from an erroneous conceit, either that the
Presbyterian Discipline is the holy ordinance of Christ, or that the government
by Bishops is unlawful and Antichristian: I was persuaded (for my part) that I
could not perform a service, either more acceptable unto God, or more
profitable to his Church; then to publish those arguments for the satisfaction
of others, which had persuaded mine own soul, not only that the Presbyterian
Discipline is a mere humane invention, and new devise, having no ground either
in the Scriptures, or other monuments of Antiquity: but also that the
Episcopal function is of Apostolical and Divine institution. And whereas my
Sermon published in defense of the holy and honorable calling of Bishops, has
been eagerly oppugned by a namelesse refuter; I thought my self bound in
conscience to deliver the truth, which I had defended, from his sophistical
cauillations. The which, through Gods good blessing upon my labors I have so
performed, that there is scarce any one sentence of the Sermon (if any at all)
oppugned by the adversary, which I have not defended by plain, evidence of
truth. These my labors I have presumed to dedicate to your Majesty, as the
principal Patron (under Christ) of that truth which I defend; not only
entreating your Highness to accept in good part my poor endeauours; but also
commending my self, and them, to your most gracious Patronage and Royal
protection. The King of Kings bless, prosper, and preserve your excellent
Majesty to his glory, the good of his Church, and your own everlasting
comfort. Amen.

Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subject, GEORGE DOWNHAM.

The Contents of this Book.
The first book treats chiefly of Lay Elders.
CHap. 1. Answering the Refuters Preamble, concerning the Author and matter of
the Sermon and the Text. Chap. 2. Dividing the Sermon, and defending the first
part thereof which he calls the Preface. Chap. 3. Defending the two first
sections concerning Elders, and proving that there were no Presbyters in the
primitive Church but Ministers. Chap. 4. Containing the first reason why
Lay Elders are not proved out of the 1 Timothy 5.17. Chap. 5. Maintayning the
second reason. Chap. 6. Mayntaining the third reason. Chap. 7. That Ambrose on
1 Timothy 5.1. does not give testimony to Lay Elders, and that their exposition
of Ambrose is untrue. Chap. 8. The proof of their exposition of Ambrose
disproued, and the reasons why the counsel of the Seniors was neglected,
defended. Chap. 9. Answering the testimonies which the Refuter alleges to
prove Lay Elders. Chap. 10. Containing an answer to the same testimonies and
some others as they are alleged by other Disciplinarians. Chap. 11. Answering
the allegations out of the Fathers for Lay Elders.
The second Book proves that the Churches which had Bishops were Dioceses,
and the Angels or Pastors of them Diocesan Bishops.
CHap. 1. Entreating of the diverse acceptations of the words (...), Church,
Diocese and Paraecia, which is translated parish. Chap. 2. Proving by either
arguments that the ancient Churches which had Bishops were not Parishes but
Dioceses. Chap. 3. that the seven Churches in Asia were Dioceses. Chap. 4.
That Presbyteries were appointed not to Parishes but to Dioceses. Chap. 5.
Answering their objections who say that in the first 200. years all the
Christians in each great city were but one particular congregation, assembling
in one place. Chap. 6. The Arguments for the new found Parish discipline
answered Chap. 7. That the Angels or Bishops of the primitive Churches were
Diocesan Bishops.
The third Book treats of the superiority of Bishops above other Ministers.
CHap. 1. Confuteth the Refuters preamble to the fourth point concerning the
superiority of Bishops, and defends mine entrance thereinto. Chap. 2.
Declares in general that Bishops were superior to other Ministers in degree.
Chap. 3. Shows more particularly wherein the superiority of Bishops did and
does consist. And first their singularity of pre-eminence for term of life.
Chap. 4. Demonstrateth the superiority of Bishops in power, and first in the
power of ordination. Chap. 5. Proves the superiority of Bishops in the power
of jurisdiction. Chap. 6. Treats of the titles of honor given to Bishops.
The fourth Book proves the Episcopal function to be of Apostolical and
divine institution.
CHap. 1. That the Ecclesiastical government by Bishops was generally received
in the first 300. years after the Apostles. Chap. 2. That the Episcopal
government was used in the Apostolical Churches, in the Apostles times without
their dislike. Chap. 3. That the Apostles themselves ordained Bishops. Chap. 4.
The places where and the persons whom the Apostles ordained Bishops, but
chiefly that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus and Titus of Creet. Chap. 5.
Answers to the allegations out of Jerome. Chap. 6. Directly proves the
Episcopal function to be of divine institution. Chap. 7. Defends the
conclusion of the Sermon, and shows that the chief Protestants did not
dissallowe the Episcopal government.
FINIS.
An Answer to the Preface.
THE scope of the refuter in his preface is as of Orators in their Proemes, to
prepare the Reader, and if he be such a one as will be led with shows to draw
his affections to himself, and to withdraw them from me.

It contains a Prologue to the Reader, and an Epilogue concluding with
prayer, and with praise to God. The former consists of a declaration, and of
a direction, to the Reader. He declares three things, first, the weighty
causes moving him to undertake this worthy work: secondly, his valiant
resolution in undertaking it; thirdly, his manner of performance.

As touching the first: Ad page
that you may not think him, after the manner of factious spirits, blinded
with erroneous conceits, and transported with unquiet passions, unadvisedly or
headily to have attempted this business; he tells you, that there were two
motives, that moved him thereto; the one, his strong opinion, page 3: the
other, his unquiet desire, page 7. His opinion was, that my sermon, defending
the honorable function of Bishops, was most needful to be answered: for so he
says, I deemed it as needful to be answered, as any book our Opposites have
at any time set forth. And that no man should think this his opinion to be
fantastical or erroneous, he confirms it with diverse reasons: but such, as
who shall compare them either with the truth, or with his opinion (for the
proof whereof they are brought) or one with another, he shall see a pleasant
representation of the Matachine, every one fighting with another. The first
reason;
because he saw the Sermon tended directly to prove, that the calling of our
L. BB. (as they now exercise it in the Church of England) is to be holden Iure
diuino, by divine right, not as an humane ordinance, their ancient and wonted
tenure, etc. In which speech are diverse untruths. For first, with what eye
did he see that directly proclaimed in the Sermon, which directly and
expressly I did disclaim, page 92. where I did profess, that although I hold
the calling of BB. in respect of their first institution, to be an
Apostolical, and so a divine ordinance; yet, that I do not maintain it to be
Diuini juris, as intending thereby, that it is generally, perpetually, and
immutably necessary; as though there could not be a true Church without it,
which himself also acknowledges, page 90. of his book. 2. where I spoke of
the substance of their calling, page 2. and 52.
with what eye did he see me defending their exercise of it? As if he would
make the reader believe, that I went about to justify all the exercise of
their function, which in all, even the best gouernements whatsoever, is subject
to personal abuses. 3. Neither is it true, that the ancient tenure of BB. was
only Iure humano, unless he restrain the ancie^tnesse he speaks of, to
these latter times, which are but as yesterday. For in the primitive Church as
hereafter shall be plainly proved, the function of BB. was without contradiction
acknowledged to be a tradition or ordinance Apostolical, and the first Bishops
certainly known to have been ordained by the Apostles.

And as his first reason fights with the truth, so the second both with his
opinion, and with it self. For why was the sermon most needful to be
answered? because says he, it is evident that the doctrine therein contained,
howsoever M. D. says it is true,
profitable and necessary, is utterly false, very hurtful and obnoxious,
necessary indeed to be confused, at no hand to be believed. In which words 3.
reasons are propunded, which now come to be examined.
It is evident says, he that the doctrine in the sermon, is utterly false,
therefore it is most needful to be confuted. But say I, if it be evidently
false, it needs no confutation. Things manifestly false or true, are so judged
without disputation or discourse. Neither does any thing need to be argued or
disputed, but that which is not evident. This reason therefore if it were true,
would with better reason conclude against his opinion. It is evident, says he,
that it is utterly false, therefore it needs not to be confuted. The second
br^anch: It is very hurtful and obnoxious, therefore etc. Obnoxious? what is
this? subject or in danger to be hurt with evil tongues, subject to
sophistical cauillations, and malicious calumniations. But hurtful it is not,
for I not only said but proved also both in the preface and conclusion of the
sermon, that it is both profitable and necessary. The third, It is necessary
indeed to be confuted. As if he had said, it is necessary indeed to be
confuted, therefore it is most needful to be answered.

Of these reasons, the two first he proves in the words following, the third
being as you see, nothing else but an absurd begging of the question.

The first he proves by diverse arguments, such as they be. First then the
doctrine of the Sermon is proved to be utterly false, because, it is repugnant
to the truth, to the word of truth, to the scripture of truth. But how, after
al these ridiculous amplifications, is the doctrine of the sermon proved to be
repugnant to the word of truth? he had rather take it for granted, then that
you should put him to prove it. But I shall make it clear in this defense of
my sermon, that as there is not a syllable in the scripture to prove the
pretended discipline, so the Episcopal function has good warrant in the word
of God. But when in the second place he proves the doctrine of the sermon to
be utterly false, because it is contrary to the judgment and practice of the
prime Churches next after Christ, Ad page
and his Apostles, I cannot tell whether to wonder at more, the blindness or
the impudency of the man. Seeing I have made it manifest that the government
of the Church by BB. has the full consent of antiquity; there being not one
testimony of the ancient writers for their Judgment, nor one example of the
primitive churches, for their practice, to be alleged to the contrary. How
durst he mention the judgment and practice of the primitive Church, for the
trial of the truth in this question, when there is not one testimony for the
pretended discipline, nor one example of it, in all antiquity? let them bring
any one pregnant either testimony or example, and I will yield in the whole
cause.

And where he adds, that it is contrary to the judgment and practice of all
reformed Churches,
since the reestablishing of the Gospel by the worthies in these latter times:
is it not strange, that a man professing sincerity should so ouerreach, seeing
a far greater part of the reformed Churches is governed by BB. and
Superintendents, then by the presbyterian discipline, as I have showed in the
latter end of this book. But he adds four notorious untruths, concerning
our own land,
saying, that it is against the doctrine of our Martyrs, contrary to the
professed judgment of all our worthy writers, contrariant to the laws of our
land, and contrarying the doctrine of the Church of England. The first he
expresses thus, See the whole story in the acts and monuments, and in the
book called the B B. book.

Reformat. legum ecclesiast. tit. de divine. officijs. Cap. 10.11.


Against the doctrine of our immediate forefathers (some of whom were worthy
Martyrs, he quoteth in the Margent, Latimer, Cranmer, etc) who in their
submission to king Henry the 8. at the abolishing of the Popes authority out
of England, acknowledge with subscription, that the disparitie of Ministers and
Lordly primacy of B B. was but a politic devise of the Fathers, not any
ordinance of Christ Jesus: and that the government of the Church by the
Minister, and certain Seniors or Elders in every parish, was the ancient
discipline. Which allegations would make a fair show, if they might pass
unexamined. The witnesses which he quoteth for both, were Archbishop Cranmer,
and other BB. who allowing the Episcopal function both in judgment and
practice, it is almost incredible, that any testimonies can from them be
soundly alleged against the same. And I do greatly wonder at the large
conscience of our re^uter in this behalf, who throughout the book takes
wonderful liberty in citing Authors, alleging as their testimonies his own
conceits, which he brought not from their writings, but to them. For the
former, he alleges the book of Martyrs, whereunto that part of the BB.
book, which he mentions, is inserted; which having perused, I find nothing
at all concerning the superiority of BB. over other Ministers: Page edi^ 157
Cypr. simpl^ lat. Hiero euag.
that which is said, concerns the superiority of BB. among themselves, all
whom, with the ancient Fathers, I do confess in respect of the power of Order
to be equal, as were also the Apostles whose successors they are. But we may
not infer, because the Apostles were equal among themselves, that therefore
they were not superior to the 72. disciples; or because BB. are equal among
themselves, that therefore they are not superior to other ministers. For the
latter, he quoteth the book called Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticaru^. Which was
a project of Ecclesiastical laws, which, if King Edward the 6. had lived,
should have been set forth by his authority, drawn by Archbishop Cranmer, B.
May, and other Commissioners, and penned (as is supposed) by D. Haddon. In
alleging whereof, whiles the refuter goes about to make the reader believe,
that they stood for Lay Elders, and the pretended parish-discipline, he plaieth
the part of an egregious falsifier. And forasmuch as sometimes in his book he
cites the 10. and 11. chapters, I will transcribe the same, the bare recital
being a sufficient co^futation of his forged allegatio^s. For among other
orders to be observed in parochijs vrbanis, in parishes which be in cities,
which begin at the 6. chapter of that title de divine. off: in the tenth this
order is prescribed. Co^fectis precibus vespertinis, Reform eccl. tit. diu.
offic^ Cap. 10.
etc. evening prayers being ended, whereunto after the Sermon there shall be a
concourse of all in their own Churches, the principal Minister, who^ they
call Parochum, the Parson or Pastor, and the Deacon if perhaps they be present,
or in their abse^ce the Ministers Vicar and Seniors are to co^sult with the
people, how the money provided for godly uses may best be bestowed, and to the
same time let the discipline be reserved. For they who have committed public
wickedness to the common offense of the Church, are to be called to the
knowledge of their sin, and publicly to be punished, that the Church by
their wholesome correction may be kept in order. Moreover, the Minister going a
side with some of the Seniors (or Ancients of the parish) shall take counsel
how others whose manners are said to be naught, and whose life is found out to
be wicked, first may be talked withal in brotherly charity, according to
Christ's precept in the Gospel, by sober and honest men, by whose admonitions
if they shall reform themselves, thanks is duly to be given to God. But if
they shall go on in their wickedness, they are to receive such sharp
punishment as we see in the Gospel provided against their contumacie.

Cap. 11.
Then follows the 11. chapter, how excommunication is to be exercised.

But when the sentence of excommunication is to be pronounced, first the Bishop
is to be gone unto, and his sentence to be known. Who if he shall consent and
put too his authority, the sentence of excommunication is to be denounced
before the whole congregation, that therein so much as may be, we may bring in
the ancient discipline. Where indeed we see mention of Seniors and of ancient
discipline; but that they meant nothing less then to bring in Lay Elders, or
to establish the pretended parish-discipline, or to acknowledge that it was the
ancient discipline of the Church, I will out of the book it self make
manifest. Wherein the whole government and discipline of our Church, by
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, rural Deanes, Tit. de Ecclesia, and
ministris eius, eorumque officys. Cap. 12.
etc. is established. And concerning BB. this is there decreed, that the B. is
at fit seasons to give holy orders, to institute fit Ministers to
Ecclesiastical benefices, to remove unfit, to hear the testimonies of the
Church, and complaints of their Pastors, to compound controversies arising
betwixt the Ministers and the Churches, to correct by Ecclesiastical censures,
vices and corrupt manners; to prescribe orders for amendment of life, to
excommunicate those which wilfully and obstinatly resist, to receive into grace
those which be penitent, to visit the whole Diocese, as well in places
exe^pted, as not, every third year. And finally, let BB. take care of all
things which ex Dei prescrpto by the ordinance of God belong to them, and which
our Ecclesiastical laws have committed to their knowledge and judgments.
Tit. de Ecclesia, and ministris eius, eorumque officijs. Cap.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.
And that by Seniors they did not mean any Ecclesiastical officers, it is
apparent, for where they reckon up all Ecclesiastical officers, prescribing
their duties, beginning at clearks or sextons, and so proceeding to
Churchwardens, to Deacons, to Presbyters, or Ministers, to archpresbyters, or
rural deanes, to archdeaco^s, and so to Cathedral Churches, to Deanes, to
Prebendaries, to BB. prescribing the obedience which must be yielded to them,
they do not once mention Seniors, or their office. If therefore it be asked,
who^ they understand by Seniors in the place alleged, I answer, that they
understand some of the principal householders in every parish, whom in some
places they call Vestry-men, in some masters of the parish, in some ancients
of the parish. With what conscience therefore that book was alleged as
approving Lay Elders, or acknowledging the newfound, parish-discipline for the
ancient discipline, let the reader judge.

The second he sets down in these words: A doctrine, I say, clean
contrary to the professed judgment of all our worthy writers, who in their
answers to the Papists, that plead for their Hierarchy, with the same reasons
that M. D. does for his, do determine, that the government our BB. exercise
over other ministers, is Iure humano, by the positive law of men only; the
which if M. D. says true, is false: and so the Papists are left unanswered.
Whereunto I answer, first, that the popish opinion is far different from
that which I hold. For they hold the order and superiority of BB. to be Iure
diuino, implying thereby a perpetual necessity thereof. Insomuch that where
BB: are not to ordain, they think there can be no ministers or priests, Page
90. fine.
and consequently no Church. I hold otherewise as the refuter himself
elsewhere acknowledges, in whose words I will relate my opinion, as he has
set it down, that I make the calling of BB.
no further of divine institution, then as being ordained by the Apostles, it
proceeded from God, without implying thereby any necessary perpetuity
thereof. For which he quoteth page 92. of my Sermon. If therefore the Papists
do bring the like arguments to prove their opinion which is so unlike to mine,
nothing hinders but my arguments may be good, though theirs be naught. For
those arguments which demonstratiuely prove the Episcopal function to be of
Apostolical institution, do not straightwaies prove it to be Diuini iuris.
Wherefore my opinion being so different from the popish conceit, who sees not
that the judgment of our Divines which is opposed to the doctrine of the
Papists, is not opposite to mine? for though they do not hold the Episcopal
function to be enjoined diuino iure, as perpetually necessary; yet what man of
sound learning does or can deny, but that the first BB. were ordained by the
Apostles.

Ad. Page 5.
The third he delivers in these terms; Yea a doctrine contrariant, to the
laws of our land, which make it one part of the Kings jurisdiction,
to grant to our BB. that Ecclesiastical power, they now exercise over us; Sir
Edw: Cook: de Iure regis Ecclesiast. fol. 8.

In his premonition before one of his last books.


and also to take it from them at his pleasure: the which his Highness takes to
himself, and gives to all Kings, where he professes, that God has left it
to the liberty and freewill of Princes, to alter the Church government at
their pleasure. The jurisdiction which BB: exercise, is either spiritual,
respecting the soul, as to bind or loose the souls of men; or corporal,
respecting the outward man, as to bind and loose the bodies. The former is
derived to them from the Apostles, the latter is committed unto them by the
King, to whose crown all commanding and compulsiue power is annexed. Again,
we are to distinguish between the power it self, and the exercise of it. For
although the power it self, which is an habitual or potentiall right to
exercise that which belongs to the said power, be derived to them from the
Apostles as a divine ordinance; notwithstanding, where is a Christian Prince,
assisting and directing them by his laws, they may not actually exercise their
power, but, according to his laws Ecclesiastical. I call them his, because by
whomsoever at the first they were decreed, yet so many as are in force with us,
they are the Kings Ecclesiastical law. As for the authority whereof the
reverend Judge speaks in the place quoted in the margent, it is the
authority of the high Commission, which the BB: exercise not as they are BB:
(for others who be not BB: have the same,) but as they are the Kings
Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical. As touching the other allegation; it
seems the refuter whiles he talks of liberty to alter at their pleasure,
thinks it left to his liberty to alter the Kings words at his pleasure.
Prefat: ad Lectorem in edit: latin^
The King indeed does say, that it is granted to every Christian King, Prince,
and Commonwealth, to prescribe to their subjects that outward form of
Ecclesiastical regiment, which may seem best to agree with the form of their
civil government; but so, as they swerve not at all from the grounds of faith
and true religion. But that it may appear how little the judgment of our most
Orthodoxall, and judicious King, does differ from that which I delivered in my
Sermon, I will crave leave to recite his words. In hi^nitio^ 44. De p^^ Romans c.
25.
That BB. ought to be in the Church, I ever maintained as an Apostolic
institution, and so the ordinance of God, contrary to the Puritanes, and
likewise to Bellarmine, who denies that BB. have their jurisdiction from God.
Now then (to come to the point) this argument makes wholly against the
pretended discipline, and not against the government of Bishops as I maintain
it. The government of Bishops is by our laws allowed; so is not the pretended
discipline. And though I hold the government Episcopal to be of Apostolical
and divine Institution, yet not as generally, perpetually, and immutably
necessary. But the pretended discipline is held by the favorers of it, T. C.
l^ part. 2.73. H. sert. 4.
so to be enjoined by divine right, that it ought generally in all places, and
perpetually in all ages, and also immutably to be observed, as being not
cha^geable by man. And so far do they differ from the Kings judgment, that
whereas the King thinks the Church may be framed to the Commonwealth, they
say the government of the Commonwealth must be fashioned to the Church. T. C.
l^ 181. v^ Whitg.
But to fashion the Church to the Commonwealth, is as much to say, as if a man
should fashion his house according to his hangings. And thus much has he
gained by his third untruth.

The fourth remains. Jewel ^ fence of pologie. D. Whit^ against ^^ Car tw.
Lastly, it is a doctrine contrarying the doctrine of the Church of England,
professed even by the BB. themselves, till of late da^es, etc. therefore
utterly false. To this Antecedent I give no credit, though for proof thereof
he cites B. Jewel, and Archbishop Whitgift* at randon. For the doctrine of
our Church appears best by the Articles and confession of our Church. First
therefore the book of consecrating BB. Priests, and Deacons (which is approved
Article 36.) says, In Prefa
It is evident unto all men diligently reading holy Scripture and Ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles time there have been these orders of Ministers
in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

Fol. 15. edit. 1552.
Of which orders it is afterward said, that God by his holy spirit has
appointed them in his Church.

Fol. 16.
And again, the Bishop is required to correct and punish according to such
authority as he has by Gods word, such as be unquiet, disobedient, and
criminous within his Diocese.

Artic. 5.
Likewise the confession of the English Church collected out of the Apology
thereof, written by Bishop Jewel: We believe that there be diverse degrees of
Ministers in the Church, whereof some be Deacons, some Priests, some Bishops,
etc.

And it is to be noted, that our Church acknowledges nothing as a matter of
faith, which is not contained in Gods word, or grounded thereon.

Again, if it were true that the Bishops having better informed themselves
concerning their functions, had reformed their iugdeme^ts according to the holy
Scriptures and other writings of Antiquity: would it follow that their latter
thoughts, which commonly are the wiser, (according to the old saying, (...),
were false and worthy to be confuted?

And lastly, if this be a true proposition, which in the refuters Enthymeme is
understood, that what is repugnant to the doctrines formerly taught in the
Church of England is evidently false, though it agree with the present doctrine
thereof; how worthy then is the pretended discipline to be rejected, which is
contrary to the perpetual doctrine of this Church, both former and latter:
especially the discipline of the newest stamp, I mean the newfound parish
discipline published by the challengers of disputation, Anno, 1606 and
maintained by this refuter, which neither agrees with our Church, nor as I
suppose with any other reformed Church in the world?

His second reason, whereby he would prove that the doctrine contained in my
Sermon was needful to be confuted, is, because he saw it to be dangerous. And
that he proves by 2. reasons. The former, because howsoever he had said in the
former reason, that it is evidently false, and so not dangerous; now he says
the doctrine is by me so handsomely and likely handled, that it is so far
from being evidently false, Pr^^^ his (...)
that every word I speak has such an appearance and promise of truth, that,
in imitation of Bishop Jewel against Harding, he thinks he may fitly use
Socrates his words against his accusers: or as I think more fitly, the words
of Agrippa, to Paul (who had uttered no untruth,) that I had almost persuaded
him to be of my mind. Act.
But more fitly may I allege the very next words of Socrates, Socr^^^ log.
(...) etc. Among many things which my adversary has objected against me
falsely, I marvel much at this one, that he wills the Readers take heed
they be not deceived by me, (...), that is, as my adversaries words may expound
it, one that can tell his tale so handsomely, and carry the matter so
smoothly, likely, and confidently, that although he utter never a word of
truth, yet every word he speaks, has an appearance and promise of truth.
For both my Sermons and writings show, that I affect not the perswasorie words
of humane wisdom and eloquence, but the plain style of simple truth. And
therefore am no more then Socrates himself in that regard to be suspected,
(...), as he says, (...). unless my adversaries call him an eloquent man and
powerful in speech who speaks the truth.

Secondly, he proves my doctrine to be dangerous, Ad pa^^^
by an induction or particular enumeration of the hurts, which (as he
imagines) were like to come to the Church of God thereby, if it were not
confuted.

The Papists (says he) would be much aduantaged, seeing that Antichristian
doctrine (even after the renewing and reviving of their ceremonies among us) so
freely preached and published, tending to the upholding of their Hierarchy from
the Pope to the Apparitor, as well as ours; his reasons being indeed the very
same with theirs, as in the answer to them it shall appear.

The advantage which arises to the Papists by this doctrine preached, and the
ceremonies still retained among us, may through Gods blessing be this. That
when they see us not so newfangled as our Opposites, nor so carried with
hatred to their persons, as to depart further from them, then they have
departed from the primitive Church, but are content to observe the ancient
government, and lawful Ceremonies used in the primitive Church, though
retained by them, they may be induced to join with us in reforming the Church
according to the doctrine and example of the ancient and primitive Church.

And whereas he calls our doctrine, defending the calling of BB:
Antichristian, and the ceremonies used among us Popish, it is merely spoken
out of faction, after the usual fashion of our Opposites, who call their own
doctrine and pretended discipline, Page 8. and 9.
though lately devised, Gods own cause, the Discipline of Christ, their
pleading for it, a giving testimony to this part of the word of his grace: but
ours, though truly Catholic and Apostolical, they term Antichristian, and
in their late writings they call the Hierarchy of our church, Dagon, the tower
of Babell, the triple headed Cerberus, the restoring of BB: the building up
again the walls of Jericho: my self, and other Ministers of the Gospel
pleading for the government established, they compare to Achabs 400. prophets,
and such as plead for Baal. Yea but our doctrine tends to the upholding of
the Popish Hierarchy from the Pope to the Apparitor, as well as of ours* God
forbid! In the Popish Clergy above BB. and Archbishops, the Pope and his
consistory of Cardinals are set as governors of the universal Church, in
whom the Popish Hierarchy so far forth as it is properly Antichristian,
consists. For seeing it is proper to Christ alone to be the head and
governor of the universal Church, he is said properly to be Antichrist, who
takes upon him to be head and governor of the whole Church. And their
government is justly called Antichristian who are his assistants in this
universal government. As for the governors of Provincial and Diocesan
Churches, that is to say, Archbishops and Bishops, in the Church of Rome, they
are not Antichristian in respect of the large extent of their jurisdiction, but
in regard of their subordination to the Pope, and dependence from him, as being
members of that body whereof they acknowledge him to be the head. And therefore
are no more Antichristian then their parish Priests. And as well might the
refuter call the Persons or Pastors of parishes among us, Antichristian,
because the Popish Parish Priests are Antichristian, as our BB. Antichristian,
because the Popish BB. are such. Neither is the function of Bishops, more or
yet so much to be ascribed to the institution of the B. of Rome, as that of
parish Ministers. For Bishops, as we shall show, were ordained by the Apostles,
and set over Dioceses, but the parishes were first distinguished in the
western Churches, and Presbyters peculiarly assigned to them by the ancient
Bishops of Rome, whose example other Churches did imitate, as diverse Authors
report.

Again, under the Deacons the Papists reckon five other orders which they
esteem so many Sacraments: whereas we, with the primitive Church, and in the
same sense with it, do reckon only 3. orders or degrees of Ministers or
Clergy men, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. It is strange therefore that the
doctrine of my Sermon concerning Bishops alone, should uphold the Popish
Hierarchy from the highest to the lowest, or as they use to speak, from the
Pope to the Apparitor, as well as our own. This therefore was a shameless
untruth.

Besides, howsoever the same three orders or degrees in name are still retained
in the Church of Rome, as well as in ours, yet with great difference. For their
Priests be Sacerdotes, sacrificing Priests, ordained to offer a proper,
external, real sacrifice. Ours, are not Sacerdotes, that is Sacrificing
Priests, but (as the Scriptures and ancient writers call them) Presbyters, that
is, Priests or Ministers, ordained to preach the word, and administer the
Sacraments. Their Bishops are subordinate to the Pope, and have their
jurisdiction as they teach from him as the Vicar of Christ, succeeding Peter,
not as he was an Apostle, Bellarm. de Romans pontif. l. 4. c. 24. and 25.
as all other Bishops suceed other Apostles; but as the head and chief
governor of the whole Church, from whom, as the head and fountain of all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, the jurisdiction of other Bishops is derived and
does depend. Our Bishops are not subordinate to the Pope, neither have any
depe^da^ce or deriuatio^ of their jurisdiction from him, but from God, partly
as it is spiritual by the ordinance of the Apostles, who ordained the first
Bishops, leaving them as their substitutes or successors in the government of
the several Churches, and partly as it is corporal, or coactiue, by the Kings
Ecclesiastical laws, furnishing them with plenary power to enquire after
disorders in the estate Ecclesiastical, Statut. An. Eliz. 1.
all manner errors, Heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, and enormities, and
to punish them. Which differences being considered between us and the Papists,
it were more then a wonder, if the very same reasons which are brought to prove
the Apostolical government of our Church, should also serve to prove their
Antichristian Hierarchy. In Bruto.
But as the young man that Crassus speaks of in Tully, having found in the
strand a small piece of a Galley, would straightway build a ship thereof: so out
of one small agreement with the Roman Church concerning the superiority of
Bishops over Prebyters, wherein they retain the doctrine of the primitive
Church, he would build a total consent and conformity to their Antichristian
government.

Thus we have heard what advantage the Papists have by my Sermon. Now let us
see what harm was like to redound to others thereby. Others says he would be
much scandalized; those that were in love with their own ease would easily
crouch down like Isachars ass,
etc: as for others, it would remoras obijcere ardentiorib. Cast blocks in
their ways that ran well, or retardare zelum, make them slack their pace: at
least Sa^ctorum spiritus inquietare, disquiet the minds of all the Saints, to
see a Sermon of that consequence, preached and published, by a man of that name
and note in the Church. That is to say, if I understand him aright: the Sermon
if it might be let alone, were not unlike to have these effects in those that
are accounted the forwarder sort. First, they that were more moderate then
others, and desired the peace of the Church, having yet some scruples in their
minds, and somewhat doubting of the lawfulnes of our Church government, were
like enough to have their doubts satisfied, and their consciences settled.
Others that were more ardent, whose zeal ouerranne their knowledge, censuring
and condemning they knew not what, would be brought to suspend their
judgment, or at least to moderate their zeal: others who are factious and of
the divided brotherhood, whom he calls all the Saints, would be grieved at
the heart, to see such likelihood of peace and union (which is so contrary to
their humor) to be established in the Church.

But as he had a strong opinion that my Sermon was needful to be refuted, so
had he as strong a Ad. p(...)
desire it might be answered after some fashion, that the Schism or rent which
is in our Church, being so beneficial as it is to some might not be healed,
but yt people might be retained in the former terms of a factious and
Schismatic alienation from the state of our Church, and the governors
thereof. Which his desire was much inflamed, when he understood that this work
having been undertaken and committed to the press, the answer and press
were taken, the Printer and concealer of the Author imprisoned. For then (good
man) his soul was cast down within him to see a truth so profitable and
necessary (as is the doctrine of their pretended discipline, having no ground
neither in the Scripture nor antiquity, obtruded as the ordinance of Christ,
and the only lawful form of Church government) The (...) is to vn^^^^stand,
the former ^^^swere (...) not sup^^^^sed, and (...) this re^^^^ (if he (...)
the sam^ ^^^thor) (...) gotten ^^^py then has w^^^some c^^^^ons and ^^^tions
pu^^^^shed the (...) again, (...) almost (...) thing to abortiue^^^ (as may
(...) gathere^ those fe^^^ sheets th^^^ were pr^^^ but an in^^^ on of ga^^^
bitterne^^^
suppressed.

Being therefore thus possessed with so strong an opinion, and transported with
so earnest and unquiet desires, he grew unto his most valiant resolution.
Which in effect, though he guild it over with glorious words, was nothing else
but this, to publish and disperse a malicious diffamatorie libell, and having
so done, after the manner of other malefactors, to hide his head.

You have heard the weighty causes moving him to undertake this business, and
his valiant resolution to undertake it: now he will acquaint you with his manner
of performance, which in general he Ad page 8.
confesses to have been done in much weakness and many wants, neither do I
deny it. But he might to his oversight, proceeding from ignorance and
weakness, have added his wilful falsificatio^s and deprauatio^s, his forged
calumniations, his Sophistical shifts and euasions to elude the light of truth
conuicting his conscience. But though he would seem to acknowledge much
weakness and many wants,
it was but (...), out of an affected modesty, for his conceit is which he
shameth not to utter, that he has brought evidence sufficient (I warrant you)
to make it manifest (he doubts not of it) that the doctrine in my Sermon is
nothing less then true,
profitable, and necessary: that my Preface is full of witty calumniations to
make them and their cause odious, and that my Sermon notwithstanding my great
boasting, has in it no one sound syllable of argument to prove my cause, and
disprove theirs. What evidence he brings I shall not need here to relate,
this defense of my Sermon will make it manifest. That I used either
calumniations to make them and their cause odious, or any great boasting, which
he talks of, I utterly deny. Who it is that uses either calumniations, the
examination of his book will bewray, or boasting, the very forefront of his
book, this present place, and many others besides do testify. But I much
disdain that he should say that there was not a syllable of any sound proof
in my Sermon,
as before he had said, that in my sermon, I uttered scarce any one word of
truth.
The proofs which I have used are such (I take God to witness) as satisfy
mine own conscience. And I trust I may, without any great boasting, assume
unto my self as good skill to judge of an argument, as this refuter, or some
others of his side. Of his blasphemy against the truth which I delivered, I
pray God give him grace to repent. And what was it that he has thus censured?
A Sermon uttered in the presence of God, in the room of Christ, before a most
honorable auditorie, by a Minister of the Gospel, shall I say as sound and
faithful as himself, no I disdain the comparison (for by his fruits in his
book whereby alone I can judge of him, he has to my seeming plainly bewrayed
an unsound judgment, an evil conscience, and an unsanctified heart) I trust I
may say, by a Minister of the Gospel as sound and orthodoxall as his betters,
as conscionable in all Sermons and writings, and as careful to deliver nothing
but the truth of God. Me thinks he should rather have trembled to think of
confuting a Sermon of such a one, as he (judging according to the judgment of
charity) cannot deny to be a faithful Minister and Orthodoxall divine, then
have dared thus to censure it, as having scarce one word of truth, and not one
syllable of a sound proof. Is this the reverent estimation that you would
work in the peoples minds of the word preached, or must they think that none
make conscience of preaching the truth, but your selves? But if it shall
appear to any indifferent and judicious Reader, comparing this my defense with
his refutation of my Sermon, that he has not been able to disprove any one
of my proofs, nor to convince me of any one untruth throughout the whole body
of my Sermon, as in my conscience I am persuaded he has not; then do those
two censures of his, the one, that thereis scarce a true word, the other, that
there is not one syllable of a sound proof in all the Sermon, contain so many
untruths, as there are sentences or proofs in the whole Sermon.

More particularly he tells you, Ad page 9.
both what he did not, and what he has done. He has made no large discourses
to teach over anew the discipline of Christ (so he doubts not to call their
own devises) only he has said, what the Author of the abortiue book, and
himself with their Coadiutors were able to say, either for it, or against the
government by Bishops. The thing which he has done, is that he has fulfilled
my desire, in applying distinctly his answers to my arguments.

But my desire was not, that he should balke those which he could not answer,
or deprave and weak on those which he did, by fitting them to his own
strength. Neither desired I alone that their answers might be applied to every
argument in order, but also that their proofs might be produced. But forasmuch
as he had none such as I told them theirs had need to be, that is to say, very
pregnant and demonstratiue, whereby they might hope to persuade both the
abolishing of that form of government which even from the Apostles times has
been perpetually observed in the Church, and setting up of another which was
never heard of till now of late, therefore in the chief points of controversy
he has been (for prooe need) very sparing to use any other proof besides the
testimonies of new Divines, who are incompetent witnesses in a question of
story concerning things done or not done, 14. or 1500. years before their
time, themselves also for the most part being parties in the cause.

Now follow his directions to the Reader. And first, that he should w^igh my
arguments with his answers,
and compare the one with the other, believing neither further then evidence
truly produced leads him: the which direction I earnestly desire the Reader
in the fear of God to follow, and not to regard his calumniation, whereby he
seeks to work in him, a preiudicate opinion against me, most falselie
charging me that as another Pythagoras, I seek to be believed upon mine own
word without authority, and good reason. For whether of us seeks more to be
believed without proofs, I dare appeal to his judgment, when he has perused
what is alleged on both sides. Howbeit I must needs say, he gives the Reader
a good proof in this place of his dexterity in alleging testimonies, Ierom.
Epist. 152. fame nemo credit, nisi inconsideratus. Tertull Apolog. c. 8.
when to prove that in disputation, credit is not to be given to him that
speaks without good proof, he cites Jerome and Tertullian, dissuading men
from giving credit to fame an uncertain rumors.

His second direction is unreasonable, Ad. page 10.
and the reasons thereof such as both contradict what he said even now, and are
contradicted by that which he affirms afterward. If thou find (says he)
no sufficiency in his reasons to enforce thee to acknowledge his doctrine for
true, justly think with thy self, it is not else where to be had.

This is an unreasonable motion, that the weight of the whole cause should lie
upon one short Sermon, uttered by so mean a man as my self. What reasons can
he bring to persuade the Reader to accept this motion? forsooth, all men know
me to be a Scholar. Not unlike, for so have I been ever since I was five
years old. But what manner of Scholar, our Refuter will tell you in the very
beginning of the confutation of my Sermon, such a one as in this Sermon do
show my self to be little worth,
yea miserable poor indeed. His other reason is, that I having professed that
I had read the chief treatises on both sides,
the Reader may be sure that in my Sermon is the pith and substance of all,
that all of us can say, either for our selves, or against them. But how can
this be, seeing he charge me to speak without proof, and that there is not
one sound syllable of proof in all the Sermon, and that I seek to be credited
upon my bare word, like an other Pythagoras, without authority or good reason?
Neither is it possible, that all, which all of us can say, can be comprised in
so short a Sermon. Wherefore if the Reader be not satisfied with that which I
have written, let him have recourse to the writings of men more learned and
judicious, who are able to give him better satisfaction. Howbeit, this offer I
will make him, that if in my Sermon, and this defense thereof, there be not
better evidence for the Episcopal government, then is to be found for the
pretended discipline, I say not in the refuters book, but in all the writings
of the Disciplinarians, I will be well content that he shall credit me in
nothing.

There remains his Epilogue, consisting, partly of prayer unto God,
that he would open our eyes to see his truth, and sanctify our hearts unto
the love of it, and that he would grant us his peace;
and partly of praise and thanksgiving, in the last words. Whereunto, as I
most willingly subscribe and say Amen, Psalm. 17.1.
so am I to give this warning, that we pray not with fained lips, asking that
with our mouths, which neither we desire in our hearts, nor seek in our
lives. For it will not suffice us in that day of the Lord, that we have desired
him either to open our eyes to see the truth, if we do shut our eyes against
it; or to sanctify our hearts unto the love of it, if when our consciences be
convicted with the evidence of truth, we cease not to oppugn it; or to sue for
peace, when we be so far from ensuing it, that when our brethren either
speak unto us of peace, we make our selves ready to battle, or secke to heal
the rupture and Schism which is in our Church, we Sch^matically and
factiously endeavor to make it worse.

And thus have I answered his preface. As for his answer to mine, being a
mere libell consisting of notorius cauillations, malicious calumniations, and
personal inuectiues: forasmuch as there is not any material thing in it,
which is not fully answered in the defense of my Sermon, I will not vouchsafe a
reply unto it; the rather, because my defense of the Sermon it self being
grown to a greater volume then at the first I intended, I should greatly wrong
both the Reader and my self, if I should hold him, or trouble my self with
personal discourses, which, if I should follow the refuters vein, would
require a new volume. In making whereof, I would be loath to be employed,
seeing personal quarrels breed endless and fruitles contentions, and being the
chief blemish of all books of controversy, ought in handling of controversies
wholly to be forborne. Besides, I do consider, that he being in the dark, and
my self in the light, it would be a very unequal combat, for me to contend
with him in this kind. Whereinto also though I did know his person, as indeed
I do not, I should be loath to descend: seeing thereby we should but present a
pleasant spectacle to the common adversary, who would take no small delight in
beholding us casting mire and dirt to besmere one another, to the disgrace of
our common faith.

But if any shall object, that it is a great disgrace and disparagement unto
me, to pass over in silence such reproaches as in the answer to my preface
and confutation of my Sermon he has cast upon me: he shall say nothing, but
what mine own corruption has already objected. Whereunto I answer, that it
behooves me to commit to the press, and by it to commend, not only to the
generation present, but also to the posterity; not what my adversary
deserves to hear, but what becomes me to write: that our Savior Christ, by
his own example and precept, has taught us, when we are reviled, not to
revile again: that in this kind of contention it is better to be vanquished,
then to overcome: that the testimony of mine own conscience, and of all that
best know me, will be a sufficient defense against flanders: that it is a happy
thing to be evil spoken of for well doing. For my conscience is clearly and
undoubtedly resolved, that I defend the truth; and it bears me witness, that
the end which I propounded to my self in publishing that Sermon, was the peace
of the Church; which I hoped to procure by giving satisfaction to those that
were of a contrary judgment. Neither do I doubt, but my endeavor in this
kind (though ungrateful to some whose good I intended) is acceptable to God
and to his Church.

Wherefore in steed of answering that which is past, I will advise them for the
time to come, that if they would be esteemed men of sincerity, who seek to
keep their consciences clear, both toward God and men; they would, when they
publish any book, (especially such as they dare not set their names unto,)
have especial regard, that they seek not to defame or disgrace any man's
person; least they make themselves guilty of that most base and odious crime
of libelling, which is so much worse in print then in writing, as the press is
more fit to diuulge then the pen: least they subject themselves to the
fearful curse of God, Deuteronomy. 2
for smiting their neighbor secretly; least by their bitterness and railing
which are fruits of the flesh, they bewray themselves not to be led by the
spirit of Christ, Psalm. 15
nor to be in the number of them which shall be saved. 1. Cor. 6.
For howsoever they may persuade themselves (as some of them have professed in
print) that in these secret practices both the Author and Printer are like
Jeremy and Baruch hidden of God, Ier. 36.^*
yet they discover themselves, to be such hiders of themselves, Psalm. 64.
as the Psalmist complains of, that having bent their tongue, or that which
is worse, their pen or press as a bow of slander, they shoot in steed of
arrows bitter words, shooting at the upright in secret and fear not. Besides,
they do expose themselves to this inconvenience, that whereas those, who shall
vouchsafe them answer, would if they knew them, respect them according to the
measure of Gods graces, which they should acknowledge in them: by these
libelling courses, they draw upon themselves such answers, as are fit to be
returned upon libellers. Truly for my part, if I had known the person of the
refuter, and could (in the judgment of charity) have acknowledged him to be a
man of a good spirit, I would have answered him sometimes with better respect.
But seeing I know him no otherwise but by his fruits, as he is the Author of
this work, wherein he has showed himself to be, in points material, a very
cauilling Sophister; and in matters personal, a malicious libeller: let him
take such answers as do not like him, not as directed to his person, which I
know not, but to the person or vizard under which he masketh of a wrangling
Sophister, and a spiteful libeller, to whom the sharpest answers which I have
made, are but too mild.

THE FIRST BOOK, TREATING CHIEFLY of Lay Elders.
CHAP. I. Answering the Refuters Preamble.
THE refuter, Ad page ^
before he would encounter the Sermon it self, thought good to spend some of
his spleen upon the Author of the Sermon, the matter, and the text: proudly
insulting over the Author; scornefully gibing at the matter, and captiously
carping at the choice of the text. His insul^^ over the ^^thor of th^^ Sermon.
His insultation is joined with scorn, and with slander, therein behauing
himself like another insulting Goliath, gibing Tobiah, slandering Sanballat. He
insulteth I say, Goliah-like, despising the Author of the Sermon (coming
against him in simple manner, like David, with The points in (...) Sermon, m^^^
and plain^^ handled.
five smooth stones taken out of the fountain of Gods word, and streams of
antiquity) as not able to stand in his hands, being as he says, little worth,
yea miserable poor indeed. He scoffeth Tobiah-like Neh^^ 4.3.
at my building as ruinous and tottering, so ready to tipe and fall, as if
belike but one of the foxes Cant^ 15. The foxe^ heretics schi^ ma^l^^*
that trouble the vine do come upon it, the goodly mansion built for our
reverend Bishops, as a tower of defense for their Lordships to rest in, (which
proud and disdainefull sco^fe he repeateth again page 8.) will fall to the
ground.

For answer whereof, I desire the Reader to compare the latter end of his
preface, with this beginning of his confutation. For there, bearing the Reader
in hand, that he has sufficiently confuted my Sermon; he uses my praise as a
step to raise himself, and to advantage his cause, giving me greater
commendation, then either I do desire, or deserve: but here, beginning his
confutation, he would persuade the Reader he shall easily perform it; his
adversary being little worth, yea miserable poor^ indeed, his building ruinous
and tottering ready to tipe and fall. Which imputations, if they be not true,
prove him to be a liar; if true, a worthless and witless fellow; worthless,
who passing by all the worthies of our side, and their most accurate and
learned treatises, Answ. to the (...) page 15.
as himself terms them; makes choice, either of such an adversary to
contend with, as is little worth, yea miserable poor indeed, or of such a
building to assail, as is ruinous and tottering, ready of it self to tipe and
fall. Witless, in making choice of such an adversary, in vanquishing of whom,
being so weak and miserable poor, as he can gain no credit to himself or
his cause; so can he bring no great disadvantage to the adverse party. The
fault being in all reason to be ascribed to the weakness of the Champion, not
to the badnesse of the cause. But if so weak and worthless a defendant, did
in a Sermon provided in 9. or 10. days at the most, so foret^fie the cause of
the Bishops, that the greatest worthies of the adversary party assailing it
withal their force, have not been able in twice so many months to make the
least breach therein, then must it be confessed, that howsoever his adversary
may be inferior to him in other things, yet he is superior in the cause.

1. King. 20.11.
But soft^ let not him that puts on his armor boast as he that puts it off.
When I consider the weakness of your strength, and badnesse of your cause, I
wonder at your confidence. You might do well to follow the counsel of
^rch^damus to his foole-hardy son, (...), either add to your strength, or
abate from your confidence.

And whereas Sanballat-like he says, I make great boast in my Sermon of much
riches, etc. I answer with Nehemiah, Ne^
it is not done according to these words, there is no such matter in my Sermon,
but it is a fiction of your own heart. Such vanting suiteth better with my
adversary, who, as in the forefront of his book, most arrogantly applies the
words of wisdom and truth to these his own writings, Pro
which for the most part are either false or frivolous; Give care says he, for
I will speak of excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall teach
things that be right: for my mouth shall speak the truth, and my lips
abhor wickedness: so now in the very entrance he plays Pyrgopolinices
himself, Pl^^ glori^^ tu le^^ dissi^^^ spiri^^ si ver^^ soli^^
taking on, as if with a little paper-shotte he could overthrow all my
building, and blow poor me away as it were with a breath.

Sect. 2. The matter also he scoffeth at, applying unto it the speech of one of
the sons of the Prophets (who^ he calls H^^^ at the ^^^ of the^^^ 2. Ki^^^
a poor laborer, to make him, as it seems the liker to me) saying of his axe
when the head fell into the water, Alas Master, it is but borrowed. Neither
doubts he with what forhead I know not (for he goes under a vizard) to
affirm, that my whole building from the foundation to the roof, is but old
stuff taken out of D. Bilsons book of the perpetual government of the
Church.Which base calumniation framed (as it may seem) according to his own
practice, he does odiously repeat ad nauseam vsque, even so often harping on
this string, as I have occasion to handle, (though never so differently,) the
same points with that most learned and reverend divine. To which objection I
answer, that if it were true, it would prove the refuter to be but a childish,
and yet an odious wrangler. Childish, for it is the fashion of wrangling boys
in their Sophemes and disputations, when they cannot tell how to answer an
argument, to tell the opponent, he had it in such a book. And it is the part
of an odious wrangler to seek the disgrace of my person, by that which does no
whit advantage his cause. For what advantage is this to his cause, to object,
that my proofs are the same with D. Bilsons; seeing his proofs be such, as
never were, and never will be answered. But if the objection be false, as every
man that compares the treatises may easily discern; then, besides the
testimony of odious wrangling, he shall gain to himself the commendation of
a slanderous libeller. For, besides my consent in judgment with that most
reverend learned man, which I most willingly and gladly professse, there is not
any thing almost besides concurrence in diverse allegations, which should breed
any just occasion of this surmile. And as for them, I do profess, that the
most of them are of mine own reading, and those, which before I had either not
read, or not observed, I did not content my self to allege them as it were
at the second hand; but to examine the allegations, and to cite them out of the
Authors themselves. So that, although the liquor many times is the same, yet I
drew it at the fountain, and not at the stream; remembering who says, Tardi
est ingenij riuulos consectari, Cic. de orat.
fontes non videre. Which course, better Scholars then my adversary, would
allow, especially to one that had no more time then I had, both to provide
what to speak, and to speak what I had provided.

And forasmuch as in many places of his book, he makes references to D.
Bilsons book, to show, that what I deliver, was taken thence: I entreat the
Reader once for all to compare the places. For thereby he shall see this
cauiller to have played the Ratte, both in discovering his own falsehood, Suo
iudicio tanquam sore^ etc.
and in betraying his cause. For as touching the former; I do unfeignedly
profess, that I am not conscious to my self, either in that Sermon, or any
other writing that I have published, to have taken any one line, from any,
without citing the Author. His cause also shall be notably disadva^taged, because
those things which I did perhaps briefly, and as it were, in have set down;
the Reader shall sometimes in the book (whereunto he is referred) read the
same points fully and accurately handled, to his great satisfaction, and good
contentment.

And whereas he obiecteth, that my house is built of old stuff, etc. Let him
know, that in these kinds of buildings, the oldnes of the stuff is a great
commendation. For that, which is the oldest, is the truest. And that which has
been of greatest antiquity, for the time past, will also be of the longest
continuance for the time to come. As for those buildings which our new Church
wrights have lately set up specke and spanne new, 1. C^^
building Churchframes as it were of wood covered over with straw, which will
not abide the fire, I verily think they will not continue until they be old.

His third quarrel is against the choice of the text, Ad (...) His (...) at
the (...) of the (...) Abo^^
as it were the plot of ground whereon to set my building. The which because it
is allegorical, is compared to a marish ground, where though I dig deep,
and do what I can, I shall hardly find fast ground whereon to lay my
foundation. The which quarrel does please him so well, that he repeateth it
again, page 3. But without cause. For seeing the exposition of the allegory is
not doubtful, but is confessed on both sides, that as by the 7. stars, are
meant the 7. Angels, so by the Angels the Bishops of the Churches: who sees
not, that this assertion, that the calling of Bishops is lawful and good, is
built on the foundation of the Apostle John, as it were upon a Rock. For
although some object, that by the Angels are meant, either all Ministers in
general, as the new sect of disciplinarians does, Bez. i^^^ 2.
or the presidents of the Presbyteries, as the Elder and more learned
disciplinarians do, who do not stand for the newfound parish-discipline; yet
I do prove both by the text it self, and by other evidence, that the calling
of Diocesan BB. is in this text commended unto us under this title of the
Angels of the Churches. But hereof more in my answer to the third page

CHAP. II. Dividing the Sermon, and defending the first part thereof which he
calls the Preface.
Having thus quarrelled with the Author, the matter and subject of he Sermon,
he sets upon the The division of the Sermon, with the sum of the Preface
thereof.
Sermon it self. Which in the abortiue book, was dismembered into six parts,
and yet one maine part left out. In this afterbirth, into 3; viz, the Preface,
the body of the Sermon, and the conclusion. The Preface, he says, is
concerning the text, and the five points I undertake to handle; and that again
he mangleth into 4. sections.

But if my adversaries were as good in dividing, as they are in making
division; or so skillful in analyzing logically, as they are captious in
comptrolling that which has been logically composed; they would, either have
followed the ordinary division of orations, Arist. Rhet. 3.1^.
saying, that the Sermon consisted of 4 parts, which are, 1. (...), the
proaeme, (to page 2. lin. 3.) 2. (...), the proposition or (...) wherein the
points to be handled are first diduced out of the text, to page 6. l. 16.) and
secondly enumerated and distinctly marshalled (page 6 and 7.) 3. (...) the
confirmation proving and defending those five points, (from page 8. to 94.) 4.
(...) the conclusion containing the application, (page 94. to the end:) Or, if
this division had not liked them, they might out of the transition page 94.
have observed a distribution of my Sermon into 2. parts; viz. the explication,
continuing to that place, and the application from thence to the end.

The explication contains 2. assertions: the first, that the pastors or
governors of the primitive Churches (here meant by the Angels,) were Diocesan
Bishops, and such (for the substance of their calling) as ours be. The second,
that the function of Diocesan BB. is lawful and good. Of these two assertions,
the former, is an explication of the text; the latter, a doctrine collected out
of the text so explained. These assertions are, for the handling of the text,
first propounded to be discussed, in that which he calls the Preface, and
afterward proved, in that which he calls the body of my book. The former,
as I said, may be called (...) or (...), the proposition; the latter, (...) the
confirmation. Now for the trial of the first, viz. wheth^er by the Angels of
the Churches we are to understand Diocesan BB. or not, these two points are
propounded to be examined; first, what manner of Churches they were whereof
they were Bishops, whether parishes only, ( as our new disciplinarians say,)
or dioceses, as we and the elder disciplinarians hold: and consequently,
whether themselves were parishionall, or diocesan BB. 2. what manner of
pre-eminence they had in their Churches, in respect whereof they be called the
Angels of the Churches, whether only a prioritie in order above other
Ministers, and that but for a short time and by course; or a superiority in
degree, and maioritie of rule for term of life. And this is the sum of that
which he calls the Preface. Now I come to his sections, and his quarrels
against the same.

Sermon. Sect. 1. page 1. Our Lord and Sauiuor Christ, having appeared to S.
John, in a glorious form, etc. to heaven at the mids of page 3. In these words
two questions (which be determined in the 2. assertions, Sect. 2. Concern^^^
the 2. (...) prop^^^ded: and who are meant by (...)gels.
even now mentioned) are propounded. The former, what manner of persons are
meant by the Angels of the Churches. And why this question was to be discussed,
I alleged, as he says, 2. reasons. The first, because when the holy Ghost
expounds the stars by Angels, this interpretation it self is allegorical,
and therefore needs some exposition.

The second reason is propounded (...) preventing a secret objection against
the former reason, which might be this: though the interpretation be
allegorical, yet the exposition of the allegory is agreed upon, to wit, that
by the Angels are meant the Bishops of those Churches, and therefore further
explication needs not: to this I answer in a discretiue sentence, granting
the antecedent, but denying the consequence, that, although it be agreed upon,
that the Angels are the Bishops of the Churches; yet, in these times it is
become a great controversy, and needful to be decided, what manner of
Bishops they were, which in former ages was not wont to be called into question.

A^ page 3.
Against the former reason, the resuter first obiecteth 2. things: the one, that
it makes against my self; the other, that it is: (...) and (...) he tells
me how I might have bestowed (...) makes against me, he proves thus (...)
faith he is allegorical, therefore it was (...) etc. Whereunto I have
answered, that the meaning of the allegory is on both sides agreed upon, and
that our adversaries themselves confess, that the Angels were the Bishops of
the Churches: and therefore, by their own confession, the text was as fitly
chosen, as if it had been said, the 7. stars are the Bishops of the 7.
Churches. Yea but, says he, though it be granted that the Angels be the
Bishops, yet not such Bishops as you speak of. Then the unfitness of the text
(be like) is not because it is allegorical, but because in his conceit it is
impertinent. Which his conceit proves the exposition of this text to be
needful, as I showed in the second reason.

Yea, but hereby, says he, the first reason appears to be superfluous. It
follows not. Of the same thing there are many times given two expositions, a
shorter called (...) a larger called (...) of both there was need in this
place. The necessity of the former arises from the allegory, which I breefly
expound according to the received interpretation, viz. that the Angels signify
the Bishops of the Churches. The necessity of the latter, arises from the
controversy, Sect. 3.
which some have raised in these times, etc.

After he has showed that my first reason might well have been spared, he
tells me, that I Whether the Angels were 7
might have spent my pains better in opening a doubt, which either I did not,
or would not see.And what is that I pray you? For it is great pity, I had not
your help. If I would needs have these Angels to be Diocesan Bishops, I should
have given some reason, why the number of the^ is not limited, as well as of
the Churches, to seven and no more. And from hence reasons thus.

If the holy Ghost by Angels had meant Diocesan Bishops (whereof there is but
one in a Church) then would heehaue limited them, as well as the Churches, to
the number of seven:

But he has not limited them to seven:

Therefore by Angels he means not Diocesan BB.

The assumption he proves, because if the holy Ghost had intended to signify
no more but 7. Angels, he would have said, the 7. stars are the 7. Angels of
the 7. Churches. And having so doughtily proved that the number of the Angels
is not limited, from thence (as if he had made all Cocke-sure) he infers 2.
things: 1. that the holy Ghost, in not limiting the number, would have us to
understand, there were more Angels or Bishops then 7. in these Churches: 2.
that where every Epistle is directed to the Angel of each Church as to one, we
are not literally to understand one, but by a synecdoche more then one. Which
light as he calls it, standing at the entry door, if I had had his eyes to
have discerned, I should no doubt have seen an high point in a low house.

But were not I pray you the Angels or BB. to whom S. John writes, just seven?
help me, I beseech you, to remove this veil, which hides the light, you
speak of from me. The stars which Christ h^ld in his hand were just seven,
or limited to the number of 7. Apoc. 1.16, 20. and 2.1.

The Angels of the 7. Churches were the stars which Christ held in his hand.
Apoc. 1.20.

Therefore the Angels of the 7. Churches were just 7. or limited to the number
of 7,

Again, of 7. monades or unities, such as be 7. singular persons; the number
is just 7.

The Angels were 7. Monades or Unities, as being 7. singular persons;
therefore of the Angels the number is just 7. That the Angels were 7. singular
persons, it appears by the inscriptions of the 7. Epistles written unto them,
viz: (...) to the Angel of the Church at Ephesus: to the Angel of the Church
at Smyrna, etc: where, whosoever is able to count 20. may easily find just 7.
I will recite them, and let the refuter keep the tale. The Angel of the
Church at Ephesus; 1. the Angel of the Church of Smyr^a; 2: the Angel of the
Church at Pergamus; 3: the Angel of the Church at Thyatira; 4. the Angel of
the Church at Sardes; 5: the Angel of the Church at Phyladelphia; 6. the
Angel of the church of Laodicea; 7: seven Angels, neither more nor less.

Moreover, to whom the 7. Epistles were written, they were just 7: for they
were written singulae singulis; the first to the first, the second to the
second, etc. To the Angels of the 7. Churches, the 7. Epistles were written:
Therefore the Angels of the 7. Churches, were just 7. The same is testified by
Arethas, unto these 7. Churches, blessed John (says he) reckneth, In Apoc.
1.11.
(...): ouerse^ing or superintendent Angels, just of the same number: and by
Ambrose, we must understand the 7. Angels, to be the governors of the 7.
Churches; Ambros. in Apoc. 1.
and afterward he calls them the 7. rulers of the 7. Churc^^s.

Yea, but the holy Ghost if he had limited their number to 7. would have said
that the 7. Stars are the 7. Angels of the 7. Churches.

Whereto I answer, that he has more plainly limited the number, then if he
had said so. For if he had said, they are the 7. Angels of the 7. Churches,
such a captious Sophister as my adversary, would have expounded septem, 7. by
septeni, seven a piece, and so have multiplied them by 7. as if there had been
according to the number of the supposed Deacons at Jerusalem, 7. in every
Church. But when he says, the 7. stars are the Angels of the 7. Churches:
he plainly signifies, that there were just so many of them, as of the
Churches: that is to say seven.

Seeing therefore the number of the Angels is limited to seven, it is not
material what the refuter infers from the not limitation of them.

And whereas he says, that by the Angel in each inscription we are to
understand more then one: I would know of him, first, what reason he has to
forsake the grammatical sense? And where the holy Ghost speaks but as of
one, how he dare without good reason expound him as speaking of more then one?
Secondly, whether in one particular congregation there were more Pastors then
one? Thirdly, whether himself did not teach, page 2. that the Angels signify
such BB. or Ministers, as were Pastors only of particular co^gregations: 4.
whether in Ephesus there were more particular congregations, seeing in Ephesus
as him self says, page: 3. there were more angels. For one that had his
faculty in syllogizing, might appose him with these Syllogismes.

1. The Pastor or Bishop of a particular congregation is but one, and he, as
the new discipline teaches, the supreme Ecclesiastical officer in every
Church.

Each Angel of the Churches, says the refuter, did signify a Pastor or
Bishop of a particular congregation: Therefore each Angel did signify but one.

2. Where were many Angels, were many Pastors of particular congregations, and
where were many Pastors of particular congregations, there were more particular
congregations then one.

But at Ephesus, says my adversary, were many Angels, and so many Pastors.

Therefore at Ephesus, there were more particular congregations then one.

Which two conclusions, are directly contradictory to his other assertions,
both here, and else where in his book.

Sect. 4. Having thus manifestly proved, BB. (...) called the ^^gels of the^^^
Churches.
that the Angels of the seven Churches were just seven; and consequently, that
there was one, and but one, in every Church, whom the holy Ghost calls the
Angel of that Church: it will be easy, both to free my Text from the cauil,
which more then once my adversary obiecteth against it; as also, out of the
text, to clear the maine controversy, which is in hand. For, whereas he
obiecteth that all Ministers are Angels, Page 2. and 4 and 6. as I my self
teach in the Sermon of the duty and dignity of Ministers: And therefore, that
nothing can be gathered from this Text, which is not common to all Ministers:
for that the Angels are Bishops (says he) who denies? but withal, who
knows not that so are all Ministers? I answer, that all Minsters, who have
charge of souls, are in a general sense called Angels, Pastors, Bishops,
because they are messengers sent from God, to feed and to ouersee his flock.
But yet, where there are many ministers, who are in general called Angels,
Pastors, Bishops; if there be one, and but one, who (...), is called the
Angel, the Pastor, the Bishop of that Church, he is plainly noted to have a
singular pre-eminence above the rest. Whereof see more in my answer to page: 6.
Infr. S. 12.
And this is so plain a case, that even Beza himself (though a chief patron
of the pretended discipline, and one that shows himself as loath as may be,
in Apoc: 2.
that the Episcopal degree should be hence proved; confesses, that by the
Angel of the Church at Ephesus (and so of the rest) we are to understand,
(...), him that was the Prelate, or President of the Presbytery; for so
els-where he confesses, that Justin Martyr calls him, In Philip: 1.
whom others call the Bishop, And although he would have us think, that this
office of Presidentship was not perpetual, but for a short time, and that by
course: yet he would have us also note out of 1. Tim: 5.19. where Timothy is
willed, Notandum in hoc loco Timotheum in Ephesino Presbyterio, tum fuisse
(...) i. Antistitem, vt vocat Justinius. Bez: in Tim. 5:19.
not to receive an accusation against a Presbyter, but under 2. or 3.
witnesses; that Timothy was at that time the (...), as Iustine calls him,
that is Antistes, the Prelate or President in the Presbitery at Ephesus. Now it
is absurd to imagine, that Timothy was sent thither, to be President among them
as his course only or turn should come, as though the other Presbyters there
were equal to him.

Moreover, we are able to show by the testimony of the most ancient Authors
in the Church, who were these singular persons, whom the holy Ghost does call
the Angel of the Church at Ephesus, and likewise at Smyrna. For as before this
time, Timothy had been the Angel, or (...), as Beza, confesses, so at this
time, Onesimus was the Pastor of Ephesus, as Ignatius testifies, and
Polycarpus the Bishop of Smyrna: If therefore Onesimus was but one man, and
likewise Polycarpus: then we may be bold to conclude, that the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, was but one singular person, and likewise the Angel of
Smyrna; and so of the rest. So much of the first reason. Sect: ^


The second indeed (says he) necessarily occasioneth us to enquire what
manner of BB. these Angels were, Ad Page What (...) of Bishop Angels (...)
because, as I said, some of our times have made a question of that, which in
former ages was not wont to be called into controversy; so says he, because
B. Bilson and B. Barlow have fancied to themselves another sort of Bishops,
then either the scriptures of the new Testament do mention, or any sound
Divines do teach thereout.

This then is the controversy which remains to be decided, whether sort of
BB. such, as those learned Fathers, and my self, do defend, or such as my
adversary and his adherents do stand for, is that kind of Bishop, which has
been but of late devised, and never till of late obtruded on the Church. And on
which side the judicious Reader shall see better evidence, and more pregna^t
proofs, I adjure him, in the name of God without partiality, to assent
thereto.

The second question is, concerning the quality of the function, The 2. quest
concerning the quality their function
which is determined in the second Assertion, viz: that the calling of B.B.
(who are here meant by the stars and Angels) is lawful and good. And this is
a doctrine so necessarily arising out of the Text, that if it be proved that
Bishops are here meant by stars and Angels (which was the thing I undertook
before to prove, and now doubt not by Gods help to make evident) it cannot be
denied but that their calling is both aproued as good, and commended as
excellent. Neither would the refuter have wrangled with this passage, having
nothing to say, but that which with an idle Coccysme he often repeateth, and in
this place is altogether impertinent, that Diocesan BB. are not here meant:
were it not that he was resolved before hand to cavil with whatsoever he
should find in my book. Especially if you consider, that elsewhere he would
make me believe the proof of this doctrine to be superfluous, the former point
being once proved.

Sect: 6.
Sermon. Sect. 2. Page 3. For the deciding of the former question, two things are
in the words offered to our consideration. For whereas they are said to be the
Angels of the Churches, we are first to consider what manner of Churches they
were, whereof they were the Angels; and secondly, what manner of pre-eminence
they had in those Churches, in regard whereof they are called the Angels of the
Churches.

As touching the first: we are to try, whether these Churches whereof they
were Angels or BB. were Parishes or Dioceses, and consequently, whether they
were Parishionall or Diocesan BB. etc: to page 5. own case.

That these 2. things are offered to our consideration (says the refuter) we
deny not: but if he had walked with a right foot in the path he entered into,
For the deciding of the former question, 2 things are to be known, by
explication whereof the Text is explaned.
he should by his Text have taught us the meaning of these 2. points, and not
quite contrary, as he goes about, by these two points to teach us the meaning
of his Text.

To whom I will not give that answer which Festus did to Paul, that too much
learning has made him mad: for he seems not to be greatly sick of that
disease: but I may truly say that too much anger and wrath (which is furor
breuis) which he vnmeasurably shows in this Section, has made him so to
forget himself, that he wrangleth without wit and against sense. Unless
any man that is in his wits will say, that it is not lawful for a Preacher
to explane his Text. For what was it that in this Section I had in hand? was it
not to endeavor the explication of my Text, and to show what manner of BB: are
here meant by the Angels of the Churches? for the explication whereof, what
could more fitly be propounded, then the consideration of these 2. things? viz:
what manner of Churches they were, whereof they were the Angels or BB: and what
manner of pre-eminence they had in those Churches, in regard whereof they are
termed the Angels of the Churches; that from my Text rightly expounded of
Diocesan BB. I might deduce the doctrine of the lawfulnes of their calling, and
from it infer the use.

Indeed if I had been now propounding the doctrine gathered out of the Text, or
urging the use thereupon inferred, there had been reason I should prove them,
as afterward I do, by the Text already explicated. But when I am about to
explicate the Text, and propound the points that are therein questionable to be
discussed for the clearing of the Text, who sees not that the handling of
these points is the very explication of the Text, and the Text that which is
explicated? And if the Text be that which is explicated, who could be so
senseless, as either to require that the points should be explaned by the
Text, or to find fault, that by the handling of them the Text is explaned.

But now he is pleased of his grace to consider them. Sect. 1. When the Chu^
were Di^^ses, or P^shes, and BB. Dio^ or Parish^nall; and this was p^^pounded*
discussed.
And whereas I yield as a reason of my propounding the former point to be
discussed, diverse newfangled Assertions of the newfound parish discipline,
whereof I spoke but too mildely, as you may see: he charge me with bitter
inueighing, scornful, vpbraiding, ouerflowing of the gall, with spitting out
unsavory reproaches, making a calumnious out-crie in the end of the Section:
and much ado he had, not to apply to me that saying of Solomon, (with whom
it better fitteth, let the Reader judge) Proud, haughty, and scornful is his
name that works in his arrogancy wrath, Ad Page Pro. 21.^^
and in the end out of the super-aboundance of his charity, he is afraid
for me, that I care not to loose much of my peace within: that all I here
speak is Night work, proceeding from great distemper of the brain, etc.

Was my adversaries back or conscience rather galled, was he guilty to
himself, of being one of the coyners of those new opinions, that he thus
flingeth and kicketh, when they are so gently touched? Who, knowing that those
Assertions were some of those 16. positions, for the trial whereof, the
unchristian and immodest offer of disputation was made, which are there
magnified, as being such chief points in controversy between us and the
Papists, that if in them the BB. (joining as they pretend, with the Papists)
have the truth; then extreme wrong is offered to the Church of Rome, by our
separating therefrom, and all Protestant Churches are for that cause
Schismatic: that if the Priests and Jesuits can satisfy them in these
points, they would be reconciled to the Church of Rome:

Who, I say, knowing this, could with more mildness have spoken of such
Schismatic novelties? For where he says, that almost all of them have been
always generally maintained and practiced, by all soundly reformed Churches,
he seems, either not to care what he speaks, or by soundly reformed
Churches, to mean none but Brownists, or such like. Between whom and these
unchristian and immodest challengers, there went as we say but a pair of
sheeres; These, remaining after a sort in the piece; the other, being by open
Schism cut off: Which again they have manifested in their late petition to
the Kings Majesty: Anno. 1609.
This being the sum of their suite, that they may be tolerated Schismatickes.

But to let pass their new-coyned positions, (excepting those that concern
this cause,) with the Libellers bitter wranglings, and vain ianglings, There
are two things in answer to this Section, which I may not let pass: the one,
is his defense of the challengers; the other, a great advantage taken against a
word, which as he says, I dropped by the way.

His defense is, against that calumnious outcrie, as he calls it, Wh(...)
Kin(...) a m(...) some(...) rish(...) oce(...)
in the end of the Section, where I briefly note, that by what reason they
deny the Bishops to be members of the true Church, because forsooth they be
not of some certain parish, by the same, they may as well deny the King, who
having a more general reference to all the Churches within his dominions, as
being the Governor of them all, in Great Britain and Irel^nd; is further
from being a member of one only parish, then any Bishop in this Kingdom.

He answers, that the challengers hold the King and his Household to be an
entire Church of it self.But tell me, do they hold it to be a true Church?
that so the King may be thought to be a member of a true Church. Or if they
do; Why may they not with the like reason acknowledge a Bishop and his
family, to be an entire family by themselves? But it is no matter what they
hold, unless they were more learned and judicious.

The advantage which is taken at my words had need to be very great, Ad
pa(...) Sec(...) Their (...) that by sertion(...) cesan (...) Popelin ^^swered.
or else the refuter and his copartners do show themselves to be very weak
men: seeing it is five times repeated in print; once in their late petition,
with great amplifications; once in the Abortiue book, with this note in the
margent, sic tu beas amicos? Thrice in this Book, with great triumphs and
insultations: not only in the treatise it self, but also every where in the
margent, demanding with scorn, in this place, Page 1^^
Is this your kindness to your friends? in the second, sic tu beas amicos? in
the third, quid facias odio, sic vbi amore noces? Page: 4^


The Reader must needs expect some great matter, Page: 1^^ Montes perbi su^^^
Aug: (...) Psalm. 10* Quid d(...) tanto fe^^ hic prom^^^sor hiat^. parturiunt
montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Horat: de art: Poet.
seeing these hills thus to swell, The words whereat they take advantage were
these.

Least they might seem to set up an absolute Popeling in every parish, who
should have not only supreme, but also sole authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, they adioyne to him ( that is, to their Parish Bishop) a
Consistory of Lay or only governing Elders.

Out of which words they frame this proposition; They which have not only
supreme, but also sole authority in causes Ecclesiastical are absolute
Popelings: hereto they add an assumption of their own, All Diocesan Bishops,
have not only supreme, but also sole authority in causes Ecclesiastical; and
from thence infer their victorious and triumphing conclusion; therefore all
Diocesan Bishops are absolute Popelings. And this, they say, is mine own
reason, whereby I make Diocesan Bishops absolute Popelings.

Mine own reason? in which there is nothing mine, but the proposition, which
also is stretched beyond, not only my meaning, but even my words? this
proposition (I deny not) may be framed out of my words: they who give to a
Bishop, not only supreme, but also sole authority in causes Ecclesiastical,
do seem to set up an absolute Popeling.

From which words, if they had been retained, this might have been concluded,
if I did give to our Bishops, both supreme and sole authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, as I do not, that then I might seem to set up absolute
Popelings. But it were well with my adversaries, if to seem, and to be, were
all one. And yet, I do not so much as seem, to any that is wise and
indifferent, to make our Bishops, as they say, absolute Popelings. The
application of this to the BB. is made in the assumption, which is both false
and foolish, and is not mine, but theirs.

They say, it is not only impleyed and intended, but is one of the chief and
principal points I undertake to prove throughout my Sermon. But their saying
is false and frivolous. How do they prove it? For the question being (says
our refuter) whether the Churches should be governed by Pastors and Elders, or
by Diocesan Bishops: whereas they say, by Pastors and Elders, adjoining the
Elders to the Pastors, and making them both subject to the whole congregation,
etc. M.D. takes all from them all, and puts the reins into his Diocesan
alone, so making him by his own rule the absolute Popeling.

Here I entreat the Reader, to keep in store for future use, the state of the
question, as it is here propounded by the refuter. In the mean time, let us
after his own manner examine his argument.

The question being whether the Churches should be governed by Pastors and
Elders (for I will for your credites sake leave out that Brownisticall and
Anabaptisticall dotage concerning the chief authority of the people)

or by Diocesan BB. whosoever takes all from Pastors and Elders, and (shall I
add) the people too, and puts the reins into the hands of the Diocesan
alone, he gives him not only supreme but also sole authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, and so makes him an absolute Popeling.

But the question being as I said, M. D. takes all authority from the
Pastors, Elders and people, and puts the reins into the hands of the
Diocesan Bishop alone.

Therefore M. D. gives to the Diocesan, not only supreme, but also sole
authority in causes Ecclesiastical, and so by his own rule makes him an
absolute Popeling.

Sect. 10. To let you see, In their (...) four untruths co^^^tained. The
first (...) truth.
how the refuter climbeth a ladder of untruths, to seat our Bishops in the
Papacy, I will begin with his assumption, wherein are two untruths. First,
that I take all authority from the Pastors, Elders, and people. The Elders,
indeed, I reject as a new devise: in the parishioners, I acknowledge some
authority in choosing, or consenting to the choice, of some Church Officers;
but authority to govern, much less to ordain, depose, and deprive their
Pastor, I know not any. They are the sheep, which must hear their pastors
voice, and be obedient to their spiritual guides: They are the flock which
must be ruled and taught, not followed and obeyed.

As touching the pastors of parishes, I leave to them that pastoral power,
which ever was granted to them since the first distinguishing of parishes, and
allotting of several Presbyters to them, that is to say, both po^^statem
ordinis, the power of order* as they are Ministers, and potestatem
iurisdictionis spiritualis seu internae*] a power of spiritual and inward
jurisdiction, to rule their flock after a private manner, as it were in foro
conscientiae, in the court of conscience, as they are pastors of that flock.

By which power they rule and guide their flock, not only in their public
Ministry, but also in their private attendance, or if ye will so call it,
superintendence, as occasion shall be offered. For as touching their public
ministry; they are the leaders and guides of the people in Gods service; they
preach the word, therein teaching, confuting, instructing, reproving,
correcting their hearers; they administer the sacraments, as the stewards of
Gods house; by the one, admitting into Gods family, those which belong to his
covenant; by the other, nourishing the household of Christ, in due season: and
both by the word and sacraments, exercising so much of the power of the keys,
In the book of ordination it is presupposed, that a Minister may and ought to
Minister the doctrine and sacraments and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord
has commanded, and as this realm has received the same.

Fol. 12. interrog. 2.

The second untruth.


as of right belongs to them, as well binding the notoriously scandalous and
impenitent, by denouncing the threatenings of God against them in the word, and
by repelling them for the time from the sacrament; as also loosing the penitent
belieuers, by applying to them the gracious promises of the Gospel, and adding
thereto the sacraments as seals.

So that all power is not taken from the pastors: neither is all given to the
Bishop alone. For in the government of the Church, others are joined with him:
some under him, some above him. Under him, in the mother Church or Cathedral,
the Deane and Chapter, which in the ancient Church as hereafter we shall
show, were called Archpresbyters, and presbyteri ciuitatis: in the other
Churches of the Diocese divided into several precincts, the Archdeacons and
rural Deanes, governing them as the Chorepiscopi were wont in the primitive
Church. Not to speak of the Chancellers and Officials, the former being
adjoined to the Bishops, the latter to the Archdeacons, by reason of their
skill in the Ecclesiastical laws. Above him, not only the Archbishop and his
courts, but also the provincial Synodes, assembling chiefly for ordaining
Ecclesiastical Canons and constitutions, by which the Bishops are to rule, and
to be ruled. In making whereof, though the Ecclesiastical authority
especially appears, yet neither all the Bishops alone, and much less any one
Bishop, concludes any thing, but with the consent of the Presbytery. And
therefore this may to the former authority of Ministers be added, that in
making Ecclesiastical laws, they have a voice, either by themselves, if they
be sent to the Synod, or by such as themselves shall choose.

Sect. 11. In the proposition likewise are two untruths. The thi^^ truth.
For first, it is not generally true as it is necessarily intended in the
proposition (for otherwise the Syllogism is a mere Paralogisme) that
whosoever does give to the Bishop alone, the power which is taken from the
several pastors with their Elders and parishes, does straightwaies give the
sole authority Ecclesiastical to the Bishop.

Indeed, The four^^ untruth.
if we were so mad, as to think that there were no Ecclesiastical
government but parishionall, there were something in his speech. But when
besides and above the government not only parishionall but also Diocesan, we
acknowledge a superior authority in the Archbishop and his courts, in the
provincial synodes, especially that authority of making Church-lawes, whereby
both Dioceses and parishes are to be ruled: it is apparent, that although I did
take all authority from parish-bishops and their Elders, yet it would not
follow that I give the whole authority Ecclesiastical to the Diocesan alone.

But that which he says of my ascribing the supreme authority in causes
Ecclesiastical to the Diocesan Bishops, that is the supreme and the loudest
lie, and makes the assumption of his chief Syllogism most evidently false.
Do I, or any of us say, that the Diocesan Bishop has the supreme authority
in causes Ecclesiastical? does not our Church subject the Bishop to the
Archbishop, and provincial Synodes? does not appeal lie from the sentence of
the Bishop to the Archbishop, and likewise from him to the Kings Delegates?
does not himself acknowledge page 69. the Bishops so to be subjected to the
two Archbishops, as that if we may judge by the outward appearance and
practice, we may in his opinion seem to have but two Churches, and those
provincial, the one of Canterbury, and the other of York? do we not all,
with one consent, acknowledge, the Kings Majesty to have the supreme
authority in causes Ecclesiastical? and whereas the greatest authority of
Churchmen is exercised in Synodes, and the greatest authority of Synodes is
the making of Church-lawes; yet the ratification of them we submit to the King
(according to the Practice of the Eusebius. in vita Constant. lib. 3. says that
Constantine (...).

(...). Council* Tol^t. ^. in sin^, edict. reg. de confirm. council.

Conc. Constable. 5. Rogamus cleme^tia^tisam says the counsel to the Emperor
Theodos. vt per litras (...) pietatis ratum esse jubeas conf^^mesque concilij
decre^um.

Con. Chalc. ^ct. 3. sacro (...) edicto (...) Marti^us the Emperor (...)
confirmamus.


ancient Churches living under Orthodoxall Kings) in so much that they, and all
our Church-lawes, are called the Kings Sir Edw. Cook do iure regis
Ecclesiastico.
Ecclesiastical law.

Now then, if neither I take all authority from the pastors, nor give all to
the Bishops, nor ascribe unto them sole, nor supreme authority; what have the
libellers gained by all their triumphing outcryes, but the manifestation of
their own manifold untruths? Yea but the title of absolute Popelings agrees
better to our Diocesan BB. then to their parish BB.

Neither did I say that they are such, but that if they did not join unto them
a consistory of Elders, they would seem to set up, not only a Popeling, but
an absolute Popeling in every parish* a petite pope indeed their pastor is in
regard of that supremacy they ascribe unto him, (making him the supreme
Ecclesiastical officer in every Church) which we deny to our Bishops, and
were it not, that he has a consistory joined to him, as the Pope has of
Cardinals, he would be more then a pope.

And again, whereas our Bishops are to be guided by laws, which by their
superiors are imposed upon them; their pastors with their Elders and people
having (as the Pope says he has) a supreme, immediate and independent
authority sufficient for the government of their Churches in all causes
Ecclesiastical, and therefore for making of Ecclesiastical laws, they are to
be governed by their own laws. For the chief thing in Ecclesiastical
government, is the authority to prescribe laws Ecclesiastical. If therefore
each parish has (as they say it has) sufficient authority within it self,
for the government of it self in all causes Ecclesiastical, immediately
derived from Christ; then questionless they have authority to prescribe laws
Ecclesiastical.

And as the Pope does not acknowledge the superiority of a synod to impose
laws upon him, no more do they. They will give synodes leave to deliberate of
that which may be best, H.I. and supplic. an 1609.
and to persuade thereto, but they will not be ruled by them. As for the Kings
supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, how it may stand with their maine
assertion, wherein they ascribe to every parish an independent authority
immediately derived from Christ, sufficient for the government of it self in
all causes Ecclesiastical, I will not dispute.

Sermon. Sect. 3. page 5. Sect. 12.
Concerning the second, viz. what was the pre-eminence of these BB. in the
Churches, in respect whereof they are called the Angels of the Churches; others
more wise and learned then the former, granting they were BB. of whole cities
and the countries adjoining (that is to say of Dioceses) notwithstanding the
sway of the government they ascribe to the Presbyteries of those Churches,
consisting partly of Ministers and partly of annual or Lay-presbyters: making
these Angels or Bishops nothing else but (...), or presidents of those
Presbyteries: and such presidents as were not superior to other Ministers in
degree, etc. to page 6. in their turns. The 2. what pre-eminence the BB. had,
and why this point was propounded.
Of the two points serving to show, by way of explication of the text, what
manner of Bishops were meant by the Angels, the latter I propounded in this
section to be examined. A reason whereof I allege a controversy betwixt us
and another sort of disciplinarians, who are as I said, more wise and learned
then the former, who though they grant that which the former denied, yet do
greatly differ from us concerning the pre-eminence which the Angels or ancient
Bishops had in the Churches. So that in this section are 2. things, first the
proposition of the second point, concerning the pre-eminence of BB. in respect
whereof they were called the Angels of the Churches, secondly, a reason
thereof. To the proposition he answers, that they had this name Angels, in
regard of their general calling of the ministry, not because of any
soueraignetie or supremacy over other their fellow Ministers, as (he says) I
imply here, and plainly but untruly affirm afterward. In which few words
are 2. untruths. Whereof the former is an error, that they are to termed in
respect of their general calling of the ministry. For though to be called
Angels, generally agrees to all Ministers: yet for one and but one among many
Ministers in one and the same Church to be (...), called the Angel of that
Church, is not a common title belonging to all Ministers in regard of their
general calling, but a peculiar style belonging to one, who had singular
pre-eminence above the rest, Conf. wit. Heart. pag^ 461. Act. 20.1 Apoc. 2.1.
that is to say, a Bishop. So says D. Raynolds: in the Church of Ephesus,
though it had sundry Elders and pastors to guide it; yet among those sundry was
there one chief, who^ our Savior calls the Angel of the Church, and
writes, that to him which by him the rest should know. And this is he whom
afterward in the primitive Church the fathers called Bishop.

As touching the latter: where he says that I do here imply that the Bishops
have a soueraignety or supremacy over other Ministers, and afterward do
affirm it plainly, that plainly is a plain lie. Soueraignetie and supremacy
over other Ministers none but Papists give to their Bishop, and they to none
but to the Bishop of Rome. Superiority indeed belongs to Bishops over other
Ministers, and so much is intended in this place.

To the reason, Sect. 13. Ad page 7. The refuter mistaking the reason and
craftily concealing the division which is among them) is bol^ to charge (...)
with four untruths.
if it had been obscure, he should have answered, as Aristotle teaches,
(...), I understand not. For better were it to plead ignorance, then to wrangle
with that he does not, or will not understand. For I do plainly note in the
Sermon two sorts of disciplinarians, who are opposite unto us in this
controversy; the one, a new sect of disciplinarians lately risen amongst us,
(who have coined the newfound parish discipline, which comes nearer the
practice of the Brownists, then of any well ordered Church) of whom I spoke in
the former point: the other, a sort of grave and learned divines, such as
Calvin and Beza, etc. who stand for that discipline, which is practiced in
Geneua, and some other reformed Churches; showing that as they do not consent
with our new disciplinarians in the former point, so they dissent from us in
the latter, touching the superiority of Bishops.

The refuter understands all as a grant made by them, whereof some part he
acknowledges to be true, the rest he rejects as false. And though in neither
he do understand what was intended, yet he is as bold as blind Bayard to
blunder out this blustering speech, that with one breath I blow out both truth
and falsehood.

Neither doubts he, though merely ignorant of that which he avouches, to
charge me with four untruths; denying 1. that they grant Bishops which here
are called Angels, to have been set over Dioceses, that is to say, the whole
city and country adjoining.

2 That they teach the only governing Elders, to be lay or annual.

3 That the Angels of the Churches were nothing else but presidents of the
Presbyteries.

4 That their presidentshippe was only for a week or a month, and that by
course as being common to them in their turns.

For the manifestation of the truth in all these points, I shall not need to
seek further then to the writings of Calvin and Beza. That Calvin and Beza,
etc. hold 1. that the Churches were Diocesan.


Sect. 14. As touching the first, Calvin teaches, that in the primitive Church
(when in the government thereof there was nothing almost dissonant from Gods
word) each city had a college of Presbyters, Inst. lib. 4. c. 4.
who were Pastors and Doctors; and that to every city was assigned a certain
region, which should receive their Presbyters ( meaning the pastors of several
parisnes) from thence, Sect. 1. Sect. 2.
and should be accoumpied as part of that Church. Every College was subject to
some one Bishop. But if the country, which was under his Bishopric, was
larger, then that he could in all places discharge all the functions of a
Bishop; in certain places throughout the country were appointed certain
Presbyters, who in business of less importance should be in his steed. These
were called Chorepiscopi, because in the province they represented the Bishop.
Likewise de gradib. ministr. c. 24.
Beza teaches, that the first distribution of the Church into Dioceses, was
framed according to the division of the provinces under the Roman Empier, into
(...), as it were precincts of government, which Pliny calls conuentus and
iurisdictiones, in the chief cities whereof the presidents kept their courts
of judgment, of which sort Pliny Plin. lib. 5. cap. 29. and 30.
reckneth 9. in Asia the less, five whereof are mentioned in the Apocalypse
(viz. Laodicea, Sardes, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus. Neither are we, says he, to
imagine that this order at the first proceeded rather from a council or decree
of the ancient fathers assembled together, then from the very instinct of
nature, and instigation of necessity.

Now says he, in the chief Town of every Diocese, the So by A^^brose his
w^^^rant he calls a B^sho^ who says th^^^ Timothy wa^ such a one at
Ephesus.
first Presbiter, who afterward by a dangerous Catachresis, was called a
Bishop, in the daily common jurisdiction, Praeerat caeteris, tum vrbanis tum
alijs eius regionis, com-Presbyteris, id est, totj Diocoesi; was President over
his fellow Presbyters, both of the City and Country, that is, the whole
Diocese. And because sometimes the Country was of larger extent, then that all
upon every occasion, could conveniently meet in the City; and forasmuch, as
other small Cities and Towns did need commune inspection or oversight, they
also had their Chorepiscopi, that is, Countrey-Bishops, or Vice-Bishops.

For the second, Sect. 15.
that they acknowledge their only governing Elders to be of the Laity it is
plain. That the only governing Elders be of the Laity, and annual officers.
For whereas Calvin divides the Church into two Orders or Ranks, Clerum, sc.
and plebem; the Clergy and Laity, he plainly says, that these Elders are
chosen from among the Laity. And forasmuch as being chosen, they do not
become to be of the Clergy, Inst. lib: 4: c. 12. Sect. 1. li. 4. c. 3. Se. 8
he must needs mean, that they still continue to be of the Laity. And that
he thought they should be annual, the order of the Church of Geneua by him
set down, does declare.

Both which points Beza acknowledges together. de grad: Ministr: c. 11.
In this City of Geneua says he, those governing Elders, (which in the title
of the chapter he called annual) are chosen yearly, not of the baser sort of
the people, but out of the very order of 25.60. and 200. men: (which be the
councills of state in Geneua, 2. being chosen out of the 25.4. out of the 60.
and 6. out of 200.) not without the knowledge and consent of the people: I say,
every year new are chosen, or the old confirmed. So every where (says he)
in other free Churches, according to the condition of the place, the like
choice is observed. For of the Laity, some are chosen to this Eldership in
Scotland yearly, in the Low-Countreyes they are chosen for 2. years, the
half of them being changed every year.

Now it may not be doubted, but that those which be of the 25. or 60. or 200.
in Geneua, being all Statesmen (as their gouerning-Elders be) are Laymen.

^
Again, great consideration must be had (says Beza) that Princes and Noble
men, and such as have authority and pre-eminence in the Church, be chosen to
be of the Seignorie.

And surely, says he, in another place, (proving that there ought to be such
Elders of the Laity joined to the Ministers) unless some chosen men out of
the body of the whole congregation, The Presby^^^^^ and (...). page: 112.
do sit in that assembly, whereby the whole Church is governed, Scarcely
shall the universal name of that Church agree to that assembly, wherewith
notwithstanding Christ adorneth it: Namely, because they being chosen out of
all the parts of the whole Church, should represent the whole Church.

His reason therefore is, that as the whole Church consists of the Clergy
and Laytie: So that Senate, which is to represent the whole Church, must
consist not only of the Clergy, but of the Laity also.

And in another place he proves by a necessary disjunction (as he thinks)
that if there must be a Presbytery at all, De grad: Minist: cap. 11 page: 64.
Sect. 16.
a good part thereof must be chosen out of the Laity. Whence do they think
they are to be chosen, if not of them whom they call Laymen? etc.

Thirdly, that they make the Angels of the Churches or ancient BB. in respect
of their superiority, They held that the Angels were but Presidents of the
Presbyteries.
only Presidents of the presbytery, etc. Nothing is more plain.

The Presbyters (says Calvin) in every City chose one out of their number, to
whom specially they give the title of a Bishop, least from equality (as is
wont) dissentions should arise. But yet the Bishop was not so in honor and
dignity superior, Inst. lib. 4. c. 4. Sect: 2.

Vid T. C^li: 1.109. and 110.

Eccles. disciplia. ang, page: 181.182.


that he had dominion over his colleagues. But what office the Consul had in
the Senate, to propound matters, to ask voices, to go before others in
counselling, admonishing, exhorting, by his authority to rule the whole
action, and to execute that which by common counsel has been decreed, that
office did the B. bear, in the assembly of the Presbyters.

Again, every College of Presbyters only for preservation of peace and good
order, were subject to one Bishop, who did so go before others in dignity,
that himself was subject to the assembly of the brethren, meaning the
Presbytery.

Calvin therefore makes the Angels or ancient Bishops, nothing else but
presidents of the Presbytery, or moderators of the Assembly.

Beza, In Apoc. 2.1
as by each of these Angels he understands (...), the President of the
Presbytery, (as before I noted; So he will acknowledge the first Bishops, de
grad: Ministr: cap. 20 114.123.
to have been no other but presidents of the Ecclesiastical Senate, Presidents
over the assemblies of Pastors, (to wit, of diverse Parishes, belonging to one
Church) whose authority he will acknowledge to be nothing else but the
Dignity of the first place in the sacred Assembly, with the right of ruling
the common action, without any dominion over those which sit with him. And such
a presidentship he acknowledges to be a Divine ordinance. cap: 21*


And whereas Jerome says, there was a time when the Churches were governed by
the common counsel of the presbyters, he would not have him so understood, as
if they had not always a president. cap: 23.139 140.
And whereas D. Sarauia objecteth, that in Saint John's time, these 7. Churches
of Asia had by Divine ordinance 7. BB. set over them, whom he calls the
Angels; Beza replieth; Wherefore urge you this against Jerome and us? cap:
23.159.160.
For when he says, that the Churches at the first were governed by the common
counsel of Presbyters, we may not think he was so unwise, as to dream that
none of the Presbyters was President of the assembly.

And most plainly in the next Chapter.

As touching the first Presbyter (says he) or Bishop of the Diocese, cap:
24.168.
what his Dignity was, and wherein it did consist, I have often showed; that
it was wholly of Order, and not of degree. Every one of his fellow-Presbyters
or Pastors ruling his own Parish, and that first Presbyter or Bishop of the
Diocese, having a super-intendencie or in-spection over all his
fellow-Presbyters, thus far, as to admonish them of their duty; as also
having assembled his Presbytery, either on set days, or extraordinarily, to
propound matters to them concerning the Diocese, or the Censure of manners, to
ask their voices, to pronounce what to the rest seems good. From which
judgment, it was lawful to appeal to a Provincial Synod.

As touching the last point, what the learned disciplinarians hold, Sect. 17.4.
That they held the Presidentship to have been but for a short time, and by
course.
may be gathered by the practice of Geneua, and other Churches, which they did
reform, as was pretended, according to the discipline of the primitive Church;
the Presidents of the presbyteries in those Churches being not perpetual, or
for term of life, but for a short time. But omitting the rest, Sec T.C. lib.
1.110. Eccl. discipl: Ang. page 184.
Beza often urges this point, that the ancient BB: had this presidentship, but
for a short time, and that by course. And as he professes the presidentship
in the Presbytery of every Church, to be a divine ordinance, and immutable; So
he acknowledges those BB: alone for divine, who had this presidentship but
for a short time and by course.

How be it he confesses, that howsoever, the order it self, De Minist: grad:
cap: 23 page: 142. ca: 141.153.
(Namely, that there should be a president in each presbytery) is perpetual
and immutable, as being essential: Yet ordinis modum; the manner of this
order: though it were a divine ordinance, that it should be by course and for
a short time, was variable, as being but accidental.

ca: 140.141.
But his words which most plainly testify that, which I delivered, are these;
In what sense it is to be taken, that Jerome says, The Churches in the
beginning, were governed by the common Counsel of the Presbyters. Ambrose
teaches; namely so, as there should be one among them, not superior in
degree, but first in the dignity of Order and Honor; to which office every
one should succeed in their turns. Now, what space of time was prescribed to
this Presidentship, ^ed hebdomadi^am hanc (...), fuisse, probabile est. page:
143.
Ambrose describes not. But it is probable, that it was a weekly course, such
as that of the Aaronicall Priesthood.

And after, speaking of that change which Jerome notes, he gives this reason
thereof; That the Primacie of Order, by course or turns of mutual succession,
was by experience found not sufficient for avoiding of Schism: the dignity of
this Primacie being communicated unto each of the Pastors in their turns.

Therefore that which had been common to all in their turns, it was thought
good to translate unto one; and that one chosen by the judgment of the whole
Presbitery.

Let the refuter therefore take home those four untruths to himself, which
he objected against me; whether out of unmannerly ignorance, or rather
cunning-rudenes. For it can hardly be thought that such bold challengers of
the BB. and so confident an undertaker of this business, could simply be
ignorant of these things: The refu^ his Cop^^ plead for ^^cipline, n^^ taught
by ^^uin and o^ learned Pr^^^tants, no^^ctised by (...) reformed Churches.
but rather cunningly sought to conceal the division, which is among
themselves; fearing lest their favorites, (whereof some follow, some go
before them, out of a zeal not guided by knowledge) should take notice, that
the aforesaid challengers, and this Champion stand for a Discipline, neither
taught by Calvin and Beza, and such other learned men, nor yet practiced by the
reformed Churches: whereof I desire all men to take notice.

And verily, for my part, I was of opinion, till I saw H.I. book to the
King, and the immodest and unchristian offer of disputation: that they who
stand for the pretended reformation among us, had sought for no other
discipline, then that which Calvin and Beza taught, and the reformed Churches,
especially of Geneua does, and Scotland did practice. But when I saw the
novel Assertions, whereon the newfound parish discipline is founded, urged
with such bold vehemency, I must confess, I was much alienated from that
side. And so I hope will all moderate Christians, when they shall consider how
they make no end of broaching more and more Novelties.

Sermon. Sect. 4 page 6. Sect. 18. The 5. poin^ propounded.
Now for the clearing of this matter which we have in hand: Forasmuch as both
sorts obtrude Lay Elders, to extrude Bishops; I would first prove against both,
etc. to the end of page: 7. Hitherto the two Assertions contained in the
explication have been propounded to be discussed. Now, in this Section, I made
way to the proof hereof, by enumerating distinctly the several points which I
purposed to handle, for the proof of either. And first for the former, which
is the explication of my Text (viz:) that the Angels or Pastors of the
primitive Church were Diocesan Bishops, and such, for the substance of their
function, as ours be.) I endeavored to prove it, both (...), by disproouing
the presbyterian discipline, wherein I intended a disjunctive argumentation,
that (the question being, whether the Churches were governed by presbyteries,
as they say, consisting for the greater part of Laymen, or by BB: as we
hold,) the disproofe of their presbyteries, might be a proof for our
Bishops: and also (...), by showing what the authority of the Angels or
ancient Bishops was, as well extensiue, against our new disciplinarians, (
viz:) that the Churches whereof they were Bishops, were Dioceses, and
themselves Diocesan Bishops; as intensiue, against the Elder, and more learned
disciplinarians, that BB. were superior to other Ministers, not only in
order, but in degree also. etc.

And for the proof of the 2 Assertion, which is a doctrine arising out of the
Text before explaned, concerning the lawfulness of the Bishops calling, this
is proposed to be proved, that the fanction of Bishops, is of Apostolical and
divine institution; and this, as in the end of the Section is signified, was
the thing chiefly intended by me. These points I did not thus propound in
Dichotomies, which the greatest part does not so well conceive and remember,
but for more easiness, was content to make a bare enumeration of them.

And this is the frame, of that which he calls the body of my Sermon, the
which our refuter endeuoreth here to put out of frame: For having first, of
the five points which I propound, referred the first four to the former part
of my maine distribution (as he calls it) where I enquire what manner of
Bishops the Angels were; and the last to the latter, which respects the
quality of their function: in the next words, as if presently he had forgotten
himself, after he has showed his scornful and disdainefull spirit, he
sets up a frame of his own to work upon. The mansion (says he) that he
builds, is a Princely and pleasant Palace for our Bishops Lordships, under
the roof whereof, their Honors may dwell safely, as in a Sanctuary, without
danger of the adversary, and much delight. Look we upon the bare frame, as it
stands, without glasing, painting, etc: it is of this form: The function of
the Bishops of the 7. Churches is lawful and good:

The function of the Bishops of the Church of England, is the function of the
Bishops of the seven Churches.

Therefore the function of the Bishops of the Church of England is lawful and
good.



The proposition of this syllogism is laid down, page: 2. and 55. where he
says, that the office and function of Bishops, here meant by Angels, is in
this Text approved, as lawful and commended as excellent: That is is lawful
and good; having divine, both Institution being Angels, and approbation being
stars.

The assumption is in the same second page propounded thus: The Bishops of the
7. Churches, (for the substance of their calling (were such as the reverend
fathers of our Church are. The which he says, by the grace of God he will
plainly prove, and that in the four first points of the five, for to them he
there refers us for that purpose. page 61.

We are therefore in the next place to see, out of which of those four points
it is concluded, and how: Which to my understanding must be out of the second,
third, and 4. points, after this manner.

The function of those Bishops, whose Churches are Dioceses, and themselves
Diocesan Bishops, superior to other Ministers in degree, having sole power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, is the function of the Bishops of the 7. Churches.

The function of the Bishops of the Church of England, is the function of those
Bishops whose Churches are Dioceses, and themselves Diocesan Bishops; superior
to other Ministers in degree, having sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction.

Therefore the function of the Bishops of the Church of England, is the
function of the Bishops of the seven Churches.

In lieue of the proposition of this Syllogism, we have the prosyllogisme, or
proof of it, in the 2.3. and 4. points before named, etc.

Sect. 19. The refuter by a forced Analysis, has put the frame of the Sermon
out of frame, to make himself work.
Behold, to how great trouble too much Learning will put a man! Nimia est
miseria doctum esse hominem nimis. If his skill in the Analysis of a Treatise
had not been extraordinary, all this stir had been needless. But if you
mark the end of his ouerbusying himself in resolving my Sermon, and then
putting the ends together to make up his own frame, perphaps he will not
seem so skillful in resolving, as wilful in dissoluing the same. The end of
his double dealing, appears in the sequel to have been double.

For first, whereas there are of the five points which I propounded, two of
principal use, serving directly, the one to disprove their Presbyterian
discipline, the other to approve the government by Bishops, (both which, he
could wish that I had spared) he would feign make his Reader believe, that of
these two, Page 9.
the former, is impertinent; and the latter, superfluous; Page 107.
or as elsewhere he speaks, the former bootlesse, the other needless. 2.
When he could not tell how to wrangle with the other 3. points, he brings
them to his frame, Page 53.70.84.
as it were to the rack: first, finding fault, that they do not directly
prove, that which he would have them: and then, by torture, making them to
say what he pleases, that he may the more easily contradict them.

To countenance these sophistical shifts, he has brought my Sermon to the
Smiths forge, and having hammered it well, he has reduced the whole body of
it into one syllogism, with the proofs thereof. Using this syllogism for the
parts of my Sermon, as the tyrant used his bed for his ghests, cutting off
those parts which seem to reach over, and retching out those which seem to
come short.

But let us examine his Syllogism which with the prosyllogisme of the
assumption he propounds as the Analysis of the whole body of my Sermon. The
function of the Bishops of the seven Churches is lawful and good, etc. I do
not deny but that out of diverse places of my Sermon patched together, some
such Syllogism as this may be framed. But in Analyzing we must respect, not
what we can devise or collect, but what the writer did intend, and our Analysis
must be answerable to his Genesis. It is apparent that I propounded two things
to be distinctly proved, the one as the explication of the text showing what
manner of Bishops the Angels were: the other as a doctrine collected out of the
text, concerning the quality of their function, viz. that the calling of
Diocesan Bishops is lawful and good. This, which I propounded as a doctrine to
be collected out of the text, page 2. and as a conclusion to be proved in the
last part, page 55. and is indeed not the proposition, but the conclusion of
the Syllogism which himself frames, he would against sense make the Reader
believe was by me propounded as the proposition of his Syllogism. As for the
proposition which he assigns to me, I did not express, but took it for
granted in the collection of the doctrine out of the text, which may be
collected after this manner: Bishops are such as are here meant by the Angels
of the Churches, therefore their function is lawful and good. Of which
collection if any man should make doubt, the consequence would be proved by the
addition of the proposition. The calling of such, as are here meant by the
Angels of the Churches, is lawful and good, etc.

Wherefore as there were two distinct parts propounded by me, so if he had
drawn the same into two distinct Syllogismes concluding the same question, and
not confounded the parts of the Sermon to make the principal branches thereof
to seem heterogeneall or superfluous, he had not much missed of my project.
The former Syllogism as I have said might be this.

The calling of such as are here meant by the Angels is lawful and good.

Diocesan BB. are such as are here meant by the Angels, therefore the calling
of Diocesan BB. is lawful and good.

The proposition I took for granted, and therefore did not express it. The
assumption is the same with the former assertion, and is proved by the four
first points. The conclusion I did not express, being employed in the
collection of the doctrine out of the text.

The latter Syllogism is this. That calling which is of appostolicall and
divine institution is lawful and good: The calling of Diocesan BB. is of
apostolical and divine institution, Therefore it is lawful and good: of this
Syllogism the assumption, is the same with the fifth point here propounded.

So that of the five points, which I propounded, not any one is either
impertinent or superfluous, the four former serving to prove the former
assertion which is the assumption of the former Syllogism, the fifth and last
being the assumption of the second Syllogism.

As for the second Syllogism which he assigns to me, I utterly disclaim it:
because as no one part thereof is propounded by me, so both the premises are
false and contrary to my meaning. For neither to the Angels of the Churches,
nor to the Bishops, do I ascribe that sole power of ordination and
jurisdiction which he speaks of, as after shall appear.

But that his Analysis of my Sermon was merely forced against the light of his
own conscience, appears, first, by the quarrels which thereout he has
raised, seeing by his Analysis, of the five parts the first seems
impertinent, the last superfluous, the three in the mids not proving that for
which as he says they are brought. For could he persuade himself that his
Analysis or resolution was answerable to my Genesis or composition of the
Sermon, when he saw two parts of the five could not be brought to his frame,
and the other three not to be suitable unto it? Secondly, by the distribution of
my Sermon, and the transitions which I use, wholly disagreeing from his
Analysis. Thirdly, by the Analysis propounded here by my self, and by the
defense of the several parts here ensuing, wherein I shall by the help of God
manifestly prove, that neither the first of the five was impertinent, nor the
last superfluous, nor the other three concluding besides the purpose. But now
we are to entreat of them severally, having first given you to understand,
that he divides the body of my Sermon as he calls it into five parts, and
every part into diverse sections: as namely, the first, which concerns the
Eldership, into eight sections, in all which the sum of that which I
maintain is this, that there were no other Presbyters in the primitive Church,
but Ministers.

CHAP. III. Defending the two first Sections concerning Elders.
Sermon. Sect. 1. page 8. And first I am to show, that there were no other
Presbyters in the primitive Church, but Ministers. A sufficient proof whereof
may be this, etc: to obtrude upon us, in the end of the 8. page
AS touching this first point, the refuter endeavors two things. Sect. 1.
That the ^^pute con^^^^ning Lay^^ders is no^ impertine^^ Page 49. fine.
First, as he says, he wardeth and repelleth my blows: and then, that we may
see what a man he is of his hands, he shows, that he also can strike if need
be. His former act is a reproof of my treatise, the latter a proof of his
own assertion. And first in gross, he rejects the whole discourse of Elders
as impertinent, and after descends to the particulars. A^ page 10.
For the first: Reason would, says he, that M. D. had showed us, how this
first point pertains to the proof of the matter in question. Whatsoever he
conceive of it, I discern not, what affinity it can have with any member of
his former assumption, etc.

Page 6. li. 18.
I might answer, that common sense would, that what he seem done, he should
conceive and acknowledge to be done. And charity would (which self love would
not) that if he discerned not the affinity of this point with his pretended
assumption; he should rather have suspected his own Analysis to be forced,
then have blamed me for his own want of judgment. But that he may discern
this passage concerning Elders to be pertinent to the matter in question; I
would but entreat him, to take notice what is in question between us. The
question, discussed in the Sermon, is twofold. The first de facto, whether the
primitive Church were governed by Diocesan Bishops, as we say; or by
Presbyteries of such Elders, as they spoke of. The second, de iure, whether the
Church may lawfully be governed by Bishops, as we hold; or must needs be
governed by their Presbyteries, as they affirm. The first question is handled
in the former part of the Sermon, the second in the latter.

The question debated in the former part of the Sermon, I say again, is this;
whether the primitive Churches were governed by Diocesan Bishops, such as (for
the substance of their calling) ours be; or by such Presbyteries, as the
Presbyterians stand for. And those, either parishionall, consisting of the
Parish-Bishop, and a company of lay or only governing Elders, as the new and
shallow sort of disciplinarians do boldly, though ignorantly affirm: or
Presbyteries in the cities, consisting of the president and other Presbyters,
whereof some are Ministers, but the greater some lay or only governing Elders,
as the Elder and more learned sort of disciplinarians do teach.

(...). Arist. M^taph. li. 10. c. 5.
In this question, as the refuter will confess, (unless he will confess
himself to be ignorant in logic) this disjunction is employed; either the
Church was governed by Diocesan Bishops, as we say; or by such Presbyteries, as
they speak of. And this disjunction, though it be not absolutely necessary,
yet is it necessary ex hypothesi, and so presupposed on both sides. For, this
being the question, whether the Church were governed by Bishops, (...) Ibid.
or such Presbyteries; it is granted on both sides, and agreed upon betwixt us,
that it was governed either by the one or by the other: and that one, and but
one of these assertions is true. For if both parts of the question or
disjunction were true, it were but a foolish question, Page 6. in med.
as the Philosopher says. And that this is the question between us, the
refuter has truly witnessed in respect of the parts of the disjunction,
though in the latter he falsifieth my assertion, where he says, the question
between us is, whether the Churches should be governed by Pastors and Elders,
or by Diocesan Bishops. The question indeed de facto for the time past, is,
whether the primitive Church were governed by Diocesan BB. or such Presbyteries
as they speak of. The question de iure respecting also the time present and to
come, is, whether the Church may or should be governed by Bishops as we say, or
must be governed by their Presbyteries, as they affirm. This therefore being
the question, whether by our Bishops, or their Presbyteries, and this question
implying a necessary disjunction: who sees not that the disproofe of their
Presbyteries, is a direct proof for our Bishops. The disjunctive argumentation
stands thus.

Either the primitive Church was governed by Diocesan Bishops, or by such
Presbyteries as they stand for: But not by such Presbyteries as they stand for:
Therefore by Diocesan Bishops. The proposition is employed in the very question
between us: and the disjunction is therein by both parties presupposed as
necessary.

The assumption is, that first point of the five, which now we have in hand.
The conclusion determines the assertion which in the former part of the Sermon
was propounded to be proved, viz. that the primitive Church was governed by
Diocesan Bishops.

This passage therefore concerning Lay Elders, will I hope be acknowledged not
to be impertinent.

Sect. 2. The sum of that which in the Sermon was said concerning Lay Elders.
Now that the Church was not governed by such Presbyteries as they speak of, I
proved in this passage. Because howsoever with great vehemency the
Presbyterian discipline by lay or only governing Elders has been by them
urged and obtruded upon us; yet they are not able to prove that ever there were
any Presbyters which were not Ministers.

For, the question, which now we have in hand, being, whether there were any
such Presbyters in the primitive Church, as were not Ministers: forasmuch as
the Presbyterians are the opponents and plaintiffes, not only holding the
affirmative, that there were such, but vehemently urging that still there ought
to be such; we contrariwise the respondents and defendants, holding the
negative, to wit, that neither there were such, nor now need to be: the Reader
therefore is to understand, that, this burden of proving, lies upon them which
hold and urge the affirmative, that there were and still ought to be
Lay Elders: and that in us it is a sufficient proof of the negative, if we can
maintain, that they are not able to prove the affirmative. And whereas all
their proofs may be reduced to two heads, for either they be such testimonies
where the word (...), or Presbyter is named, or where at the least the
function it self is (as they suppose) meant; to these two heads therefore I
oppose two contrary assertions. The one, that the word (...) or Presbyter,
does always signify a Minister: the other, that there is no one pregnant
testimony mentioning or meaning the lay or only governing Elder. The former
of them, being affirmative, I do briefly confirm by three reasons; the
latter, being such a negative as cannot otherwise be proved (for the induction
of the particulars were infinite) I do therefore maintain it against the
principal instances of the adversaries. And this is the sum of this passage.
Now I come to his cauils, with the particulars.

Sect. 3.
The two assertions (which I did even now mention) opposed to the two heads of
their proofs, the refuter casts into one Syllogism, and having so done,
wrangleth both with the substance of each proposition, and also with the manner
of setting them down. The Syllogism is this.

If in the writings of the Apostles, the ancient fathers and councils the word
(...) or Presbyter (noting an Ecclesiastical person) does evermore signify a
Minister or Priest, and there cannot any one pregnant testimony be alleged
out of the scriptures, councils or fathers, mentioning or meaning any
Lay-annuall-onely-gouerning-Presbyters, then were there no other Presbyters in
the primitive Church, but Ministers: but the antecedent is true, therefore the
consequent. In the antecedent of the proposition he notes two parts: Ad page
11. His cavil against the former part of the antecedent and the consequence
deduced therefrom.
the former whereof he rejects as superfluous, because the latter is as firm
and full without it. And yet having rejected the former, he says the
consequence is infirm and weak. But if the former be therefore superfluous,
because the latter is firm and full without it, by this reason it shall not be
lawful for a man to bring two arguments for one thing, the one concluding the
question without the other. Yea but these two are joined in one proposition,
and therefore either must afford necessary help to the other, or the one is
superfluous. Blame him then that joined them, and disdain that sophistical
shifts of the refuter, devised to make himself work. Yea but if they be not
joined, the former will be weak and of no strength, for it will not suffice that
I say the word Presbyter does evermore signify a Minister, unless I added
only. For though it always signify a Minister, yet it may also signify him
that is no Minister. But in mine understanding, if it always signify a
Minister, it never signifies him that is not a Minister. Neither will it serve
their turn that they make Presbyter the genus of teaching and
gouerning-Elders, unless they can show, that as always it signifies a
Minister, so in some place, an onely-gouerning Elder also, and they must
remember that in this cause of Elders, they are the opponents, and therefore
they must prove that the places which they allege for their Lay-presbyters,
not only may, but of necessity must be understood of them, or else in vain
do they urge and obtrude them upon us.

And surely we must needs esteem it a very partial genus, and such as yet was
never heard of, that is always predicated of the one species, and never of the
other. If animal, did always signify a man, and were never predicated of any
other thing but man, we should hardly think it were the genus, but the self
same species, and conuertible with it; as indeed Presbyter is with Minister,
and therefore not the genus of it* and that I proved, (...). Arist. Poster 17.
when I said, it always signifies a Minister, because in english it is
priest, and in the scriptures is confounded with Episcopus, and notes such a
person as must be (...), able to preach.

But let him add only if that would please him, though so much be signified
without it. No, it will not serve the turn, for though Presbyter do always
and only signify a Minister, and never signify an only governing Elder, yet
there might be governing Elders, who were signified by other names. Why but
then there were no Presbyters but Ministers, which was the point to be proved.
And what then becomes (which is the chief scope of this place) of all those
testimonies, wherein the word Presbyter is mentioned, which T. C. and others
do allege; supposing the most of the places in the scriptures, councils and
fathers, where (...) or, Presbyter is mentioned, to be so many proofs of your
governing Elders? call you this a weak proof, which does not only at once
bereave you of all those testimonies where Presbyter is mentioned, and wherein
your chief strength did lie; Sect. 4. His answer to the latter part, and to
the consequence inferred thereon.
but also prove, that there were no Presbyters but Ministers. This consequence
therefore was not to be denied.

And much less the other. For if there cannot be produced so much as any one
pregnant testimony out of the scriptures, councils, or fathers, mentioning or
meaning, any lay, annual, onely-gouerning Elders, with what proofs will they
urge them, or with what conscience can they obtrude them, as the ordinance of
Christ? An argument taken from the scriptures alone negative, was wont to be a
sufficient disproofe of any pretended ordinance of Christ; and shall not an
argument hold negatiuely from Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and all?

Notwithstanding, the consequence must needs be infirm and weak, for although
there be no proof of any Lay-annuall-onely governing elders, yet may there be,
and indeed is for all that, proof sufficient, for such only governing
Presbyters as are ecclesi^sticall, and and to be perpetual. Wherefore which
way soever the proposition lie, the consequence thereof I flatly deny, says our
ryming refuter.

But here I entreat the Reader to try the spirit of this Sophister. For if
himself acknowledge, that my meaning is, simply to deny the onely-gouerning
Elders; then can he not be excused from this imputation of setting himself to
wrangle against conscience. But so much he acknowledges, when he comes to
the assumption, for otherwise he could not have wrangled therewith. Page 12.
M. D. meaing (says he) is simply to deny all kind onely-gouerning Elders,
therefore I deny the assumption. His meaning was not to deny all, but annual
and Lay Elders, therefore I flatly deny the consequence.

Thus you see, how he is carried with a spirit of contradiction, not caring to
gain say himself, so he may seem to contradict me. But so far was the
consequence from being to be denied, Though by the refuter they were lewdly
united as afterward will appear.
because I mention Lay, and annual, that rather it was to be granted; These
words being added, ad maiorem cautelam, and distinctly propounded, to make the
consequence so much the stronger, and to signify that I spoke of all Elders
whatsoever, that are not Ministers, call them as you will, whether Lay, or
annual; or only governing Elders.

And here again, let the Reader observe, that the new sect of Disciplinarians
will not have such Elders as lately were in Scotland, and still are at Geneua,
and the Low Countries* No, they scorn such, those be Lay and annual, as you
have heard, but these may not be so.

Therefore let the elder sort of Disciplinarians be accounted wise, who, though
they were feign to yield that the greater part of their presbyteries should be
of the Laity, yet they did foresee that the Ministers would bear the sway (as
indeed they ought) because they were perpetual, the others annual, or but for
a short time; whereas these men, making the Lay Elders perpetual, and
referring matters to be ruled by plurality of voices, absurdly subject the
Ministers to be ruled and ouer-ruled by them, who, in the most
Countrey-parishes, are more fit to hold the plough then to sit at the stern
of the Church.

And so, desperate or frantic whether are they now grown, that although
they make their parish-Bishop the supreme officer in the visible Church; and
do hold that every parish has a sufficient and independent authority,
immediately derived from Christ, Supplicat. anno. 1609.
for the government of it self in all causes Ecclesiastical: Notwithstanding,
offer to submit their Bishop and his Consistory: yea, their whole visible
Church, with their whole managing of causes Ecclesiastical, to the oversight
and superintendencie of each Justice of peace.

Sect. 5. H^s answer to the assumption and first to the former part, that
Presbyter always signifies a Minister.
Having thus wrangled with the proposition, he sets himself also against
the assumption, containing the two aforesaid Assertions: The former whereof,
viz: that the word Presbyter, (noting an Ecclesiastical person, in the Church
of Christ) evermore in the Scriptures, Counsels, and Fathers, signifies a
Minister, he denies. For, if the word only be added* it is utterly false.
For I shall make it evident (says he) that the word Presbyter does sometimes
signify one that is not a Minister. A^ page 12.
And if it be left out, it will be false nevertheless. For it shall appear,
that sometimes the word is used for an Ecclesiastical person, that is no
Minister.

So that, by his own confession, all is one, whether the word only be
inserted or omitted, the contradictorie being one, and the same, that sometimes
it signifies one that is not a Minister.

But though he delay the Reader for his own proofs, (which I dare assure him
will not satisfy his judicious expectation) yet seeing he sets himself to
catch and snatch at every word, he should not have passed by those arguments
^hereby I proved my Assertion, and I am persuaded, would not, if silence had
not been his best answer. For a man of his Acumen, might easily out of those
few words have raised three syllogismes, which he could not so easily answer.
But the labor which he thought best to spare, I will undertake for him. For,
1. If the word Priest, (freed as it is in our Church, from the popish abuse,
and conceived without all relation to real sacrifices) be the proper English
of presbyter, as it notes an Ecclesiastical person, then presbyter signifies
a Minister only, and as well might question be made whether there were any
Lay-priests, as Lay-presbyters; but the former is true, therefore the latter.
2. That word, which in the Scriptures is confounded with Episcopus, or Bishop,
does signify a Minister only.

But Presbyter by their own confession, Call. in Tit.
is confounded with Episcopus, or Bishop.

Therefore presbyter, does signify a Minister only.

3. That word, which being in the Scriptures confounded with Bishop, does also
note such a person as by the Apostles rule must be (...), able to preach, does
signify a Minister of the word only; for in none but Ministers is that
property required.

But Presbyter is such a word, as being in the Scriptures confounded with
Bishop, does also note a person, who must by the Apostles rule be (...), or
able to preach. Therefore the word Presbyter, does signify a Minister only.




The latter part of his assumption (says he) in case he urge the words Lay,
His answer to the latter part of the assumption.
and annual, may perhaps be true, and his cause never the better, nor ours the
worse by it, it being enough for us, if there be Ecclesiastical governors,
which are no Ministers.You see then the cause of the new reformers, is not the
cause of other reformed Churches, as I said.

But seeing M. D. says he, is simply to deny all kind of only governing
Elders, I as plainly deny the assumption. So that both his propositions in
this Syllogism do want their armor of proof, and wait upon M. D. as two
poor servants upon their master for their cloth, before they can do him any
service.

Mark well the spirit of this man. For having denied without reason the
consequence of the proposition, being (even as himself propounds it)
undeniable, were it not that he cauilled with the words Lay and annual, which
in his a^swere to the ^ssumption, he confesses were not to be cauilled with:
and having barely denied both the former part of the assumption, which I
fortified by 3. reasons, which he could not answer, and also the latter,
without any show of reason, though the proof of the contradictory in both lie
upon him, (which course any man might take to answer the best argument that
ever was propounded,) notwithstanding he scornefully craketh, as if he had
done some great act, which might give occasion to leave fighting, and fall a
crowing. For my part, I greatly wonder a^ him, how he could either content
himself, or hope to satisfy his reader with such answers. For if it be a
sufficient answer to say. I fl^tly deny the proposition, and I do as plainly
deny (...) assumption; who cannot answer sufficiently any Syllogism
whatsoever? But if a man having thus answered, shall take occasion thereby to
insult over his adversary, verily as he deludeth egregiously his Reader that
is simple, so he makes himself ridiculous, if not odious, to him that is
judicious.

Sect. 6. ^:
Having seen how substantially he has dealt with the substance of each
proposition, let us now see how ma^nerly (...) he deals with the manner of
laying them down. For in regard thereof, he charge me with three no small
faults. First, inclination to popery: 2. falsehood: 3. contempt and scorn. The
which imputations, if he cannot make good by sound evidence, he will show
himself unmannerly in obiecting them.

How then proves he the first? He says, and says it again, that I delight
to call the Ministers of the Gospel by the n^me of Priests, which all but
those that are Popish, or desirous to please the Papists would rather forbear.

First, I deny that those which call Ministers by the name of priests, are
popish. For those worthy instruments under God, of that happy reformation,
which is among us, and separation from Popery, in the book of Common prayer,
in the book of Orders, and in other their writings, do ordinarily use that
name. And when they distinguish the Clergy into three degrees, they usually
reckon these three orders, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, therein imitating the
most ancient and purest writers, both of the Greek and Latin Church, who
seldom using the word Minister, distinguish the same degrees by words of the
same signification: viz. (...): Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, that is,
Bishops, Priests, Deacons.

Yea, but the Popish shauelings have appropriated the words to themselves., and
protestant writers find fault with them for calling the Ministers of the
Gospel by the name of Priests, to which purpose he alleges D. Whitaker, and
D. Raynolds Whereto I answer: of the word Priest, there are two uses, whereof
the one is an abuse, the other is the right and proper use of the word,
according to the native signification thereof. The abuse is, when it is ascribed
to the Ministers of the Gospel, as it is the English of Sacerdos, which
signifies a Sacificing Priest, and implies a relation to sacrifices. Thus the
Papists abuse the name when they apply it to the Ministers of their Gospel,
with relation to their sacrifice of the Mass.

And thus D. Whitaker denies both Sacerdos and Priest (as it is the English of
Sacerdos) to agree to the Ministers of the new Testament. Ad Duraeu^.
The right use of the word is, when it is used as the English of Presbyter, and
without any relation to sacrifice. For Presbyter is the name which the Apostles
and all antiquity gave to the Ministers of the Gospel, Conf. with Ha^t.
4^3.464
and the English of Presbyter is Priest, as D. Raynolds does confess, where
also he shows, that the Papists play the sophisters in using the word Priest,
after a double sort, the one, as it is derived from Presbyter, the other, as it
signifies the same that Sacerdos. For Priest, as i^ signifies a man appointed
to Sacrifice is (...)
Sacerdos, and not Presbyter. The name which the Apostles give a Minister, (...)
is Presbyter and not Sacerdos.

And again, though the Apostles call the Ministers (...), whence our English
name of Priests is derived; yet they did not call them priests, as the name of
priest has relation to Sacrifice. For the word Priest has two meanings: the
one of (...), the other of (...), whereof the one is given by the Apostles, but
does not implie authority to sacrifice; the other, does implie authority to
Sacrifice, but is not given by the Apostles. It is plain therefore, that the
word Priest is rightly used in the signification of presbyter, but abused, as
I said, in the Sermon, to signify Sacrificing priests.

I confess, that the first Translators of the Bible into English, in these
latter times, being, (as D. Fulke says) not Lords of men's speech, Mo^ trium
literarum tyrannus.
but ouer-ruled by the popish use of the word, as it were by a tyrant, did give
the name priest to Sacrificing priests, as the papists do, and having so done,
when they were to translate (...), Presbyteri, which do not signify
Sacrificing priests, but Ministers of the Gospel, they avoided the name, least
they might seem with the papists, to make the Ministers of the Gospel
Sacrificing priests. And so I do confess that their purpose was godly, who
translated presbyters not priests, but Elders: though I dare not say that the
cause was sufficient. For if they had called Sacerdotes Sacrificers, as the
French do in their Translations, Sacrificateurs.
they might safely have given the Name Priest to the Ministers, and left the
name of Sacrificers to the popish priests.

The name Priest says D. Fulke, we do not find fault with, as it comes of
presbyter, Co^r. Rhem. in Matthew. 23. S. ^. In Act. 14. S. 4.
but as it is commonly used for a Sacrificing priest.

Again, as for the name priest, as it is derived of the Greek, we do not
refuse it, but rather wish that the Sacrificers of the Law had never been
called by it.

And again more fully, we do not contend for the terms, nor refuse the name
priest, In Lam. 5 l. 4.
when it signifies the same whom the Apostle calls presbyter: but when by
abuse and vain cauillation of papists, it is taken to signify a Sacrificer.

To conclude therefore, according to the true Etymology, we confess the name
to be good, and do use it in our service book and otherwise, knowing that it
implies no sacrificing, as you most fondly and ridiculously would enforce out
of it. But in Translation, because by common speech a priest was taken for a
Sacrificer, and the Translators had no other name, whereby to call the
Sacrificers of the Law, but priests, to make and observe that difference which
the holy Ghost always observes in the New Testament, they call the one
Priests, the other Elders. But if they had called the one Sacrificers, and the
other priests, that priests might have been known to differ from Sacrificers,
it had been a small matter, and perhaps hindered you of this vain quarrel. It
is not a popish abuse therefore to call Ministers priests, but to give the name
priest, to Sacrificers.

And likewise, it is an abuse of Innouators, to give the Name presbyter, or
(...), (as it is a name of an office, and not of age,) which is proper to
Ministers, to them who are no priests. Who, though they may be called
Saecerdotes, that is, Sacrificers, as all Christians may, yet presbyters they
cannot truly be called.

But how does he prove that I delight to have the Ministers of the Gospel
called priests? Forsooth because there was no necessity laid upon me to call
them so, but might have contended my self with the name of Ministers.

Whereto I answer, that I mention the Name Priest, (the proper English of
presbyter;) as a necessary argument, to prove that (...) or presbyter, does
signify a Minister, as I showed before, affirming that they might as well make
question, whether there were any Lay-priests as Lay- presbyters. For this was
the first argument of the three; to none whereof the refuter could see any
necessity laid upon him to answer. It is necessary with him (belike,) to
wrangle with words, but not to answer arguments.

Now to conclude my answer to his first accusation, I appeal to the refuter
himself, and to all which either know me, or have read my other Books;
whether this imputation was laid to my charge, out of an upright conscience, or
not rather out of an uncharitable desire to bring me, though unjustly, into
the dislike of the people, to whom the Name priest is odious, as D. Fulke
truly notes; because they know not the Etymology of it. Matt. 23.
For if they knew that the English word Priest, as also the like words in
French and Italian, were derived from Presbyter, and that (...), or Presbyter,
is the name which the holy Ghost and all antiquity ordinarily gives to the
Ministers of the Newe-Testament; They would rather condemn them that abuse,
either the name Priest, to Sacrificers, as the Papists do; or the name
Presbyter, whereof Priest is the true English, to signify Lay Elders, as our
Disciplinarians do: then he would mislike our Church, which uses the word
aright? Namely, as the proper and true English of Presbyter, from whence it is
derived, without any relation to Sacrifices at all.

Whereunto this is to be added, that howsoever our first Translators in King
Henry his time, avoiding the word priest, translated Presbyteri, by Elders;
Yet by Elders they understood no other but Ministers. As appears by this
speech of M. Tindall.

Presbyteri Page 251.
All that were called Elders (or Priests, if they so will,) were called BB. also.

Sect. 7. His second accusation, charge me with untruth.
Secondly, he charge me with untruth, for saying, that question might as
well be made, whether there were annual Ministers, or Lay-Priests, as annual
or Lay-Presbyters.

But this I proved, when I demonstrated by three arguments, that (...) or
presbyter, does signify none but a Minister. Ad Page 13.
For if (...), or presbyter, as it is the name of an Ecclesiastical office,
does signify nothing but a minister or priest, as I proved; then that
question might as well be made of Ministers or Priests, as of presbyters.

But how I pray you does he convince me of falsehood? with an if begging the
question, if Presbyter does not signify only a Minister, then question may be
made of Lay-Presbyters, though not of annual Ministers or Lay-Priests. As if
he should have said, if you will grant me the question, and deny that which
you have already proved, and I could not answer, then I shall be able to charge
you with untruth. Yea, but the untruth of my speech was before manifest in the
former part of the answer to the proposition. His words there, be these: that
the consequence is weak, because there might be other Presbyters in the
primitive Church, though the word Presbyter did evermore signify a Minister.

So that this was but a poor shift for want of proof to refer the Reader as
often he does to another place, where he should find little to the purpose. In
both places, as you see, all that he can say is, that seeing it might be there
were Presbyters that were not Ministers, and if there were such, which I have
disproued, then that would appear to be false, which I have proved to be most
true.

I come to his third accusation: Sect. 8. The third i^putation of scorn and
contempt.
It would be noted says he, with what contempt and scorn he calls the
Elders in question, Lay-annuall-onely-gouerning Elders. And it would be noted
say I, with how bad a conscience he wilfully depraueth the manner of uttering
my words, to give some small color both to his unconscionable denial of the
proposition which himself contradicted in answer to the assumption; and also
to this forged calumniation. For whereas I propounded the words distinctly with
a Comma or note of distinction, lay, annual, onely-gouerning Presbyters, using
these diverse titles more fully and certainly to express whom I meant; he has
joined them with notes of union Lay-annuall-onely-gouerning Elders, as if I had
in contempt and scorn of them, framed a nickname for them, compounded of all
these words.

And whereas he says, that I call them lay in disgrace of the Elders, and
reproach of those who stand for them, as though they committed the government
of the Church to such as are base and private persons: the truth is, that he
disgraceth the laity intollerably, as if there were no lay persons but base
and private men. Indeed if I had said, that such men as be not of the Clergy,
are to be called idiotae, (as some of your side would have them called, rather
then lay men) you might have had some colorable pretense for this accusation.
But when with Calvin we divide the whole Church into the clergy and laity:
Instit. li. 4. c. 12. li. 1.
under the laity, we comprehend the noble as well as the base, and public
persons as well as private, and men of excellent gifts as well as Idiots.

And it is but a seely exception, which you do usually make, that you would
not have them called lay, but Ecclesiastical. For first, that word does not
distinguish them from the Ministers. And secondly, because Ecclesia the Church,
being divided into the Clergy, and laity, those which be lay men (as not
being of the Clergy,) may have Ecclesiastical offices, and in regard thereof
may be called Ecclesiastical officers, as Church wardens among us, officials,
Chancellers, and commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical, as well as your
Elders, whom though you make Ecclesiastical officers, yet you cannot deny
them to be Lay Elders.

Let our great Clergy men says he, know and be all men by these presents
given to understand etc.
Now to avoid this imagined disgrace, he would have all men to take notice,
what manner of persons they would have by prayer and imposition of hands
ordained and set a part to this Ecclesiastical office: not such as each parish
is like to afford, but according to the vtopicall Idea conceived in their own
brain. And though there must be many of them in every parish, men religious,
of great gravity and piety (you may be sure) and of good years, adjoined to
the Ministers: and though matters are to be carried by plurality of voices,
every one having the like right of suffrage; yet we must not in any case
think, that they will overrule the Minister, but be altogether ruled and
directed by him. De grad. Ministr. cap. 11.
Beza says, that in the sacred senate, which is called the Presbytery, there
is no superiority of degree or power, but a distinction of order; and that all
matters are managed by common and equal right in giving their voices: the
whole consistory being for that cause called a Presbytery, because, howsoever
otherwise there may be distinction of degrees among them, yet in this common
function the Ministers are made equal with the Elders, and the Elders with the
Ministers. So that they wrong them shrewdly, who shall say, where all have
equal right, and where all things are swaied by the greater number of voices,
the one or two voices at the most of the Ministers, are like to be ouer-ruled
by the multitude of Elders.

Sermon. Sect. 2. page 8. Sect. 9. The dese^^ of the 2. se^^ on, serving prove
that there are (...) sound testimonies for Lay Elders and that the^ are but two
that I thou^^ worth the a^^swering.
For although many places are usually alleged out of the scriptures and
fathers: yet I do unfeignedly profess, that to my knowledge there are only
two allegations, which I esteem worth the answering. The one, out of 1. Tim.
5. the other out of Ambrose on the same chapter. Where the words of the
abortiue book seemed bitter and spiteful enough, Ad page 1.
there our refuter follows that copy: otherwise to that potion of worme-wood,
he adds an infusion of gall, as in this place. It is strange says the
abortiue book, that a man of such skill in logic as I acknowledge D. D. to
be etc: and more strange that one of his temper etc: is it fit for D. D.
modesty, etc. Not so, says the libeller, you must not attribute any skill in
logic, or modesty to him now: we must make our followers believe, that
since he has written in defense of the Antichristian calling of the prelates,
those petite popes, he has lost all modesty, and skill in logic too. For if
we cannot answer his arguments, nor take away his answers, let us disgrace
his person: so will our followers be sure to preiudge any thing he says, and
which is our desire, the people whom he thought to satisfy, shall be kept in the
same terms they were wont. But my purpose is not by reciting his words to
spread this part of his spiteful libell, and much less by vouchsafing an
answer to multiply words in this kind with so odious a wrangler. To pass by
therefore his barking eloquence, or dogge-rhetoricke, the reader is to
understand that in this section and those which follow, I endeavor to defend
the two former assertions, viz. that they can neither prove that the word
Presbyter does signify any but a Minister, nor yet produce any one pregnant
testimony mentioning or meaning their lay or onely-gouerning-Elders.

Now I would know of my adversary for my learning, how such a negative as this
should be maintained. Whether, by induction of particulars, or by special
insisting upon the instances which the adversaries give: not the former, for
that were to examine every sentence in the scriptures, councels and fathers,
which were infinite. If the latter, should I in one of the least parts intended
in the Sermon, where I had promised brevity, stand upon every particular
allegation which could hardly have been discussed in a whole Sermon? or should
I make choice of some of the principal, which are of more weight then all the
rest? the latter course I was necessarily to make choice of. And therefore
supposing our opposites to insist on those two testimonies, which are of more
weight then all the rest, yea then all, that all of them can say besides in
this cause, I endeavored to defend my assertions against them. And although I
did not intend to dispute Syllogistically as the opponent, but to defend the
truth as the respondent; yet this my defensive answer is brought to the
anuill, and forged into a Syllogism after this manner.

If neither Paul in 1. Tim. 5.17. nor Ambrose upon 1. Tim. 5.1. (he should have
added, which two allegations only I esteem worth the answering, or which two
are of more worth then all the rest) do not mention or mean any lay or only
governing Elders, then no pregnant testimony can be alleged to that purpose.
But neither does Paul, nor Ambrose, in those places mention or mean any lay or
only governing Elders: Therefore no pregnant testimony can be produced to
that purpose. The refuters three wonders.
In answering the proposition, he wonders, and wonders again at three things.
Sect. 10.
First at my want of modesty, in that I gloriously despise, and insolently
reject the judgments of those divines, who besides those two, allege many
other testimonies, when I say, I esteem these two only worth the answering.
Whereunto I answer, that I esteemed no other, in that shortness of time,
worthy to be stood upon but those two.

And if that answer will not suffice him, I plainly profess, and yet without
despising the judgment of any learned man, that these two testimonies are the
two maine pillars, whereon their whole building leans: and that, as their
other testimonies depend upon the presupposall of these as giving witness to
their Lay Elders: so these being taken from them, the rest have scarcely any
probability in them, but may as easily be rejected, as objected. And this I
will say, because I am so indignely provoked, that if my adversary, or any of
his copartners, can produce but any one testimony, either out of scriptures,
or fathers, that either may be compared with either of these, or that in it
self, without an eye to these, has so much as any show of a necessary or
demonstratiue proof, I will then be content, that they should wonder, and
wonder again, at my want of modesty.

Secondly, he wonders at my want of logic in making so feeble a consequence.
The consequence, though it be not absolutely necessary, yet upon supposall,
that these are the two chief proofs, without which, all they can say besides
for their Elders, is scarce worth the answering, it is necessary. For, if any
testimonies prove their Elders, then certainly the chief, and which be, as it
were, all in all.

Thirdly, he wondreth at the weak proppe, whereby this consequence is
underset; which is my unfeigned profession, that to my knowledge, there were
only these two allegations, which I esteemed (in that shortness of time)
worth the answering; which was reason sufficient for my insisting on those two
alone. If this proppe be so weak, let his knowledge, and the skill of all his
adherents, show but one other testimony comparable to these two. But that he
may leave both wondering and wandering, I do again plainly and confidently
affirm, that the whole cause of the Lay Elders relieth on these two places;
and therefore as in the former negative assertion I did imply; so now I
express, a challenge to him and all his partakers, to produce any one such
testimony if they can. This challenge I say was employed, when I professed that
they cannot allege out of the scriptures, Councels, or Fathers, any one
pregnant testimony mentioning or meaning, any lay, or only governing Elders.

Sect. 11. Ad page 15.
To this challenge, what does our insulting refuter, reply? Sundry others
besides these two I both could and would allege, and approve also (I doubt
not) to all judicious and indifferent men, His answer to the challenge.
but that others before now have said enough to that purpose. And at this time,
(professing my self an answerer only, not an opponent) it is not my The
abort^^e book has the^e word, no man can reasonably look that we should
dispute the question.
part to dispute the questions, but d^fend the truth, so far only as M. D.
opposes to it in his Sermon.

In which words, though he dares not, as you see, accept the challenge, yet he
sets a good face upon it. For whereas I said, and say again, that besides
these two testimonies, they can produce no more of any moment in comparison; he
says, that he both could and would produce many more. He would, I do not
doubt, if he could: but because he does not, you may be assured, he cannot.
What he, and all of them can do, he performs afterward, when he will let
you see that they can strike also; and yet that all, is as nothing to these two.

The reasons of his refusal are two; the one, because others before now, have
said enough to that purpose; but that I denied upon certain knowledge. And
what they have said to any purpose, has been confuted also before now; and
that, though often repeated, and often refuted, as threedbare as it is, himself
does afterward produce, having nothing to say, that has so much as a good
show of a necessary proof, as hereafter shall appear. The other, because he
being the answerer only, and not the opponent, it is not his part, neither can
it reasonably be expected at his hands, that he should dispute the questions,
but only defend the truth.

The which is a sophistical, and if I may freely speak what I truly think,
a lewd shift, to elude my answers and the reasons thereof, and to delude the
unlearned Reader.

For who I pray you, be the opponents and plaintiffes in this controversy, we
or they? Those which be in possession do not use to be plaintiffes.

Neither would there have been any controversy betwixt us, if they did not
oppose: forasmuch therefore as they are the opponents, urging the pretended
discipline; we the defendants maintaining the established discipline among us;
it is a sufficient defense of our cause, especially where we hold the
negative, if we show that their proofs are not sufficient; and their proofs
are not sufficient, which do not necessarily and ineuitably prove, that which
they urge.

Neither let them ever hope to bring in their Lay Elders, till they have
necessarily proved that they ought to be admitted.

But the lewdnes of this shift is then most manifest, when as I ex professo
undertaking to answer their objections, he will needs make me the opponent:
and where it is required of them, necessarily to prove what they say, and is
sufficient for me, to show that their proof is not necessary; absurdly,
against all order of disputation, he makes himself the respondent, and me the
opponent. So that my answers must be put into Syllogismes, and his proofs be
thought sufficient, if he can but say, that they make not against his cause,
though they do not prove it. Examples of this shameful dealing we shall not
want long. For in the discussing of their allegation out of 1. Tim. 5.17. which
is their chief objection, it is most manifest, that they are the opponents,
and I the answerer. But my adversary makes me the opponent, and my answers
must be oppositions, and so put into Syllogismes: and in the end as you shall
see, whereas that is the only place in scripture which they can with any show
of necessary proof allege for their Elders; he would make the Reader
believe, that he has acquitted himself well, if their Elders be not
necessarily disproued out of that place. When indeed, if they be not
necessarily and ineuitably proved out of it, they have no ground nor warrant
for them in the scriptures.

Again in my preface (where the refuter understands me to have made a
challenge, Sect. 12.
and as it were to have cast down the gantlet) as I desired they would
distinctly answer my arguments, so also that they would produce their proofs,
(for it is an easier thing to pull down, at least to seem so, then to set
up:) in his answer to my preface, he accepts of the offer, acknowledging
that I desire nothing but reason; and does not only promise to satisfy my
desire, but also bears the Reader in hand, that he has brought sound
demonstrations, pregnant proofs, arguments strongly grounded upon the
scriptures, etc: but now, when he should come to the performance, when I again
renew the challenge; auerring, that they have no such proofs, and exspecting
that he should produce them, if he have any: his answer is, that alas he is
the respondent, and it cannot with any reason be exspected, that he should
bring proofs or dispute the questions.

And that you may yet more fully note the absurdity of this disputer, (of
whose great acts in this book, I hear no small vants) though he say, it is
not his part to produce proofs, neither can it with reason be exspected of
him, which before he confessed to be reason: yet this is to be understood of
needful proofs, whereby he might prove something, which is by us denied. But
if there be any thing, which seems to make for his cause, and which we freely
confess, as for example, the consent of diverse protestant writers with them
in some things, there he will be sure, to be plentiful in proving of that,
which no man does deny.

And this is the chief thing, which he and his consorts in compiling this
book, have labored. As if they should have said: do you indeed grant, that
diverse protestant writers expound such and such places as we do? and do you
not deny, but that diverse of them agree with us in some things? Mary that
will we prove at large, and although reason grounded on scripture, testimony
of antiquity, and no small consent of new writers be against us: yet we will
make a fair muster of those new writers which be for us: and though the
greatest part of them be parties in the cause as well as our selves, yet we
will allege them as witnesses without exception, and will never have done with
alleging their testimonies. For though the learned will easily discern the
desperateness of our cause, yet the unlearned sort, who are carried away with
shows, seeing such a multitude of learned men on our side, will still cleave
unto us, etc.

And this shall suffice (says he) for his proposition. To his assumption I
answer, by denying it, and affirming that both these places do speak of
only governing Elders, and that I will clear (as the opponent, no doubt) by
the places themselves, which now come to be handled.

CHAP. IIII. Containing my first Reason, why Lay Elders are not proved, out of
1. Tm. 5.17.
Sermon. Sect. 3. page 9. The Presbyters (says Paul) that rule well, let them be
accounted worthy of double honor, especially they, who labor in the Word
and doctrine. From whence they gather a distinction of Presbyters, or Elders;
that some are Governing Elders only; others, also Ministers. Whereunto I
answer, that not any of the Fathers, nor any other before our age, did ever
understand this text of any other, but of the Ministers of the word; they
conceiving of it, as if the Apostle had said, Let those Ministers or Priests
which rule well, etc.
THeir reason briefly stands thus: The Apostle in this place, does set down
2. sorts of Elders, the one, only ruling; the other laboring also, in the
word and doctrine.

Therefore besides the Ministers which labored in the Word and Doctrine, there
were other Presbyters or Elders, which were no Ministers.

This, as I said, is the principal reason that is alleged for the
Lay Elders, wherewith the Disciplinarians do wonderfully please themselves.

T. B. is so confident, that he judges them to be of no sound judgment that
will not acknowledge two sorts of elders to be contained in this place. D^
grad. Minist. ^. 13
Another T. B. that spied them under the wings of the 4. Beasts, Apoc: 4. says
plainly: they are blind, and of no understanding, that cannot or will not see
them in this place. T. C. setting some color upon Act. 14.23. to make it show
for Lay Elders, at length he says, Why should we follow conjectures? when S.
Paul, 1. Tim. 5.17. does declare what these Elders are? The author of the
counterpoison affirms, that the Apostle in express words, does in this place
set down their two sorts of Elders. And this is usual with them all, to
confirm their exposition of other places which are ambiguous, by this which
they esteem most clear.

To their reason I answered, by denying their antecedent, and because I would
not shake off the opponents with a bare denial as enemies, but satisfy them
as brethren, I yielded some reasons of my denial, which I set down in 2.
degrees. For whereas they urge the Lay Elders, as necessarily collected out of
this place;

First, I answer, there is no necessity that the place should be understood
of any other but Ministers. And secondly, that this place is so far from
concluding Lay Elders, that it does exclude them, or conclude against them.

The former again, I maintain by two reasons: The which I can well be
content that my adversary shall reduce into Syllogismes, so he would frame
them, as being the reasons of a respondent, that is, such as be propounded,
to show that there is no necessity of their inference from this Text. For that
as I said, is a sufficient defense for the respondent.

The first reason is this; If none of the Fathers, nor any other before our
age, did ever understand this text of Lay Elders, but all with one consent,
conceived of it, as spoken only of Ministers: Then is it not necessary, nor
yet likely, that Lay Elders are meant in this place.

For surely if there had been any such Elders in the Apostles times, the
ancient Fathers, which were near those times, had been more likely to have
noted these two sorts of Elders, then those who came so many hundred years
after.

But none of the ancient Fathers, nor any other before our age, ever understood
this Text of Lay Elders: but all with one consent, conceived of it as spoken of
Ministers.

Therefore it is not necessary, nor yet likely, that Lay Elders are here meant.

Of this Syllogism he denies both the the parts. Sect. 2 Ad Page 1^ His first
reason of his denyal^ of the consequence.
And of his denial* of the consequence in the proposition, he gives three
reasons.

The first, because we may not argue negatiuely, concerning the sense of the
Scriptures, from the authority of the Fathers, etc.

Whereunto I answer, that I argue as affirmatively from the consent of the
Fathers, and of all before our age, who always conceived of these words, as if
the Apostle had said, Let the Ministers or Priests which rule well, etc: as
negatiuely: Neither do I reason as he would make me to argue, that either
because this place is not by the Fathers expounded, of Lay Elders, therefore
that exposition is necessarily to be rejected: or because it is always by them
interpreted, as speaking of Ministers only: Therefore this interpretation is
necessarily to be received. But thus I reason, that this exposition is more
likely, which has the perpetual and universal consent of the Fathers, and of
all writers before our age, then that which not only has not their allowance,
but is clean contrary to their interpretation.

Whereunto I now add that, which my adversary will never be able to answer.

That exposition of the word Presbyters. 1. Tim. 5.17. which is agreeable to the
perpetual use of the word in Scriptures, Counsels, and Fathers, is to be
admitted, and contrariwise, that exposition thereof, which cannot be warranted
by any one example or testimony, either of Scriptures, Counsels, or Fathers,
(it being a word in all of them of frequent use) may not be admitted, and much
less urged, as the only true sense of that place.

But by the word Presbyteri to understand the Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments alone, is an exposition thereof, agreeable to the perpetual use of
the word, in Scriptures, Councels, and Fathers; and not one testimony can be
alleged, where the word (signifying an Ecclesiastical function) does import
any other but a Minister: and co^trarywise, to understand the word Presbyters
in that place, as containing in the signification thereof Lay Elders, is such
an exposition of that word as cannot be warranted by any one example or
testimony, either of Scriptures, Councels, or Fathers.

Therefore the former interpretation, expounding that word of Ministers alone,
is to be received; and the other, including Lay Elders, is not to be admitted,
and much less is it to be urged, as the only true sense of that place.

For my part, until my adversary shall be able to disprooue this assumption
by some one instance, which I am well assured he shall never be able to do: I
will take it for granted, and in my conscience am fully resolved, that the
Apostles meaning in this place, is all one, as if he had said; Let the
Ministers or Priests which rule well, etc: which argument, if no more could be
added, is sufficient to show, that Lay Elders cannot be proved out of this
Text.

Sect. 3. His 2. reason, because their exposition favoring Lay Elders, has
the consent of new writers.
His second reason is this: That interpretation which has the consent of the
new writers, though contrary to the exposition of the Fathers, is to be
preferred before that which has the consent of the Fathers.

The Interpretation of the word Presbyters, as implying Lay Elders, has the
consent of new writers.

Therefore that is to be preferred. The proposition is propounded. page 20.
lin. 22. etc: the assumption is set down, page 16. lin. 17. etc.



To the parts of which syllogism before I answer, I must know of the
disputer, whether he mean the consent of all the new writers, or not, for if
the word all be not added, the proposition is absolutely to be denied. For it
is against sense, that the opinions of some new writers should be preferred,
not only to other, and perhaps as many, and as learned new writers; but also
to the general and perpetual consent of all writers before our time. If it be
added, then is the assumption manifestly false. For that exposition has not
the consent of all, nor as I am persuaded, of the most protestant divines.
Notwithstanding, he endeavors to prove both.

That the proposition is true, His proposition examined, and whether the
authority of old writers, or new is to be preferred.
he appealeth to my conscience. Whence he shall receive this resolution. Where
the contrary expositions of the old and new writers concern a point of
doctrine, I would not incline to the authority of the new, unless they have
better reason then the old. For where the question is simply of authority,
which is the greater; I say with the Philosopher, that whereas witnesses be of
two sorts (...), some old, some new: Rheti. l. 1. c. 15.
(...), the ancient are of greatest credit. If it concern a matter of story or
fact, as whether there were any Lay Elders in the primitive Church, or not; I
would without comparison, give credit to the ancient writers, who lived in, or
near those times, then to them who lived 13. or 14. hundred years after them.

Yea, but the points being in question in these days, and not in the Fathers,
the new writers have been the more occasioned to search into them.

Tell me then, why was not this point called into question in the Fathers
times? Was it not because there was none to contradict their judgment? And
does not this prove, that the Assertion, which in this cause is opposite to
antiquity, is to be condemned of novelty?

Again, you say the judgment of the new writers is to be preferred, because
they have more searched into the matter, as being now in question.

Whereunto I answer, that in this very respect, the authority of the ancient
is to be preferred, for the reason which the Philosopher gives in the place
before alleged. (...). The old be of most credit, for they are vncorrupt, or
impartial. Whereas contrary wise, the new writers, which oppose themselves to
us, who follow the ancient, are parties in the cause; and therefore to be
preiudged as partial.

And whereas he challenges me to show if I can, what mou^th (...) to think
that the spirit of God, who enlightened them, as touching the substance, in
which they were so sound, did fail them in this particular: I ask him whether
he does think they were free from all error or mistaking in the expounding
of Scriptures? and if he thinks that they did fail in any particular, I
would desire him to show what moves him to think, that the spirit of God, who
enlightened them as touching the substance, in which they were so sound, did
fail them in that particular? This therefore was a mere color: or if there
were any weight in it, might not I more justly make the like demand of him
concerning the Fathers; what reason he has to think, that the ancient Fathers
who had such profound knowledge in the greatest mysteries of divinity, whereby
they confounded the most subtle heretics, should be ignorant of those things
which appertain to the outward government of the Church? or what reason he
has to imagine, that the writers of our age do know what was done or not done
in the primitive Church, better then the Fathers, that lived in those times?

Sect. ^. His assumption answe^ed (...) the (...) of (...) writers.
As touching his assumption: if he speaks of all the new writers, it is
manifestly false, if not of all, it is to no purpose, neither does it need to
be proved, because it is not denied. Yea, but the naming of 25. writers, and
boasting of more in a case not denied, though to the learned and judicious it
seem a very idle and vain flourish, and in this writer, who is copious only
in this kind, a manifest sign of a desperate cause, which cannot be fortified
by better proofs, which he forbeareth to allege under a poor pretense, that
he is the answerer, and yet spends above 20. whole pages in his book, in
proouing what we deny not, that many writers are partly of his mind.
Notwithstanding, it is a matter of great content to the unlearned Reader, to be
led along, (for so he speaks more then once) by such a worthy leader,
from one to another till he has seen the whole Troop, and has heard the
commendation of every one.

For that also is to be noted, how he plays the egregious Mountae ^banke, in
commending and setting forth his authorities in most glorious manner.

Luther that rose up as a bright morning star, even another Elias of these
times. Bullinger, that learned and faithful Pastor of the Church of Zuricke:
Peter Martyr, that burning and shining lamp of Oxeforde: Zanchius, a man
admirable for judgment and pains: the very Oedipus, (says the abortiue
book) of the Schoole-mens riddles: Chemnitius, the worthy examiner of the
Tridentine Council, and ouerthrower of their heresies: Old Father Nowell, in
his book published by authority, and commanded to be taught: D. Whttaker,
who like another David, fought valiantly against the popish Goliath. D. Fulke,
one of the wonders of our days, etc. Just commendations I confess of worthy
men, whose memories are blessed.

Notwithstanding when he has all done, one good reason alleged, though it
were by the meanest of his 25, had been of more worth then the allegation of
all their authorities, though they had been as many more. But this was done as
I said, to please the unlearned: for otherwise where the new writers gainsay
him and his fellows, as they do in the points of their newfound parish
discipline, they set not a button by them all.

But if bragging of all, or almost all the new writers, he name but 25, Sect.
5. Not all those whom he cites, do expound this tex^ of Lay Elders.
and stoop very low for some of them, (especially if you consider that they
are to be weighed with the ancient Fathers) and if of the 25. he thought good
to cite but 8: now if all these 8. be not clear on his side, what shall we
think of the rest? Surely Luther, though he tell him that he rose up as a
bright morning star, even another Elias of these times, will not be gotten to
speak a word for him. Aduers. falso nomi^. Episc. 331.
For in the place by him cited, he does not so much as speak of this Text,
and much less expound it: But he speaks only of the 19. verse, Receive not
an accusation against an Elder: where understanding Elder, according to the use
of the word, in the first verse of that chapter, as a word of age, as well as
of office, (as Chrysostom also does, though he understand, verse: 17: of
Ministers only) he says, that how soever the popish Bishops, against whom
he writes, did expound this place of Priests, that is themselves, that they
might be the more free from accusation or reproof: yet the Apostle speaks of
Presbyteri, that is, Elder and grave men, (for such then, bare rule in the
Church) meaning thereby most plainly ancient Ministers, as appears by the
words following; which the refuter has Sophistically and shamefully perverted.
For the Apostle does not speak, De ijs Episcopis (says Luther,) and
Sacerdotibus, qui iam nostra aetate plerumque sunt aetate florenti and pene
adolescentes, sed de senibus and grand^^ bus in Scriptura peritis loquitur; Of
those Bishops and Priests, which now in our time are, for the most part of a
flourishing age, and in a manner young youths, and lusty gallants, (which he
meant in the words going a little before, when he calls them Penelopes
sponsos,) but he speaks of such as be aged, and ancient men, skillful in the
Scriptures.

Observe now our Sophysters dealing.

First he says, Luther expounds this verse of Lay Elders; when as Luther
does not so much as speak of this text: 2. that he should say, their
Lay Elders ruled in the Church then, when he plainly speaks of ancient and
aged Ministers. 3. that Luther denies simply, that Paul speaks of BB. and
Priests. For so he cites his words; Neque enim loquitur de Episcopis and
Sacerdotibus, when he says, that he speaks not of such Bishops as were in
his time, young and lusty men; but of such as were aged and skillful in the
scriptures.

Bullinger in neither place alleged, does say, that there were elders in the
chuch, which were not ministers, but rather the contrary. For on 1. Tim. 5.17.
he understands that text, as requiring the stipend of the ministry, and
seems to confound the words Ministers and Presbyters in that sentence which
the refuter cites by halues. Cum emin varia sint in ecclesia munia non vnius
quoque generis ministri aut Presbyteri sunt. For where Bullinger says,
Ministers or Presbyters be not all of one kind, by Presbyters, meaning no other
but Ministers, he cites him thus: the Elders are not of one kind, leaving out
the word Ministers. And upon the words following in the nineteenth verse, he
says, as to a diligent and good Minister of Christ sustena^ce is due, so also
defense, the reason of which law is this, a Presbyter is the Minister of truth,
and truth procures hatred, Dec. 5. Sermon. 3.
etc. In his Decades he says, the Elders in the Church of Christ, are either
BB. or otherwise prudent and learned men added to the BB. who albeit they did
not teach always as did the BB. yet were they present with them that taught,
etc. Where he does not speak of lay and unlearned Elders, but of wise and
learned men of the Clergy.

The rest, in the places cited, do acknowledge a second sort of Elders,
besides those which chiefly labored in the word and doctrine, but when they
were of the laity or Clergy they do not mention.

As for D. Fulk in his answer to the Rhemists on 1. Tim. 5.17. he giving two
interpretations of that place, prefers that whereby the Apostles words are
understood of Ministers or Priests only, that as every one of them labors
more in preaching and teaching, he is so much the more to be honored.

But of his assumption this is more then enough, seeing this is not the
question between us, whether any of the new writers do stand for the new
Elders, for that is confessed.

His third reason for the denial of my proposition: Sect. 6. Ad page 21. His
third reason: because my exposition is not made by any of the Fathers.
that if that consequence is good, my interpretation of this place is naught,
seeing it has not so much as the naked shade of any father to cover it. Naked
to cover! But what fig leaves can he find to cover this naked, and shameless
untruth? For whereas my exposition consists of two points, the first and
principal that by Presbyters I understand, Ministers, as if the Apostle had
said let the Ministers that rule well etc: Primas. in 1. Tim. 5.17. (...) 1.
Tim. ^. (...) This is to rise well, to spare or forbear nothing for the care of
the sheep. Sect. 7.
the second that by the words (...) which commonly are translated governing
well, I understand the commendable performance of their duty in general, for
the latter I alleged the authority of Jerome and of the Syricke Paraphrast,
to whom others might be added; for the former, I have the general consent of
all the Fathers and of all writers before our age, who have expounded this
place, and not one of them can be produced to the contrary; and yet he is not
ashamed to say, that my interpretation has not the patronage of any one Father.

And thus much of the proposition: in confuting whereof, when he has spent
five whole pages with very ill success as you see, he concludes with as vain
and causeless a brag, as his success was badde.

The assumption (that none of the Fathers nor any before our age did ever
expound this text of any but Ministers) though he dares not plainly deny it;
yet that it may appear, how he sets himself to wrangle with every thing,
he seeks all the corners of his wit to find some starting holes: out of which
he may easily be driven, if the Reader will but remember these two things.
First, that I speak of such as have before our age, (meaning hoc seculum this
ce^turie or hundred of years) expounded this place, either in their
commentaries, or in their other writings, which be extant. For it were foolish
presumption to rely upon their judgments, who, either did not write of it, or
whose writings are not extant, whereby their judgment might be known.
Secondly, that I am in this point the respondent, answering their allegation
out of this place; and that the refuter is the opponent; who, if he will say
any thing to the purpose, must prove by good instance the affirmative, that
some one of the Fathers, or some other before our age has expounded this place
of Lay Elders; and not absurdly urge me, being the respondent, to prove the
negative; which as it cannot be otherwise proved, but by alleging, that no
instance can be given to the contrary; so might it be easily disproued by any
one instance, if any such could be given. If these two things be remembered, the
bare recital of his five exceptions will be a sufficient evidence of his folly.
First diverse of the Fathers may so have expounded it, though their writings be
not come to our hands: there is one instance, therefore some have so expounded
it. 2. Some of them as Augustine, Ierom, Chrysostom, etc: have so written,
that they may well be so understood, (which is utterly false for they
understand by Presbyters, no other but Ministers) ergo, etc.

3. Others write so briefly, that they expound not the former words of this
text, ( because Presbyter to them was as plain as Minister to us) ergo, etc.

4 The ancientest of them ( as Ignatius, Polycarpus, Tertullian, Origin,
Cyprian, etc:) whose works are now extant, though they left nothing written
upon this place, yet (no doubt) they understood it of Lay Elders; for they
always in their writings (wherein Presbyter is often mentioned) do understand
thereby a Minister of the word, yea but they were most like to bear witness
to this truth. No doubt for three of them, Ignatius, Polycarpus, and Cyprian,
were Metropolitan Bishops; and by the other two, Tertullian and Origin, who
were Presbyters you may easily conceive, what manner of men the Presbyters (who
were distinguished from Bishops) were.

Yea but in many men's judgments (who would feign have it so) they did give
witness to this truth, though they left nothing written upon this place.



But the fifth passes all, for therein he gives plain instances I warrant
you of some before our age, etc. For Luther, Bucer, Bullinger, and diverse
others in their time, understood this place of Lay Elders, therefore diverse
before our age. The antecedent he takes for granted, as well as he might,
because as we heard before how Luther who does not speak of this text, by
Presbyteri understands verse. 19. ancient Ministers, and Bullinger expounds
it not of Lay Elders; so, what Bucer says, we have not yet heard. But the
consequence he proves by such an argument, as shows he was very near
driven, because D. King in a Sermon preached in the year 1606. says, In Cant.
8.1^.
that the Geneua discipline had not at that time seen the age of a man, though
you should reckon the age of a man not at an 100. but 70. years, and well
might he say so. For in Geneua it was first conceived in the year 1537. ^
when Calvin having with Farell and Viret, in the year before, attempted, as
Beza says; Ecclesiam compo^e^^ and had drawn the first draught of it, got the
assent of the Senate and people of Geneua on the 20. of July, 1537. howbeit
before the year, ^
1541. it was not established, having in the mean time been banished together
with Calvin.

But why should time which is so precious be spent in co^futing such seelly
shifts, whereof even the refuter himself is by this time (I hope) ashamed.

CHAP. V. Containing my second reason, why Lay Elders are not proved out of 1.
Tim. 5.17.
The 2 reason that Lay Elders (...). Tim. 5.17.
Sermon. Sect. 4. page: 9. Neither does the Apostle indeed note two sorts of
Elders, as they imagine, but two duties of the Ministers, etc: to page 11. med.
IN these words is set down the second reason of my exception against their
allegation of 1. Tim. 5.17. proving that there is no necessity this place
should be understood, as they imagine, of Lay Elders. The reason stands thus:
If the words may very well be understood of two duties of Ministers, the one
general, to be good presidents, the other special, to labor in the word and
doctrine, in respect whereof the Apostle requires double honor to be yielded
unto them, then is there no necessity that this place should be understood as
they imagine of Lay Elders:

But the Antecedent is true: Therefore the consequent.

I might have reasoned thus. If diverse and sundry expositions, all of them
understanding this place of Ministers alone, may be given, and each of them
more probable or likely then that which is for the Lay Elders; then is there no
necessity, nor yet likelihood, that the place is to be understood of
Lay Elders:

But diverse and sundry such expositions may be given, as after you shall
hear.

Therefore there is no necessity nor yet likelihood, that this text is to be
understood of Lay Elders.

But I thought it sufficient to insist in this one exposition, which seems to
me to have been the very meaning of the Apostle. For seeing the word (...), or
Presbyter, as it notes an Ecclesiastical person, does always in all other
places, in the writings both of the Apostles and Fathers, signify a Minister
or Priest, and no one testimony can be alleged to the contrary: what sense
is there, that it should otherwise be expounded here, unless the other words
of the sentence did enforce so much. But that they do not, seeing they note
only two duties of Ministers, for (...), is the general duty of the
Ministers, that is, to be good presidents; and to labor in the word and
doctrine, is the special duty, for which especially honor is due to them. I
had once thought, that the especial duties of a Minister had here been
mentioned, the one respecting his behavior only; the other, the ministry of
the word, unto which all the duties of a Minister may be referred. But I did
consider, it would be objected, that the meaning of the Apostle was not, that
double honor should be given to Ministers, that only lived well, unless they
did also preach: for in another place where he would have Ministers to be
honored and loved (...), more then abundantly for their work sake, 1 Thessalonians.
^ 12.13.
he joins these together, (...), which labor among you, and which govern
you in the Lord: and therefore I insisted in this exposition, against which,
well may my adversary cavil after his fashion, but he can take no just
exception; especially, if the emphasis or force of the word (...), be not
neglected.

As for his triuiall gibes, Ad page 22.
which are frequent with him, of going lame upon both feet, of going upright
on one leg and halting of another, of halting on the former leg, and
limping of the hinder leg: they are fitter for him to use, then for me to
answer. But though he boasts, that my Syllogismes hitherto have been lame
on both feet; yet I trust the judicious Reader will testify with me, that he
has not been able as yet, to disprove any one proposition, or assumption,
which hitherto has been produced. And I am verily persuaded, for all his
gibes, he will have no better success in those which remain.

Sect. 2. His answer to the 2. reason, and first to the proposition.
As touching the Syllogism, which now he is about to oppugn, he seems to be
glad of mine amendment, that whereas hitherto I have gone lame on both feet,
now I go upright on one leg, the consequence of the proposition being good.
But yet he says I am never the nearer, for on my assumption as it were on the
other leg, I halt down right still.

But shall the proposition escape so, think we? No, I warrant you: though he
can object nothing against the matter, yet he must needs cavil at the words,
for he will play small game rather then s^t out: two faults he finds with
the words, charging me that I speak unfitly and unkindly. unfitly, when I say
the Apostle does here note two duties of Ministers, the one general, the other
special. What logic or reason is there in this kind of speech, says he.
What opposition betwixt these two duties? so much is he set upon opposition and
division, that he thinks there is no reason in that speech, where is no
opposition.

And what is the logic that this logicaster does teach me? forsooth I should
have said, that the Apostle first speaks of the Ministers duty in general,
and afterward in special. Thus, in disprouing the manner of my speech he does
unwittingly approve it: such is his judgment. For if the Apostle first
speaks of the duty in general, and afterward in special; then does he
speak of two duties, the one general, the other special. For when you speak
of a duty in general, do you not mean a general duty? and when you
mention a duty in special, do you not mean a special duty? Yes, your
self do speak so page 25. where you say, the duties are in the former
clause, general; in the latter, special.

Neither does that need to offend you, that I call them two, when you speak of
them in the same place in the plural number. For if the one be not the other,
as you will grant, then there is no question, but they are two. But, if want of
opposition was the fault of my speech, what opposition I beseech you is in
yours? or what logic was in this, to require opposition betwixt the whole and
the part? or if you conceived of Duty as the Genus, and of this speech as a
distribution thereof, what logic was it, not to discern an opposition in a
distribution of duties into general and special? for general and special I
hope be opposite.

All this notwithstanding, my logic master chideth me for want of logic.
If a man says he should say, there are two duties of a Logician, the one
general, to reason well, the other special, to judge well, would he not be
thought to speak of logic, without logic? Yes verily, if in so speaking
he should intend a perfect distribution of logical duties: Which,
notwithstanding your cauills, might thus be performed.

The duties of a Logician are either general, as that which is comprehended in
the definition of Logic, to reason well: or special, as those which be
contained in the distribution of Logic, to invent well, and to judge well.

But, if in imitation of the Apostles speech, you should say, Logicians that
reason well, that is all good Logicians, are to be honored, especially those
which are judicious, or which do excel in judgment, I might note out of this
speech, not two sorts of Logicians, but two duties or faculties of all
Logicians, in respect whereof they are to be honored; the one general, to
reason well, the other special to judge well, disposed not in a distribution,
but in a comparatiue sentence, which some Logicians call axioma relatae
qnantitatis, wherein the duties of a Logician are thus compared; that whereas
Logicians are to be honored for the performance of their (...) take liberty,
to disgrace, revile, slander, and libell, against our betters, we may not be
touched in the least degree* neither will we stick oblique to revile him, By
appl^ ^o him. ^ ^6.16.
that shall but say, we imagine that, wherein we foulely, if not perniciously
err. For your misinterpreting of this one place, is the very foundation of
your Presbyterian discipline, and the vr^ging of that discipline, the very
cause of that pernicious division which is amongst us. And thus much of the
proposition.

The assumption was this; Sect. (...) but a (...) shift.
that this place may very well (for so much is sufficient for me, being the
respondent, to say, but I do also add) and in mine opinion, is to be
understood of two duties of Ministers: the one general, the other special. In
respect whereof, double honor (...) due unto them; This difference only being
put, that whereas double honor is due to all Ministers, for the performance of
their duty in general: yet especially for their pains in the Ministry of
the Word, they being chiefly to be counted worthy of double honor, who excel
that way.

This assumption containing the exposition of this place, he oppugneth with
all his force, cauilling that it is but a bare shift, and such as will not
serve my turn: and this he undertakes to prove by three reasons, which will
prove nothing, but his own want of judgment.

For, Ad page 2. and ^4.
as touching the first: Is not this extreme want of judgment, to allege the
manifold expositions of this place, as a matter of great disadvantage to us;
when as indeed, it notably disaduantageth his cause? especially, to triumph and
insult over us for this cause, Saying Lo here, how their tongues and pens in
the exposition of this place are divided, as in the building of the Tower of
Babell: and how they having no sure hold to trust unto, 2. King. 22.
fly from one to another, as Zidkia^h went from chamber to chamber, to hide
him.

Now whether this multitude of expositions be an advantage to his cause, or
disadvantage, the Reader may hereby judge.

For seeing the learned men of our side do reason thus, as I noted before, (
if diverse and sundry expositions of (...) text (...) be given, not including
your Lay Elders, every one whereof is (...) probable th^n yo^rs: then is it not
necessary, nor yet likely that your Lay Elders be here meant.) Who sees not,
but by how which the more expositions can be given in this ki^^e, by so much
the less necessity there is to admit your exposition of Lay Elders.

But our men do thus reason: D. Bilson, page: 130. The fourth reason (says
he) that holds me from receiving this construction (implying Lay Elders)
is, that I find diverse and sundry interpretations more agreeable to the Text,
and more answerable to S. Paul's meaning then this. His reason stands thus.
If diverse and sundry interpretations are found more agreeable, etc. then that
for Lay Elders, then have we no reason to yield that Lay Elders are meant in
this place. But diverse and sundry such interpretations may be given, which he
proves, by producing four of them.

Likewise D. King, as your self do cite him, arguing to the same purpose,
says, How many interpretations may be brought to divert and disappoint
Lay-gouernours? and then alleges diverse.

Of all which interpretations, (which by Presbyters understand Ministers) it
may truly be affirmed, that they are more agreeable to the meaning of the
Apostle, then yours. Seeing they expound the word Presbyter according to the
perpetual use of it, in the writings both of the Apostles and Fathers: whereas
of your use of the word, after all your pains and laying your heads, and helps
together, you are not able to produce any one testimony, no not one.

Wherefore, look how many such probable expositions may be given,
understanding this place of Ministers only, they are so many proofs, that
there is no necessity of admitting your interpretation.

Sect. 4.
But let us now examine your reasons, whereby you would prove my exposition to
be but a bare shift, and such as will not serve my turn.

His 1. Reason that my exposition is a bare shift.
The first. If others opposing to Lay Elders have brought 8. or 9. expositions,
which are but shifts to avoid them, all of them being diverse among themselves,
and from that which M. D. brings, then this 10. of his, is but a shift also:
but the former is true, therefore the latter.

If the reader desire to have examples of such lame legs, as the refuter
talks of, here he may have a couple. For as touching the proposition: seeing
among different expositions, one only is the true and proper meaning of the
place: may not this exception be taken against any exposition be it never so
true, being but one amongst many? For suppose the other 9. were but shifts,
how will it follow, that therefore the tenth is so: Must all expositions be
false or unfit, because the most are such?

If those 9. expositions be shifts as you say, and if yours be false as I have
proved, this is so far from preiudging the truth of mine, which is the
eleventh, as that it is a strong presumption to confirm it.

For, seeing it is to be presumed, that some one true exposition of this Text
is known; and seeing all other known expositions of this place, are either
supposed by you, or proved by me to be false: it remains therefore, that
this eleventh is true: The consequence therefore of the proposition is stark
lame.

The assumption also is false. For those diverse expositions are not shifts, as
this shifting Sophister cauilleth, but being all (I mean so many as by
Presbyters understand Ministers) more probable then that which stands for
Lay Elders: (for that does not so much as touch the subject whereof the Apostle
speaks) they are so many proofs to avoid the necessity of their Lay Elders,
which by the^ are as necessary, urged and obtruded upon us. And this was his
first reason, which he brought, to make it appear that my exposition is but a
bare shift.

His second, brought to the same purpose, either proves it thus, Sect. 5. His
2. Reason.
or not at all. If M. D. utterly reject 8. of the aforesaid expositions, and
rests upon one of those 4. which D. Bilson propounded, then his exposition is
a bare shift.

But M. D. rejects 8. of the former expositions, and rests upon one of
those 4 which D. B. propounds.

Therefore his exposition is a bare shift.

In the proposition, there is not so much as a show of a good consequence,
unless it be presupposed (which I have disproued) that D. B. expositions are
but bare shifts. His assumption, which in plain terms he sets down,
contains two untruths.

For first, if you understand my words, as they may be understood of them that
conceive me to be the answerer in this place, and as my self even now
propounded them, then does it not follow that I utterly reject all other
expositions: because, in adding this to the former, I seem to prefer it
before the rest.

Again, that I rest in one of those 4. expositions, which he recited out of D.
B. is not only false, but if you respect his intent, sclanderous also, as all
other his references are, as to any that will compare them, may easily appear:
For not any of D. B. 4. expositions understands the former branch as
containing the general duty of a Minister. Howbeit some of the examples which
he produces, together with his explication of some of them, do well agree
with my exposition, as you shall hear in my answer, to his third reason,
which being his shoot-ancor, if it fail him, his Lay Elders are like to suffer
shipwreck. Hear his words.

Sect. 6. Ad Page 25. His third reason, co^taining 3. Syllogisme^
Thirdly, that it may appear, that M. D. is besides the true meaning of the
Apostle, in the sense he rests on, let us weigh the Apostles words well, and
we shall find them clearly and evidently, to speak of persons, and at the
most, but indirectly of duties. The Elders that rule well, especially they: can
any man be so blind as not to see, that these Elders, and they must needs
signify persons, who must be counted worthy of double honor?

No, says M.D. but this account rises from the consideration of their duties.
Even so, we deny it not: but may it not be so* and yet 2. sorts of Elders
here noted? Yes verily. The elders that faithfully discharge their duty in
governing the Church, are worthy of double honor: especially those who labor
in the Word and Doctrine. Is there any thing in this Scripture thus understood,
to shut out 2. kinds of Elders? Are not the duties in the former clause
general, in the latter special? Yes says he, but for all that, they be
indeed two duties of the Minister only.

Of which discourse, the best that I can make, is this: If the comparison
betwixt the persons evidently noted in this Text, does seem to favor the
distinction of Elders, into 2. sorts, and the comparison between the duties
indirectly noted, does not hinder the said distinction, that, then is there
nothing in this Text, to exclude two sorts of Elders.

But the antecedent is true in both the parts thereof:

Therefore the consequent.

The former part of the antecedent is proved thus:

The persons here mentioned are in the comparison noted to be of two sorts.

Elders are the persons here mentioned:

Therefore Elders are in this comparison, noted to be of 2. sorts. The latter
thus: The distinction of duties into general and special: does not exclude
two sorts of Elders:

For the general agrees to both sorts.

The distinction of duties here mentioned, is into general and special:

Therefore the distinction heree mentiond, does not exclude two sorts of
Elders.

By the refuters maine conclusion, it is evident, that he has gotten the
wrong end of the staff. For whereas this place to Timothy, is the chief;
and, as I judge, the only place to speak of in the Scriptures, which all of
them without exception object, and most confidently urge, as necessarily
including and concluding their Lay Elders, in answering whereof, this part of
my Sermon is spent: my adversary by his Sophysticall shifts, in making me the
opponent, and himself the respondent, would make the Reader believe, that he
has acquitted himself well, if this place be not against Lay Elders.

But the Reader must remember, that it lies upon my adversary, and those of
his side, out of this place, invincibly, and ineuitably to enforce Lay Elders,
or to confess that they cannot be proved out of the Scriptures. Neither will
it suffice him to say, they may be here meant, unless he can necessarily prove
and demonstrate, that they are, and must necessarily be meant in this place.

Otherwise I may grant his maine conclusion, without any prejudice to our
cause: when the chief thing which he proves is, that the principal, and
almost only place objected by themselves for Lay Elders, does not make against
them. But if the only place, which can to any purpose be alleged for them,
do exclude them, which in the last reason I do endeavor to prove; being as
yet not proceeded so far, but only to maintain that they be not here
included; then is the cause of the Lay Elders most desperate. The which, that
it may appear, I will not refuse, seeing my adversary has found this
starting hole, to examine his proofs.

And first, I deny the connection or consequence of his proposition. Sect. 7.
Answer to his first syllogism
For though neither of the things by him named did exclude Lay Elders; yet
there are two words in the Text, which do plainly show they are not included.
The one is, the word Presbyters, which always signifies the Ministers, and
never signifies the supposed Lay Elders.

For if this Text include them, then are they included in this word Presbyteri,
the Text speaking of none but such. But that word, being a word of order proper
to Ministers or Priests, does not include them, nor can any one example or
testimony produced to that purpose: Therefore Lay Elders are not included in
this Text.

To the 2.
The other is double honor, or maintenance appointed to all the Presbyters, of
whom Paul speaks; from which Lay Elders are excluded, as I shall show in my
third reason.

As touching his second Syllogism, I answer first to the proposition, that
the persons here mentioned, are not noted to be of two sorts: but that the
comparison is between two duties belonging to one sort or order of men; or if
you will, between men of the same order, in respect of their duties; the words
being as plain in the language of the Apostles, and of all the Fathers, both
Greek and Latin, as if it had been said in our language, Let the Ministers or
Priests, etc: And this I hold for a most certain and undeniable truth.

The comparison between the duties, I explane thus, that as to Presbyters or
Ministers double honor is due, for their duty in general: So especially, for
that which is the principal: the comaprison being between the general or
whole duty, and a particular, or part of the duty, which is preferred, as
being the principal. The comparison between the persons, in regard of those
duties, and depending upon the former stands thus: that as all they that
perform the general are to be honored, so especially they, who in special
sort perform the principal.

Thus much then the words import, that as all Presbyters who demean themselves
well in their places, are to be accounted worthy of double honor: so
especially those that labor painefully in the Word and Doctrine.

Let us consider the like examples. All Counselors that demean themselves
well in their functio^s are highly to be honored, especially, those that are
good Patriotes, or Comon-wealthsmen. From whence it were absurd to infer,
that there is a sort of good counselors that be not good Patriotes. But in
this speech I note, in respect of the duties of counselors, that this is the
principal; and in respect of the persons, that they are chiefly to be honored,
who are in special manner such. Likewise (to use the refuters own example)
All Logicians that reason well, that is, all good Logicians are to be
honored, or well esteemed of: especially, those that are judicious, or that
have a special faculty of judging well.

It may not hence be gathered, that there are any good Logicians, that are not
judicious, or that cannot judge well. But I note, that as among the faculties
of a Logician, good judgment is the principal; so they which be judicious,
are most to be esteemed.

So, all good Servants are worthy to be rewarded, especially, those that are
faithful, etc: In like manner, when the Apostle says, All Presbyters or
Ministers, that demean themselves well: (that is, all good Ministers) are to
be accounted worthy double honor: especially those which labor in the Word
and Doctrine: We may not collect from hence, that there is a sort of
Presbyters worthy of double honor, which do not labor in the word. But the
meaning of the comparison is, that as among the duties of Presbyters, or
Ministers, Preaching is the principal: so they chiefly are to be accounted
worthy of double honor, who labor; or if you will, who in special manner
do labor therein. And this special manner is noted in the word (...): For
(...), is to labor painefully, and unto weariness. Which pains is to be
esteemed, as well by diligence, in the study of the Word: 1. Tim. 4.3. Attend
to reading and doctrine.
as either by the frequent, or laborious delivery of the Doctrine. The
comparison therefore is so far from being made of all Elders, as they
imagine; that it is not of all Ministers, but only of those which be good. And
the greatest distinction of persons, that can hence be gathered is this, that
among good Ministers, there are some, who are more especially to be counted
worthy of double honor for their pains in Preaching.

Page 7. and 8.
Now because the refuter refers you to D. Bilsons preface, and I promised
even now to acquaint you with some of his examples and explication thereof; you
shall well perceive, that my exposition, though it be none of the four which
he propounds, is not unlike to have the approbation of that most learned,
reverend man. Does not (...), (says he) that is chiefly (the note of
comparison) distinguish as well things as persons, and not so well diverse
respects, as diverse subiects^ for example, if we should say, Magistrates that
govern well are worthy of double honor, specially they that hear the
complaints of the poor: Were he not very fansifull that would hence conclude,
there are therefore two sorts of Magistrates, one that govern well, another
that hears the complaints of the poor. Nothing is more common, then by this
kind of speech to note as well two diverse qualities in one man, as two sundry
sorts of men; yea thereby to prefer a part before the general comprising
that part. As teachers are to be liked for their learning, specially for their
knowledge in the scriptures: Good men are to be loved for their virtues,
especially if they be liberal.

To the assumption affirming that Elders are the persons here mentioned, I
answer, that no Elders are here mentioned but Ministers, and that Presbyteri
in this place are unfitly translated Elders: for though that be the english of
it, as it is a word of age, yet it is not the english of it (according to the
use of our language) as it is a word of order, noting (as it does in this
place) an Ecclesiastical function, but Ministers or Priests, who^ we do not
use in our common speech to call Elders. But hereof I have already spoken.

There remains his third Syllogism, Sect. 8. His 3. Syllogism answered.
concluding as before, that their two sorts of Elders are not excluded in the
distinction of the duties into general and special, because the general
duty which is to govern well, agrees to the Lay Elders as well as to
Ministers. To omit that which has been said of his conclusion, not concluding
as he ought Lay Elders, if he will urge them, out of this place, but proving
only that they are not excluded, which is but a poor proof, proving nothing
so well as that the cause of the Lay Elders is come to a low ebb. And yet for
this, all his proof is, that the general duty agrees to them: which indeed
is false, for the general duty meant by (...) besides godly life and such
attendance of the flock as might be common to lay Presbyters, implies the
fulfilling of their ministry, their going before the flock in the duties of
Gods service: their feeding of them with the word and Sacraments. Neither can
he be said (...), according to the Apostles meaning in this place; that does
not (which a Lay-Elder may not do) attend and superintend his flock in these
respects. This prosillogisme of his proposition, which is his only proof, he
sees and acknowledges to be before denied by me, holding that as well the
general as special duty (as they are here meant) be peculiar to Ministers,
and therefore not agreeing to their Elders, making me thus to say, yes says
he but for all that, they be indeed two duties of the Ministers only. His
proof therefore was nothing else but a mere begging of the question. And when
he should have proved that in the former part of the sentence (Let the Elders
that govern well) the Lay Elders are comprised, or else have ceased to urge
them: fair and mannerly he slippeth his neck out of the collar, putting me to
disprove it, and telling me, that otherwise I should offend (wherein as
respondents do not use to offend, so himself being indeed the opponent, in
this place is extremely faulty that is to say) in begging the question.

Sect. 9. The reasons (...) exposition examined.
Having therefore struggled to no purpose with my exposition of this text, in
the next place he sets himself, having no reasons to prove his own
interpretation, to strive (though with the like success) against those reasons
wherewith my exposition is fortified. Now in my exposition two things are
specially to be noted, as I have said; first, that by Presbyters I understand
Ministers only. The second, that by the words which are translated governing
or ruling well. I understand the whole duty of the ministry in general; and
not only governing in that sense, as it may be common to the supposed
Lay-Elder. The first is the principal, and already proved; though the refuter
had rather seem not to have seen the reasons, which he did not see how to
answer, then go about either to confute them, or to bring any testimony
where Presbyter does signify a Lay-Elder. But as he would not see the former
reasons, so either he does not, or will not see the force of the latter. The
first reason.
For whereas I prove that (...)* does signify the general performance of the
whole duty of the Ministers, being as much in effect as if the Apostle had
said thus: Those Ministers which fulfill their office as Jerome and Prim^sius
expound those words, that go out and in before their people as becomes them,
according to the phrase of the scriptures th^^e that demean themselves well
(as the Syriach* paraphrast does interpret the words) as well in respect of
their private conversation, as of their public administration; whereas I say,
I prove all this to disprove their inferrence for Lay Elders out of this place:
A^ page 26.
he, as though he saw no force of argument in all this, fears not to confess
all: and yet will needs maintain that inference, because forsooth all this may
be verified of Lay Elders, etc.

But say I, when you urge your Elders as from this place, your inference is
not, that what is said of Presbyters governing well, may be understood of
Lay Elders, but must be understood of them, or else you speak to no purpose.
Now, although there be some show of an inference, if by governing well were
meant only so much as might be common to Lay Elders; yet if you understand
these words in the general sense, you shall see not so much as a show of a
good consequence, nor any reason to move a man to make such an inference: which
I did verily think, that all men of understanding would readily have
conceived: and yet my lot is, to light upon such an adversary, as either does
not, or will not see it, unless it be beaten into him. Go too then: Is not this
your inference from this text, that because the Apostle requires double honor
to be given to such Elders as govern well, though especially to those which
labor in the word, that therefore besides those which labor in the word, there
are certain onely-gouerning Elders? Understand therefore those former words in
the general sense which I give, and your inference will be both senelesse and
false. Senelesse thus: the Presbyters that fulfill their office, or that
demean themselves well in their place, are worthy of double honor, especially
those, that labor in the word; therefore besides those which labor in the
word, there are certain only governing Elders: for of this inference there is
no sense, unless it be supposed, that none can fulfill their office or demean
themselves well, but your Lay Elders. If therefore you will ground them upon
this place according to the general sense which you seem to allow, call them
no more the onely-gouerning Elders, but the only good, or well demeaned
Presbyters. False, because the words being generally understood of the whole
duty of the ministry can be understood of none but Ministers; the general,
which includes the special, being peculiar to the Minister as well as the
special. Thus therefore I reason: Those words which import the performance of
the whole duty of the ministry, cannot be understood of Lay Elders but of
Ministers only:

The words (...), 1. Tim. 5.17. translated which govern well, import the
performance of the whole duty of the ministry in general:

Therefore the words (...), 1. Tim. 5.17. translate^ which govern well, cannot
be understood of Lay Elders but of Ministers only.



The proposition you cannot be so absurd as to deny, unless you will
attribute the performance of the whole office of the ministry in general to
your onely-gouerning-Elders. The assumption you freely confess, and all the
proofs (...) and yet with great ^^oath of idle and addle words, you (...)
maintain the contradictorie to the conclusion, (...) nor ^e^^^ng any force at
all in my proof, which yo^ valiantly overthrow by denying the conclusion. So
that I must conclude* that you extremely want, ^
either a sound judgment, or a good conscience.

Besides the former proof, I produce for the confirmation of my exposition,
the speech of the same Apostle, to the same Presbyters of Ephesus, Act. 20.28.
to parallel this. And whereas of my exposition there are two parts, the one
concerning the subject or parties here mentioned, whom I expound to be
ministers only, the other concerning their duties, in regard whereof double
honor is due to them, the one general, the other special: in both respects,
the one text does answer the other, as face answers to face in the water.
For first that Presbyters here are Ministers only, I prove thus: The
Presbyters to whom Paul speaks Act. 20. were Ministers only:

The Presbyters of whom he speaks 1. Tim. 5.17. were the same to whom he
spoke, Act. 20.

Therefore the Presbyters of whom he speaks, 1. Tim. 5.17. were Ministers
only.



Secondly that the duties both general and special are peculiar to Ministers,
I prove by this argument: The duties which Paul requires, Act. 20.28. are
duties required peculiarly of Ministers.

The duties for which double honor is due, 1. Tim. 5.17. both general and
special are the same with those which Paul requires, Act. 20.28. therefore
the duties for which double honor is due, 1. Tim. 5 17. are duties peculiarly
required of Ministers.



This latter Syllogism my expert adversary observed not: the former he
flingeth after his manner into a connexiue Syllogism. For though his forge do
scarcely afford any other, yet he has gotten a pretty smacke of Syllogizing
that way, were it not that his Syllogismes for the most part, are too long by
the half. But here he surpasses himself, for he has cast my whole
Syllogism into his connexiue proposition, and in his minor repeateth at large
both the proposition and assumption.

But let us see what he says to these Syllogismes. In the first he only
denies my proposition, viz. that the Presbyters, Act. 20. were none but
Ministers: which I must confess in that brevity I took for granted, because
I thought it needed not to be proved. For seeing that verse is not only
generally understood, (even of them which stand for Lay Elders, writing not
(...), Calvin, in Act. etc. D. Whi^ak de pon^. Romans page 1
but commenting upon, or otherwise expounding that place) of Ministers, but
also is alleged both by protestants and papists to justify the calling of BB.
I did presume, that it was to be understood of such only as are Ministers at
the least. But that which before was for brevity omitted, shall now be
supplied. First therefore I argue thus: All those that are called BB. in the
acts and writings of the Apostles are Ministers of the word. All the Presbyters
to whom Paul speaks, Act. 20.28. are called BB.

Therefore all the Presbyters to whom Paul spoke, Act. 20.28. were Ministers of
the word.

Or thus: Lay Elders are no where called BB.

All the Presbyters, Act. 20.28. are called Bishops:

Therefore none of those Presbyters were Lay Elders.

Shall I need to prove any of the premises. Are our Presbyterians of late
grown so absurd as to deny them? What? are not all BB. Ministers, and are
your Lay Elders grown of late to be Bishops? did not our refuter page ^ affirm
that these Presbyters, Act. 20. are Angels and Bishops, and that Angels are
pastors? and are Lay Elders, Angels and pastors too? ^ie for shame! and yet so
absurd is our refuter, as to say that some of these Elders whom Paul calls
Bishops, were not Ministers, but their lay or onely-gouerning Elders.

Sect. 11.
But if either reason or authority will prevail with him, he may easily be
confuted: my reason I frame thus: All Episcopi or Bishops, must by the Apostles
rule (which is general) be (...) able to teach, 1. Tim. 3.2. that is as he
expounds himself, Tit. 1.9. holding fast the faithful word, according to
doctrine that they may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and convince
the gainsayers.

But not Lay Elders, nor any but Ministers, do need by the Apostles rule to be
(...), able to preach in that sense that he expounds it, Tit. 1.9. For on
those words Calvin observes, that it is required in the^, that they should be
learned, and endued with sound knowledge, and that their doctrine should tend
to edification, etc.

Therefore not Lay Elders, nor any but Ministers, are Bishops. As for
authority; let him show me any testimony of scripture, or of any sound
writer, old or new, that is not a party, using the word Bishop for Lay-Elder,
or any one that is not a Minister, Inst. li 4. c. 3. 8.
and I will yield to him the bucklers. Calvin, though a party, plainly says,
that the scripture uses promiscuously these words, Bishops, Presbyters,
Pastors and Ministers; to signify those who do exercise the ministry of the
word. And having entreated of them, in conclusion he says, that as yet he had
not spoken of any other functions but such as consist in the ministry of the
word. And in another place, although he coll^teth out of 1. Tim. 5.17. two
sorts of Presbyters, Calvin. in Tit. 1.5.
yet he says, that the Presbyters mentioned, Tit. 1.5. are by the context
manifested to be no other, but Doctors or Teachers, because Paul presently
after calls them Bishops.

Page 101.
The author of the book de Ecclesiastica disciplina, and of the defense
thereof, ingenuously confesses, that only pastors and teachers are Bishops,
and that ruling Elders are not comprehended under the name Bishop, and so far
is he from comprehending them under the title of Bishop, that although he were
resolved to find a room for them, 1. Tim. 3. yet he durst not comprise them
under the title and description of a Bishop (though the Bishop be all one with
Presbyter, Tit. 1.5.7.) but shrowdeth them under the title and description of
Deacons, as hereafter we shall show. Again, all pastors of Christ's flock are
Ministers only: All the Presbyters of Ephesus, were pastors of Christ's flock:
therefore they were Ministers only. Or thus: Lay Elders are not Pastors of
Christ's flock (of other flocks perhaps they may.)

All the Presbyters of Ephesus were Pastors of Christ's flock:

Therefore they were not Lay Elders.

That they were pastors I prove thus: Bishops set over the flock of Christ by
the holy Ghost to feed the Church of God, are pastors:

The Presbyters of Ephesus were such, Act. 20.28.

Therefore they were pastors. In Act. 2
And that Calvin confesses more then once. And our refuter also in the place
before alleged; from whose confession I argue thus:

The Angels were pastors says our refuter, The Presbyters of Ephesus were
Angels, therefore the Presbyters of Ephesus were pastors.

But why should so plain a thing seem to be made doubtful with longer
proof? for if such Presbyters as were also Bishops and pastors, were any but
Ministers: then Presbyters, Bishops and pastors were Lay Elders also; and
Lay Elders were all in all.

And whereas he obiecteth, that Lay Elders may be comprehended under the name
Presbyter and Episcopus, because D. B. says, that these words (...) Bishop,
Presbyter, Deaco^ or Minister, are often so largely taken, as that they comprise
all Ecclesiastical functions: I answer in a word, by Ecclesiastical
functions, he means only the functions of the Ministry, including neither
your Lay Elders, nor your Lay-Deacons, no more then our Churchwardens and
Collectors for the poor.

As touching the latter Syllogism which the refuter saw not: Sect. 12.
The proof of the proposition depends upon the former Syllogism. For if the
Presbyters to whom Paul spoke, were Ministers only as has been proved, then
the duties which he requires of them only in that place; he requires
peculiarly of Ministers. The assumption affirming that the duties both general
and special, 1. Tim. 5.17. are the same with those, Act. 20.28. I explain in
the Sermon, showing that (...), which are the words translated to govern well,
and contain the general duty, is the same with attending to themselves and
their flock, Page 14.15.
which I did more fully deliver in the Sermon of the dignity and duty of the
Ministry (which the refuter himself does seem to approve) showing that
(...) is carefully to attend to themselves and their flock. To themselves,
that they may be precedents, and as the holy Ghost speaks, (...) patterns
and samplers of a godly life. For this in the Apostles phrase is (...) to be
presidents of good works. Tit. 3.8.14.
To the flock also they must attend. First, by ouerseeing and watching over
them. Secondly, by feeding them in the ministry of the word and sacraments;
Thirdly, by praying for them both publicly and privately. The special duty
which is to labor in the word and doctrine, is the same with feeding the
flock of Christ, which is also noted as the special duty, Act. 20.28.

The refuter though he saw not the reason, yet he would be sure to contradict
my assertion, and therefore stumbling upon the proposition, Ad page 28.
he says, that neither of the duties mentioned in the Acts are restrained to
Ministers only. For to attend to the flock is all one says he with (...)
which is more general, and the special duty of feeding which he confineth to
the word and doctrine, is often used for governing also, as Mat. 2.6. Apoc.
2.27. and 7.17. and 12.5. and 19. 15. Grec. schol. in Act. 14.23.

The truth of my proposition, as I said, depends on the former Syllogism, as
upon a sure hold, and the duty signified, 1. Tim. 5. by ruling well: and Act.
20. by attending to themselves and their flock, being applied (as in both
places it is) to Ministers, and importing, as he has confessed, the whole
duty of the ministry in general, must be confessed to be restrained to
Ministers. As for the word (...) which in this pla^^ is truly translated to
feed, besides the proper sense wherein sometimes it is used, as Luke 17.7.1. Cor.
9.7. Iud. 12: it has indeed 2. metaphorical significations in the Scriptures:
translated from shepherds, to civil or spiritual pastors; the one, as it is
applied to Princes, and civil Pastors, and so it signifies chiefly to rule;
John, 21.1.* Act. 20.28 1. Pet. 5.^*
the other, as it is attributed to Spiritual Pastors, and so it signifies
chiefly to feed with spiritual food. For our Savior commanding Peter, if he
loved him to feed his sheep: (which text the Papists, understanding the word
(...), John. 21.1^ 16.17.
as the refuter does, of ruling abuse to prove the Popes supremacy) expounds
(...), by the word (...), which signifies not to rule, but to feed. To feed
(...) flock, says Raynolds, to perform^ the duty of Pastor unto Conf. with ^
461.
It is true, that authority of guiding and governing his flock is employed also
in the signification of the word, but it is a pastoral authority, given to
none but pastors, and to them, unto this end, that they may feed the flock.
Which end is noted by Paul. Act. 20.28. to feed the flock: as also, by our
Savior himself, Luke 12:42: where the Lords servant is said to be set over
his household, to this end, to give them their food in due season. Call. in 1.
Pe^ 5.2
For therefore are they called pastors, that is, such as do feed.

Calvin speaking of this word, in 1. Pet. 5.2. says, the name of Presbyter,
contains in it the duty of feeding: And the definition of the word is to be
known. Because the flock of Christ, Pasci non potest nisi pura doctrina quae
sola spirituale est pabulum, cannot be fed but with pure Doctrine, which is
the only spiritual food. Hence it is, that Pastors and Doctors, (which some
would distinguish) are in the scriptures confounded. As Ephesians: 4.11. For whereas
the Apostle when he would note diverse functions, uses notes of distinction,
saying: Christ gave some to be Apostles, some to be Evangelists, etc when he
comes to Pastors and Doctors, he uses a note of copulation. For he does not
say, some Pastors, and some Doctors; but some pastors and Doctors, using the
latter word, as the explication of the former, Epist. 59. ad Paulinum.
and nothing that by Pastors, he means such as be teachers. Upon which words
Augustine says thus: Pastors and Doctors, whom you would have me to
distinguish, I think are one, and the same. For Paul does not say, some
pastors, some Doctors; but to pastors joins doctors, that pastors might
understand it belongs to their office to teach: of the same judgment is
Sedulius and Muscul: and some others

In the places, which the refuter quoteth, the word (...), is not applied at
all to Ecclesiastical persons: but either to Christ; and to him, either as our
King, and then it signifies to rule (as Mat. 2.6. cited out of Mi. 5.1. and
Apoc. 12 5. as it is usually paralleld with Psalm. 2.9. Apoc. 19.15. compared
with v. 16.) or as our pastor and doctor, and the^ it signifies to feed, and
so ought to be translated, as Apoc: 7.17. (where, to our hunger and thirst, v.
16. his feeding and leading us to the waters of life is opposed:) or else it is
applied to all the faithful, who in Christ are made Kings, as Apo. 2.27.
Apoca. 1.6. In Act. 14.23.
The Greek scholiast, in the place quoted, has no such thing: But is alleged
by T. C. to another purpose, for the proof of Lay Elders (as we shall hear)
which perhaps was the cause of this allegatio^, But on the place in hand, In
Act. 20.28.
upon those words, Attend to your selves, and the flock: he says that Paul
(...), enioyneth the teachers two things to be done: and notes also, whom Luke
called ver. 17. Presbyters, to be called in this verse Bishops: either says
he, because presbyters or ministers also, must superintend the flock: (...),
or else he calls Bishops here, such as indeed be Bishops: and in like
manner, on 1. Pet. 5.1.2 with some parallel with Act, 20.28. He notes that
(...), fellow-Elder: in that place, if it be not used as a word of age, does
import (...), the honor of a Bishop, as if he had called himself their fellow
Bishop. For in the book of the Acts also, Bishops are called Presbyters. and
by (...), he understands the Clergy. (...) says he, (...). He calls
Cleru^, (which is translated inheritance) the sacred company. Even as we now
also do call it, that is to say the Clergy. Which exposition if we follow,
then those presbyters to who^ Peter writes, prescribing unto them how they
should (...), That is (says Calvin,) Episcopatu fungi, exercise the office of
a Bishop, and noting their authority over the Clergy, were such as we call
bishops: But of that, by the way.

Now if the presbyters, Act: 20. were ministers and teachers as I have proved,
and as all writers, almost, even those that are parties in the cause do teach:
then by (...), we are to understand the duty of feeding, Cons. w^ Ha^^. p^
which belongs to pastors and teachers, and will never be proved to belong to
Lay Elders.

The refuter having with such success as you see, endeavored to maintain, Sec^
that the presbyters, Act. 20. were as well Lay Elders as ministers, and that
the duties both general, of attending to themselves, and the whole flock, and
also special of feeding the Church, were required, as common to Ministers with
Lay Elders (which assertions I have confuted, with evidence of truth) in this
exposition, or opposition rather, he does so please himself, as that he
doubts not to retort my Syllogism upon me after this manner,

If the presbyters spoken of Acts 20, 28, be not only ministers, but governing
Elders also, and the same with those. 1. Tim, 5.17. then the presbyters spoken
of 1. Tim. 5.17. are not only Ministers, but governing Elders also:

But the presbyters spoken of Acts 20, 28, are not only ministers, but
governing elders also, and the same with those 1. Tim 5, 17

Therefore, the presbyters spoken of 1. Tim. 5.17. are not only Ministers, but
governing Elders also.

Here this great Logick-maister, that takes upon him to teach, and to
comptroll me in matters of Logic, bewrays himself to be a Logicaster, or
smatterer in Logic: For an entire and a better Syllogism, concluding the
same question as I noted before in his Analyzing of mine, is here tumbled into
the proposition; and the proposition and assumption thereof, not only idly,
but with disadvantage to himself, if he had meant to have proved it, repeated.
But because he has been at some pains with me this way to show his own
ignorance, I will teach him to make his sillogis: thus: The Presbyters to whom
Paul did speak, Acts 20.28. were not ministers only, but Lay or governing
Elders also:

The Presbyters of whom he speaks, I. Tim. 5.17. were the Presbyters to whom
he spoke, Acts. 20*28.



Therefore the presbyters of whom he speaks, Tim. 5.17. were not only
ministers, but Lay, or only governing Elders also.

This proposition which is but part of his own assumption, when he shall be able
to make good by any sound proof, I will subscribe to his Lay Elders. For
whereas he for want of better proof says, that he has already justified it
by the overthrow of mine, it is a most vain brag, as I hope it does
sufficiently appear to the reader. For what one reason, or show of reason has
he brought, or can bring, to prove that the Presbyters mentioned, Acts. 20.
were Lay, or only governing Elders?

CHAP. VI. Maintaining the third reason, that Lay Elders are not mentioned nor
meant 1. Tim. 5.17.
Sermon. Sect. 5. page 11. And that he speaks not there of Lay, or only
gouerning-Elders, it may further be proved, by plain evidence out of the
text. For seeing by honor in that place, the Apostle understands honorable
maintenance, which by their own confession, is not due to Lay Elders: it is
therefore certain, that this place acknowledges none such. Thus therefore I
argue:

To all those Elders, who are mentioned or meant in this place, the honor of
maintenance is due for their work sake.

To the Lay Elders, the honor of maintenance is not due for their work sake.

Therefore the Lay Elders, are not mentioned nor meant in this place, etc: to
page 13.


Ad. page 29.
THe refuter having neither learning enough to bear the weight of this
argument, nor wit enough to forbear it, in answearing thereto, he utters more
gall then would well become an honest man. The virus and poison of his
libelling speeches I leave to himself: The vir^s and force of his arguments
and answers, I will take upon me plainly to confute, and both here and every
where else, by the help of God, to put him to silence.

First (as his manner is) though he dares not deny the proposition of my
syllogism to be most true and undoubted, His cau^^ the prop
yet he must needs cavil with it: And because he has nothing to say against
it, he hops with it to wound some of our side, who among other
interpretatio^s of this place, have thought the former part of this Text might
more probably be understood of not preaching Ministers, or Deacons, etc: then
of Lay Elders. And although I would be loath to become a Proctor for unlearned
Ministers, especially, when learned may be had: yet thus much I will say, that
if the Disciplinarians do rightly ground upon this place a distinction of
Presbyters, into two sorts, that there be some preaching Presbyters, some not:
then this text does without comparison, favor the not preaching ministers more
the^ the Lay Elders. Because it is a most certain truth, which I have
manifestly proved, and which the refuter will never be able to disprove, that
by Presbyters, ministers only are meant. As for Deaco^s, (I mean not your Lay
Deacons) D. B. has better reasons to comprise them under Presbyters, then your
W. T. had under the name of Deacons, to understand your Lay Elders, though T.C.
himself did subscribe to his opinion. And whereas you challenge those reverend
men, for seeking by warrant of this place, to surcharge the Church with
maintenance of unpreaching Ministers and Deacons: I answer, they do not hold,
that in every parish such ought to be maintained (as you would have your
Presbytery erected in every parish) but where better, and more sufficient
Ministers cannot be had; which was the case of many parishes in England, at the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign, etc.

But all his spite is against the assumption: His spite against the assumption.
though he spend his spite, neither in disproouing it with force of argument,
nor in answering my proofs with any substance of reason, but in sophistical
cauilling and odious wrangling. For when he has said what he was able, I
cannot tell whether he does deny the assumption, or grant it, only he
cauilleth with my proofs of it.

My assumption was this: To Lay Elders, the honor of maintenance is not due
for their work sake. Hereunto I require a direct answer.

If he say that the honor of maintenance, yea, double honor, ^
that is, (as not only Theodore^, but T. C. also expound (...) plentiful
maintenance, is due unto them: he should have brought sufficient proofs, both
to confute the judgment of those learned Divines, who reformed (as directors)
other Churches, and condemn the practice of all reformed Churches, which
having those Presbyters, do not allow, neither do think themselves bound to
allow any maintenance at all to their Lay Elders: and also to persuade all
those reformed Churches which have them not, and which in many parishes are
either not able, or not willing to yield sufficient maintenance to one learned
minister, to erect in every parish, besides the Pastor, and the Doctor, a
Senate of Lay Elders, with purpose to undergo an unsupportable charge, and to
think themselves bound by the word of God to allow them all, and every of them
sufficient maintenance. But what one reason does he, or can he allege to
persuade this, or where does he go about to persuade it? If he say, according
to the judgment and practice of all Churches whatsoever, which either have
them, or have them not, that this honor of maintenance is not due unto them;
why does he not ingenuously confess, that which is ineuitably proved out of
the words, that Lay Elders are neither mentioned nor meant in this place. If
he say (as indeed that is all he does say) that my proofs are not sufficient:
what better proof would he require in such brevity, then the confession of
the parties? yea, but they do not confess it.

First therefore I will prove their confession. And secondly, I will
demonstrate, that the double honor of maintenance, though they did not
confess so much, is not by the word of God, due to their imagined Lay Elders
for their works sake.

Their confession I prove thus: Their (...) the tenanc^ due to (...)
What the learned reformers prescribed to be done according to Gods word as
they pretended, that was their Doctrine.

That there should be only governing Elders, elected out of the people or
Laity, without maintenance to be yielded to them, was prescribed by the
learned reformers according to the word of God as they pretended.

Therefore, that there sho'uld be Elders, elected out of the Laity, without
maintenance to be yielded to them, was the Doctrine of the learned reformers.

The proposition needs no proof:

The assumption I confirm thus;

That which is practiced according to the laws of Discipline, in all those
reformed churches: where the Presbyteries be erected, was prescribed by the
learned reformers, according to the word of God, as they pretended.

The election of only-gouerning Elders, out of the Laity, without maintenance
to be yielded to them, is practiced in all those reformed churches, according to
the laws of discipline

Therefore the election of only gouerning-Elders, out of the Laity, without
maintenance to be yielded to them, was prescribed by the learned reformers,
according to the word of God, as they pretended. And consequently, that
Lay Elders are not to have maintenance, is both the Doctrine of the learned
reformers, and the practice of all those Churches reformed by them.

The proposition is manifest, because the laws of Discipline in those
Churches, were either prescribed by the learned reformers, or framed according
to their prescript. The assumption may also be evidently proved by induction:
For the Lay Elders, neither in the Churches of Geneua, France, Low Countries,
have, nor of Scotland, had any maintenance allowed the^, and that according to
the laws of their discipline; neither can the refuter give any one instance to
the contrary. It shall suffice me to make insta^ce in Geneua, which was a
pattern in this behalf to the rest. Bez. in vit. An. 1536. (...) 1541.
In Geneua is this order taken by their laws, whereof Calvin was the chief
author, that of the 12. only governing Elders, joined to the 6. ministers, 6.
should be chosen out of the Council of 200.4. out of the Counsel of 60.2. out
of the Council of 25. all statesmen; See the laws of Geneua, and sum. capit.
di^c^ph. Eccl. Gen^a inter e^ist. Calui^j Bez. de grad. M^^^^. c. 11. page ^^.
(...) ibid. (...) before the Hel^et confess. Lib. 1. 179.
to this end, both that they should be of great countenance, and also that the
Church should not be charged with allowing them any maintenance: Beza
professes that every where in other Churches the like choice, according to the
state of the place, is made; viz: Not of the meaner or poorer sort, but men of
great, both ability and authority, are chosen to be of the Presbytery: And
elsewhere he says, that consideration must be had, that Princes and Noblemen,
and such as be of authority, be chosen into the Seignorie. And T.C. himself
confesses it to be the practice of the Churches in these days, to make choice
of such Elders, as are able to live, without charging the church any whit.
Their confession I have showed.

Sect, 4. His objection denying their confession refuted.
Now let us see what the refuter obiecteth. 1. That I might have read the
contrary in Calui^, Bullinger, Beza, Cartwright, D. Bilson, and D. Sutcliffe,
but that it seems I did not read on that side of the leaf. And it seems to
me, that you would not have me read on that side as yet, or rather, that there
is no such thing to be read: Else you would have pointed, if not to the leaf,
yet at least, to the book. For my part, I profess that I do not remember,
that I have read any such thing, either in Calvin, Beza, or Bullinger, but the
contrary, as I have showed in Calvin and Beza. As for Bullinger, you had less
reason to allege him, D. Bil^on. page 130.
seeing that you found him cited together, with the other two, expounding this
word honor, as signifying the maintenance due to ministers.

As touching D. Bills: it is strange that you should both accuse me for taking
this reason from him, and also charge him with teaching the contrary. In his
preface, he says thus: page 7.
By no precept nor example will it ever be proved, that Lay-presbyters had in
the Apostles times, or should have by the word of God at any time, double
honor and maintenance from the Church of Christ. Wherefore they must either
give all Lay Elders double maintenance, as S. Paul wills, which they do not,
or shut them clean from these words, which yield double maintenance, by Gods
Law to Presbyters that rule well. page 129.130. Ad page: 30.
And to the like purpose he speaks, in the place by you quoted.

The speech of that worthy learned man, D. (...)
who is highly to be commended for his great learning, good pains, and zealous
affection for the maintenance of the truth, whom you vilely and ungraciously
abuse, as you do all others that come in your way, be they never so worthy
champions of our Church against the Papists, his reproof I say of T. C. for
requiring maintenance as due to the Lay Elders, Page 90.
I have not seen to my remembrance. But this I remember well, that I have read
in his treatise of Ecclesiastical discipline, 1. Tim. 5. 1. Pet 5.
that the Elders whereof the Apostles speak received wages of the Church. But
(says he) the new Aldermen in all Churches where they reign, live upon
interest of their own money or goods, and receive no salarie of the Churches.

Neither had he indeed any great reason (in my judgment) to blame T. C. (that
I may also come to him) as opposing his judgment to the practice of the
reformed Churches. Lib. 1.17* 179.
For although he seem to say, that by the Apostles rule such Elders, as be
poor, ought to be relieved at the Churches charge; yet it does not seem to be
his judgment, that he would have Lay Elders maintained at the Churches charge.
But this is one of his colors, whereby he would persuade, that the Eldership
should rather now be admitted, then in the Apostles times. Because if the
Apostle would charge the Churches being in persecution, and therefore poor
with maintaining Elders, which being poor, were not sometimes able to live
without some relief from the Church, etc: how much more ought there now to be
Seniors, when the Churches be in peace, and therefore not so poor, and when
there may be chosen such for the most part throughout the realm, as are able
to live without charging the Church any whit, as the practice of these days
does manifestly declare. For if it had been his judgment, that Lay Elders are
to be maintained otherwise then for need, he would have argued thus.

If by the Apostles rule, the Elders were to be maintained for their works
sake, by the Churches being poor and in p^rsecution, then much more are they
to be maintained when the Churches be in peace and profp^ritie, and so would
have assumed the antecedent, to conclude the consequent. But seeing he does
tollere consequens, contradict the consequent, saying, that when the Churches
are in peace and prosperity, such a course may and ought to be taken (for that
may seem to be his meaning) according to the example of all the reformed
Churches, that the Church shall not be charged at all with the maintenance of
the Seniors, that is to say, by choosing men of ability who need no relief;
it is easy to conclude tollendo antecedens, that his judgment was, that (this
rule of the Apostle notwithstanding,) Lay Elders were not to have maintenance
for their works sake, but relief only if they did need.

Chap. 14. Page 74.
Of the same judgment is the demonstratour of discipline: for it being objected
that the parishes would be ouerburdened in providing for so many: he answers,
it is not necessary that they should provide for any more of them, saving
those that are exercised in the ministry of the word, unless any of the rest
may need the liberality of the Church.

But suppose that this were T. C. judgment, or the opinion of any other among
us, who has conceived a platonicall Idea of discipline which he never saw
practiced: were this sufficient to disprove my assertion, who have the
confession of the learned reformers in respect of their doctrine, and of the
reformed Churches in respect of their practice? Or if this were a sufficient
exception against the consent of those which stand for discipline, that some
one does hold a singular opinion by himself; then can their consent be
scarcely alleged for any one affirmative point of discipline, every man almost
pleasing himself in the novelty of his invention, and in the singularity of
his opinion. For plentiful proof whereof, Chap.
4.5.6.7.9.11.12.14.16.17.18.19.31.34.
I refer you to the survey of the pretended discipline.

5. His second objection is, that although in practice reformed Churches do
not give their Lay Elders any maintenance, yet this does not hinder, but that
in their judgment they may according to the Apostles rule, His 2, Objection.
esteem them worthy of it. Can we doubt says he, but our Clergy masters
think M. D. worthy of a Bishoppricke for his pains in pleading their cause:
yet we see they bestow not so much as a suffraganeship on him. Shall we
therefore say they do not think him to deserve it?

What a profane mockery is this, to expound the Apostles words, as though he
would have the people think they had discharged their duty in esteeming only
their Ministers worthy of double honor, when in fact they do not yield them
sufficient maintenance. If he were in the ministry (as I know not whether he
be or not) and the people should answer him thus: Sir, though we allow you no
maintenance as you desire, yet let this content you, that according to the
Apostles rule, we count you worthy of double honor: would he not think S.
Paul abused, himself deluded, yea and Christ his Lord and master in him to be
mocked? Gal. 6.7.
Be not deceived says the Apostle, speaking in this cause, God is not mocked.
That which I say of Ministers, is in like manner to be understood of
Lay Elders, if they be included in this text. The words of the Apostle are
general, the Presbyters that rule well, let them be counted worthy of double
honor. Wherefore let them either acknowledge that the Lay Elders are not meant
in this place, or else teach the people before they admit Lay Elders, to think
themselves bound by the Apostles rule, to yield them double honor, Lib. 1.178.
(that is says T. C. a plentiful reward, such as may be fully sufficient for
them and their households) and to yield it willingly and gratefully. For that is
the Apostles meaning, when he requires the Presbyters to be accounted worthy
of double honor, not only that this honor of maintenance should be given
them, as appears by the reasons which he has annexed; but that the people
should give it, not grudgingly, and as it were by constraint of law, as
thinking the Ministers not worthy of maintenance: but willingly and gratefully,
as esteeming them most worthy of double honor, and thinking it a small matter
to give temporal things to them, 1. Cor. 9.11 Object. 3.
of whom they receive spiritual. Neither is it to any purpose which he
obiecteth concerning either Paul's refusing of maintenance from the Corinthians
and Thessalonains, or of wealthy Ministers refusing to burden the Churches by
taking maintenance from them: unless he can prove, that order being taken in
those Churches for the maintenance of their Elders, which they may readily
receive if they will, themselves do voluntarily, and freely refuse it. For if
those Elders be comprised under Presbyters in this text, there must the like
order be taken for maintenance of all by the Apostles rule, though the
painful Preachers are chiefly to be respected.

But the contrary course is taken. Neither is there not having of maintenance
to be ascribed to their own refusing, as in the example of Paul, and the
wealthy Ministers; but to the Churches not allowing them maintenance.

Object. 4.
To the like purpose is that which he says, that I need not insult over those
reformed Churches, which with consent of the Elders themselves, think it best
to ease the people of that charge, seeing the pains to be taken in the office
of the Eldership is not such, but that they may attend their civil callings
and means of living, as well as our Churchwardens, and civil officers. In
which words, first, he wrongfully charge me with insulting over those
Churches. Secondly, he confuteth himself, who having before denied them to be
Lay Elders, here confesses they have civil callings, which they may attend
upon, as well as our Churchwardens. Thirdly, where he speaks of the Elders
consent in not taking maintenance, it is the consent of obedience to the laws
and orders of the Church, such as is in our Churchwardens, who by the like
consent have no maintenance. But to leave his words, and to come to the
substance of his speech; seeing their pains are not such, but that they may
follow their civil callings and worldly business, and seeing they have civil
callings to attend upon, and other sufficient means of liuelihood, being in
all these respects like, if not superior to our Churchwardens, it may not be
thought that the Apostle who was desirous the Churches should be eased as much
as might be, would require them to give double honor to such, as neither
deserved nor needed such maintenance.

And therefore he did not comprise them under the name of Presbyters (which
indeed signifies Priests or Ministers) or if he did, no Church must think it
self to have authority to dispense with the Apostle, but must acknowledge it
self bound, if it understand Lay Elders to be comprised in this text,
willingly and gratefully to give double (that is sufficient and plentiful)
maintenance to them, esteeming them worthy of it for their work sake.

The only thing which is objected by the learned of that side, Sect. The
exc^tion, that Elders if need, are have allo^^ance, ans^^red.
is that, which I mention in the Sermon: that their Lay Elders, if they stand
in need, are to be maintained. Whereunto I now add, that some of them so
understand the Apostle: and I answer, that if he be so understood in respect
of Lay Elders, he must in like manner be understood of Ministers, his speech
being general, and favoring the Ministers no more then thus, T.C.
that as all Elders are to be maintained if they need, so especially Preachers;
whom notwithstanding the Apostle would have, according to equity and justice,
maintained with an honorable stipend for their work sake, and not only by
way of alms to be relieved for their need.

But here the refuter behaueth himself as one that is at a nonplus for reason,
and at an overplus for rancour: his words added to the last I cited, be these.
But to prove it, he propounds (out of the surueyour of discipline, cap. 10.)
an objection, and then answers it. The sum whereof is this, that the
maintenance allowed them, is rather a beggarly alms given in charity for
need, then that honorable stipend, which injustice is due to them for their
work sake. But to prove it, says he, what would I prove? the refuter is
confoun^ed, he knows not well what he says. He propounds says he an
objection out of the surueyour. Sure his eyes dazeled, and his wits were to
seek. In the survey is not so much as a show of any such objection: neither is
it alleged to any other end, but to prove that, whereunto the letter in the
margent directed him, that is, that they make choice of such as have no need.
But what is it? the sum whereof is this, that the maintenance allowed them is
rather a beggarly alms, etc. Is this the sum of the objection? that is
senseless, and yet he seems to say so: What then? is it the sum of the
answer, or of both? no man that were not at a loss would say it. I profess I
have not often read a speech more senseless. To help him out of the maze, and
to make him confess that he was at a nonplus, I will explain my words. For
whereas some object said I, etc: My meaning was this, the only thing which is
objected to disprove my assumption, that to the Lay Elders the honor of
maintenance is not due for their work sake, is this: that Lay Elders if they
stand in need are to be maintained. Which objection has been made personally
to me, I will not say by the refuter, though some think so, for I take that
obiector to be an honester man: and that which is objected, is that conceit not
only of T. C. the master, and the demonstrator his scholar, but of Danaeus
also writing on that place: In 1. Tim. 5.17.
To this objection of their need, I answered first, that it is needless, (as
the refuter also in the words following does censure it) as being prevented by
all those reformed Churches where the Presbyters be erected, in which order is
taken, that none shall be chosen into the seigniorie, but such as be of good
ability. To which purpose I cited the tenth chapter of the Survey: the
argument whereof is this. Their Aldermen must be (according to their own
positions) men of good calling: and among other things in that chapter, are
cited the laws of Geneua, requiring, that all their twelve Lay Elders should
be men of state etc: as I said before.

Secondly, I answered, if they chance to have need (which is a case that
happens as seldom at the least to them, as to our Churchwardens) and if
they be relieved (as our Churchwardens also should in the like case) that then
the maintenance which is allowed, is for their need, and not for their work
sake. But the Apostle says, the Presbyters are worthy of double honor, and
the workman is worthy of his stipend, etc. As if I had said: the relief which
is given to Lay Elders for their need (if ever that do happen) does not
disprove my assumption, nor prove that they are included in this text. For, The
maintenance which the Apostle requires to be given to Presbyters is not a
beggarly alms (that is a poor man's relief given by way of alms,) bestowed
only in charity to supply their need, but an honorable stipend, ( Paul
calls it (...) Philo (...) our Savior (...)) in justice due to the
Presbyters for their work sake.

But the relief, which they require to be given to their Lay Elders, is a
beggarly alms (that is a poor man's relief given by way of alms) and
bestowed only in charity to supply, their need, and not an honorable stipend
(called (...) or (...) etc:) in justice due for their work sake.

Therefore the relief which they require to be given to their Lay Elders is
not that maintenance which the Apostle requires to be given to Presbyters.
Sect. 7 His excepti^^ that allowa^^ occasioned by the Elde^ need, is yielded
for the^ work, answ^red.




Now let us hear what the refuter adds to his former words. But says he as
the objection is needless, so his answer is insufficient, here now he
speaks with reason, though without truth. The objection is made by the chief
of his side, and is the best (though needless) if not the only objection,
they have. My answer is such as you have heard, that is to say, such an
answer, as whenever he medleth with it, will bring him to a nonplus again:
but because I said he speaks with reason, let us hear his reason. For says
he albeit their necessity occasioneth their maintenance by common allowance,
Ad page 3^
yet is it for their work sake that they are maintained: to which I reply: if
it were a maintenance in justice due for their work sake, and not a relief
given only in charity by way of alms for their need; that then it ought in
justice to be given to them, whether they be in need or not. For the workman
is worthy of his stipend for his work sake; and willingly it must be given him
as deserving it, whether he need or not. For although it be a crying sin, and
do offend more against charity to hold it from him if he need: yet it
offends as much against justice, to withhold the stipend from the workman,
that is not in need. The stipend, which Paul appoints to Presbyters, in
respect of their pains in edifying the Church, which is the house of God, is
as due in justice to them for their work sake, as the stipend is due to a
Carpenter, that builds an house. And as it were injustice joined with folly,
for a man not to think himself bound to give the Carpenter his stipend,
unless he be poor: the like is to be conceived of the stipend denied to
Presbyters for their wealth, which is due for their work.

The rest of his speech is uttered in rancour and gall: but the points be
these. First, that it does not become me, etc: to call it a beggarly
maintenance. Secondly, that it is more then is given to our Churchwardens that
are crept into their rooms. The third, which is more plainly uttered in the
abortiue book, that the like perhaps will not make D. D. rich. In what sense I
called it beggarly alms, given only in charity, opposing it to honorable
stipend, due in justice, I have already explaned. To the second I answer, our
Churchwardens, having less trouble, have notwithstanding no less allowance,
then your Elders, for they have none at all. And where you say, our
Churchwardens are crept into their rooms: you must first prove that ever they
had a room in the Church. For we will never grant that our Churchwardens be
your Elders successors, till you have proved your Elders to have been their
predecessors. And whereas you make your selves merry with my want of riches,
as you did before with my want of preferment; I tell you plainly, I had rather
be poorer then M.D. is with a good conscience, then to be as rich as some of
you by maintaining a faction, to be maintained by it.

Sect. 8. No honor of maintenance appointed to Lay Elders in Gods book. See
the survey of discipli. Page 440.441.
Thus have I maintained my assumption, and the prosyllogisme thereof concerning
their confession. Now I will prove by another argument, that the honor of
maintenance is not by the word of God due to Lay Elders, and that the
Lay-Eldership is not the ordinance of God, nor has any warrant in the
scriptures. We have often heard great words, that your Presbyterian discipline
is an essential note of a true Church, if not an article of your faith; that it
is to little purpose to receive the doctrine, unless we also embrace the
discipline of Christ, meaning the pretended discipline: that your discipline is
the kingdom of Christ, wherein your Presbyters hold, as it were Christ's
scepter; that to deny this discipline, Demo^st
and yet to profess Christ to be our King, is with the soldiers that
crucified him, to put a Reed in his hand, Prefac. demons^
and a crown of thorns on his head: that in the second petition of the Lords
prayer, Let thy Kingdom come, we are to pray, that your Discipline may be
advanced; that the question between the BB. and you, is about no less matter
then this, Ibid.
whether Jesus Christ shall be King or no: that in denying your discipline,
we are the men that say, Luke 19. Luke 19. and 27. Table o^ cipl.
We wll not have this man to reign over us: and to us is applied that
terrible doom, Those mine enemies that would not have me to reign over them,
bring hither, and slay them before me: and many such like speeches, concerning
the kingdom of Christ, which being applied to your own devices, are not far
from blasphemy. These confident speeches considered, a man would think that
you have most evident, certain, and undeniable grounds for your Presbyteries.
But when I come to examine your proofs, and to search the Scriptures, and
records of antiquity; I profess unfeignedly, and in the fear of God, that I
cannot sufficiently wonder, that men of reading should approve, and men of
sincerity should urge so confidently, and maintain so resolutely, even unto
silencing and deprivation, such not only humane devices, but mere novelties,
as the sacred ordinances of Christ our Savior; for which, after all the search
which has been made, there cannot be produced any sound testimony. But to
come to the point: you say, (if you deny my aforesaid assumption,) that to
Lay Elders governing well double honor is due by the word of God, for their
work sake. I say, the holy Ghost is so far from assigning this double
honor to them, that neither their work, or office it self, for which that
honor should be due to them, nor their qualities whereby they should be
qualified for that office, nor themselves, Sect. 9 The office Lay Elders not
prescrib^ in the scriptures.
or their names, whereby they should be known are once mentioned, or intimated
in the holy scriptures.

For first, as touching their office: it is by them assigned, either to their
Elders severally, or to the Elder-ship jointly Their duty severally, is to be
watchme^ in ye Church, having their several Wards or precincts appointed to
them, wherein they are to observe the manners of men for avoiding offenses, and
other occurrents for perverting disorders.

The manners of men they are to enquire into, and to pry into their faults,
that if they be secret or small, they may admonish the offenders priu^ly: if
open or great, they may inform the Consistory thereof. And for other
occurre^ts, they are to look that good orders be kept, especially respecting
the sacraments. As they are to inform their pastor if there be any child in
their Ward to be baptized, if there be any in their precinct, lately come into
the parish, to acquaint the Minister before the Communion, and at the Communion
to keep back those whose religion and honesty is not known, and whom the
Ministers have not dealt withal before. Wherefore, as in respect of manners,
they are by them compared to the Censors of the Romans, so in respect of good
orders, they are as the (...), of the Athenians.

The ioynt-office of the Elders, is the office of the whole Presbytery, or
Eldership, Consistory, or sacred Senate, which in the Assembly of the Elders
of the Church, who by common counsel and authority, do rule and govern the
same.

For as Lacedemon had her Seignorie, Athens her high court of the Areopagi^^s,
Rome, her Senate, and every kingdom their counsel, so every Church, (that is,
every parish according, to the new disciplinarians) must have her Presbytery,
or sacred Senate, unto which Christ has given the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, whereby is meant all Ecclesiastical power and authority.

This authority respects either the Officers of the Church, or the
offenders. Officers, as Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons. Concerning whom the
Eldership has authority to elect, ordain, deprive, or depose them.

As touching offenders, the Eldership has authority to censure them, either
by reproof, suspension, or excommunication.

Believe me, if the word of God has committed these things to the hands of
the Elders, then have they an office of great consequence indeed. Eccl. dis.
fo. 5
But if you remember their own positions, T.C. l. page: 16 Demons^ page: 1:^
that the Word of God does perfectly describe all the lawful offices of the
Church; and that no office or calling in the Church is lawful, but that which
is directly warranted out of the Word: yet it was the sin for which Coreh,
Dathan, and Abiram were punished, in that they presumed, though they were
Levites, to take in hand that for which they had no warrant: then can you not
but expect most manifest and pregnant proofs out of the Scripture, directly
warranting this whole office, and all the branches thereof. Or if you fail of
your expectation, you cannot but wonder at the extreme boldness of them, who
holding these positions, impose upon the Church, an office of such authority,
not as an humane policy, but as the holy ordinance of Christ, having no
warrant in the Scriptures.

But what one pregnant testimony of Scripture can they produce, The parts the
Elders ^ice, not p^^scribed in Scripture.
pursuing any one part of their Lay Elders office? Upon my credit not one. For
first a peculiar office, either of spiritual watchmen, the scriptures
acknowledge none.

Besides, Prophets, and Priests, or Ministers, or of Censors of men's manners,
besides ministers and Magistrates: and much less do the scriptures appoint a
peculiar officer to be the accuser of the brethren.

Indeed it is the duty of all good Christians, mutuallie to exercise the
duties of the Communion of Saints, by instructing, exhorting, admonishing,
rebuking, comforting one another. And as the Apostle s^ith, to consider or
observe on^ another, to provoke unto love, and to good works.

We may not be of Cains mind, Heb: 1*
who said, Am I my brothers keeper? We are so far to be keepers and obseruers
of our brethren, as by all good means to further and advance the salvation one
of another.

The Lord has charged thee in the Law, Leu. 19.
freely to rebuke thy brother, and not suffer sin to rest upon him. And
likewise in the Gospel, Matt: 18 15, 16, 17*
If thy brother sin against thee (either committing an injury against thee,
or giving thee offense, by some sin committed in thy knowledge, laying by his
evil example, a scandal or stumbling block in thy way,) go and reprous him,
privately between thee and him alone, If he hear thee thou have won thy
brother. But if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two; if he will
not hear them, tell the assembly, etc. But a special Church Officer to prye
into other men's faults, such as S. Peter calls (...), the scriptures do not
appoint, and much less to inform against, or to accuse private offenders,
such as we call Prom^ters, and the Grecians, Sycophants.

As for their dividing of Parishes into Wards, and awarding them to several
Elders, as also all the rest of the offices and duties assigned to their
Elders, of acquainting the ministers who is to be Baptized, what new
parishioners are come, of helping at the Communion, and repelling some there
from, they must and do confess they have no scripture for them: and yet all
these duties must be thought to be prescribed in Gods word.

Eccl. discipl. 122
To which purpose, the arguments which some of their chief writers do use, are
these. First, that although all these things be not specially expressed in
scripture, T.C. Beza Arguments proving the office of Elders out of the
Scripture, answered.
yet forasmuch as offenses must be avoided, and those duties of Charity, and
Communion of Saints must be performed, as also those things which appertain
to good order provided for: and forasmuch as there are no other officers or
Elders to whom the charge of these things should belong; therefore satis vt
opinor apparet, haec ad Presbyterorum officium ex verbo Dei referenda esse; I
think it sufficiently appears, that these things by the word of God, are to
be referred to the office of Elders. Their argument stands thus.

All necessary duties which the Scripture has not assigned to other officers
or Elders, it has appointed to these Elders.

But the duties before spoken of, are necessary duties, which the scripture
has not assigned to any other officers or Elders.

Therefore the duties before spoken of, the scripture has assigned to these
Elders.

It seems by the proposition, that the Lay Elders have begged a book of
concealme^ts, that they may be authorized to deal in all these causes, for
which other men have not express commission. But first I deny that the
Scipture has granted them any such concealements. Nay, I most confidently
auow, that they themselves are concealed in the Scriptures, which do not once
mention them in any place. And therefore, if there be cases omitted, that the
Scripture has not assigned to other Elders or officers; We may think it has
referred them to the wisdom of the Church, and authority of the Sovereign,
r^^^er then to them, whom it never mentions. Secondly I answer, that there
are many necessary duties, the performance whereof the holy Ghost has not
assigned to any public Officers at all, as though there should be special
offices appointed for them; but are to be performed by every Christian; as the
aforesaid duties which concern the avoiding of scandales, the duties of
Charity and Communion of Saints. Likewise, there are duties respecting outward
order and decency, which the Scripture does not prescribe in particular, and
much less assign to any peculiar office.

But the determination of these particulars, and the nomination of the
functions or persons whereunto they shall be assigned, is left to the discretion
of the Church, and authority of the Sovereign.

And to such purposes, other Churches may appoint Lay Elders, as well as ours
does Churchwardens, so they do not urge them as the ordinance of Christ, nor
give them commission to intermeddle with things above their reach, as being
peculiar either to the Ministers of the Word, or the Civil Magistrate.

Their second Argument.

As for that part of their office of taking heed to offenses, Sect. ^ ^ Their
2. argument. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.17. 1. Pet. 5.1.2. (...).
who can doubt, but that charge properly appertains unto the Elders, seeing
they are said in the Scriptures to ouersee, and to govern. For this oversight
can have but two parts only, whereof the first partaineth to doctrine and
religion; the other, to life and manners. Seeing then, that two sorts of Elders
are expressly named by Saint Paul, whereof the first sort are occupied in
Preaching, and Doctrine: It is necessary that the other should have charge of
manners and conversation, for that only remains. This discourse contains
2. Syllogismes: the First, All Presbyters who in the Scriptures are said to
ouersee and govern, having not that oversight, which respects doctrine and
religion, have the oversight of manners, and care of avoiding offenses: for
these are the two parts of oversight:

The Lay Elders, are such Presbyters, as in the Scriptures are said to ouersee
and govern, having not that oversight, which respects doctrine and religion.

Therefore the Lay Elders have the oversight of manners, and care of avoiding
offenses.

The 2. If the Apostle expressly name 2. sorts of Elders, distinguished,
according to the 2. parts of (...), or oversight, viz: Ministers and
Lay Elders, then it does necessarily follow, that as the Ministers, have the
care and oversight of doctrine and religion; so the Lay Elders have the
oversight of manners and care of avoiding offenses.



But the Antecedent is true. 1. Tim. 5.17.

Therefore the consequent.

To the assumption of the former Syllogism, I answer, that Lay Elders are no
where is said in the Scriptures to be Presbyters, or (...): to govern or
ouersee, but all those places, which be alleged to this purpose, are to be
understood of Ministers only.

Besides, the same Author has confessed; that Lay Elders are not Bishops,
neither will he say, that they be Pastors.

But the places which he quoteth, are to be understood of Bishops and Pastors.
Of Act. 20.28. and 1. Pet. 5. I have already spoken, as also of 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
Why Heb. 13.17. should be applpyed to Lay Elders, there is no reason; unless
whatsoever is spoken of Spiritual governors, is to be understood of them. The
Writers, both old and new, expound it of Bishops and Pastors.

The assumption also of the second syllogism is untrue, neither has it any
thing to support it, but their own exposition of 1. Tim. 5.17. which I have
proved to be false. Neither is that true, which is presupposed in both
syllogismes: that there must be two sorts of Elders answerable to the two parts
of oversight. For both the parts of (...), or oversight, belong to those which
be (...), overseers, that is Bishops and Pastors, whose duty is, both to teach
and to govern.

Their third Argument is taken from the practice of the primitive Church next
succeeding the Apostles. Which of all their Arguments is most frivolous, there
being not any testimony of any writer, or example of any Church to be
alleged, that ever there was such an office in the Church.

But howsoever these duties to be performed by the Elders severally, might be
borne with, so they were not obtruded as the ordinances of Christ: yet the
joint office of their Lay- presbyteryes is intolerable. For what reason can
they allege for their intruding into the sacred office of Bishops and Pastors,
and usurping the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which our Savior Christ
committed to none, but to the Apostles, and their successors? That Laymen
should have authority, and that by the ordinance of Christ, to ordain
Ministers by imposition of hands, to remit or retain sins, to excommunicate
the obstinate, or to reconcile the penitent, is an opinion too absurd to be
confuted.

Thus therefore I reason, according to their own principles. No office in the
Church is lawful, as themselves say, which has not express warrant in the
scriptures, which is all one, as if they had said, All lawful offices in the
church, have express warrant in Gods word.

The office of the Lay Elders severally, and of their Elderships yearly, has
not express warrant in Gods word: Therefore it is unlawful.

To their office we will join the consideration of their qualities: Sect. 12.
The quality of Elders, not described in Gods word.
for surely, if the holy Ghost had prescribed in the scriptures, an office of
such importance, it is to be thought, that he would also have described what
manner of men were to be chosen to it, and how qualified for the performance of
an office of so high a nature. And although he omitted their qualities in other
places, yet me thinks if it be a function that is in dignity under the
Minister, but above the Deacon, the Apostle could not have forgotten them, in
1. Tim. 3: where he describes the qualities, not only of Bishops and Ministers
which be above them, but of the Deacons also, which are beneath them; directing
Timo(...), and in him all Bishops, what manner of persons to or^a^^ Ministers,
or Deacons. Forgotten? say they, why, are they not plainly expressed in that
place? Yes no doubt, for that is agreed upon among us: For some will needs
comprise them under the Bishop or Minister, and fear not to ^ay, ^.
that they also must be su^ modo, (...), that is, able (...) preach after their
fashion. Others acknowledge, that they are never comprehended under the name
Bishop, and that it is necessarily required of Ministers alone, to be (...),
able to preach, especially, in that sense that the Apostle means, as
appears by comparing that place with Tit: 1.9: yet resolved to find a room
for them in that place, and not to suffer them to be excluded, are feign to
s^row^e them under the name of Deacons: (...) Page 44
though the name of Deacon, neither in scriptures, nor Fathers, was ever
attributed to them. How they will compound these contrarieties I know not. For
if they be comprised under the name Bishop, then are they not to be shrouded
under Deacons and if they be contained under Deacons, then are they not
comprised under Bishops.

It shall (...) me to allege, that for so much as the Eldership is in their
conceit a different office, both from the Minister and Deacon, that it is
comprehended in neither. For who cannot conceive this reason?

None but Bishops, Ministers, and Deacons, are described in that place:
(Bishops and Ministers in the former description, and Deacons in the latter:)

But Lay Elders are neither Bishops or Ministers, nor Deacons, but an imagined
office distinct from both:

Therefore they are not described in that place.

^
The refu^^^ has solemnly proclaimed before, and required all men to take
notice of it, that their Elders ought to be men religious, of great gravity
and piety, and of good years also, if it may be, as the name imports,
called with due examination, chosen with consent of the congregation over which
they are set, with prayer and imposition of hands put a part to that
Ecclesiastical office. All which I will not deny to have been politickely
devised, so it may be acknowledged an humane devise, and not a divine
ordinance. But why are not the margents filled with scriptures for the proof
of these things? The truth is, there is not one testimony of scripture to be
alleged, prescribing the office, or describing the qualities of Lay Elders.

But perhaps there may be mention sufficient of them in the scriptures to
warrant their calling, though neither their office nor their qualities be
described in the word of God. Nor that neither: as shall appear, when I come
to answer the refuters allegations for them. In the mean time I will not
doubt to renew my former challenge, if they can produce any one pregnant
testimony out of the scriptures, whereby it may necessarily be concluded, that
either there were at any time, or ought to be at all times in the Church of
Christ such Elders and Elderships as they speak of, that then I will yield to
them in the whole controversy betwixt us. But until such proof be produced
for them, which will never be: they shall give me leave to esteem their
doctrine of Lay Elders, to be, as it is, a mere fiction, how vehemently soever
it be urged and obtruded upon us, as the holy discipline of Christ.

And now had we done with this place of the Epistle to Timothy, Sect. 13. His
3. cau^^les against page 10. answered.
saving that the refuter looking back to the ^enth page of my Sermon, as being
loath thus to leave wrangling with my exposition of that text, noted three
things to be cauilled at, in this one speech, where I say, that Ministers are
especially to be honored for their pains in preaching of the word, that
being, in Paul's estimation, the chief work of the ministry. For first, he
would feign know of me why ^adde in Paul's estimation. I answer, because it was
necessary to be added: for in such comparatiue sentences, where one part
seemeh to be preferred before all the rest, we are not always to understand
that part simply to be the chief, but in the estimation of the speaker, who in
some respect prefers it to the rest. As for example, if that you should say,
all good Ministers or Preachers are greatly to be honored, especially they,
who go before their people in the example of a godly life: I would expound
your meaning (as I did the Apostles) to be this, that whereas double honor is
due to all Ministers or Preachers, for the performance of their duty in
general, (...) they are especially to be honored for their godly life, that
being in your estimation the chief commendation of a Minister. Or to use the
refuters own example, which before I explaned: all logicians that reason well,
are to be well accounted of, especially they that judge well, or are judicious.
In this speech are to be noted, not two sorts, but two duties of logicians; the
one general, to reason well, the other, special to judge well, disposed in a
comparatiue sentence, wherein the duties of a logician are thus compared, that
whereas logicians are to be esteemed for the performance of their duty in
general; yet especially they are to be honored for judging well, that being
in the estimation of him that shall so speak, the chief work of a Logician:
I say in the estim^i^^ of him that shall so speak; for another perhaps would
say thus; All logicians that reason well are to be well esteemed, especially
those that analise well: another perhaps thus. All good Logicians are to be
honored, especially those that are methodicall; another thus, especially those
that invent well. In like manner I explane the Apostles speech, as has been
showed before. I but says he, if this be true that those Ministers are
especially worthy of double honor, that labor in the word and doctrine; then
some poor Ministers that continually preach or would do, if they might be
suffered, are more especially to be honored then some great prelates, that
seldom or never preach: and it was the envy of this illation, which by saying
in Paul's estimation, you would derive from your self to the ^^^stle. Answ. The
Apostles comparison is to be understood of them which be of the same degree,
being Presbyters and no more. Neither was it Paul's meaning, writing to Timothy
the Bishop, that any of the Presbyters should have more maintenance then he,
(for that is the honor whereof he speaks) though perhaps they were more
painful in preaching, as having better opportunity. It is well known that
in the primitive Church, when the revenues of ^ach Church were divided into
Vid ^ confess. ^ s. 30. Syn^ Romans sub syluest. c. 12. q. 2.^.27.28.2.30.
four parts, the Bishop alone had one fourth part, and that was as much as all
the Presbyters and all the rest of the clergy (though perhaps there were an
hundred of them) had amongst them: For all of them had but another fourth part,
a third fourth part went to the buildings and reparations, and the fourth to
the poor.

His second cavil, Sect. 1^ Ad page 3^ His 2. ca^^^
that in other places, viz. page 42.45.53. I have through flattery
contradicted this assertion, making governing a labor of greater honor then
preaching. Answ. In none of those places do I compare preaching with
governing, but Bishops with Presbyters, saying and proving that Bishops are
superior to Presbyters in the power of ordination and jurisdiction, and that
the Bishops are the Apostles successors in the government of the Church. But
does it follow because Bishops are superior to Presbyters, that therefore
preaching is a work inferior to government? I trust Bishops are equal at
the least with Presbyters in the power of order, as it respects the
ministry of the word and sacraments, so that what can be said in commendation
of the order of Presbyters in respect of the ministry, belongs also to
Bishops. If therefore BB. being at the least equal with Presbyters in the
power of order, respecting the ministry of the word and sacraments, be above
them not only in the exercise of that power, but also in the power of
ordination and jurisdiction; they may, without disparagement to the ministry
of the word, be said to be superior to other Ministers.

To your third cavil I might answer as to the first, His 3. cavil
that the Apostle speaks to the Bishop of Presbyters, not to a Presbyter; as
you do, of Bishops. But indeed our Bishops, as they ought all, so the most of
them (as I trust) do think themselves bound to preach, when they have
opportunity and leisure in respect of their other weighty employments; in
regard whereof I have always thought, that one good Bishop, though he have
not opportunity to preach very often, may do more good in the Church of God,
then a dozen good Preachers. So that in these three cauilles the refuter has
gained nothing, but the manifestation of his own malice, which I pray God to
forgive him.

CHAP. VII. (...) Ambros^ in 1. Tim. 5.^. does not give testimony to the
Lay-(...) that their exposition of Ambrose is untrue.
The testimony of Ambrose discussed
S^rm. Sect. 6. page 13. I come now to Ambrose writing on the first verse of
the same chapter, 1. Tim. 5. where the Apostle exhorting Timothy not to rebuke
an Elder or aged man, Ambrose gives this reason. For among all nations old age
is honorable, and then adds: vnde and synagoga and postea ecclesia seniores
habuit, quorum sine co^silio nihil agebatur in ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia
obsoleuerit nescio, nisi forte doctorum desidia aut magis superbia, dum soli
volunt aliquid videri. Whence it is that both the Synagogue and afterward the
Church had Seniors, Without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church.
Which by what negligence it is grown out of use, I know not, unless perhaps
by the slouthfulnes of the learned or Teachers, or rather pride, whiles they
alone will seem to be something. Which words whosoever understand, as giving
testimony to Lay Elders, they wrong Ambrose, etc. 10. lines further.
IN this allegation the disciplinarians have great confidence: For this
testimony of Ambrose says T.C. is so clear and open, Li. 2. part. ^ Page 44.
that he which does not give place unto it, must needs be thought as a Bat, or
an Owl, or some other night-bird to delight in darkness. And it is a world
to see how the refuter thinking that his cause will be aduantaged by this
testimony of Ambrose, takes on like a beggar on horseback, or a coward when
he has gotten his adversary at a supposed advantage. See you not how he
braggeth and vanteth, how he crakes and crows, and all for want as of a good
spirit, so of a sound judgment, presuming of advantage, where he has none, as
the event will prove.

Concerning this testimony of Ambrose, he finds fault as well with my manner
of alleging, as of discussing it. At the allegation he has three cauills.
First he repeateth his frivolous cauillation concerning the consequence of an
argument which he bestows upon me: that, if in this place of Ambrose there be
no mention of Lay Elders, then there is none to be found in the fathers
writings. Chap. 3. 9 and 10.
Which cavil I have so clearly refuted before, that I think I shall never
hear of it more.

The second, Ad page 33*
that I allege this place not out of Ambrose himself (which is a base
slander, for I had Ambrose lying before me) but out of D. Bills. because
forsooth I cited the first words (which are not so pertinent, showing the
slender occasion whereupon Ambrose uttered this sentence) in english, as D. B.
does: And yet his blind malice would not let him see that I cited the latter
sentence in latin, out of the Author, which D. B. alleges in English. Quod
qua negligentia obsolouerit, etc. Which words if I had cited as a chief man of
your side does, you would have charged me, either to have alleged a place
which I had never seen, or else notoriously deprived it. T* (...). 1. page 183.
Ambrose speaking of this office of the ^lders (although, says he, not upon so
good occasion,) thus (...) says, whereupon the Synagogue, and after the Church
had Elders without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church. Which Elders I
know not by what negligence they are worn out, etc: and again, Ioh. 2. (...).
2. page 44.
his saying is that the Elders fell away by the ambition of the doctors. Which
allegation the rest, which were but gleaners after him, taking upon his word,
have urged, as if the Seniors themselves, of whom Ambrose speaks, were
ceased before his time, inferring thereupon that he means Lay Elders,
because the learned Presbyters still remained in the Church. When Ambrose does
not say, that the Seniors themselves were grown out of use, (for he does not
say, qui qua negligentia ob^oleuerint) but that (themselves remaining) their
counsel was neglected. If it be demanded; why then does he say habuit
ecclesia, the Church had; I answer because the verb was to have reference
both to the Church which had been before his time, and also to the Synagouge,
not because the Church had not Seniors still. For Jerome, Augustine, and
Gregory are alleged by the disciplinarians themselves, that there were
Seniors in the Church long after Ambrose his time.

Sect. 2. Concerning the ma^^ation of the (...) Do^^^rum.
Thirdly, he cauilleth at the translation of the word docterum, which I rendered
learned or Teachers. For which reading, if he had a sound judgment, he would
rather have given me thanks. In that translation, as also in the exposition, I
intended to give them satisfaction, who (as I thought) were not satisfied with
the judgment of our learned men, who by the word doctorum understand Bishops
only. For indeed if it be read Doctors or teachers (a title in these times
appropriated to Bishops) the allegation out of Ambrose is as easily answered,
as alleged, Ambrose his meaning being plainly this; that whereas the Bishops
in former times were wont to do nothing of importance without the counsel and
advise of certain ancient Ministers, who were his assistants; this was now
grown out of use, either through the negligence, or pride of the Bishops. But
because I thought it might be objected, that the word may signify the learned
as well as Teachers; and so an opposition might be conceived as well of the
learned to the unlearned Seniors, as of the Doctors that is Bishops to the
Presbyters (who though they were learned were not called Doctors, neither did
usually preach) I therefore endeavored so to expound it, as that they, who
should so understand this place, might be satisfied, showing that although the
word doctorum should signify learned, and although they would gather from
thence, that the Seniors which were excluded from consultation were unlearned.
And consequently lay men: yet notwithstanding that the speech of Ambrose
needs not to be understood of Lay Elders. But seeing my adversary, in the
profundnesse of his judgment, rejects that reading as unlearned and without
example, (of which notwithstanding doctorum esto iudicium let the learned
judge) I will cleave to that interpretation, which by Doctorum understands
Doctors or Teachers, as the best, and keep the other in store as a secondary
exposition to satisfy them, who by doctorum shall understand the Learned, and
thereof infer seeing the learned are blamed for excluding the Seniors, that
therefore the Seniors who were excluded, were unlearned. And although my
antagonist fighting Andabatarum more and as cowards use to do, winking, smote
he saw not what, nor cared what, so as he might deal his blows apace,
condemning me in that for which he had cause to thank me: notwithstanding I
will acknowledge my thankefulnes to him, for handling this matter so well, that
in this point he has left our cause better then he found it. For whereas there
being two expositions of this place according to the two significations of the
word doctorum, the sentence has almost no show of probability for Lay Elders,
if doctorum be translated Doctors, but seems very favorable to them if
doctorum signify the Learned: my adversary, I thank him, has freed me from
the difficulty of the latter, (if his exceptions against it be good) and has
permitted me to rest securely in the former. The reader therefore is not to
expect from me an ample defense of that latter sense against his exceptions,
which make for us. For if his exceptions be good, and that sense untrue (as he
says, it is certain and plain that it is) then will there be no difficulty
at all in answering this testimony of Ambrose, that translation which seemed
most to favor Lay Elders, being rejected.

Sect. 3. (...) discussing (...) testimony ^. Amb^^se 17. pages (...).
In discussing this testimony of Ambrose, because it seems to make for him,
he is content to spend 17. pages: who if it were against him would scarce
vouchsafe one line by way of answer.

I have known, when above a dozen testimonies of ancient writers directly
testifying that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus (in which number Ambrose was
one) the chief patron of the pretended discipline among us, has refused so
much as to examine the allegations, T. C. h. 2. part. 1. page ^ 14. (...). 528.
Luke 1. page 41.
as a thing unworthy the turning of a leaf, and in another place he shakes
off Ambrose thus: As for Ambrose, a child may see how violently he forces the
text, etc. And again, the errors and corrupt expounding of scriptures, which
are found in his works, declare, that it had been more safe for the Church,
if by study of the scriptures, he had first been a scholar of divinity, or
ever he had been made Doctor. And of this authority is Ambrose when he is
alleged against the pretended discipline. But if he let fall a speech, which
seems, and but seems to favor their cause, though so impertinent as if it
had been foisted in by others, though in a book, wherein besides some
suspected, there is apparent corruption, (...) 1. Tim. 3.16.
though the testimony it self is mistaken by them, and though their
exposition thereof, has neither scripture to warrant, nor consent of other
writers to second, nor good reason to prove it, notwithstanding because they
want better evidence, they make so much of it, that eight whole leaves are not
sufficient to bestow upon it. Which I mention not that I would have any thing
detracted from the authority of this testimony, as though it made, against
us; but to show, partly the partial dealing of the disciplinarians, and partly
the poverty of their cause.

In my handling this testimony, Sect. Three ^^ noted in handling this
tes^^^^nie of Ambrose.
the refuter observes three things. My re^^ their caption, as ^^ging Ambrose,
^^^^red as ^^^dest.
First, my denial of their exposition with the reasons of my denial.
Secondly, a refutation of their proofs. Thirdly, an allegation of reasons
(omitted by Ambrose) why the counsel and assistance of the Seniors in Ambrose
his time was grown out of use. In the denial it self, he lays upon me such
an imputation of immodestie, as he did before of unkindness. For although he
cannot be against it, but that I may (salua modestia) confute the new writers
for their false or wrong expounding Ambrose of Lay Elders (whom he never so
much as dreamed of) yet he cannot abide I should say they wrong Ambrose, though
I prove that they wrong him by misconstruing his words, and giving them a wrong
sense. Ad page 3 and 35.
And in this nice and idle cavil, for want of better matter, he spends
almost a leaf, aggravating the accusation by numbering 12. Divines of our time,
who understand Ambrose as speaking of Lay Elders, and alleging that it is more
likely that I should mistake him, In prefat.
then they. Indeed if I were alone in this cause, and did oppose my credit
alone to their authority, or expected as my adversary falsely accuses me,
like another Pythagoras to be believed upon my bare word: such arrogancy (I
confess) would not become me. But he sees, and (I hope) feels, that I say
not any thing in this controversy, which I do not prove by such reasons, as
he does not know, without sophistical shifts and mere cauills how to answer.
If these new writers prove their exposition of Ambrose by any sound reason, why
be not their arguments produced? if they speak without reason, why is their
bare authority objected against, both so many reasons as have been used to
show there never were such Elders, and also against the general consent of
antiquity, which never acknowledged any Presbyters or Ecclesiastical Elders,
but Ministers only.

Of my denial he acknowledges two reasons: Sect* 5. The reason why their
exposition was to be rejected.
which though they were lighter then they be, are of more weight then bare
testimonies, especially of parties, who are not to depose in their own cause.
Howbeit I acknowledge but one reason, though my speech may be resolved into two
Syllogismes, whereof the one is a prosyllogisme to the other: and because he
says, in steed of proving, I do nothing but beg the question, I will
resolve the reason of my answer into this Syllogism.

They which make Ambrose against his meaning to testify that which has no
warrant, either in the scriptures, or elder writings of antiquity, do
wrongfully expound him: But those which expound Ambrose, as giving testimony
to Lay Elders, do make him against his meaning, to testify that which has no
warrant either in Scriptures, or elder writings of antiquity:

Therefore those who expound Ambrose as giving testimony to Lay Elders, do
wrongfully expound him.

The proposition is manifest. The assumption has 2. parts, the one that
Lay Elders have no warrant either in scriptures, or in the elder writings of
antiquity. The other, that the sense which they give to his words, is against
his meaning. The former was proved in my former challenge, that not any one
testimony can be produced out of the writings of the Apostles and Fathers,
mentioning or meaning any Lay Elders. The which is a sufficient allegation in a
respondent holding the negative, until the opponent by sufficient instance can
prove the affirmative. And therefore his cavil in saying, either that I do but
beg the question, which himself should prove, is false and foolish: or that
if it were granted: it would not prove their exposition to be against his
meaning, (for he might testify that which has no warrant either in
scriptures, or elder momuments of antiquity) is both an ignorant mistaking
(for those words as you see, were not inserted to that end,) and a needless
extenuating of Ambrose his testimony, as being such a one, of whom it may be
said, that he testifies that which has no warrant either in scriptures or
other monuments of antiquity. Ad Page 36.
The rest of his words are mere babbling. The latter I prove, by this Reason:
To whom Ambrose gives testimony, he complains that their council and
assistance in causes Ecclesiastical was grown out of use, and seems to
charge the bishops with slothfulnes, or pride therefore.

But it was not Ambrose his meaning to complain that the council or
assistance of Lay Elders was grown out of use, nor to charge the BB: with
slothfulnes or pride for it:

Therefore it was not his meaning to give testimony to Lay Elders.

The truth of the proposition is evident, by the words of of Ambrose himelfe.



The assumption is thus proved: A Diocesan Bishop, who not only approved, but
labored to magnify his own calling, and was as far as any from subiecting
either Bishops or Ministers, to the Presbyteries of Laymen (as the
Presbyterians do) would not complain that the council or assistance of
Lay Elders, (such as the Disciplinarians mean) was not used, or charge the
Bishops with slothfulnes or pride for it:

But such a one was Ambrose:

Therefore he would not complain for want of Lay Elders, etc.

The proposition if it be explaned, will need no further proof. The
Elderships of Laymen, such as the Disciplinarians stand for, 1. were never in
use together with Bishops, but either were devised to supply the government
of Bishops, when they were depressed, as in Geneua, Scotland, and the
Low Countries, or where orthodoxall Bishops were wanting, as in France, or are
urged to extrude Bishops, as among us: 2. in their Presbyteries consisting for
the greatest part of Lay Elders, all having equal right of Suffrage, and all
things being carried by plurality of voices, it is evident that the
Ministers, which in parish presbyteries are but one or two at the most, and in
others the far less number, are subjected to the Lay Elders, as being the
greater number.

It is manifest therefore, that a Diocesan Bishop, who not only approved but
sought to magnify his calling, and was as far as any from subiecting
Bishops or Ministers to the Presbyteries of Laymen, would not complain of the
want of such Elderships.

Now that Ambrose was such a one as I affirm in the assumption, I will
manifestly prove in answering the refuters cauills. For he (as being led
with a spirit of contradiction) after his usual manner, grants neither
proposition nor assumption, nor any one branch of them to be true. Which
course (me thinks) should discredit him with all indifferent Readers, who may
discern him to write, not out of conscience, but out of a resolution to cavil
and contradict: especallie, if they consider that hitherto (though he would
scarcely grant any thing to be true that I had said: yea, in his preface
auowed, that I have scarce uttered one true word) yet he has not been able to
prove any one thing which I delivered to be false. And such will his success
be in the rest.

Sect. 9. His answer to the Reason.
That he might fit this Argument to his own strength, he has cast it (as his
manner is) into a connexiue syllogism: For it is an easy thing to frame a
connection, and when he has done to deny the consequence. But yet belike this
consequence was too strong for him to deal with, whiles the Medium consisting
of 3. branches, was bound together: therefore he dissolueth it, taking every
branch by it self, indeuouring like a gross headed Sophister, to persuade the
Reader, that because he can bow every twigge severally: therefore the whole
bundle or faggot is weak. For the 3. branches being joined together, as they
are in the proposition, the conscience of the Reader will I (doubt not) give
testimony to the manifest truth of the proposition, understood as I explaned
it. But though it be to no purpose, if he can bend and break the branches
severally, yet we will try his dealing that way: and what he weakneth by
dissoluing, I will stre^gthen by uniting. And first, The ^ Con^^^^^^ce.
he says, this consequence is naught: If Ambrose were a Diocesan Bishop
(understand who magnified his own calling, and could not abide that Bishops or
Ministers should be subjected to the censures of Laymen) then would he not
give testimony to Lay Elders, (he should have said, then would he not have
complained of the want of Lay Elders, who were never thought to be wanting,
where Bishops were thought to be lawful.

And why? because D. Whitgift was a Bishop, yea an Archbishop; and D. K. would
be a Bishop, and yet both give testimony to Lay Elders. Because D. Whitgifts
grant is often laid in our dish, Page: 62^
the Reader is to know, First, that he denies Lay Elders could be proved out
of the scriptures. Secondly, he grants they had been in use as Calvin and
others had testified, taking it upon their credit, being loath either to
contradict those famous learned men, or to impeach the credit of those Churches
where the Presbyteries were erected. Which course of not contradicting them had
still bin held, if the Elders had not been obtruded as Christ's ordinance, to
extrude those, who (in respect of their first institution), were ordained of
God. Thirdly, B. Whitgift was so far from complaining of the want of
Lay^Elders, that he was a chief instrument of God under the Prince to keep
them out.

The testimony, which D. K. gives to your Lay Elders, appears by his Sermon:
where, for confuting your Presbyteries, you say he spitteth out much poison
against these Elders, and spends much gall upon them. God grant the poison of
Aspes be not under your lips, and that your self be not in the gall of
bitterness, who so virulently and bitterly use to rail on men of so good note
in Gods Church. But his testimony concerning your Elders, is so far from
complaining of the want of them, as that he does not only say, but also prove
at large, that there never were, nor yet do need to be such. Only you catch
hold of his exposition of Ambrose his speech, which as he says, may well be
understood of Elders in years, experience, and gravity, having some temporary
commission to assist in ordering the Church, but not such as your Lay Elders.
It is very true, that although Seniores or Presbyteri, be a name of order,
signifying Ministers and Priests; yet according to the original signification
thereof, it is used by Tertullian, and here by Ambrose, (as appears by the
occasion of his words) as opposed to the Iuniores of the Clergy. Apolog: c. 3*
And so not only Luther understands the word as you heard before, De offic.
li. c. 20.
but Ambrose so speaks elsewhere: showing that it was not needful that the
Iuniores, the younger men of the Clergy should go to the houses of Widows,
and Virgins but only to visit them, and hoc cum senioribus and that with the
Seniors or elder sort of the Clergy, that is with the Bishop or with the
Presbyters, Sect. 7.
if there be great cause.

The second consequence.
Secondly, he rejects this consequence: if Ambrose did labor to magnify the
calling of Bishops, then was it not his meaning, etc: for says he Su^tonius or
Tacitus might magnify the excellency of the Monarchy, and yet confess that
the state of Rome had been democraticall, or might they not complain that the advice of the Senators was not now regarded, without whose counsel Tiberius in
his five first years would do little or nothing? Ad page 37.
Yea did not Samuel magnify the monarchical government under Saul, and ^et
testify that they had been otherwise governed, yea and complain that the
form was altered* These examples, unless they had been better fitted, are to
little purpose. If he could have said, A Monarch laboring not only to
justify but to magnify the royal calling, and not enduring that Monarchs
and Princes should be subjected, either to the Senate or people, would
notwithstanding complain that the state is not either Aristocraticall or
popular, he had fitted the example, though he had spoken untruly; For if
Suetonius and Tacitus had been Emperors and such as did magnify the
Monarchical government and could not abide either that the commonwealth
should be ruled by the multitude, or themselves ouer-ruled of the greater part
of the senate, then would they not complain that the government was not
Democratical, or Aristocratical. But thus he might have said both fitly and
truly. As a good king mislyking that some of his predecessors had managed all
things without the advice of their senators, might complain, that through
their pride or temeritie the advice of the senators was neglected: so Ambrose a
good Bishop, seeing the Bishops not to regard the advice of their ancient
Presbyters, that is Ministers, as it were their senators, without whose advise
nothing of importance was wont to be done in the Church, might also complain
that their counsel and assistance was grown out of use through the
slouthfulnes or pride of the Bishops. As for Samuel, if either the state before
was Monarchical, or if he had magnified the Monarchical government of the
Jews when Saul was set over them, he had had little reason to complain for
the altering of that government into a Monarchy. But the state before had
been Monarchical, neither did Samuel magnify the Monarchical government
when Saul was set over them. For until Saul, God himself was the Monarch of
the Jews, 1. Sam. 12.12.
retaining iura Maiestatis the right of sovereignty in his own hands, chiefly
in prescribing them laws, and in appointing their chief magistrates and
governors, Deuteronomy. 33.5 Iud. 17.6. and 19.1. and 21.21. 1. Sam. 8.7.
especially the judges whom he set over them to be as kings for a time. But
when the people would needs have a king, after the manner of other nations; the
Lord says to Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but me have they rejected,
that I should not reign^ over them. And so far is Samuel from commending the
government of the ear^hly King, in comparison of the Celestial; that
describing unto them the fashion of their future king, 1. Sam. 8
11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18. The.3. consequence.
he tells them, that whereas before, God did rule them by his will and by his
own laws only, they should now be ruled after the kings will and pleasure,
which would not prove very pleasant to them, as he shows by many particulars.

Sect. 8. As touching the third branch, he says the consequence thereof is of
the same feather with the former. If Ambrose could not endure that Bishops or
Ministers should be subjected to Lay-persons, then would he not complain that
Lay-Presbyters were out of use. It follows not says he, there may be
Presbyters wherein are Lay Elders and yet the Bishops and Ministers not be
subjected to them. But say I, where the far greater part of the Presbyteries
consists of Laymen, as always it has done according to the practice of
Geneua, and always would do according to the new Parish-discipline, it cannot
be avoided, but that the fewer number of Ministers would be subjected to the
far greater number of Lay Elders; especially, if they (according to the wise
conceit of our new disciplinarians) may be perpetual. But whether these three
branches severally do infer a necessary consequence or no, it is not
material, seeing they were jointly propounded, and seeing from them united a
necessary consequence depends. Wherefore the seuering of them to weaken the
consequence, and to breed matter of cauil, was a sophistical, if not a leaud
trick. The leaudnes whereof will the better appear, if we consider his dealing
with the assumption: for he, that having severed the branches of the
proposition, exacted from every one severally a necessary consequence: in the
assumption, he will have them all taken together. For before he takes the
assumption in pieces, meaning to cavil with every part severally, he uses
this Caution: Provided always, and be it remembered of the Reader, that if any
one of the three parts thereof prove false, though the other two be never so
true, the whole assumption is in law of true reason, utterly void and of none
effect: But if in the proposition I be urged to make good the consequence from
each part severally, the assuming of any one part will conclude the question.
As thus: If I must be forced to maintain this consequence, If Ambrose were a
Diocesan Bishop, then would he no^ complain of the want of Lay Elders: it will
be sufficient to assume thus, but he was a Diocesan Bishop, to conclude, that
therefore he would not complain of the want of Lay Elders. It is true, that it
is required in my assumption, as I propound it, that every branch must be true:
but the reason hereof is, because they were joined in the proposition to make
good the consequence. For if they be severally propounded in the proposition,
they may also severally be assumed in the assumption. Whiles therefore he
charge me with a bad consequence, himself is to be charged with a badde
conscience.

Sect. 9. The ^ branch of the assumption (...) Ambrose (...) a Diocesan B.
But come we to the assumption, with the first branch whereof the refuter
plays thus. Ambrose says M. D. was a Dioces^n Bishop. Was he so indeed? Had
he not only supreme, but (...) authority (as our BB: have) over (I know not
how) many hundreds of Ministers, in causes Ecclesiastical? Was he an absolute
Pop lin^ indeed? What a shame is this? that he who eue^ now charged so many
learned men to have done Ambrose wrong, should now be found the man ^uilty of
that trespass? Ambrose was no more like a Diocesan Bishop, then he that is tied
by virtue of his calling, to preach the word, and administer the sacraments in
his own Church, etc.

Can a man of a sincere conscience professing (as themselves term it) the
cause of sincerity, be so malepartly confident in denying that whereof he is
utterly ignorant? or rather can a man that takes upon him the defense of this
controversy, as a chief champion of the pretended discipline, and one (I
doubt not) of the chief challengers of the Bishops, to dispute with them in
these causes, be ignorant, that Ambrose was a Diocesan Bishop? does he know
that he was a Diocesan at the least, and can he thus deny it, and keep his
conscience sincere? well, though the task be all one, as if I should be
required to prove that the Bishop of London, or rather the Archbishop of York,
is a Diocesan Bishop: yet seeing my learned adversary denies it, and
pretends some reason of his denial: I will first prove, that Ambrose was at
the least a Diocesan B: and for the greatness of his authority, and largenes of
his jurisdiction, comparable with ours; and in the second place, I will answer
his reasons.

First therefore you are to be advertised, that Mediolanum Millaine, whereof
Ambrose was Bishop, not only is a Metropolis, or seat of a Metropolitan, but
was both in and before Ambrose his time. Strabo Geograph. lib. 5. Insubres hac
aetate sunt qui Mediolanum Metropolin habuere.
says it was a Metropolis, wherein the governor of the province of Liguria
and Aemilia kept his residence. Athanasius speaking of Dionysius the Bishop of
Millaine says Epist. ad solita.
(...) it also is a mother city of Italy. It is also evident and a thing
confessed by Beza De grad. Min. c. 24.
that the distribution of the Church into Dioceses and provinces, was framed
according to the division of the Dioceses and Provinces under the Roman Empire.

Ambrose himself Centur. 4 c. 10.11^7. Ruffin. hist. li. 2 c. 11. Paulin. in
vit. Ambr.
was a man of consular dignity in Rome, and being appointed governor of
Liguria and Aemilia came to Millaine. Where keeping his residence, it fell out
Theod. lib. 4. c. 5.
that Auxentius the Bishop being dead, and the Emperor Valentinian having
assembled (as the manner) Balsam. in Conc. cost. in. c. 2. olim omnes pro.
^i^ciarum metropolitani, a proprijs synodis eligebantur. Conc C. haelc. act.
11. oste^dat Bassianus si per synodum ReMetropolis
was for the choice of a Metropolitan) the Bishops of that uerendorum
Episcoporum and consueta lege Episcopus Ephesiorum est constitutus.

The honor and sublimitie Episcopal cannot be matched with any comparison: if
you compare it with the excellency of Princes and civil Magistrates, you
shall compare gold with lead. As for the people, the Episcopal function has
not only obtained to be preferred before them, but also is enjoined by
Evangelical precepts with fatherly authority to govern them: for they, as
the sheep of Christ, are committed to BB. as to rulers, who together with
Peter received that authority to govern them, etc. Again, Cap. 3.
these things I have spoken says he, to show that nothing in this world is
more excellent then Bishops.

For his deeds, consider his repelling of Theodosius Theodor. li 5. c. 18.
the Emperor from entering into the Church, until he had testified his
repentance: his not permitting him to remain within the Cha^cell, alleging
Ibid.
that it was a place peculiar to the Clergy, (which favor when Nectarius the
Bishop of Constantinople would have granted to him, Theodosius professed that
he had with much a do learned the difference between an Emperor and a Bishop,
adding, that he had scarce found a Teacher of the truth. Ambrose is the only
man whom I know worthy the name of a Bishop) his refusing to be tried in a
cause of faith, in the Emperors Consistory, when Valentinian the younger had
sent for him, contrary to a law made by his Father Valentinian, protesting
that he would rather loose his life, then by his yielding, the honor of
Bishops should be diminished. Non Epist. 32. ad valentin. imp.
tanti est Ambrosius vt propter se deijciat sacerdotium, non tanti est vnius
vita, quanti est dignit as omnium sacerdotum: his refusal Orat. in Auxent. l.
5. Epist. inter Epist. 32. and 33. Epist. 33.
to deliver up the Churches to be possessed of Arians at the Emperor
Vale^tinians commandment, professing that the palaces pertained to the
Emperor, but the Churches to the Bishop. His other doubt is, whether I compare
Ambrose with them of his own time, or with them that lived before or after,
etc: here was a knot sought in a bullrush: seeing my meaning is evident, that
Ambrose labored as much as any of the ancient approved Fathers. And that he
did so, it is already sufficiently manifested. If that be so says he, then
either all men thought it needful for the Bishop to be advised and directed as
D. Bilson says by the counsel and consent of Elders: Cap. 11.157.
or else that Ambrose who thought it needful, as appears by this testimony,
labored not to magnify such a calling of Bishops, as M.D. maintains. Ambrose
and others thought it needful, that a presbytery of grave and ancient
ministers, should with their counsel and advise assist the Bishops in cases of
doubt (as D. Bilson says) of danger and importance, when as yet nether
Synodes could assemble, nor Christian Magistrates could be found to help and
assist the Church. But this, as it does nothing further the cause of
Lay Elders: so does it no more detract from the dignity of Bishops, to use the
counsel of wise and learned men; then it does derogate from the Majesty of
Kings, to use the advice of their wise and faithful Counselors.

There remains the third branch. Sect. 13. The 3. branche of the assumption.
Whereunto, besides his railing against our Bishops for subiecting Ministers to
their Chancellours, Commissaries, and Officialls, which are but laymen, he
answers only That if adjoining Presbyters to the Bishop be a subiecting him
to them, I doubt not but this testimony will prove, that Ambrose was not
willing, that Ministers should be subjected to the Consistories of Laymen.

There are two differences between that which Ambrose holds and our new
Disciplinarians. Ambrose speaks of an assistance of ancient ministers; they,
of Lay Elders.

Ambrose, of an assistance to advise and direct, such as is the advice of
Counselors to a Prince; they of an assistance to ouerrule, as in the Roman
Senate, by plurality of voices, giving their Bishop not so much as one negative
voice, Ambrose therefore requires an assistance of ministers subjected to the
Bishop: they an assistance of Lay Elders, subjecting the Bishops to them.
Neither should they of all men rail against the BB. for submitting ministers
to Chancellors, etc. seeing it is not so intolerable, that ministers should be
subjected to the censure of men wise and learned in the laws, and that so
far only as the B. shall think fit, as that they should not only be
ouerruled by such as the Lay Elders must needs be in most countrey-parishes,
but also stand to the courtesy of them and their neighbors, to be deposed and
deprived at their pleasure.

Now, how far Ambrose was from subiecting BB: or Ministers in causes
Ecclesiastical, to the Consistories of Laymen, may appear, first, by his
sentence given against Palladius, the Arfian. Bishop, in the Council of
Aquileia For when Palladius refused to answer, Cons. Aquil.
but before some honorable persons of the Laytie, who were at hand. Ambrose
answered, Priests or BB. ought to judge of Laymen, and not Laymen of Priests.

And again, though he be found guilty of many impieties, notwithstanding
we are abashed, that he which challenges Priesthood to himself, should seem
to be condemned of Laymen. And therefore forasmuch as herein he is to be
condemned, who expects the sentence of Laymen (seeing rather priests ought
to judge of Laymen) according to those things which to day we have heard
Palladius professing, and according to those things which he refused to
condemn. I pronounce him (says Ambrose) unworthy of Priesthood. Epist. 32.
But chiefly by his Epistle to Valentinian the young Emperor, wherein he
refuses to be tried, as his adversary Auxentius desired, in the Emperors
Consistory: alleging, that his Father Valentinian had by Law provided, that
in the cause of faith, or of any Ecclesiastical order, he ought to judge qui
nec munere impar sit, nec iure dissimilis: who is neiher in function unequal,
nor in right unlike; that is, Sacerdotes de Sacerdotibus voluit iudicare: He
would have BB: (for them ordinarily he means by Sacerdotes) to judge of BB:
or Priests. Yea, moreover (says he) if a Bishop were otherwise called into
question, and the cause of manners were to be examined, even this also would
he (that is, Valentinian the Father) have to belong to Episcopal judgment.
When did you ever hear most gracious Emperor, that Laymen in a cause of faith
judged of BB: Are we therefore so bowed with flattery, that we forget the
right of BB? And that I should think what God has given me, is to be
committed to others? If a Bishop must be taught of a Layman what to follow,
let the Layman dispute, and let the Bishop hear, let the B: learn of the
Layman. But surely if we call to mind either the tenor of holy Scriptures,
or ancient times, who can deny, but that in a cause of Faith, In causa inquam
fidei Episcopos solere de Imperatoribus Christianis, non Imperatores de
Episcopis judicare: You shall one day (if it please God) come to ripe years,
and then you will be able to judge. Qualis ille Episcopus sit, qui Laicis
Sacerdotale substernut! What a Bishop he is, that subiecteth the right of
Bishops to Laymen. Your Father being through Gods goodness of ripe years,
said, Meum non est: I am not able: (For so Ambrose expounds him in the next
Sentence, Inhabilem se ponderi tanti putabat esse Iudicij) to judge among BB.
and does your Grace now say, I ought to judge; would Ambrose condemn such a
Bishop as should subject the right of BB. to Laymen, and would he allow of
such prerbyteries of Laymen as intrude upon the right of BB: yea which are
urged to extrude BB? could he not endure that a B. or minister should be
judged in causes Ecclesiastical by the consistory of the Emperor, because it
consisted of Laymen; and would he allow a B. or minister should be judged,
yea deposed and deprived by a parishionall consistory or whole parish
consisting of Laymen? does he commend the good Emperor that said he was
unable to judge among Bishops; and would he allow of private men, unlearned,
and unacquainted with government, as competent Judges in causes
Ecclesiastical?

And thus much of my denial of their exposition of Ambrose, made good by
sufficient proof.

CHAP. VIII. The proof of their Exposition of Ambrose, disproued, and the
reas^os which I alleged, why the Counsel of the Seniors, was neglected,
defended.
Sermon. Sect. 7. Page 14. But let us examine the force of their Argument. Ad
Page 39.


Ambrose says, there were Elders in the Church, as well as in the Synagogue:
Therefore, say they, there were Elders. It follows not, etc: to learned
Presbyters, in the middle of page 16.


THeir Argument is here such, as in this question of Lay Elders, perpetually
they use in all their proofs, of Scriptures, and Fathers, that is, from the
genus to the species: yea, to a fancied, or fained species, affirmatively. As
if they should say, he is a Magistrate, therefore a Constable, an ancient
Citizen, therefore an Alderman, or rather thus: It is a man, therefore the man
in the moon. I see a ship, therefore it is Argo. Like the wise man of
Athens, who standing in Pyraeo on the key there, said every ship he saw was
his. Saving that he was somewhat wiser, because he had a ship at the Sea:
These men's ship, does swim in their own brains.

So strong is their fancy, as we shall hear, that when either Christ says,
Matt. 18.
Tell the Church, that is, as themselves expound it, the rulers of the Church,
they strongly conclude, therefore tell Lay Elders: or Luke Act: 14.23.
that Paul and Barnabas, ordained Presbyters, ergo, Lay Elders, or James, Iam:
5.
is any sick, let him send for the Presbyters, ergo, for Lay Elders: or Paul
Romans 12.8
he that rules, Mark how he speaks of a ruler, therefore of a Lay-Elder:
God has appointed gouernements, therefore of Lay Elders: or Ignatius Ad
Trallian.
be subject to the Presbyters, as to the Apostles of Christ, ergo, to
Lay Elders: or Tertullianus, Apolo. 39
Certain approved Seniors be presidents, etc: ergo, Lay Elders: or Jerome In
Esa. 3
we have a Senate of Presbyters, Ergo, of Lay Elders. And that no man should
live in fear of the great strokes, which this great champion has threatened,
let him understand, that these be all the strokes that he will strike, when his
turn of striking comes.

To this argument, and all the rest, I answer by denying the consequence,
which is so badde, as the refuter is loath to Father it; and yet neither in
this, nor in any other of their testimonies, they have or can make no better.
Well, says he, Whatsoever the argument is, the answer is well worse. meaning,
as it seems, the reason of the answer, which was this: for even the
Synagogue had Seniors of the Priests, as well as of the people. My reason may
thus be explained: If not only the Church had Seniors, that were ministers,
whose advise was neglected in Ambrose his time, but even also the Sinagogue
(meaning Israel, or the state of the Jews) had Seniors of the Priests; then
it follows not, that the Seniors of whom Ambrose speaks, were Lay Elders.
But the antecedent is true in both the parts of it:

Therefore the consequent:

The consequent of the proposition is necessary: for an argument from the
genus to the species, does not hold affirmatively. Genus says Fabius, Quintil.
li: 5. c: 10.
ad probandum speciem minimu^ valet, plurimum ad refellendum, the general is
of no force, to prove the special affirmatively, though it be of great force
to disprove it, if you argue from it negatiuely. As for example, it follows
no^, because it is a tree, that therefore it is a plane tree. It is not
necessary, says ye Philosopher Topic 2.2
that what is affirmed of the genus, should also be affirmed of the species.

As touching the assumption: the former part, viz: that the Church had seniors,
which were ministers, I took for granted, because either all those places of
Scriptures and Fathers as I say, or at least some, as my adversary will
confess, where Presbyters be named, Ministers are understood.

The second part I prove out of Ier. 19.1. Ps. 37.2.
Ierem: 19.1. where the Prophet is commanded to take with him some, not only
of the Seniors of the people, but also of the Seniors of the Priests, that is,
men of authority as well of the Ecclesiastical state as of civil.

Which words, though the refuter understand as I do, as proving, not that the
Jews had an Eccclesiasticall Senate, consisting partly of the Priests, and
partly of the Elders of the people (for of such a presbytery, though there be
much talk, yet there is no proof) but that in the Jewish state there were as
well Seniors of the priests, as Seniors of the people: notwithstanding the
seely Philosopher, would feign make the Reader believe, that I confess (which
most confidently I do deny) that in the Church of the Jews, there was an
Ecclesiastical Eldership, consisting both of the priests and Seniors of the
people: and thereupon would infer, that this testimony makes me: Because
(forsooth) Ambrose acknowledges that there was such an Eldership in the
Church, as had been among the Jews. But among the Jews there was as he
says, I confess, an Ecclesiastical Senate consisting of the Priests, and
Elders of the people, therefore Ambrose acknowledges such a Presbytery to
have been in the Church, consisting of Ministers, and Lay Elders.

First for Ambrose: he does not speak of Eldership, either among Jews or
Christians; but shows, that because both the Jews and Christians had
Seniors, this is an Argument, that age is honorable, seeing that ancient men
were of authority, both among the Jews, who had Seniors as well in the
Ecclesiastical as civil state, and also among Christians.

Now, to infer from hence, that either the Jews or Christians had an
Ecclesiastical senate consisting in part of Lay Elders, is a vain collection.
For if by Synagogue is meant the state of the Jews (they might have) as indeed
they had) a Senate consisting of Priests and Levites, and chief of the people;
but that was not an Ecclesiastical Senate, as hereafter shall be showed, but
their chief Counsel of state* ^f by Synagogue, you understand only ye
ecclesiastical state of the Jews; in that, there were no other seniors, but of
the Clergy of Israel.

And as for my confession, I protest, that I meant nothing less, then that the
Church of the Jews had an Ecclesiastical Senate consisting of the Seniors of
the Priests and Elders of the people. For I know it to be an idle conceit,
having no other warrant, but the probabile est, of a new writer, a chief party
in this cause. But hereof more in my answer to his allegation, out of Matthew: 18.

Besides, can any man that does not wilfully pervert my meaning, understand me
to speak of any, but the Seniors of the priests, saying, and of such Ambrose
speaks, when he says, in the Church, Sect. 2. Their argument urged, and
refuted. Ad page 40.
or Church-causes, nothing was don without their consent.

But it may be, that your former consequence may be confirmed, if the
testimony of Ambrose be better pressed upon us, to which purpose I say in the
Sermon: If it be said that Ambrose speaks, etc. If it be said? says the
refuter, he knows it well enough, that it is said, and shall be maintained,
that Ambrose speaks of such Seniors, whose advise was neglected, through the
default of the teachers, (not learned or teachers, as M. D. sets it down)
and therefore of such Seniors as were not teachers. Cunningly therefore and to
weaken the force of our argument, does he here so produce and allege it, as
if it were rather conceived for our help by himself then propounded and
expressed by us.

Let him therefore, for his honesty and credits sake, show the Reader where
this testimony of Ambrose is thus urged. In the mean time, the Reader shall
understand these 2. things

First, that the disciplinarians, knowing that their proofs out of Scriptures
and Fathers, will not necessarily conclude for them, if they should seem to
enforce them by discourse: Therefore they use this poor policy, to hold
them out, (as it were Mineruaes shield, as if they were so pregnant, that they
need not to be urged, but the very naming of them were sufficient to put us to
silence. --

They think it therefore, their best course, in all their writings almost to
take it for granted, that their discipline is the very discipline and kingdom
of Christ, their presbytery, the very ordinance of Christ: and when they
should prove it, as they would seem most sufficiently to do, they hold out a
few places of the Scriptures and Fathers, barely quoted, being so far from
urging them, as that for the most part, they do not so much as cite the words:
(thus in the book of H. I. dedicated to the King. Page: 67. Page: 26.29.31.
1604. urging a reformation after the newe-cut. Thus in the protestation that
came out of the North, made in the year 1606. and printed Anno 1608. Thus in
this worthy work of the refuter, as after you shall hear, when he comes to
deal his blows) thinking belike that the very naming of such witnesses will
sufficiently, if not daunt us, yet satisfy their simple followers, who are too
easily led with shows.

The other thing is, that I have urged this testimony for them, and (to speak
the truth) have enforced it better, and made it stronger for them, then ever
they made it, or have yet the wit to conceive.

But to answer their argument, for now it is theirs, neither must my words be
retained, learned, or teachers, etc: The Reader therefore is to remember what
before was said, that the word Doctorum, being ambiguous, signifying either
learned, or teachers, this place of Ambrose does accordingly admit two
interpretations.

The one, as it signifies Learned, and is a common title to the Bishops and
Presbyters: the other, as it signifies Doctors or Teachers, and was a title in
those times peculiar to the BB. as shall be proved. The former of these, which
seems more to favor the Lay Elders, my adversary does reject, and insisteth
in the latter. But he does not show (as me thinks he should) how this
testimony then will conclude for Lay Elders. It was sufficient for him, to
contradict me, though he left his cause in w^rse case then he found it. For
my part, I am so far from this spirit of contradiction, that I do agree with
him in preferring the latter exposition, which by Doctorum, understands
Doctors, before the other.

Let us see then, how that sense being retained, this place does conclude for
Lay Elders.

All Seniors that were not called Doctors, in those times, were Lay Elders.

The Seniors, whose counsel was neglected by the Doctors, were such Seniors,
as in those times were not called Doctors:

Therefore the Seniors, whose counsel was neglected by the Doctors, were
Lay Elders.

I deny the proposition: because in those times the title of Doctor or Teacher
was peculiar to BB: we therefore may with more truth affirm that all Seniors
or Presbyters that were not called Doctors in that time, were Ministers; and
thereupon conclude, that therefore the Seniors, whose Counsel was neglected by
the Doctors, were Ministers.

For the clearing of this matter, Sect. 3. Four things declared.
I will briefly show these four things.

1. That not Presbyters, but Bishops, were in those times called Doctors. 2.
That the Presbyters, though they were not called Teachers, were notwithstanding
Ministers. 3. That certain ancient or principal Ministers called Seniores, in
the primitive Church, did so assist the Bishop, that nothing almost of
importance was done without their counsel and advise. 4. That their counsel
and assistance was much neglected, and themselves much debased in Ambrose his
time.
For the first: First that BB. were called Doctores.
After that Arrius, being a Presbyter, had poisoned the Church with his
heresy; the Presbyters or Ministers, were in many Churches restrained from
preaching. So that the Bishops, who before were the principal, in Ambrose his
time, they were almost the only Teachers; and for this cause the name of
Doctors was appropriated unto them. And this is so clear a case, that the
Bishops in those times were in a manner the only Doctors; that li. 2. part. 2.
page 42. and 43.
therefore thought the Presbyters, which are mentioned in the Fathers, to have
been no Ministers, because he perceived they were no Teachers, and for this
cause commends the decree of the Church of Alexandria, that the Presbyters
should no more teach, and prefers the Affrican Churches before others, for
that the same order was observed therein. As touching Alexandria, Socrates
Socr. lib. 5. c. 22. (...),
reports that Presbyters do not preach there, and Sozomen Sozom. li 7. c. 19.
that the Bishop alone of the city does preach. (...) says he (...). Both of
them assigning the heresy of Arrius to have been the original occasion of
that custom.

Concerning the use of the Affrican Churches says T. C. until Augustines
time, that one testimony Possidon. in vita. Augustini.
is more then sufficient, whereby is affirmed that Valerius B. of Hippo did
contrary to the custom of the Affrican Church, in that he committed the
office of teaching unto Augustine who was an Elder of that Church, and that he
was checked therefore of the Bishops, checked I say, notwithstanding that
Valerius is there declared to have done it for support of his infirmity,
because himself was not so apt to preach. To conclude, his conceit is, that
not the Presbyters mentioned in the Fathers and by him translated Elders, but
the Bishop only had right to preach, the other but by indulgence or by
commandment. In those times therefore the Bishops alone were called Doctores
(...) at the least: for further proof whereof, if you expect some other
testimony either of Ambrose, or of others in that time, you may have recourse
to his book of offices, and to the Council of Carthage. Ambrose De offic. li.
2. c. 24.
therefore says, that the Bishop must not be offended, if either a Presbyter
or Deacon, or any other of the Clergy do by mercy, fasting, integrity,
learning or reading obtain great estimation. Gratia enim ecclesiae laus
Doctoris est, for the grace of the Church is the Doctors that is the Bishops
praise. But if any do not obey the Bishop and desiring to advance himself,
seeks a^ counterfeit affectation of learning, humility, or mercy, he is
lifted up with pride going astray from the truth. In the Council of Carthage
it was decreed, that the people which never had a Bishop of their own, should
not have Conc. Carth. graec. c. 54. Carthag. 3. c. 42. Mat. 23.8.10.
(...) a Doctor or Teacher of their own, that is a Bishop: for so is the title
of that chapter, that the parts of the Diocese without the consent of the
Bishop (...) should not receive another Bishop.

Sect. 4. The 2. that Presbyters though not called doctores yet were Ministers.
But hereupon we may not infer with T. C. that therefore the Presbyteri
mentioned in the Counsels Fathers and histories of the Church, were no
Ministers; or that by the word of God they had nothing to do with the word and
Sacraments. Far be it from us so to think, for nothing is more evident, then
that they were Ministers.

The Fathers knew no Lay-Presbyters, nor Lay-Deacons no more then Lay-Bishops;
but reckoned these three, Conc. Aneyr. c. 1. and. 2. Can. Apost. 8.14.16.17.50.
Conc. Nic. c. 3. Con. Carth. graec. c. 3. and 4. Carth. 2. c. 2. Antioch. c. 3.
Chalced. c. 2. Sard. c. 10. etc.
for sacred or consecrated persons, calling them three degrees of the Clergy;
the Bishop, answering to the high Priest; the Presbyters, to the Priests; and
the Deacons, to the Levites. For proof whereof, there are almost as many
evidences in the Canons of the counsels, as there be leaves.

But that it may most clearly appear, that the Presbyters were Ministers, I
will prove it first by their name, Secondly by their office, thirdly, by some
laws that peculiarly concerned them. For their name: as they are most usually
called Presbyters, so oftentimes (...) or Sacerdotes and these names confounded
with Presbyteri, that is, Priests. In the Council of Carthage Con. Carth. 2.
c. 2. grae c. 3.
continency is committed to Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, as it becomes holy
Bishops, Priests and Leuits. Tertullian De prescript. aduers. herstico.
reproving the disorder of Heretics says, among them, hodie Presbyter qui
cras laicus, nam and laicis Sacerdotalia munera iniungunt, he is to day a
Presbyter who to morrow is a layman: for even to laymen do they inioyne
priestly functions.

Cyprian Lib. 4. Epist. 10.
speaking of Numidiuns to be chosen a Presbyter says he was reser^ed that God
might add him to our Clergy, and that he might adorn the decayed store of
certain Presbyters with glorious Sacerdotibus.
Priests. And more plainly in another place he says Cum. Episcopo Presbyteri
Sacerdotali honor coniuncti. lib. 3. epist. 1.
that the Presbyters are joined with the Bishops in priestly honor. Dionysius
termed the Areopagite, instead of Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, into which
three he distinguishes the Clergy, uses Ecclesiast. hierarch. c. 5.
the names (...) for the Bishop, (...) for Presbyters, and (...) for Deacons.
Sozomen Soz. li. 7. c. 19.
also calls them (...) that is Priests, Isidorus, Isid. de eccles. offic.
lib. 2. c. 7.
those who in the old Testament were called Sacerdotes, are they who who are
called Presbyteri. And then he sets down their office. That to them is
committed the dispensation of divine mysteries, they rule the Church, and in
the consecration of the body and blood of Christ are partners with the Bishops,
as also in teaching the people and office of preaching. The Ancient Council of
Ancyra Conc. Ancyr. c. 1.
permitting the Presbyters (who having once sacrificed, did after refuse) to
retain their place; notwithstanding suspendeth them from the exercise of their
function in these respects, forbidding them (...): to offer the communion, to
preach, or to minister in any part divine service.

The learned Author of the unfinished work which goes under the name of
Chrysostom In Mat. 25. homil. 53.
by the servant which received five talents and gained other five,
understands a Presbyter sent of God, whom he calls sometimes Teacher and
sometimes Priest: and shows how by his five talents he gains other five:
that is, by the knowledge of Christ as a talent committed to him, a godly life;
by the office of a Presbyter the careful government of the Church: by the
word, the sincere preaching of the word of truth: by baptism, the begetting of
worthy children to the Church: by the sacrifice; the offering of an holy and
immaculate sacrifice for the people, and making intercession for their sins.

More particularly for the ministry of the Sacraments, the Council Conc.
Laod. c. 8.
of Laodic^a determined that those which returned from the heresy of the
Cataphrygians, though of the Clergy among them, though supposed great men,
must with all diligence be instructed and baptized either of the Bishops or
Presbyters of the Church. Tertullian says, Tertull. de baptism. Hier. adu.
Lucifer.
the chief Priest which is the Bishop has right to give baptism, then
Presbyters and Deacons, etc. In the Canons Can. Apost. 3. and 31. Conc.
Neocaesar. 13. C. Carth. graec. 4. Con^. Elib. c. 32. C. Constable. in Trullo. c.
26.
called the Apostles and in diverse Counsels it is presupposed that to
Presbyters it belongs to administer the communion In the Council of Nice
Conc. Nic. c. 18.
the Deacons who are there said to have no power to celebrate the Communion,
are forbidden to deliver it to the Presbyter who has power, but must receive
it either at the Bishops or Presbyters hands. To omit other of the Fathers,
Cypr. li. 3. epist. 14. and 15.
does not Jerome Hier. ad Euagr.
expressly testify, that the Presbyters prayers, the body and blood of Christ
are consecrated. For the Leiturgie or saying of divine service, it is reckoned
Conc. Ancyr. c. 1. and 2.
among the functions both of Presbyters and Deacons, and such Presbyters or
Deacons as without the consent of their Bishop do remove to other Churches and
refuse to return when they are called by their B. are Can. Apost. 15. Conc.
Antioch c. 3 and 4.
forbidden (...) to minister or serve any more.

As for the ministry of the word; though Presbyters were for a time by reason
of Arrius his fall restrained from preaching, yet both before and after they
were allowed to preach. Among their functions, as you heard, the Council of
Ancyra Con. Ancyr. c. 1.
reckons preaching. The 58. Canon Can. Apost. 58.
of the Apostles so called, requires them to instruct not only the laity,
but the Clergy also. Ignatius Ad Antioch.
requires them to feed the flock. Origin In Ps. 37. hom. 1.
testifies, that all BB. and all Presbyters or Ministers erudiunt nos, do
instruct us, etc. Basil Ethic. (...). 70.
says, that to them and to Deacons, in committed (...) the preaching of the
Gospel. Calvin Instit. li. 4. c. 4. 3.
speaking of the primitive Church, says, it was the duty in those times of
the Bishop, as well as of the Presbyters, to apply themselves to the ministry
of the word and Sacraments, Chrysostom. Chry. in 1. Tim. 3.
having affirmed that there is no great difference between a Bishop and a
Presbyter renders this reason, for they also have received (...) authority to
teach, (...) and government of the Church, and what things the Apostle has
said concerning Bishops, do agre^ also to Presbyters. In them therefore it is
required that they should be (...) able to preach as most plainly appears by
comparing that place with Tit. 1.5 7.9. Socrates Lib. 5. c. 22.
reports that in Caesarea of Cappadocia, and in Cyprus on the Saterdaies and
Lords days in the evening (...) the Presbyters and B B. expound the scriptures.

Sect. 5. As touching the custom of Alexandria, in restraining the Presbyters
from preaching, he Socrat. ibid. (...).
says, that it began after Arrius troubled the Church: and Sozomen Sozom lib.
7. c. 19.
likewise, that it was not the custom before Arrius being a Presbyter by his
preaching broached his new opinions. And this is most plainly testified by
Epiphanius, Haeres. 68.
who says that Arrius was a Presbyter in Alexandria (...) who was Rector of
the Church called Baucalis, for all the Catholic Churches, says he in
Alexandria are under one Archbishop, and to them severally are assigned
Presbyters: whereof when he had named some, he says in one of these was
Colluthus, in another Carpones, in another Sarmatas, and Arrius in another. Now
it is manifest, that every one of these at their accustomed meetings (...)
teaching the people committed to their charge in their Sermons, made division
in the people, whereof some inclined to Arrius, othersto Colluthus, some to
Carpones, others to Sarmatas. And as they taught diversely in their several
Churches, some one thing, some another: so the people called themselves, some
Arrians, some Colluthians, etc.

Neither was it the custom of the Churches of Africa, as T.C. gathers, that
Presbyters should not preach at all; but that they might not preach, nor
administer the communion in the presence of the Bishop.

And that was it which both Valerius granted to Augustine being a Presbyter
Possidon. in vita. Angust. c. 5.
potestatem coram se in Ecclesia Euangelium predicandi power to preach the
Gospel in the Church himself being present, contrary to the use and custom
of the Affrican Churches, and also nonnulli Episcopi not all, but some Bishops
found fault with. Whose reprehension Valerius regarded not, because he knew it
was the custom in the East Churches (as appears by Chrysostomes homilies at
Antioch.) And some other Bishops, (even Aurelius August. Epist. 77.
himself the Bishop of Carthage,) were so far from finding fault with
Valerius, that they followed his example. Insomuch that some other Presbyters
having received the like power, began to preach the word to the people Coram
Episcopis in the presence of the Bishops. But that so learned a man as T. C.
should be so transported with prejudice as to think that Augustine was a
Lay-presbyter I cannot sufficiently wonder, especially, considering that
Valerius, when he had ordained him Presbyter, rejoiced and gave thanks Possid.
in v^t. August. c. 5.
to God, who had heard his prayers in sending such a one, as might, verbo Dei
and doctrina salubri Ecclesiam Dei aedeficare edify the Church of God, with
the word of God and wholesome doctrine. Jerome De 7. ordin. Eccle.
such another Lay-Presbyter no doubt) though he grant that the Presbyters may
not celebrate the Communion in the presence of the Bishop standing at the Altar
(for so his words are Nec ego dico presentibus Episcopis, etc: though in
Gratian Did. 95. c. 6.
it be corruptly written. Ecce ego dico) yet he says, Ad Nepotian. pessimae
consuetudinis est in quibusdam ecclesijs tacere Presbyteros and presentib.
episcopis non loqui.
it was a very bad custom in some Churches that Presbyters might not preach in
the presence of Bishops. And such was the custom of the Church of Rome as
appears by Leo Leo. epist. 88. in fine.
who denies it to be lawful for Presbyters in the presence of the Bishop
unless he command them either to administer the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ or to teach the people, etc.

The Council of Vaux, Conc. vasens. 2. c. 2. tempore. Theodosij. 2.
held not long after Ambrose his time, decreed for the edification of all
Churches, and for the profit of the whole people, that not only in cities,
but also in parishes the Presbyters should have power given them to preach. And
if by any infirmity the Presbyter were hindered, so that he could not preach
by himself, that then the Deacon should read some homily of the Fathers.

To conclude, it seems strange to me, that they, who out of the Ex Chrysostom.
in 1. Tim. 3. and Hieron. ad Euag.
Fathers would prove the Presbyters to be equal to the BB. in power of order,
as indeed they are, excepting the power of ordination, (for as Jerome Adeuagr.
says, excepting ordination, what does a Bishop that a Presbyter may not do,)
equal I say in the ministry of the word and Sacraments, should deny they
were Ministers; or that to preach or to administer the Sacraments did not
belong to them by reason of their office. Ambrose in 1. Tim. 3.
says of a Presbyter and Bishop there is one order, vterque enim sacerdos est,
for either of them is a Priest.

There remain the laws and discipline peculiar to Presbyters as being of the
sacred ministry: As for example, that Presbyters and Deacons should not be
chosen ex plebe out of the people or laity but Epist. Council. Illyrici. apud
Theodor. li. 4. c. 9.
(...) out of the sacred order or Clergy. That as in the Counsel of Nice it
was attempted, Socrati. li. c. 11.
so in some others concluded, Con. Constable. in Trullo. c. 3.
that Presbyters and Deacons should lead a single life; that he which had
married a widow, or was the husband of a second wife, might not be a Presbyter.
That they might not take upon them worldly business, not so much as Cyprian. li.
1. Epist. 9.
Gardianship; that they might not Conc. Antioch. c. 3. Nicen. c. 15. Arelat. 2.
c. 15. Laodic. c. 24.
remove from city to city, or from one Church to another, without the leave
of the Bishop; that they might not go into a Tavern, and such like.

It is therefore most evident, that howsoever the Bishops were called the
Doctors, yet the Presbyteri also were Ministers. Neither can any one instance
be given of a Presbyter either in, or before or after Ambrose his time, who was
not a Minister. For howsoever T. C. affirms, that this Eldership of theirs
continued in the Church diverse hundred years after Ambrose his time (which
does not well agree with his exposition or reading of Ambrose) yet being
challenged by D. Whitgift D. Whit. 653.
to show any one testimony, and auouching that he could not produce any one,
he T.C. l. 2. part. 2. page 68. in med. Sect. 6. The 3. thatancie^t Ministers
called Seniores were wont to assist the B.
answers thus: The next I leave to the Readers judgment.

For the third: there was great necessity that the Bishops in the primitive
Church, when they had neither the assistance of the Magistrate, nor direction
of Ecclesiastical laws, should use the Council and assistance of wise and
learned men. For which cause, Cyprian, Lib. 2. Epist. 5. and. l. 3. Epist. 10.
and. 19. and 22
to avoid both ouersights in himself and offense in others, resolved to do
nothing of moment without the common council, and advise of his Clergy, and
for the same cause was Chrysostom Synod. contr. Chrysostom. iur. gra^corom. 556.
accused (...) that without the Presbytery and without the consent of his
Clergy he made ordinations.

And that Presbyters were wont to hear causes, and to assist the B. it
appears by the testimonies, first of Ignatius ad Trall.
who calls the Presbytery the (...), or consistory of God, a band of
Apostles, and the Presbyters the Councellers, and Coassessors of the Bishops.
2. of Tertullian, Apolog. c. 39.
president probati quique seniores the approved Seniors be praesident. Apolog.
c. 39.
Thirdly of Clement Clem: epist. 1: ad Jacob.
in his epistle to James, translated by Rufinus, and cited by Gratian, if any
of the brethren have Saints let them not be judged by secular Judges, sed apud
Presbyteros Ecclesiae quicquid illud est dirimatur, de 7. ord: eccl: did. 95
c. 8.
but before the Presbyters of the church let the cause be decided, and to their
determination let the parties stand. Fourthly of Jerome, Presbyters, says he
(meaning ministers whom he also calls Priests, and attributes to them the
ministry of the word and Sacraments) from the beginning were appointed Judges
of causes, etc.

And to the same purpose the Authors of the centuries Centur. 4 7. pa. 490.
Sect. 7. The 4. that the Seniors advise was grown out of use in Ambrose his
time.
testify, that the Presbyters besides that they taught the people, did also
compound suites and controversies.

Now that their advise was much neglected, and themselves but too much dejected
by the Bishops in Ambrose his time, appears not only by his, but also by
Ieromes Hier. de 7. ordin. eccl: c. 7, and ad Nepotianum
complaint.

Likewise, by diverse Canons in the fourth council of Carthage, Conc. Carthag.
4.
held about the year 401 wherein it was decreed, Can: 22.
that the Bishop without the assembly of his clergy, should not ordain
clerks: and that in the Can: 3.
ordination of a presbyter, the Presbyters also, which be present, should with
the Bishop impose their hands: that the B: Can. 23.
should not determine any man's cause, but in the presence of his Clergy: that
he C: 32.
might not alienate or sell the goods or possessions of the Church, without the
consent of his clergy: that the Bishop C: 34. and 35.
though in the Church, and in the assembly of the presbyters, ought to sit in
an higher place, yet privately he should use the presbyters as his Colleagues,
and sitting himself, should not suffer a presbyter to stand: that C: 37 and 39.
the Deacons should acknowledge themselves to be Ministers to the presbyters,
as well as to the Bishops; and that if the presbyters badde them, they might
sit in their presence, which otherwise they might not Con: Nic. c. 18.
do.

All these things considered, together with that which before has been
alleged, to prove that there were never any Lay Elders, do necessarily
euince, that there is no reason to imagine, if Doctorum signify Doctors or
Teachers, Lay Elders to be meant by Seniors in this place.

And so much of the exposition of this place, according to the former sense of
the word Doctorum, signifying Doctors: which, with my adversaries consent, I
do much prefer before the other, and therefore can be very well content to
give in the latter.

Sect. 8. Though doctorum should signify learned, yet this place makes not
for Lay Elders.
Notwithstanding, because some perhaps will understand the word Doctorum, as
being a common title both to Bishops and Presbyters, signifying learned, and
will therefore imagine that the Elders whose counsel was neglected by them,
were Idiotae or Laymen: for their sakes therefore, I will briefly show, that
though this interpretation be admitted, yet there is no necessity that Seniors
should signify Lay Elders: Ad page 41.
for Doctorum, being according to this interpretation, a common title both to
Bishops and Presbyters, Ambrose his meaning may be conceived to be this, that
the assistance and council of ancient Ministers, meant by Seniors, who were
wont to assist the Bishop, was grown out of use, either by their own
negligence, or the Bishops pride. Whereunto, after much froath of idle words,
he replyeth, First, Ad page 42.
that the Council of Ministers was not grown out of use in Ambrose his time:
and this he indeuoureth to prove by five testimonies, First of Jerome Genesis in
Tit. 1.
saying that the Churches at the first were governed communi presbyterorum
consilio, by the common Council of Presbyters: Which testimony makes against
him: for Jerome speaks of such Presbyters as Paul speaks of, who were
Ministers, and are there called Bishops. If therefore the Church was at the
first governed by common council of Ministers, and if Ambrose complain that
their council in his time was neglected, which at the first had been used,
and whereby the Church had been governed: who sees not, that it was the
neglect of the Ministers advise whereof Ambrose complains: 2. yea but Jerome
Ierom. in Esa. 3.
says, we also in the Church have senatum nostrum ^^tum Presbyterorum, our
senate a company of Presbyters: which testimony is wont to be alleged, to
prove that in Ieromes time there was a Presbytery of Lay Elders. But here my
adversary presupposing that Lay Elders were grown out of use, in Ambrose his
time, (whom T: C: supposes to have continued diverse hundred years after
Ambrose brings it to prove, that in Ieromes time, who was almost as ancient
as Ambrose, there was a Senate of Ministers, which no man doubts of. For
elsewhere he says Ad Rusticu^ 16. q. 1. c. 7. Ecclesia.
the Church has a Senate, a company of Presbyters, without whose Counsel,
the Monks may do nothing. And not only in Ieromes time the Church had, but in
all Ages since, even to this day, it has such a Senate, which in latter times
has called Capitulum, the chapter. Howbeit, both in Ambrose his time, and
since, the advice, and assistance thereof, notwithstanding the Decree of the
fourth counsel of Carthage, has been, though in some things eue^ to this day
used, yet in the most things, and for the most part neglected.

His third testimony, (which he says is plain enough) of the said Jerome,
Did 95. c. 6. ex. lib. de 7. gradib. Eccl.
cited in the canon Law, is also plain against him. For having said as even
now I alleged him, that the presbyters from the beginning had been appointed
to hear and judge causes, as the Bishops assistants, he proves it, because
they also in the scriptures are called Bishops, howsoever now the Bishops
envied them that dignity, etc. Conc. Carth. 4. c. 23.


His 4. testimony is, the 23. canon of the council of Carthage (which even
now I cited) which makes against him, rather then for him. For seeing good
laws arise from bad manners, it is to be imagined, that according to the
complaint of Ambrose and Jerome, who were somewhat before this council, the
presence of the Clergy, and Though the Clergy were to be present, yet none
but Presbyters were the Bishops coassessors: for Deaco^s might not sit among
Presbyters, C. Nic. c. 18 Hier. ad Euagr. presbyteri sedeni, Diaconi stant.
assistance of the presbyters was neglected: and that this neglect gave
occasion to the making of that canon.

His. 5. testimony is of D. Bilson, (though he name also another learned man,
only to abuse him.) Howbeit Chap. 11.160.
D. Bilson understands Ambrose, as co^plaining of the Bishops of his time,
who whiles they would seem to rule alone, had excluded, or neglected the aid
and counsel of their brethren of the Clergy, who were wont to advise and
assist them, as well in Doctrine as in Discipline.

And whereas in the second place he replieth, that slothfulness and pride must
needs be referred to the same persons, and not slothfulnes to presbyters, Sect.
9. Ad page: 43. Whether slothfulnes and pride must necessarily be referred to
the same subject Doctorum: signifying Learned: and being a common title both to
BB. and Presbyters.
and pride to BB: I answer, that if Doctorum be a common title to both (as it
is, if it signify learned) and if the slothfulnes of the presbyters, rather
then of the BB. be as like almost to be the cause why their assistance grew out
of use, as the pride of the BB: then is there no necessity that slothfulness
and pride should both be attributed to the Bishops: but rather it is very
likely, that slouthfulnes is imputed to presbyters, and pride to the Bishops.

But both the parts of the Antecedent is true, therefore the consequent.

But let us hear his Reasons.

The first, If Ambrose had meant to ascribe slouthfulnes, to the Seniors, he
would have said, that their assistance grew out of use, either by their own
slothfulnes, or rather by the pride of the BB.

The second: he would have said not Doctorum, but Ipforum desidiam, which
reason is the latin of the first, and the first the english of this: Such
judgment here is showed in distinguishing of arguments. But who knows not,
that the same sentence may very many ways be varied, in respect of the
words, the same sense remaining? so that this exception might be made against
any exposition almost. If I should say:

As in Christ's College, so in some others, Elections were wont to be carried
by the voices of the iuniors, as well as the Seniors, which thing is now grown
out of use, by what means I know not, unless perhaps, by the remissenes of
the fellows, or rather arrogancy whiles they would rule alone, I might not
unfitly so speak, ascribing remissnes to the junior fellows, and arrogancy
to the Seniors.

His third and fourth reasons are impertinent, understanding the word Doctorum
of Doctors, a title in those times, peculiar to Bishops, and not of learned,
which is common to both. For though the special title of Doctors according to
the former interpretation, which is ^ better, be opposed to of the Seniors or
presbyters, who were not called Doctors; yet to a common title, neither of the
specials, to which it is common, are to be opposed, but both to be subjected.

The 5. that Ambrose charge both slothfulnes and pride upon the same persons,
called Doctors, etc. But this should have been proved and not begged:
especially, seeing I disprooue it in the reason following.

For that which he pratteleth of amplifying the fault, by rising from the less
to the greater, has not so much as a show of a good reason, to dsproue my
exposition; seeing of the 2. causes, Ambrose seems to make the slothfulness
of the learned, that is, the Presbyters, not so principal as the pride of the
learned, that is to say, the BB. unless perhaps says he, by the slothfulnes of
the presbyters, or rather pride of the BB.

Lastly, says he, If we make diverse sorts of teachers (he should have said
learned) Ambrose his speech were defective, and somewhat must be added, as
either by the slothfulnes of the teachers, or rather pride of the Bishops, or
some of them.

I answer, if the word Learned be used, being a title common, both to the
Seniors and the Doctors, there needs no addition to make the sentence perfect;
but a distinct application of the common title to the special sorts, according
to their several faults, by which they are to be distinguished; Slothfulness
being the fault of the one, and pride of the other, as before you heard, in
the example of fellows.

But why should I spend time in answering such slieght Objections? Sect. 10.
The reasons why I reject their infere^ce, first dissembled by the refuter, and
then depraved.
the which notwithstanding, seem of such weight with him, that he wondereth,
that all these worthy reasons considered, I would understand Doctorum,
signifying learned, as a common title, both to the Bishops and Seniors, and
that says he, as if he were another Pythagoras, upon his bareword, I say his
bare word; for as yet he has not vouchsafed us one piece of a Reason.

This is one of the refuters poor shifts, to make himself wrangling work: To
take an Assertion of mine, and having severed it from the Reasons wherewith it
was guarded, to cavil with me, as if without alleging a Reason, I would
(like an other Pythagoras) be believed upon my bare word. Whereas in truth,
both here and in other places, where I am the Answerer, I render more reasons
then were needful, were it not, that I sought to satisfy, in hope that men
will at the length be satisfied with reason.

As for example, this place of Ambrose is objected, as giving testimony to
Lay Elders.

I answer there is no necessity, this place should so be understood. Here
might I have rested, and put the opponents to enforce this testimony, which by
them is barely propounded. But being desirous to give satisfaction, I urge it
for them thus:

Ambrose says, there were Seniors in the primitive Church, whose council was
now neglected, therefore he gives testimony to Lay Elders. I deny the
consequence, giving a reason, because those Seniors were of the Clergy and not
of the Laity.

Against this answer I make them reply thus; The Seniors advise was neglected
by the learned: Therefore themselves were such as were not learned, or of the
Clergy.

To this I answer, that if the word Doctorum signify learned, Notwithstanding
this place may be understood of the Seniors of the clergy only: If we
conceive Doctoru^ signifying learned, as a common title, both to the BB: and
Seniors, and of this answer I give a reason by explaning this testimony of
Ambrose.

And whereas I did foresee that it would be objected that Doctorum was to be
understood either of pastors of parishes alone, according to the conceit of
the new Disciplinarians, or of BB. a lone according to the rest: I therefore
sought to prevent this objection in those words, for if you expound Doctorum
for pastors, etc. Wherein a sufficient reason is concluded, holding strongly
against the parish B. and his Elders. And not contented with all this, in
desire to give satisfaction, I rendered the true causes besides arrogance of BB.
which I knew was presupposed, why the assistance of the ancient ministers,
called Seniors, was grown out of use: and yet forsooth, like another
Pythagoras* I look that my bare word should be credited without reason.

Yea, but says he, that which is added in steed of a Reason, has no more
reason in it, but his own blindness, saying, that I cannot see how, etc.

But is it not strange, that he, who is so sharp sighted to find out
Syllogismes where none were intended, could see no reason here?

Or shall we not think, that he chose rather like a shifting sophister, to
take advantage of that modest phrase, the^ to encounter with the reason it
self, which may thus be concluded.

That which is a matter of great labor and pains, to the undertaker, and ease
to the relinquisher, is not to be ascribed to slothfulnes in him that takes it
upon him, but rather in them who are eased.

But the taking of the whole burden, and cumbersome employment of hearing
suites, and managing all causes Ecclesiastical, upon the BB: is a matter of
great labor and pains to them, and ease to the Seniors.

Therefore the Bishops, vnderaking the whole burden, and cumbersome employment
of hearing suites, and managing all causes Ecclesiastical, is not to be
ascribed to slothfulnes in them, but rather to the Seniors.

One of these premises should have been denied, Sect. 11. His encountering with
the conclusion.
and the denial made good, if he had been able: but in steed hereof he
encountereth with the conclusion, laboring, as we say, clauum, clauo pellere,
and undertaking to make me see, (if I will not shut mine eyes,) the
contradictory of that conclusion to be true, which notwithstanding cannot be
false the premises being true.

And first, he denies that Ambrose spoke by guess, as I say, but certaienly
and upon knowledge; when Ambrose his express words be these, Quod qua
negligentia obsoleuerit nescio, nisi forte, etc: which by what negligence it is
grown out of use I know not, Ad page 44.
unless perhaps by the slouthfulnes, etc. 2. He says, it might be a matter of
slothfulnes, in the BB: to suffer the seniors to neglect their duties. But not
to their own so great trouble, will M, D. say, we might believe him, if we saw
not pride drive men to undertake, more then they either need to be charged
with, or are able to weeld.

Then is it not their slothfulnes belike, that caused them to take the whole
burden upon themselves, but their pride, which made them wink at the seniors
slothfulnes, as giving way to their own ambition.

Thirdly, he says, the Bishops might provide for their own ease, by putting
off the burden to their Chancellors, Commissaries, Officialls, Whether the BB.
did put off the burden to their Chancellours, etc.
etc: and therefore it might be imputed to them as a matter of sloth or
idleness, and pride to: and so the word Doctorum, rightly expounded, for
Pastors of Parishes alone, and not to Diocesan Bishops. As though their
Parish-Bishops were more likely to have had Chauncellours, etc: then Diocesan
BB: But I answer, 1. the question is not what they might have done, but what
they did.

Now it is evident, that in Ambrose his time, and a good while after, till the
Presbyteries were in a manner wholly neglected, the Bishops had not ordinary
vicars, or chancellors, or ordinary Commissaries, which were not of the
Clergy; But what they did without the advice of their Seniors, they performed
ordinarily in their own persons, or else extraordinarily delegated the same to
some of special trust. In some cases, it is evident, that both then, and long
after, they used the assistance of their Presbytery, as in the judgment of
Heresy, or for deposing of a clergy man, etc.

Siricius the B. of Rome, in an Epistle Ambros: epist: 80.
to Ambrose, denouncing Iouinian, Auxentius, etc. for heretics, shows, that
for their trial, his whole presbytery had been assembled; and says, that by
the common consent of his whole clergy, they were condemned for heretics.

The 4. council of Carthage, Cap. 23.
as you heard, ordained that the Bishop should hear men's causes in the
presence of his clergy. The 2. council of Towers decreed Turon. 2. c. 7.
that a Bishop might not depose an Archpresbyter, without the counsel of all
his compresbyters: But whom negligence casts out, let him with the counsel
of the presbyters be removed. The council of Carthage Co^. Cart. graec: c. 20.
sieve Carth: 3. c. 8.
appointed, that in the cause of a Presbyter, six, and of a Deacon, three
Bishops should be joined with their own Bishop, because as the counsel of
Civil co^: hispal: 2. c. 6.
determined, one Bishop may to Priests, and ministers, that is, Presbyters and
Deacons. give their honor, but one alone may not take it from them: but in the
cause of inferior Clergy men (...) the Bishop alone of the place shall hear
and determine it, viz. in the presence of his Clergy, according to the
aforesaid Conc. Carth. 4 c. 23.
Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage.

But as in some cases they used the counsel of the Presbyteri; so in others
they did for the most part undergo the whole burden themselves. For the
proof whereof, the examples of Ambrose and Augustine may suffice. For Ambrose
was so occupied in hearing and determining men's causes, that he had so little
time left him for his corporal repast, or spiritual studies; that Augustine
August. Confess. lib. 6. c. 3.
could never find him at leisure to break his mind unto him. And Augustine
August. Epist. 110. Non permittor ad quod volo vacare ante meridiem* post
meridiem occupationibus hominum teneor.
was so encombred with hearing of causes, that scarcely he could have the
forenoone for his studies, the afternoon being wholly taken up with other men's
business: neither could he, when the Councels of Numidia and Carthage had
imposed a task upon him, and when his people had promised to forbear him for
five days, obtain so much breathing time from their affairs. But when he
was old, and was desirous to spend the rest of his time in writing, and in the
study of the scriptures, he nominated Eradius to be his successor; in most
earnest manner requiring, and charging the people, that they would suffer him
to put off the burden of those employments to him. Possidonius Possid. in vita
August. c. 19.
gives him this testimony, that he heard men's causes diligently, sometimes to
the hour of repast, sometimes fasting the whole day: but always himself had
the cognizance of them, and determined them.

The Emperor Justinian Constit. Novel. 123. c. 21.
provided by law, that in Ecclesiastical causes civil judges should have
nothing to do: sed sanctissimus Episcopus secundum sacras regulas causae finem
imponat, but let the holy Bishop according to the Sacred Canons determine the
cause.

As for ordinary Vicars, Chancellors or Commissaries which were Laymen, in
those times the Bishops had none: for not so much as the steward of the Church
might be a Layman: whereupon Gregory Lib. 7. Epist. 66.
writing to Ianuarius a Bishop, charge him to take heed, that Ecclesiastical
matters be not committed to secular men, but to some approved of the Clergy.
And the second Council of Civil, penned as it seems by Isidor who was
president thereof, pronounces Conc. hispal. 2. c. 9.
it an unseemly thing Laicum esse vicarium Episcopi, and seculares in ecclesia
iudicare, that a Lay-ma^ should be the Bishops Vicar, and that secular men
should judge in the Church: for in one and the same officer there must not be
different profession. Which having confirmed out of Deuteronomie, it infers:
wherefore it behooves us to obey Gods book and the preceps of the holy
Fathers, ordaining that they who shall be associated to Bishops in
Church-gouernement, may not differ neither in profession nor habit.

Notwithstanding that they extraordinarily committed to others or delegated
causes to be heard appears by the aforesaid example of Augustine. But more
clearly by the practice of Siluanus a godly Bishop of Troas, not long after
Ambrose his time: who Socrat. lib. 7. c. 37. (...), etc.
perceiving that they of the Clergy made gain of the contentions of them who
came to be judged, he would not at any time appoint a judge of the Clergy, but
himself receiving the petitions of Suitors would make choice of some faithful
man or other of the laity, whom he knew to be a lover of justice, and to him
he would commit the hearing of the cause: and for this cause Socrates says he
was greatly renowned. Out of which examples we may note that causes were wont
to be brought to the Bishop, that he heard them himself if he had leisure:
otherwise, that he committed the hearing of the cause to some of his Clergy:
but yet so, as if he saw cause, he might make choice of some other, whom he
durst better trust.

Secondly, I answer, that the reason which I used, concludes most strongly,
against the refuters exposition, who by Doctorum will needs understand parish
Bishops. Who if they should take the whole burden upon them of
Church-gouernement, and deciding causes Ecclesiastical, without the aid or
assistance of the Elders, could not therefore be accused of idleness: for I hope
the refuter will not say, that they also had Chancellers or Comissaries under
them to whom they might put off those cumbersome employments. Sect. 12. Of
Deanes and Chapters and Cathedral Churches.

That there were Cathedral Churches in Ambrose his time.




It remains now, that I should proceed to the causes, which I rendered why the
Council of the Seniors in Ambrose his time was so much neglected by Bishops.
But that my adversary, after his accustomed manner, will needs take occasion to
show his own ignorance, by taking up a speech which as he says, I let drop by
the way, concerning Deanes and Chapters of our Cathedral Churches, as being a
resemblance or remainder of the Presbyteries which were in the Primitive
Church. For such is his reading, that he doubts not to deny, that in Ambrose
his times there were any Cathedral Churches, or that our Deanes and Chapters
are so much as resemblances of the Presbyteries of those times.

For Cathedral Churches, you are to understand, that although in every
Diocese there were many parish churches, both in country and city, yet there
was one chief church in the city, which was the Bishops Cathedra or seat,
wherein the Bishop most usually performed the duties of the Episcopal and
pastoral function, whereunto a peculiar Clergy belonged, consisting of
Presbyters, Deacons, and other inferior orders, and whereto Episcopium the
Bishops house was near adjoining. This church in those times was called
sometimes Cathedra sc. Episcopi, as Council. Carthag. Conc. Carth. 5. c. 5.
where it was decreed that no Bishop, relicta cathedra, leaving his Cathedral
Church, should remove his seat or See, to any church in his Diocese, the
Greek Carthag. graec. c. 72.
has (...). And likewise BB: are forbidden Carthag. c. 122. sieve Affric. c.
88. Item. Carthag. graec. c. 54. sieve Affric. c. 20. Conc. Mileuit. c. 24. and
25.
to neglect any of those places which belong (...) sometimes (...) or Matrix,
and Matrix Cathedra Conc. Carth. 3. c. 46. Carth. gr. c. 124. Affric. c. 90.
as Conc. Carth. 3. c. 46. Episcopus qui matricom tenet. Conc. Carth. graec. c.
24 sieve Affric. c. 90. (...). If in the mother Churches, that is to say the
Cathedral the Bishop shall be negligent, etc: sometimes Conc. Aurelian. 3. c.
18. Conc. Neocaesar. c. 13.
Ciuitatensis ecclesia, sometimes (...) as in the Council of Neocaessaria.

Such a Church was that in Millaine, whereunto Ambrose his house adjoined: for
that Theodoret. l. 5 c. 18.
(...) that house of salutation where Ambrose sat, when Theodosius came to him
to be absolved, was not, as T. C. imagined, Ambrose his own house before he
was Bishop: for it was intra septa Ecclesiae within the bounds of the Church,
and Paulinus Paulin. in vita Ambr. nihil sibi quod hic suum diceret,
derelinquens.
testifies, that Ambrose gave away all when he was made Bishop, and left
himself nothing which here he might call his own. In that Church Ambrose
usually preached, to that Church the Emperor himself resorted, In the
chancell whereof, when Theodosius the Emperor would have remained to receive
the communion, Ambrose Theod. lib. 5 c 18.
sent him word by his Archdeacon, that that place was peculiar to the clergy,
which belonged to this Church, consisting of the Arch-Presbyter and the other
Presbyters, of the Archdeacon and other Deacons, and other inferior orders of
the Clergy. For albeit the name Decanus was not perhaps as yet in use, yet the
office was, and the Deane signified by other names. For sometimes he was called
(...) the chief or ruler of the Presbyters, even as Ambrose his Archdeacon, in
the place even now cited, is called (...) Such a one was Chrysostom, Theodor.
l. 3. c. 19. (...).
in Antioch a long time. Lib. 4. c. 18.
Eulogius at Edessa: sometimes (...) so Peter (...).
was the Protopresbyter in the Church at Alexandria. And Arsacius, Socrat. lib.
6. c. 9. Iure gaecorum. in synod. Contr. Chrysostom. page 557.
who succeeded Chrysostom in the Bishopric of Constantinople, the
Protopresbyter there. In latin most usually Archipresbyter; as Hist. tripart.
li. 10. c. 10.
histor. tripat. lib. 10. c. 10. and in the fourth Council of Carthage: Conc.
Carth. 4. c. 17
where it was decreed that the Bishop should take care of widows, Orphans and
strangers, not by himself but by his Archpresbyter, or by his Archdeacon.
Jerome Ad Rustic. Monach. tom. 1. page 46.
showing that in each society there is some one ruler, says, singuli
Ecclesiarum Episcopi, singuli Archipresbyteri, singuli Archdiaconi the Churches
have each of them one Bishop, one Archpresbyter, on Archdeacon. In process of
time they were called decani. Archipresbyteri Decret. Gregor. li. 1. tit. 23.
deoffic Arch. c. 7.
a pluribus decani nuncupantur, Archpresbyters of the most are called Deanes.
Neither were there only Archpresbyters and Deanes of Cathedral Churches which
were called Duaren. de sacr. Eccles. minist. and benef. lib. 1 c. 8.
Archipresbyteri vrbani, and ciuitatenses, of whom all these former testimonies
are to be understood; but also rural Deanes, called sometimes Archipresbyteri
decani, as in the Council Con^. Turonens. 2. c. 20.
of Towers, and sometimes decani firsti. Archipresbyteri parochiarum in the
Council of Council. Agath. c. 15.12. q 2. c. 32. ^ist. 50. c. 64.
Agatha.

The chapter was wont to be called Presbyterium. Placuit Presbyterium contrahi
we thought good the Presbytery should be gathered together says Cornelius
Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 11.
to Cyprian. And Syricius Ambros. Epist 80.
the Bishop of R^me in an Epistle to Ambrose, facto Presbyterio, the
Presbytery being assembled, sometimes Hier. in Esai. 3.
se^atus, caetus Presbyterorum, the senate, or assembly of Presbyters.

The Presbyters or Seniors themselves were called sometimes Conc. Neocaesar. c.
13.
(...), Conc. Agath. c. 22.
ciuitatenses Presbyteri the Presbyters of the city, seniores Tertull. Apol.
c. 39.
by Tertullian and Ambrose, Ambr. in 1. Tim. 5.1.
in the place alleged. The ancient Council of Ancyra having pronounced it
unlawful for the Chorepiscopi or country Bishops to ordain Presbyters or
Deacons, adds Conc. Ancyr. c. 13.
(...), neither yet is it lawful for the Presbyters of the city: whereby it
may in part appear, what was the estimation of the Presbyters of the city in
comparison of the country Bishops.

But as the Archipresbyteri in latter times were called decani, so these
Presbyters of the city were in process of time called Canonici and
prebendarij and the company of them which had been called Presbyterium, was
termed capitulum in english Chapter. Calvin Instit. li. 4. c. 5.
says Presbyteri vrbani versi sunt in canonicos the Presbyters of the city
are turned into Canons or prebendaries. And it is to be noted says Duarenus,
that in every city there was a certain College De sacr. Eccle. minist. ac.
benef. li. 1. c. 7.
of these Presbyters which the Bishop governed, 16.
such as is at this day canonicorum collegium the college of Canons who seem
to have succeeded into their place: and this company of Presbyters Jerome
calls the senate of the church.

By all which it is more then evident, that as in the ancient times they had
Cathedral churches as well as we, and those endowed with great revenues, as
it is easy to prove: so the Deanes and chapters of our Cathedral Churches are
the remainder of their Presbyteries, our Deanes being those who were called
Archpresbyters, our Prebendaries, those which were called Presbyteri vrbani,
our chapters those which they called Presbyteries.

Neither does that hinder which our refuter obiecteth, that our BB: have not
the like assistance of the Deane and chapter that the ancient BB: had of their
Presbyteries. For Ambrose complains, that even in his time their counsel was
neglected. And yet in these times, as the Bishop may use their advise if he
please, so in some cases their assistance is necessarily required, the acts of
the Bishop being void without their consent. Besides sede vacant, in the
vacancy of the Sea, the custody of the Bishopric and Episcopal rights, as
also the election of the new Bishop, is after a sort referred to them. Ad page
46.
And as in times past, so now, the placing and displacing of the Presbyters of
the city, whom we call Prebendaries, appertains to the BB: a few Churches
only among us excepted. And to conclude, as Deanes and Chapters with us are in
a manner peculiar to Cathedral Churches, the seats of Bishops (some collegiate
Churches excepted:) so were the Presbyteries in the primitive Church. Insomuch
that our new sect of disciplinarians might as well say, there was in old time,
and now should be, a Deane and chapter, as a Presbytery in every parish. If
therefore they will sue for reformation according to the precedent of the
primitive Churches, let them seek and sue, that the Bishops may use the
counsel and assistance of the Presbytery of the city, which we call the
Deane and Chapter, and they may hope to prevail, if none of the reasons why
their assistance is forborne be sufficient, which now come to be examined.

Sect. 14. The reasons why the Council of Seniors was neglected.
Sermon. Sect. 8. page 16. But howsoever Ambrose knew not what to say of this
matter, otherwise then by conjecture, etc: to the end of the first point, page
17. These reasons I added by way of surplusage or advantage, (...).
to give satisfaction if it might be. But nothing will satisfy them, who set
themselves to cavil: for whereas I said, I doubt not but the true causes etc:
the refuter depraueth my speech, as if the word I, had been uttered with an
immodest Emphasis: when as I meant no more by that speech, then when we say,
proculdubio, or dubium non est: which kind of speech my adversary (me thinks)
should not so greatly mislike, since their Lay Elders, which have been urged
with such heat, have no better warrant then dubium non est, satis opinor,
constat, probabile est, as you shall hear, when we come to their proofs. They
may say confidently, there were Lay Elders in the time of the Apostles, yea
from the time of Moses until Christ, and that after the example of the Jews
(who indeed never had such Presbyteries) they are to be erected in every
parish: and yet have no better warrant for these things, then their own
conjectures. They may take upon them to auow without reason, that to have been
done in the Apostles times, whereunto neither scripture nor Father gives
testimony: and in me it is great immodestie to affirm that, which but one of
the Fathers seemed to doubt of, though I allege sufficient reason of my
affirmation. For in the first three hundred years after Christ, when
Christians neither had frequent Synodes to determine doubts, nor Synodall
constitutions to direct the Bishops, nor the authority of the Christian
Magistrate to rectify what was amiss in the government of the Church, there
was great necessity that the Bishop should use the advice and counsel of
other wise and learned men: otherwise, his will would have seemed to stand for
a law, and his government would have been subject to oversight in himself,
to remediless wrong toward the clergy and people, and to the obloquy and
scandal of all. But when as provincial Synodes were frequently viz: Twice a
year. Conc. Nic. c. 5. Antioch. c. 20. Chal. ced. c. 19.
assembled to determine doubts, to right the causes of them that were wronged,
to prescribe so many Ca^ons and constitutions, as to the BB: assembling in
Council seemed sufficient for their direction, when the authority of the
christian Magistrate was helpefull to the Church; then we may easily conceive,
that as the Council and assistance of the Presbytery was not so needful, so
both to the Presbyters desiring their ease and Scholasticall quietness, and
also to the Bishops desiring to rule alone, it would seem needless: which
reason I am well content it shall be put into the equal balance of the Readers
judgment, against the cauills of the refuter, Page 46.47.48.
wherewith he has blotted more then a whole leaf. It happened to the
Presbyteries as after it did to the provincial Synodes. For when by experience
it was found to be very troublesome and chargeable to the BB: hurtful to their
churches, tedious to suitors by reason of multitude of causes referred to
Synodal audience, that all the BB: in every country should twice every year for
a long time be absent from their churches, to be present at Synodes; it was
decreed, both by the Emperors and BB, that those causes wherewith provincial
Synodes had usually been troubled, should be referred to the audience and
decisio^ of the Archbishop or Metropolitan. Even so, when it was found
troublesome and tedious to the Presbyters, and hurtful to the Church, that
their time which might better be spent in study of Divinity, to furnish them
for the public Ministry, should be taken up in hearing brabbles and quarrels,
and also their assistance seemed not needful to the Bishops for the causes
aforesaid; it is not to be marvelled, that their assistance grew out of use.
For whereas the refuter obiecteth, and is the only thing worth the mentioning
which he obiecteth, that the Presbyteries continued in Ambroses time, and long
after: I answer, that they continue to this day. But as their assistance now
in matters of government is not much used, so before Ambrose his time it began
to be neglected.

And thus much concerning the testimony of Ambrose: which having cleared as
well as that, 1. Tim. 5.17. being the only places of moment, which use to be
produced in this cause, I might safely conclude from all the premises, that
therefore there were no Lay Elders in the primitive Church: From whence, besides
the maine conclusion, that therefore the primitive Church was governed by
Diocesan Bishops, Two conclusions inferred upon the disp^oofe of Lay Elders.
the two particular assertions concluding against our new sect of
disciplinarians will necessarily follow. The first, that therefore there were
no parishionall Presbyteries: the second that therefore parish Bishops or
pastors were subject to the Diocesan Bishops.

Against the former, Chap. 10.155.
he obiecteth a speech of D. Bilson affirming that every Church in the Apostles
times had many Prophets Pastors and Teachers, which, as the refuter says, Ad
page 49.
might make a Presbytery. But the Churches D. Bilson speaks of, were not in
several parishes, but as he says in populous cities, such as that of Ephesus
Act. 20: and those provided, not for any one parish, but for the whole city
and country adjoining, that is to say, the Diocese. For when my adversary
shall produce any one pregnant testimony that in such congregations, as we
call parishes, there was a Presbytery of Ministers, I will also grant, that
there were no other but parish Bishops. In the mean time let the Reader hold
this for a certain and undeniable truth, that there were no Presbyteries of
Ministers, but only in cities and Cathedral Churches, but hereof I shall have
occasion to speak in the second book.

As touching the second conclusion, it follows thus: the parish pastor had
either a Presbytery to assist him, or he was subject to superiors, as namely
the Diocesan and provincial Bishops, to ouerrule him, or else he ruled like a
Pope; for a fourth thing cannot be named, before there were Christian
Magistrates. But it is absurd to imagine, that in the primitive Church they had
an absolute popeling, who neither had assistants nor superiors, for that were
to ascribe not only supreme, but also sole power to them: and it is as false,
that in several parishes there was a Presbytery to assist him, therefore it
remains that the parish Bishops were subject to the authority of the
Diocesan and provincial Bishops.

To the proposition he answers two w^ies, first by retortion: that what I say
of the parish Bishop his ruling as a Pope, may with more probability be spoken
of a Diocesan Bishop, which I have answered before. For this is the second
place where he labors out of my word^ to prove our Diocesan Bishops to be
popes, using this insultation in the margent. Sic tu beas ami^os? But though
their parish Bishops, whom they make the supreme Ecclesiastical officers,
would be absolute popelings, if presbyteries were not adjoined to them, because
they should have not only Supreme, but also sole authority: yet it follows
not, that our Bishops, to whom neither supreme, nor sole authority belongs,
should he esteemed such.

Secondly he denies the disfunction, alleging that a fourth thing might be
added concerning the chief authority of the people: Which, if it be added in
the proposition, is with the rest to be denied in the assumption. For this
brownisticall or rather Anabaptisticall conceit (for some of the Brownists
disclaim it) that the Bishops in the primitive Church were subjected to the
people, as if the state of the Church had been Democraticall or popular, is a
dotage that was never dreamed of till of late, and therefore as it is most
confidently to be denied, so it needed not to be inserted in the proposition.

CHAP. IX. Answering the testimonies which by the refuter are alleged to prove
Lay Elders.
But now had I need to call for armor of defense. For hitherto says the
refuter we have warded the blows that M. D. gave to beat down the
Lay-presbyterie, now let us show, that we also can strike, if need be.

The Reader, that has found the refuter so strict in exacting Syllogismes of
me, even when I perform the part of an answerer, cannot but expect most
formal and accurate Syllogismes at his hands.

But he shall find that to be true, which I foretold him not long since: that
this great Champion, not daring to urge his testimonies, or to reduce his
proofs into Syllogismes; according to the poor policy of them all, holds
out certain testimonies, as it were Pallas shield, thinking with the bare
quotation of them, though he cite them not, to put us to silence. And to this
purpose, like a notorious Mountebanke, setting himself to delude the simple,
he commends his witnesses, even Christ himself, his Apostles, and
Evangelists with swelling titles, when their testimonies themselves are not so
much as cited; as though he thought it more needful to win credit to his
witnesses, then to prove, that they testify that, for which he would seem to
allege them. But you shall hear Pyrgopolinices himself: For the scriptures
we have (among others) these mighty ones to wage battle for us. First the
great Emperor of the Christian army, our Savior Christ himself, Mat. 18.17.
Next a great worthy, Ad page 50.
Luke the Evangelist, Act. 14.23. Add to these James the Apostle, one of the
Pillars of the Church Iam. 5.14. and that famous General of the gentiles, the
Apostle Paul: Romans 12 8.1. Cor. 12.28.

These are most worthy witnesses indeed, and without exception. If any one of
these give testimony to your Lay Elders, we will most willingly yield. But I
pray you let us hear their words; It shall not need: if you will not believe
us, that they give testi-monie to Lay Elders, yet believe other divines, who
say they do. Are they witnesses, what they said only, or what by the holy
Ghost is committed to writing? If the latter, why be not their own testimonies
produced, but other witnesses must be deposed, that they said so, when it
appears upon most authentical record, whether they said so or not?

Let us therefore hear the words themselves. Sect 2. The first allegation.
Matt. 18.17.
The first is Matt. 18.17. Where our Savior Christ says dic Ecclesiae, tell
the Church or assembly.

What then? therefore there ought to be Lay Elders in every congregation.

See you not by this time, what a striker this is? first there may be question,
whether Ecclesia signify the whole congregation of the people, or an assembly
of judges or governors: if the former sense be followed, there is no show for
Lay Elders. If the latter, which is the more likely, question again may be
made, whether Christ speak of the Synedrion of the Jews, as Calvin and some
others suppose, or of Christian governors: if of the Synedrion, which was a
civil senate and indeed the high counsel of estate in the policy of the
Jews, what does that make for Ecclesiastical Elders in the Church of Christ,
and that in every parish?

If of christian governors, as the Fathers expound it; what sense is there to
understand the words of Lay Elders, unless it can otherwise be proved, either
that Christ had already ordained them, or that afterward they were in use in
the Church of Christ. But the former is absurd: and for the latter they have
not so much as a fair show, being disarmed of the two places, which I have
vindicated out of their hands, viz: 1. Tim. 5.17. and Ambrose in 1. Tim. 5.1.
Nay further I add, that if it could be proved (as it never will) that ever
there were Lay Elders in the Church before this our age, yet they should but
argue from the Genus to the Species affirmatively, tell the governors, ergo
Lay Elders: wherefore this is a very seely argument.

Yea but other divines say, that Christ spoke of Lay Elders. What others say it
is not greatly material in this kind, so long as we plainly see, there is no
necessity nor probability so to understand him. But who are they that say so?
Chrysostom, Theophylact, Erasmus, Calvin, Beza, Piscator upon the place it
self, Chrysostom. in Mat. 18. presulibus S^eta^ presidentibus. (...).
etc. For the three first, because they are no parties, I can be content to
examine their testimonies.

All that Chrysostom says of those words is this, (...) tell the Church, that
is Prelates and governors: and on those words whatsoever you shall bind on
earth, etc: nec dicit says he, Ecclesiae presuli, neither did he say to the
prelate of the Church, whom he understood by Church, bind him with bands or
cords, etc.

Theophylact explaineth the words thus: Theoph. in Mat. 18.
If before two or three witnesses he being reproved shall not be ashamed,
(...) which Oecolampadius translateth thus, For of (...), the genitive plural
is (...), according to the rule, in d^^abus primis declinationibus ge^i (...)
plurales circumflectuntur.
Ne graueris tunc in Ecclesiae suggestu invulgare peccatum, stick not then to
publish his fault in the pulpit of the Church or judgment seat. But the
acce^t shows that by (...) we are to understand An tistites or presides, the
Prelates of the Church. And those words, what you shall bind, etc: he
expounds thus, If thou who art wronged shall hold the offender as a Publican
or Ethnicke, even such a one he shall be in heaven, but if thou loose him, that
is, forgive him, he shall be pardoned in heaven, (...) for not only what the
Priests loose are loosed, but also what we who are wronged do bind or loose,
the same shall be bound or loosed: where, by Priests, he means those, whom
before he called the Prelates of the Church.

Erasmus makes this Paraphrase: Paraphra. in Mat. 18.
If the offender be so intractable, that he will be moved neither with shame
nor fear of judgment, bring the matter to the congregation, that either he
maybe reformed by the content of the multitude, or by authority of them which
be rulers ou^ the multitude. But if he be so far past cure, that he will not
be corrected neither by secret and brotherly monition, neither by the knowledge
and consent of two or three, neither by the shame of his fault uttered and
disclosed, neither by the authority of the ^hiefe rulers, leave him to his
disease.

My adversary therefore, to salve his credit, had need to bring those, from
whom he had these testimonies at the second or third hand, to depose, that
Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Erasmus do say, that Christ speaks of
Lay Elders. Otherwise he will hardly escape the censure of imposture, and
seeking to seduce the people with glorious shows.

To the rest of his witnesses I answer, that what new writers, being parties
in the cause, do testify without warrant of scripture, evidence of reason, or
testimony of antiquity, it deserves no credit.

Sect. 3. The 2. allegation. Act. 14.23.
The second testimony, Act. 14.23. that Paul and Barnabas ordained Presbyters
in every Church, therefore Lay Elders. How is this consequence proved? because
the greek Scholiast and a few new writers say so.

But here the disputer, for his credit sake, must plead, that he (for his
part) never saw the Greek Scholiast, but received this allegation from T. C.
else he must be accused either of gross ignorance, or notorious falsification.
I see not says T. C. why it may not be referred to Elders (meaning Lay Elders)
as well as too Bishops, Lib. 2. part. 2. page 36.
(meaning Ministers) seeing S. Paul there sets forth, how they set a full
order in the Church. And of that judgment is the greek Scholiast, which
affirms, that those which followed S. Paul and Barnabas, were worthy to be
Bishops, and that they created of them Elders and Deacons: Understanding
Oecumenius, as if by Bishops he meant ordinary Ministers, and Elders and
Deacons, their Lay Elders and Lay-Deacons: which were a notable deprauing of
Oecumenius his meaning, if he were so to be translated. But his words being
these (...), those who have but small skill in greek do know, that the
article of the plural number with the preposition (...) or (...), does most
usually signify no more then the proper name alone, so that (...) is all in
one with (...) and so is used by Oecumenius in the very next sentence
following, as you shall hear. Besides, (...) does not signify they were
worthy, but they had the dignity or honor: or if they had been worthy to
have been Bishops, Paul and Barnabas had small reason, in that want of
sufficient Ministers, to make them lay either Elders or Deacons. So that
Oecumenius his words are thus to be translated, it is to be noted, that Paul
and Barnabas had the dignity of Bishops, for that they ordained by imposition
of hands, not only Deacons but also Presbyters.

Note also says he that in Miletum (...) Barnabas and Paul were by imposition
of hands ordained, but I found another coppie which for Miletum has Antioch,
In verse. 26. from thence they sailed to Antioch, the coppie whereon Oecum,
writes, has M^letum.
and that is more probable. His meaning is that at Antioch Paul and Barnabas
were ordained Bishops. Act. 13.2.

And that Oecumenius by Presbyters understood Ministers or Teachers, it is
apparent by his words going before: for demanding, why the Apostles made not
Presbyters in Cyprus and Samaria, but in these places mentioned* Act. 14. he
answers, those were near to Jerusalem and the apostles, and in Antioch the
word prevailed, (...), but in these places they needed much exhortation,
chiefly those of the gentiles needed much teaching.

The third testimony, The 3. allegation. Iam. 5.14.
Iam. 5.14. Is any man sick among you? let him call for the Presbyters of the
Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the
Lord. Therefore there were Lay Elders in S. James time.

This consequence is proved because Calvin and four other new writers say so.

The fourth: The 4. allegation. Romans 12.8. Ambrose in Romans 12.
Romans 12.8. (...), he that rules, in diligence, this Ruler must needs be the
Lay-Elder. For besides certain new writers, Ambrose says so. But Ambrose
understands the words generally of any Ruler, expounding him that rules to
be eum qui curam vt praesit fratribus suscipit him that undertakes the care to
rule his brethren.

The fifth 1. Cor. 12.28. The 5. allegation. 1. Cor. 12.28.
God has appointed in the Church (...) gouernements: these gouernements must
needs be of Lay Elders, for besides some new writers, Ambrose, Jerome,
Theodoret, do testify so much.

Ambrose his words be these, In 1. Cor. 12.28.
sunt and gubernatores gui spiritualib. retinaculis hominibus documento sunt,
there are also governors who with spiritual reins do nurture men.

Jerome, qui sciunt singulos prout apti sunt gubernare, who know to govern
every one according as they are apt. Theodoret, hereby he signified the
administrations or gouernements of the Church.

These be all the places of scripture which this great striker Sect. 4.
durst make show of. A common exception against these allegations.
Whereof not any one can be said with any show of probability to speak one
word for Lay Elders. If Lay Elders were first proved by other arguments or
presupposed, the best argument that could out of these places be raised, were
from the Genus to the species affirmative; as if they should say, the
scriptures speak of governors, therefore of Lay Elders; of Presbyters,
therefore of only governing Presbyters.

But seeing they never were, nor ever will be proved by other arguments; the
reason taken from these places, is from the Genus, to a fancied and platonicall
Idea, or poetical species, and that affirmative. If I should say, it is a
bird, therefore a Swanne, it were but a simple argument: but if thus, it is a
Bird, therefore a black Swanne, it were too ridiculous. Such are the arguments
of this disputer: for if he should say, the holy Ghost speaks in three of
these places of governors, therefore of Presbyters, it were a weak argument;
but when he infers therefore Lay-presbyters, who were more rare then black
Swannes, it is very ridiculous. If the worst argument in my Sermon, even when
he made the worst of it, had concluded no better then the best of these, he
would never have done insulting and triumphing. But I cannot blame him, they be
the best proofs his cause can afford; they are the testimonies, which the
principal patrones of the Presbytery do use to allege.

But you will say, this is a strange kind of arguing to proceed from men, who
allow no office in the Church but what has express and direct warrant in the
scriptures: this is the meaning of the scriptures, because some new divines do
think so. We are wont to hold, that scripture is to be expounded by scripture,
as by conference of other parallel scriptures, or by inference out of the
context it self, diduced by some artificial argument; or if these fail,
especially, in such places as concern matters of story or fact, as for
example, whether there were any Lay Elders in the primitive Church, we fly to
the expositions of the Fathers, and testimony of antiquity. But what would
you have a man do, these proofs and testimonies failing, the best gloss they
can set upon their cause, and the fairest excuse for themselves is, that some
other new writers, in matters of substance for the most part Orthodoxall, have
been partly of their mind, and yet if we consider, that two or three
principal men, having upon necessity devised the Presbytery, to supply the
room of the Bishop before eiected, and afterward (being grown into liking
with their own devise, because a few places of the scriptures and Fathers
especially, 1. Tim. 5.17. and Ambrose in 1. Tim. 5.1. seemed to favor the
same) commended it to others, as warranted by scriptures and Fathers; others,
taking it upon their word without sufficient trial, have yielded their
consent, and by their writings commended the same to posterity: I say, if
these things be considered, we have no great reason, much to esteem the
testimonies either of the principal Authors, or of the pedarie fautors of the
Presbyterian discipline, being all parties in the cause.

But now if I should prove unto you, Sect 5. New writers falsified by the
refuter.
that as this disputer abused the names of so many of the Fathers, as he has
named: so also has wronged some of the new writers: assuredly, if he be not as
shameless, as he is namelesse, his face which now he hides, De council. qu. 5.
cap. 3.
he will never dare to show. For first, where he produces D. Whitakers as a
witness, that Christ when he said tell the Church meant Lay Elders: it is
evident to any that reads him, that by Ecclesia in that place, he
understands the Church represented in a Council, whether provincial, which
he shows to be above a Bishop; or general, which he proves to be above the
Pope. For if a Bishop or the Pope should offend, the course which our Savior
prescribes to Peter himself and the rest of his Apostles should be taken;
First, by private admonition, Secondly, before two or three witnesses, and
thirdly, if these fail, by telling the Church.

For the second place he alleges D. Fulke, In Act. 14.23.
who does not once mention Lay Elders, nor mean them in that place. But our
translation being accused by the Rhemists, for that where we should say
Priests, In Act. 14.
we say Elders: D. Fulke does not deny, but that Priests or Ministers are there
meant by Elders, whom he could be content should be called Priests, as Priests
is the English of Presbyters, and wishes that the sacrificers of the law had
never been called by that name, but that it had been reserved (if I
understand him) to signify the Ministers of the Gospel. There is no question
therefore between them, whether Lay Elders be there meant; but whether the
Ministers, who are there meant by the name Presbyteri, whom the Papists would
have translated Priests, may not also be called Elders.

In act. 14.23.
Aretius, though he holds the distinction of Elders, and so is a party in
the cause, notwithstanding by Presbyters, Act. 14 23. he understands
Ministers only. Ministr^s ordinat per singulas Ecclesias, expende hic quid
sint Presbyteri, nimirum ministri certis Ecclesiis deputati, vnde duplex fuit
primitiuae Ecclesiae genus Presbyterorum, vnum quod Ecclesiae praer at docendo,
quales isti hic sunt, etc.

In Iam. 5.14.
For the third, he abuses again the testimony of D. Fulke, who, as in the
former place, by Presbyteros, understands Priests or Ministers. And as the
Rhemists blamed, after the same manner, our translation, for saying Elders and
not Priests, he answers as before. And whereas they object, that our Elders
be not such as the Apostle James requires to be sent for, as being not deputed
specially to public praying or administration of the Sacraments; he answers,
that although in some Churches there be some Elders appointed only to govern,
yet is there no Church, in which there be no Elders appointed specially to
public prayers and administration of Sacraments. But admitting, that the
Ministers of our Church be such as the Apostle speaks of, you demand why we
translate them not Ministers* I answer (says he) because the word signifies
Elders, and not Ministers, and yet we contend not for the term, nor refuse the
name Priest, when it signifies the same whom the Apostle calls Presbyterum,
but when by abuse of Papists it is taken to signify a sacrificer.

Act. 14.23.15.4.6.22.24. and. 20.17 28. Tit. 1.5.
In the second and fifth, he quoteth D. N^well, who indeed speaks of certain
Seniors which with the Pastor, that is the Bishop, were to exercise the
discipline of the Church, but whether they were chosen out of the Clergy, or
laity, he shows not: by the places which he quoteth for the proof of them,
diverse whereof, even in the judgment of Calvin, are to be understood of
Ministers, he may seem to mean Seniors of the Clergy.

In the fourth and fifth he abuses the testimony of Th. Morton (not the
learned and judicious Deane of Winchester, Th. Morton. in 1. Cor. 12.28.
but another old acquaintance of mine) who in Romans 12.8. and 1. Cor. 12.28. by
governors, understands those, who have the government of the Church.

These may suffice for a taste of his good dealing with new writers, especially
our own country men: the rest, let examine them who either have the books,
or think it worth their pains.

CHAP. X. Containing an answer to the same testimonies, and some other
proofs, as they are urged by other disciplinarians.
THus much might suffice to have answered his allegations out of the
scriptures; were it not, that some perhaps will imagine, that these places
might be better urged. For their satisfaction therefore, I will take upon me,
briefly, yet fully to answer these and some other of the best proofs, as they
are urged by T. C. M. Calvin, Beza and Dudley Fenner.

First therefore concerning, Mat. 18.17. urged by T.C.l. 1. page 176.
Mat. 18.17. T. C. argues thus. By Church is meant either all the people, or
the Pastor alone, or the Pastor with the ancients and Elders; but neither the
people, nor Pastor alone, therefore the Pastor with the ancients and Elders.

The disjunction is grounded upon a supposition of the newfound parish
discipline, that there were no other Ecclesiastical governors but
parishionall, which I shall hereafter by Gods help prove to be absurd. In the
mean time, for the confutation of this disjunction, it shall suffice to note
that, which all disciplinarians confess, that our Savior Christ speaks
according to the manner of those times either bidding them tell the assembly,
that is the Synedrion; of the Jews; or at least, that the party offending is
to be delated to the like assembly, authorized for hearing of causes, in the
Church of Christ. Wherefore T. C. and our new disciplinarians, must first prove
these two things, first, that there was an Ecclesiastical Presbytery in every
Synagogue, and secondly, that what they had in every Synagogue we ought to have
in every parish, before they may urge the like, in imitation of them, to be
erected in every parish among us. But they are so far from proving the latter
of these assertions, that they fail in the former. T. C. professes, T. C.
lib. 2. part 2 page 46.
he cannot prove it out of the old testament; but that it may be concluded out
of the new, he hops the Reader will judge; considering that the policy of
the Church now, was in this point taken from the Jews Church. As if he should
say: forasmuch as the Church, which imitated the Jews, had in every parish a
Presbytery (which indeed is most notoriously false) it is to be supposed, that
the Church of the Jews had in every Synagogue the like. Where, by a circular
disputation, the question which we deny, is brought to prove his argument,
whereby notwithstanding he would seem to prove the question. For aid
therefore he brings the custom of the modern Jews, who, if they had any
such custom, were no fit presedents for us to follow. But indeed they, though
they have their Rabbi in every Snagogue, yet an Ecclesiastical Presbytery
they never had for ought that I can find. And whereas he, and after him the
author of the Counterpoison, allege Jerome, Ad Al^gasiam. qu. 10.
to prove, that they had their Elders in Every Synagogue, which should as well
admonish the polluted to abstain from the assemblies, as to reprove the
Sabbath Breakers; I cannot sufficiently wonder at the allegation: for Jerome
mentions that custom of the Jews, which he speaks of, as one of the worst
of the Pharisaicall traditions which he calls (...), which one (says he) I
will mention to the shame of the whole nation, and which I will not mention for
modesty sake; and therefore we may be sure, neither Christ transmitted, nor
Jerome commended it to the Church. Secondly, the governors of their
Synogogues, which Jerome speaks of, were such as were to judge of clean and
unclean, a duty peculiar to the Priests. Leuit. 10.10.
Neither does he speak of admonishing the polluted from coming to the
assembly, but only of judging between clean and unclean. And thirdly that
which T. C. adds concerning the Sabbath, is by Jerome mentioned as another
tradition of the Pharisees having no affinity with the former.

Yea but the new testament speaks of them in diverse places, Sect. 2. T. C
ibid. page 47. Matt. 23.2. de Rep. Hebr. l. 2. cap. 8. De polit Iudaic. c. 18.
Sigon li. 5. c. 10. Act. 13.15. and 18.8.17.
calling them (...) the chief of the Synagogues. The archisynagogi were such
as now they call their Rabbis as being the Scribes and Pharisees who were
their Teachers sitting in the chair of Moses, as Sigonius witnesses. Bertram
likewise says, those who at the first were called Prophets and afterward
Scribes and Doctors of the law, at the last in the Synagogues were called
Archisynagogi, (for those who were in the Temple were called scribae templi)
and of these in the greater Synagogues there were more then one. Beza also
seems to have been of the same mind. Howbeit, both he and Bertram (who
dedicateth his book unto him) do think, that in the Synagogue of the cities,
these Rulers had Elders joined with them. But it may be you expect their
proofs. Hear therefore the very foundation of the Presbytery: to wit, that
what was the order of the Church of the Jews, Christ translated and
recommended to his Church. But in the Church of the Jews there were Elders
joined to the Teachers to make up an Ecclesiastical Senate. How the
proposition will be made good, I know not: The assumption is proved thus. There
were Levites in the Synagogues, says Beza, Bez. de presbyt. and exco^mun. 102.
in whose hands the spiritual administration was, there being joined to them
vt probabile est as it is probable, some Citizens of note. Hence is mention of
the Archisynagogi, who ruled the assemblies. Bertr. de polit. Iudaic. c. 18.
Those says Bertram who had been called Prophets and after Scribes, as the
last in the Synagogues were called Archisynagogi, vnde verisimile est whence it
is likely that those Archisynagogi, did moderate the order of Seniors, who were
to enquire into men's ma^ners: for the Synagogues also had their Ministers, Luc.
4.20. So that (belike) the Minister or attendant, to whom Christ gave the book,
was one of these Seniors, or ex illustrib. ciuibus, as Beza speaks. Well, and
what was their office? Horum proculdubio parts fuerunt, their office no doubt
was, not to admit to the Synagogue them, whom the Synedrion of Jerusalem had
excluded from the Synagogues. Bez: vbisup:
And what their office has been since in the Church, you heard it proved
before, by Satis opinor constat: I think it is evident enough. So that the
very foundation, Eccl: disc.
whereon the presbytery of Lay Elders, (which with such vehemency and
violence has been urged as the undoubted ordinance of Christ) is grounded, is
no better then the probable conjectures of some new writers, who are parties in
the cause: probable (I say) in their own conceits: For else there is not so
much as probability in their Assertions. And so much of M. Cartwrights
collection out of Matthew: 18.17. and what else is said of others, in favor of
the presbyters in the Synagogues of the cities.

Sect. 3. Calu: in Matthew: 18.17.

Bez: de presbyt, and exco^: p. 106. neque ambigimus quin Chru^s ad vera^ista^
institutionem ecclesiastici Synedrij respexerit

Counterpois. 4. Reason for Elderships.


Now let us see what Calvin, Beza, and others, collect out of that place of
Matthew. When Christ bids them tell the Church: Forasmuch as there was no
Christian church established, whereunto they might repair, it were absurd to
understand Christ as propounding the judgment of the Church, which yet was
not. Therefore dubium non est, it is not to be doubted, but that Christ spoke
of such an assembly as was then in use alluding to the order of the old
Church, wherein, after their return from Babylon, a select Council was
established, which they called Sinhedrim, in Greek Synedrion, whereunto the
censure of Doctrine and manners was committed. Which Synedrion, besides some
Priests and Levites, consisted of the Elders of the people. And although the
discipline was corrupted amongst the Jews in our Savior Christ's time, and
therefore it is not likely that our Savior would send his Disciples to their
Assemblies to have their causes heard; yet dubium non est, it is not to be
doubted, but that form of discipline which had been under the Law, was by
Christ transmitted to us: and that the form of discipline, which was in use in
the Church of Christ succeeded in the room thereof.

The sum is.

What manner of presbyters were among the Jews, the like Christ ordained in
his church: when he said, Tell the Church:

But among the Jews there was an Ecclesiastical presbytery, which, besides
the priests and Levites, consisted of the Elders of the people:

Therefore such an Ecclesiastical presbytery Christ ordained in his Church.

The proposition has no other proof but their own testimony, signified in
those asseuerations, dubium non est, neque ambigimus: for that which is added
by Beza and the author of the counterpoison, that the words which Christ used,
Let him be to thee as an Heathen or Publican* to prove that he spoke according
to their custom, do in no sort prove, that he translated their form of
government into his church. For if Christ did translate from the state of the
Jews, any Consistories into his church, then he transmitted such, as were
either ordained of God, or devised by men.

If the former, then such as God ordained for the government of the people,
either in the Wilderness, or in the Land of promise. In the Wilderness, by the advice of Iethro. and approbation of God, Exodus: 18.21.22. Deuteronomy: 1.15.17. Number:
11.16.17.
there were Rulers set over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens, to judge
the people: the deciding of more difficult causes being reserved to Moses. But
the multitude of these difficult causes increasing, and Moses waxing weary of
them, the Lord joined to him a Senate of 70. Numb: 11.

Answereable to these, the Lord appointed Consistories or Senates, for the
government of the people in the Land of promise.

To the former, Deuteron: 16.18. Deuteronomy: 16.18.
Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Cities, throughout all thy
Tribes, and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment. To the
latter, Deuteronomy: 17. Deuteronomy: 17.8.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in Judgment between blood and
blood, between plea and plea, between plague and plague, in the matters of
controversies, within thy Gates, then shall thou arise, and go up into the
place which the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall come unto the Priests
and Levites and the judge (that is, Judges says Calvin) that shall be in those
days, and ask, and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment.

Verse. 5.
This prescript the godly king Iosaphat followed exactly 2. Chron. 19. both in
respect of the inferior consistories in the cities, placing judges in the land
throughout all the strong cities, Verse. 8.
city by city: and in Jerusalem did he set of the Levites and of the Priests
and of the chief of the families of Israel for the judgment and cause of the
Lord, saying to them; In every cause that shall come to you of your brethren
that dwell in the cities, between blood and blood, between law and precept,
statutes and judgments, you shall admonish them, etc. Besides these, the Lord
ordained no consistories, or senates. But none of these did Christ translate
into his Church, for none of them was Ecclesiastical. Neither did he translate
those which were devised by men; whether by the Jews, as their Synedrion or
Sanedri^n, Joseph. antiq. lib. 14. c. 11. Sigon. lib. 6. c. 7.
which was their chief counsel of state, which Calvin says after their
return from Babylon they did institute, or by P. Gainius the Proconsul of
Syria, who ordained four more Synedria of the like nature: which some suppose
to have been the cause, why our Savior speaks in the plural number Matt.
10.17. Mar. 13.9. But of the counsel renewed by Iosaphat, and the Synedrion
ordained of the Jews, Sect. 4. The proposition confuted.
I shall have occasion to say more in answer to the assumption.

But how little credit is to be given to that proposition, may appear by this
dilemma: for by Church, Christ does signify either the consistories and
assemblies of the Jews, or assemblies in the Church of Christ.

If the former, then was the direction, which Christ gives, peculiar to those
times, and pertains not to the Church of Christ, Perpet. govern. chap. 4.
as D. Bilson shows in the fourth chapter of his book, whereunto I do
refer you. If the latter, then had he not so much as respect or reference to
the Consistories of the Jews, so far was he from translating them into his
Church, Matt. 18.6.7 10.
as shall appear by this most plain explication of the text according to the
latter sense.

Our Savior Christ entreating of scandales and offenses, first teaches us
that we be careful to avoid offenses, and that we do not in that respect
seem to disregard any of his little ones. 2. He directs us what course we
are to take when we are offended. If thy brother (that is, one professing the
same religion) shall sin against thee (that is, privately,) either by
injury, Verse: 15.
doing thee wrong, or if ye will also, by evil example scandalizing or giving
thee offense, by his sin committed in thy knowledge, laying as it were a
stu^bling block in thy way, Leuit: 19.17
thou must as the Lord has commanded not suffer sin to rest upon him, but
in a desire to reclaim him, thou must 1. use private admonition, and brotherly
reproof; go, (...), a^gue and redargue, convince and reprove him, between
thee and him alone. If he harken to thee acknowledging his fault, Iam: 5.20.
Verse: 16.
and testifying his repentance, then have thou won or gained thy brother, and
saved a soul from death. But if he hear thee not, suffer not sin so to rest
upon him, but take with thee yet 1. or 2. witnesses, and set upon him jointly,
that either by ye presence and authority of so many together he may be
reclamed, or at least a way be prepared to public trial; that howsoever thy
testimony alone would be rejected, yet in the mouth of 2. or 3. witnesses,
the matter may be sufficiently testified. And if he will not hear them, but
remain obstinate, Verse. 17.
then tell the Church, that is, the assembly of them who in the church have
spiritual authority to censure offenders, whether it be the Consistory of
one City, or particular church, or the Synod of a Province or Nation, or an
universal Counsel, according to the nature of the offense, and the quality
and degree of the offender. And if he will not hear the assembly, but
remaining obstinat, draw upon him their censure of excommunication, whereby they
shall bind the offender, and after a sort deliver him to Satan; then shall thou
hold him no more as a brother, or think thy self bound to exercise the duties
appertaining to the communion of Saints, but withdraw thy self from him,
abandon him, and have no more to do with him, then a Jew of this time would
have to do with an heathen or publican, that by these means seeing himself
avoided and shunned, he may at length be ashamed and brought to repentance.
And least any man should lightly esteem the judgment of the Church, Verse. 18.
that is, of such spiritual governors as have authority in the church to
ce^sure offenders, Verily I say unto you, says our Savior, speaking to his
Apostles, and in them to all their successors, to whom the keys of heaven are
committed, Matt: 16.19 John. 20.23.
Whatsoever you (for you and such as you sitting in Consistory or Synod, are
they whom I meant by the Church or assembly) whatsoever you shall bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven. Neither think, when I mentioned the church, I meant a
great assembly only, or the whole congregation; for I say unto you, that where
2. or 3. are gathered together in my name, Verse: 19.20.
I am there in the mids of them, and therefore, if but 2. of you shall consent
in asking any thing of God (as namely pardon for the penitent sinner) it shall
be granted unto you.

If against this exposition it shall be objected, that the Churches hearing and
censuring of offenses would be prejudicial to Magistrates: I answer, offenses
and offenders admit diverse distinctions. Of offenses, some are open and
notorious, some are secret and private. Some again are grievous and capital
crimes, which may not be co^cealed or left unpunished, other be offenses not so
heinous or enormous, but they may be concealed and pardoned, where is hope of
amendment: For notorious and enormous crimes our Savior does not prescribe
this course, but for the private and less offenses. Again, offenders are
either (in the judgment of charity) our brethren in Christ, or the sons of
Belial: For the latter, we may take the civil course of Justice, for the
former we must take a spiritual course of Christian charity, that we may
win our brother unto Christ, or recover him being fallen, which course our
Savior here prescribes.

By Church therefore or assembly, our Savior means neither the supposed
Ecclesiastical senate of the Jews, nor yet a Presbytery of Christians
answerable thereto, consisting for the most part of Lay Elders. Not the former:
for Christ speaks of such, as should meet in his name, to who^ he promises,
what they bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: neither are we to think,
that our Savior would send his disciples to the corrupt Consistories of the
unbelieving Jews, as Calvin also says. It was a strange conceit therefore of
Beza, not only to imagine, In Matt: 18 17. and in Marc: 5.22.
that the name Church is here attributed to the Jews, but that the
Archisynagogi assembled together were they who are meant by Church in this
place. Or if that were true, how should this direction belong to us, seeing not
only the imaginary Ecclesiastical Senate of the Jews is vanished, but also
the true Synedrion is long since abolished, and their whole policy abrogated.
Not the latter, for our Savior, by Church understands such as should have
power to bind and loose sins, as appears by the words following. Which
power of the keys of binding and loosing sinners, Matthew: 16.19. Ioh: 20.23,
of retaining and remitting sins, our Savior Christ has so peculiarly
appropriated to the Apostles, and their successors in the ministry of the
word and Sacraments, as nothing more.

Neither had the Jews indeed such an ecclesiastical Senate, as they speak
of, Sect. 5. The assumption confuted
mixed of the Priests and Levites, with the Elders of the people: as I am now
to show in answering the assumption. For if this be true, that the Jews had no
such Presbytery, then what show of truth or probability is in their argument
taken from Matthew: 18.17*

Calvin says, that the Jews after their return from captivity, in Math:
18.17.
had a chosen counsel, to which was committed the censure of doctrine and
manners, which they called Sinhedrin, or Sanedrin, in Greek Synedrion. T.C.
holds, that the Synedrion was not then first instituted, Lib: 2. part: 2 page:
41.
but restored: which seems to be the truth: Howbeit his reason (as almost all
the rest) is but a mere color. For it would follow (says he) that the
Priests, and other Leuiticall teachers who were a part of that Bench, had then
their first institution: when it is plain, that the Priests and Leuiticall
teachers were instituted before the Synedrion, Exodus: 28. Numb: 11. De presbyt:
and excomm: page 103. Lib: 2. part: 2. page: 40.
and so might have continued their function, though the Sanedrin had never bin.
Beza fetches the first institution of it from Moses, and the instauratio^
thereof, when it was decayed from Iosaphat. T. C. doubts not to fetch the
Eldership from Exodus: 4.

With his Elders therefore, as being the eldest in conceit, I will begin.
This order of Eldership (says he,) was taken from the government of the
people of God, before, and under the Law. Before the Law, the Elders which
Moses assembled, Exodus: 4. Exodus: 4.29.
were Ecclesiastical officers: for it is not likely, that under such a Tyrant,
they should have Magistrates of their own.

I answer briefly: the state of the Hebrews, if you respect the whole people,
was neither a settled Church, nor established commonwealth. But if you respect
the several kinreds and Families, they were ruled by the Elders of the people,
which were the heads of the Families; See Beza, de Presbyt: and excomm: page:
101.
who, as always from the beginning, so at that time, and until the separation
of the Tribe of Leui, to the priestly function, were both priests and
magistrates, to their several kinreds and Families. Wherefore let them, who
will needs have these to be Lay Elders, tell us, who were then the priests,
whom these Elders did assist.

Under the Law, he finds these Elders in Elisha his house, 2. King: 6. and in
Ezekiels house, Ezekiel: 2 King: 6.32 Ezekiel: 8.1.
8. because it is unlike that in so corrupt a state the Prophets could have the
civil Governors to consult with: and is it not more unlike, that there should
be approved Elders of an ecclesiastical Senate, either in the Apostoticall
Church of Israel, under Achab and Iehoram, or in Mesopotamia, whether
Ezekiell, and those Elders of Judah were transported, who could never be found
under the most godly Kings at Jerusalem?

Again, he finds them standing on the right hand of Ezra, and on the left,
Nehem: Nehem: 8.2.
8. Being distinguished both from the teaching Levites, and from the people:
From the people, because they stood by Ezra. From the teaching Levites, because
he speaks of them after. Therefore they must needs be Lay Elders: as though,
either some of the Princes of the people might not stand with Ezra, or that
these might not have been priests, or that all the Levites were teachers, or
that there were no more teaching Priests or Levites but those, which are
mentioned then, and there to have taught the people. He that considers what
T. C. was able to say in a good cause, must needs think this cause to be very
badde, which he was not able to make good by better arguments, then those most
unlikely likely-hoods.

Sect: 6.
Beza holds that 2. sorts of councels or consistories were ordained by Moses,
which should be held both in Jerusalem, the place which God did choose, and in
other cities; whereof the one, was civil, the other ecclesiastical,
consisting of the priests, Leuits, and scribes, or teachers, and also the
seniors of the people. But the reader shall easily understand this latter to be
a mere fiction, if he consider that the Synedrion at Jerusalem, which was the
highest court and chief council of state, having power of life and death, and
authority to deal in causes both civil and ecclesiastical, co^sisted of the
high priest, and other priests and Levites, 2. Chron: 19.8, 10, 11. Number: 11.16
Ezekiel: 8.11. Sigon: li. 6. c. 7, ex Talmud: Lib. 6, c, 4, ex Ier: 19, 1,
together with the Princes and Seniors of the people, being besides the
High Priest 70. or 71. in number: Of which, that in Deuteronomy: 17.8.9. is to be
understood. These were called Sanedrin, and did sit in Gazith: In which number,
those which were priests, were called Seniores Sacerdotu^, and those which were
Princes, were called Seniores populi, as Sigondus says. And likewise that the
Sanedrioth or consistories in other cities, consisted as well of the learned
Leuits as of the seniors of the people. Josephus says, that to every
co^sistory in the cities belonged 2. Levites. The reason hereof was, Lib, 4,
Antiq, 8.
because the laws whereby that church and commonwealth were governed, were the
laws of God; wherein the Priests, Levites, and Scribes were most skillful, and
therefore best able to determine what was right according to the law. And
therefore another sort, which should consist of Priests, Leuits, and elders of
the people, De presbyt: and excom: page: 104- Leuit: 10, 10
and which should respo^dere de iure (as Beza imagines this should) was
altogether needles. But his proofs are as weak, as his imagination was strong.
His only proof for the 1. institution of the Ecclesiastical senate, is Leuit:
10.10. where they were ordained says he, to show the difference between holy
and profane, between clean and unclean, and to teach the law of God. But no
such thing can, with any show of probability be gathered out of the text,
where the Lord speaking to Aaron, commands him, and his sons the priests,
by a perpetual law, that they should not drink wine nor strong drink, when they
were to enter into the sanctuary, whereby they might be hindered from
exercising their function discreetly and soberlie, either in judging between
holy and profane, between clean and unclean, or in teaching the people;
which duties were to be performed in the sanctuary, by the priests, as well
severally as jointly, and no ecclesiastical senate at all here instituted: or
if there were, Cap. 11.
it should (according to Bertrams conceit) consist wholly of the Priests, to
whom alone this speech is directed. As for Elders of the people, they were not
to intermeddle with these things. The high Priest indeed, if it pleased him,
might consult with other Priests, and use their assistance, as Azariah did use
the aid of 80. 2. Chron. 26. 2. Chron. 26.17
But that there was a settled Presbytery or senate Ecclesiastical ordained by
God, we do not read: and that it should consist in part of Laymen, there is
not the least semblance of likelihood.

Page 103.104.
His proofs, that there were two diverse Synedria instituted, are these First,
because the number of the one is defined to be 70 the other left uncertain.
Secondly because the second was not ordained at the same time with the former.
I answer, there is neither number set down, nor time, of that which never was.

Sect. 7.
His proof for the instauration of two distinct Synedria is out of 2. Chron.
19. where he says Iosaphat ordained two Synedria or counsels, the one
Ecclesiastical for the causes of God, over which the high Priest was chief;
the other civil, for the causes of the King, over which Zabadiah a Prince of
Judah was chief. But it is evident by the text, that it was one and the same
high counsel of state, which afterward was called Sanedrin, or Synedrion
Hierosolymita^u^, consisting of the Levites and Priests, and of the heads of
the chief families in Israel, ordained for the judgments of God and
controversies of men, which was to hear and determine all manner of causes
that were brought unto them from the judgments or consistories of the inferior
cities, and were to judge between blood and blood, that is slaughter and
slaughter, between the law and the precept, between statutes and judgments,
having among them in the causes of God, Amarias the high Priest; and in the
causes of the King, Zebadiah a Prince of Judah, as chief, and that the Masters
or governors the Leuits were with them to instruct them in the law. Shoterim.
See 1. Chron 234.
For whereas he would prove, that Iosaphat ordained two distinct counsels at
Jerusalem, by these reasons, because the duty of the one was to deal in the
causes of God, the other of the King: the one should determine de iure, the
other de facto: the one, had for the president the high Priest, the other a
Prince of Judah: none of these reasons do prove, that Iosaphat ordained any
thing but that, which before had been appointed by God; Deuteronomy. 17.9.10.
namely, that the difficult controversies which the judges in the cities could
not determine between blood and blood, plea and plea, plague and plague,
should be brought to the Syned^ion or counsel of the place which God should
choose, the which is there noted to consist of the Priests, In Pentateuch. in
deuteronomy. 17 9. Also see Deu. 19 17.
Levites and judge, that is judges, says Calvin, as appears by the holy
history, where it is declared that Iosaphat besides the P^i^sts and Levites
chose the Princes of the families of Israel: for the godly King would decline
n^uer a whit from the rule of Gods law. To this counsel the difficult causes
before said as we^l civil as Ecclesiastical, as well de facto, Sigo^ de rep.
Hebr. lib. 6. c. 7.
as de iure, were to be brought from other civil courts, as appears both in
Deuteronomy. 17.8. and also 2 Chronicles. 19.20.

Besides, it is ridiculous to imagine, that the civil senate should determine
only de facto, and that questions de iure should be brought to the
Ecclesiastical; the rather because that counsel, which was appointed by God,
Deuteronomy. 17. and renewed by Iosaphat did consist of the Priests and Leuits and
Elders of the people, and was to determine and to decide all questions of doubt
and difficulty: or if they were to seek to an Ecclesiastical senate, it is
absurd to imagine, that Lay Elders should be joined to the Priests and Leuits
to answer de iure.

As for the causes of God, which verse 8 are termed the judgment and cause of
the Lord and are particularized, verse. 10. and Deuteronomy. 17.8. (between blood and
blood between law and precept, etc.) we are to understand them to be not only
Ecclesiastical but also civil, so far as either they were to be decided b^
the laws of God, or concerned the observation or transgression of Gods law,
whereby that land was gou^rned, in judging, whereof, they also exercised Gods
judgment.

The causes of the King were such as belonged to the Kings house, or his
eschequer. And it is fond to imagine, that those causes which were to be
decided by the judicial and mor^ll laws of God, were not the causes of God, as
well as those which concerned the ceremonial law.

Neither do I therefore reject the exposition of Beza and some others, who by
the causes of God, understand Ecclesiastical causes, and by the causes of the
king, civil causes, because it is prejudicial to my defense; but because it
is repugnant to the truth: for though their interpretation were admitted, it
would no more prove, that there were two distinct Syn^dria, Antiq. lib. 9. c. 1.
then that which I do embrace. For though Zebadiah the prince of Judah was the
chief in the causes of the King, as Amariah the high priest was the chief in
the causes of God, yet were they Colleagues and coassessors in the same
counsel, (...).
as Josephus also does witness. For speaking of this act of Iosaphat, he
says, that he being returned to Jerusalem appointed judges there (...) of the
Priests and Leuits, and of the chief or principal men of the people:
Synedrion fuisse. 71. cui precrat Sacerdos Summus. The high Priest had
autho^itie to call or assemble the counsel, till the time of Antipater Herod's
Father, but after wards not without the Lieuetenants leave. Sigon. li. 6. c. 7.
Iosep. l. 20. Call. in Mat. 18.
requiring them to exercise just judgment, but especially that they should be
diligent in determining those difficult causes that should be brought to them
from inferior judgment seats: but the chief or presidents of them, as
colleagues and coassessors be appointed Amasiah the Priest, and Zabadiah of the
tribe of Judah: and relating the law, Deu. 17.8. Li. 4. c. 8.
he says, if the judges (in the cities) be not able to determine any cause, it
is entirely to be sent to the holy city, (...) Li. 6. c. 7.
and let the high Priest and the Prophet (that is the scribe or Doctor of the
law says Luke 22.66.
Sigonius) and the senate assembling together, pronounce what seems right.

Besides, it is manifest, that the counsel at Jerusalem, after the captivity,
which consisted of priests and Leuits, besides the Seniors of the people, and
whereof the high priest was president as Bertram confesses, having authority
to assemble it, etc. Act. 5.21. Matt. 26.57.59. was the high council of state
called the Sanedrin or Synedrion, or co^sistorium Gazith which dealt in causes
not only Ecclesiastical, but also civil, and in causes criminal and
capital. Neither happened this by the ambition of the priests, but by the
ordinance of God in respect of the first institution, Deuteronomy. 17. and
instauration by Iosaphat. 2. Chron. 19. and by his approbation, as Calvin
witnesses, in respect of the erection of it after the captivity. For as the
Lord promised by Esaias to restore their judges and counselors after the
captivity, Esa. 1.26. Ezekiel 44.24.
as before; so Ezekiell prophecieth, that the Priests, after the captivity,
should not only teach the people, and judge between holy and profane,
between clean and unclean; but also that they should stand up to judge
controversies, judging according to Gods judgment. Josephus also testifies,
that the Priests were ordained by Moses (...), Contr. Appion. lib. 2.
overseers of all, judges of controversies, and punishers of such as are by the
law condemned.

And so much for the present shall suffice concerning the counsel at
Jerusalem, until I come to answer Caluins opinion. Sect. 8. Exodus 18. Deuteronomy.
1. and. 16. 2. Chron. 19. De presb. and excom. page 102. In Marc. 5.22. de
presbyt. 112. Page 103.


As touching Ecclesiastical Presbyters in other cities, Beza has nothing but
his own conjectures: For the courts of judgment, which both Moses instituted,
and Iosaphat renewed, though they had Levites among them, were to deal not
only in Ecclesiastical, but also in civil and criminal causes. The reasons
which he brings for distinct Ecclesiastical senates are three. First,
because the Archisynagogi had, as it is probable, Seniors of the people joined
with them. Secondly, because the name of Church in this place of Matthew is
given to them, which could not be, unless they did consist of the laity, as
well as the clergy. Thirdly, because as the civil consistories assembled in
the gates, so the Ecclesiastical, in the Synagogues. To the first I answer,
that a probability (if this were such, as indeed it is not) is no proof: to
the 2. that the name Ecclesia is not given to the Archisynagogi, but to the
Rulers of Christ's Church assembling in his name, with whom he promised his
presence, and to whom he committed the power of the keys, to whom also the
name Ecclesia, which may be given to any company of Christians, be it but of
two or three meeting in the name of Christ, does fitly agree. Thirdly, he
tells us of Ecclesiastical consistories ordained by Moses, and renewed by
Iosaphat, sitting in Synagogues; when there is not once mention in the old
testament, either of Ecclesiastical consistories, or yet of Synagogues. And in
the new, such judges are mentioned in Synagogues, Mat. 10.17. and 23 34. Act.
22 19. Cap. 13.
as punished by stripes. Bertram also witnesses, that in the Synagogues of the
cities, judgments were exercised by ordinary judges; the greater and
weightier causes, as also the appeals of the less being referred to the
counsel ^t Jerusalem. And again, that the people came to the Synagogues to
prayer, Sect. 9. Cap. 18.
to hear the law and the Prophets, and to hear the judgment of Moses law, as
well civil as Ecclesiastical And so much of Beza.

Calui^ by Ecclesia understands the Synedrion or Sanedrin of the Jews
instituted by them after their return from Babylon: In Mat 18.17. In Number.
11.16.
which he conceiueth to have been an Ecclesiastical senate, to which belonged
the censure of doctrine and manners, having the power o^ excommunication etc.
What this Synedrion was, Calvin himself shall tell us, It is certain says he
that the Jews, when they were returned from the Babylonian banishment, because
they might not make a King, did imitate this example (of appointing 70. Elders.
Number. 11) in ordaining the Synedrion. Only so much honor was granted to the
memory of David and the Kings, that out of their stock they would choose 70.
governors, in whom should be the chief power: And this course continued
until Herod, etc. The Sanedrin indeed was the high counsel of state, which
was to judge of causes, not only Ecclesiastical, but also civil and criminal,
yea capital, having the authority of the sword and power of life and death.
Whereby they adjudged malefactors convicted of capital crimes to one of these
four kinds of death, stoning, Sigon. lib. 6. c. 7. ex Talmud. and Petr.
Galatin.
burning, killing with the sword and strangling; having also authority to
ordain Sanedrioth, that is, the consistories of judges in other cities; to
whom alone it appertained to judge the cause of a tribe, of a false Prophet, of
the high Priest, etc. And howsoever their power was much restrained after
Iewrie became a province subject to the Romans; notwithstanding the Romans
having granted the Jews (...) liberty to live according to their own laws,
permitted them to exercise authority both in judging not only Ecclesiastical
but also civil and criminal causes, Act. 6. and 7. and 22.4.5.19.20. and
24.6. and 16.10.11. Deuteronomy. 17.12.
and also in punishing by stripes and imprisonment, and sometimes by death.
Moreover, by the law of God, he that disobeyed the sentence of this counsel,
was not, as our Savior Christ here says, to be held as an heathen or
Publican, but he was to die the death. Finally there was but one Synedrion for
the whole estate of the Jews by the appointment of God, and that in the place
which he should choose, either ordained by Moses, or restored by Iosaphat, or
renewed by the Jews after their captivity. Wherefore our disciplinarians
might as well desire to have a parliament or high counsel of state in every
parish, as such a consistory as this was.

To conclude this place: Though it were true, that the Jews had an
Ecclesiastical Senate consisting of Priests and Elders of the people: yet it
cannot be proved, that in this place of Matthew Christ alluded to it, and much
less that he ordained the like in his Church. But now I have showed, that the
Jews had no such Ecclesiastical senate: and therefore out of this place
nothing can with any show of probability be concluded for Lay Elders.

The second testimony T. C. urges thus: Sect. 10. Act. 14.23. T. C. lib.
1.174.
Diverse Ministers were not ordained in every congregation:

Diverse Elders were ordained in every congregation: therefore there were
Elders which were not Ministers.



The proposition he proves, because it was not like that they had diverse
Ministers for such a number of congregations as were then to be preached unto.
I distinguish of the word congregation, which T. C. uses ambiguously: for in
the assumption it signifies the Church of a whole city: in which sense (...)
and (...) is all one: Tit. 1.5. act. 14.23.
and so it is true, that diverse Presbyters were placed in every Church, In the
proposition, as appears by the prosyllogisme, it signifies every particular
congregation, which T. C. seems to acknowledge to have been diverse in every
city or Church, contrary to our refuter, as we shall hear in the second
book. And in this sense it may be true, that not every congregation had
diverse Presbyters: as with us every city or Church has diverse Presbyters,
yet every congregation has not. Tit. 1.5.
I say then, what Paul required Titus to do in Creet, the same he and Barnabas
performed in these countries: that is, they ordained Presbyters (...) or (...)
in every city or Church; which Presbyters were also such as the Apostle Tit.
1. calls Bishops, and requires in them ability to preach. And although in
every city or Church there were diverse of them, yet not diverse for every
meeting. There is no necessity therefore, nor yet probability, that by
Presbyters in this place we should understand any but Ministers, contrary to
the perpetual use of the word: Neither can any interpreter be alleged old or
new, that is not a party, which does understand the word of Lay Elders. De
relig. page 1 68. In Act. 14.23. In Act. 14.23.
Zanchius, though a favorer of the Presbytery, reckons this place among
those, wherein Ministers of the word are called Presbyters. Aretius, though he
acknowledges the distinction of Presbyters into two sorts, yet he confesses
this place is, as you heard before, to be understood of Ministers. Calvin
himself the principal Patron of the Eldership, understands by Presbyters
in this place Ministers, and Preachers. Prebyteros his vocari int^rpretor,
quibus iniunctum erat docendi munus: Presbyters here I interpret those to be
called, to whom the office of teaching was enjoined. Yea but says T. C. though
Calvin say Ministers; here be called Presbyters, Lib. 2. part. 2.35. and 36.
yet he does not say that they only: yea he must be understood (as implying
Lay Elders under Presbyters) seeing he avouches the place of Titus, which to
us seems all one with Act. 14,) for the establishment of these Elders, and
quoteth instit. lib. 4. c. 3. s. 8. where he writes thus. Lib. 4. c. 3. 8.
Whereas I called those who govern the Churches indifferently, Bishops,
Presbyters, Pastors, Ministers, I did according to the use of the scripture,
which confounds these words: for whosoever exercise the ministry of the
word, it gives the title of Bishops to them. So where Paul commands Titus to
ordain Presbyters in every city, he straightwaies adds, for a Bishop must
be unreprovable, Tit. 1.5.7. so Phil. 1.1. and Act. 20.17.28. here now it is
to be observed, that hitherto we have reckoned those officers only, which
consist in the ministry of the word. You see then, how Calvin in his
institutions, urged this place in the Epistle to Titus for Lay Elders. Will you
also hear his judgment in his co^mentarie upon the place? Calvin. in Tit. 1.5.
although we gather says he out of the 1. Tim: 5: that there were two sorts of
Presbyters, yet the context here will straightwaies show, that no other then
Doctors are here understood, that is who were ordained to teach; because by and
by he will call them Bishops.

But for all this T.C. sees not, why it may not be referred to Elders, meaning
Lay Elders, as well as too BB: meaning Ministers. But say I, you must see that
Lay Elders not only may, but must necessarily be understood in this place, or
else it is absurdly alleged by you to prove them. Yes, he and the Author of
the counter poison will prove, that they are meant here: for the word Elders is
set down generally signifying as well Lay Elders as Ministers, therefore Paul
and Barnabas ordained Lay Elders as well as Ministers. To the consequence I
first answer, that if Elders were a general name comprising more sorts then
one, and if Luke had said, that they ordained all sorts of Elders, this
consequence would have held: for from the Genus universally taken, we may
affirmatively conclude the special sorts. But Luke not speaking so, it is
sufficient for the truth of the history, if they ordained any sort of Elders.
Now it is confessed of all, that they ordained Ministers, therefore though
Elders were the Genus, yet this were a very weak argument. Yea but says T.C.
S. Luke there sets forth, how they set a full order in the Church:
Counterpois. arg. 6. for Elders.
and his purpose was says another to declare how the Apostles brought the
Churches to a perfect and full order of Church government, Whereunto I answer
first, that the Church might have a perfect and full order of government
without them, And secondly that Lukes meaning was not to signify that they
brought those Churches to a full and perfect order of government at their
first conversion, which was not to be expected; but that now they began to
establish Churches, placing among them Presbyters or Ministers, as being
necessary for the very being of visible Churches, without mention (I say not
of Bishops, who notwithstanding were added before they were brought to the full
and perfect order of government, but even) of Deacons.

The consequence therefore were naught, though the antecedent were true, that
is, though Presbyter were the Genus, or general word, signifying as well
Lay Elders as Ministers; for it were only an argument from the Genus to the
Species affirmatively. But the antecedent I have before proved to be most
false: there being not any testimony to be produced out of scriptures,
Counsels, Fathers, or histories of the Church where Presbyter signifies an
Ecclesiastical function in the Church of Christ, does signify any other but a
Minister of the word. And therefore it is absurd to imagine, that Luke Act. 14.
does by Presbyters mean any other then Ministers.

Sect. 11. Iam. 5.14. Counterpois. argum. 5. for Lay-Elder. 1. Tim. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
The third testimony, I find not urged any where, but in the counterpoison.
Where it is said, that James willing them, when they be weak, to send for the
Elders of the Church, thereby plainly declares, that the Church ought not
only to have a pastor and a doctor, whose chief attendance must be on reading
exhortation and doctrine; but also many, who ought always to be ready at an
instant calling of diverse and many at once, that none in that necessary work
be neglected. It follows thereby that besides them, there ought to be such
other Elders as may admonish the unruly, comfort the weak minded, and be
patient toward all.

If all this were granted as it is propounded, it would not follow thereupon,
that therefore there should be any Lay Elders, but many Ministers in every
Church: for such were those in the place cited, 1. Thessa. 5.12.14.
and it is the duty of those, whom James would have sent for, to attend unto
reading, doctrine and exhortation.

But his meaning (no doubt) was this: There ought to be many Elders in every
Church, therefore some Lay Elders. The consequence he takes for granted: the
antecedent he proves thus. There were many Elders in every Church in S. James
time, therefore there ought to be many now.

For answer to his antecedent and proof thereof, we are to distinguish of the
word Church. For if thereby he mean the Church of a whole city and country
adjoining, there were, and are many Presbyters in every Church: but if thereby
he mean every several congregation, meeting, or assembly of Christians: there
neither are, nor were many Presbyters appointed to every such Church. In S.
James time, though in each Church there were diverse assemblies of Christians
meeting as they could; yet were not parishes distinguished, nor Presbyters
severally and certainly allotted to them; but to the Church of a whole city
and country adjoining, there was one Bishop, and many Presbyters provided. But
when parishes were distinguished, to each of them severally a Presbyter was
assigned out of the Clergy or Presbytery of the city; the residue of the
Presbyters remaining with the Bishop, who (as before the division of parishes)
retained still the charge of the whole Diocese, as I will God willing show in
the next book. Wherefore, though in S. James time, before the division of
parishes, there were in every Church (that is Diocese) many Presbyters; yet it
does not follow, that therefore in every parish there should be diverse
Presbyters.

But his consequence is especially to be insisted upon: for though there were
in each Church many Presbyters, as at Ephesus Act. 20. and at Jerusalem where
James himself was Bishop Act. 15. and. 21. of which number James would have
the weak to send for some; yet in that number there was not one, who was not a
Minister. Neither can any sound reason be alleged, why we should conceive
these Presbyters, of whom James speaks, to have been any other then
Ministers. First the title which is given them, viz: Presbyters of the Church
as Act. 20.17. is peculiar to Ministers, not one instance to be given to the
contrary. Secondly, the function, for the performance whereof they were to
visit the sick, chiefly, if not only pertaining to Ministers, and that was
not only to pray over the party, and that (as it seems by the phrase (...))
with imposition of hands, Bez. in Iam. 5.
but also to anoint him with the oil in the name of the Lord, that by the
oil, as an outward, though temporary Sacrament, annexed to the temporary
gift of healing, granted for a time not only to the Apostles, Mar. 6.13.
but also to their successors in the ministry of the word, the sick might be
restored to health; and by prayer joined with imposition of hands, the sins
of the party might be remitted, and so the cause of the sickness be removed.

Wherefore I make no question, but the speech of Saint James is to be
understood, according to the perpetual use of the word, the general
interpretation of all writers both old and new, Zanch. de relig page 168.
(excepting not all that be parties in the cause,) and the general and
continual practice of the Church, expounding him, as if he had said, let him
call for the Ministers, etc.

Sect. 12. Romans 12.8. Counterpoison. arg. 2. for Elders.
The fourth testimony is thus urged. If the Apostle setting down the ordinary
members of Christ his Church, which differ in their proper action, do set
down the Elder to be over the people with diligence, and not to be occupied in
the ministry of the word either by exhortation or doctrine, but to admonish
them and rule them; then the onely-gouerning Elders were ordained by the
Apostles: but the first say they is manifest, Romans 12.6.7.8. therefore the
second.

But the first, say I, is so far from being manifest, that it cannot so much
as obscurely be gathered out of the text. It is true, the Apostle speaks of
the members of the body of Christ, and of the diverse gifts bestowed upon them,
which the Apostle exhorts every one knowing his proportion, or measure, in
all humility and modesty to employ to the common good of the whole body. But
you must understand, First, that the members of Christ are not only officers
in the state Ecclesiastical, but all Christians whatsoever, as well in the
body politic, as Ecclesiasticke, whether public or private. Secondly, that
the Apostle does not speak of distinct offices which are not coincident to the
same persons, but of the diverse gifts, and graces of Gods spirit: Rom: 12.6.
for so he says (...), etc: having diverse gifts according to the grace which
is given unto us, of which all or most may concur in the same subject. As for
example, a good and faithful Minister, has as a Minister: First, (...), the
gift of expounding the scriptures and of prayer, Secondly, (...), a function to
Minister and serve God in the edification of the church, Thirdly, (...), the
gift of Teaching. 4. (...), the gift of Exhortation: 5. (...), the gift of
government: and as a good Christian. 6. (...): and 7. (...): the grace to
distribute, and to communicate to to the necessities of his brethren, in
simplicity and cheerefulnes. 3. That these gifts are not proper to
Ecclesiastical persons, See D. B^lson, Page 137, 138.
but common to others.

But if the Apostle had here propounded distinct offices, then might 7. be
distinguished, and those (...), or in-compatible in the same person. But
neither are there according to these branches. 7. distinct offices; And
besides, they are, or may be all, or diverse of them, coincident to the same
person. As for Lay Elders, they are neither particular, lie expressed, nor in
the general employed. The speech is general, he that governs, in diligence,
appartaining to all, that have authority, not only in the church, but also in
the family or commonwealth. Indeed, if it were presupposed, (which will never
be proved by them, nor granted by us) that among governors, Lay Elders had a
place in the primitive church; then this general might particularly be applied
to them, after this manner; all governors ought to be diligent, therefore they.
But seeing there were none such, for men to argue from the general, to a
fained special, and that affirmative, in this manner; the Apostle speaks of
governors, therefore of Lay Elders: It is an argument like all the rest, not
worth the answering.

Yea, but the disputer alleges Calvin, who in his institutions affirms that
this place cannot be otherwise understood. Lib. 4. c. 4. Sect. 8.
I would be loath to contest with Calvin, whose name is reverend, and whose
memory is blessed. Nevertheless, it is evident by that which has been said,
that it may and ought otherwise to be expounded.

Yea Calvin himself confesses elsewhere, that howsoever this place do seem
especially to be understood of Ecclesiastical Governors or Seniors; Inst. li.
4. c. ^^ Sect. 4.
tamen dubium non est, quin omne iustae prefecturae genus nobis commendet; Yet
it is not to be doubted but that the Apostle does commend unto us all kinds
of just government.

In Rom: 12.8.
And again, although properly he call the Church-Gouernors, and namely the
Seniors, (...), notwithstanding what he says of them, may universally be
extended to gouernements of all sorts. By Caluins own confession therefore, the
words may generally be understood. And if they may, then also they must. For
who shall dare without good warrant, to restrain the general sense of the
holy Ghost to one only particular; Especially, that being but a counterfeit;
as if the Apostle when he says, he that governs, in diligence, had said,
let the Lay, or only governing Elders be dilligent in their office.

The countterpois. Beza de presbyt: and exco^m. 113.
Yea but the Apostle speaks of such a Governor, as might neither teach nor
exhort: and therefore being neither Pastor nor Doctor, it must needs be the
only governing Elder. Of this Enthym^me both the antecedent is false, and the
consequence unsound. For if the Apostle speak of such a Governor, as might
not teach, nor exhort, then neither distribute, nor show mercy; and by the
same reason, the teacher, and exhorter, of whom he spoke before, may not
govern.

But as I said, the Apostle does not speak of distinct offices, but of diverse
gifts, which many times concur in the same person. So that, as he that
teaches and exhorts, may also govern, and distribute: so he that
governs, as the Pastor, may teach and exhort, and not only he, but the
Father is to teach and exhort his children, the master his family; yea, Coll.
3.16. Heb. 3.13.
private Christians are to instruct and exhort one another. Neither does it
follow, if he which governs be neither a Pastor nor Doctor, that
straightwaies he should be an only governing Elder. For husbands, parents,
masters, and magistrates, masters of Colleges and hospitalls, are governors,
though neither Doctors nor Pastors, In Tit. 1. sect: 2. contra Rhem. Sect. 13.
1 Cor. 12.28.
and yet are they no Ecclesiastical Lay Elders. To conclude, D. Fulke
understands this place chiefly of Bishops, whom he supposes here to be
called (...), as Heb: 13.17. (...).

The fifth and last testimony, is thus enforced by them. If God has set in
his Church Governors distinct from the Ministers of the Word, then has he
ordained Lay or only governing Elders. Bez. de presbyt: and ex: co^m: 113. T.
C. lib. 2. part. 2.38. Counterpois: Argum: 3. for Elders. Verse: 27.
But the first is testified by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12.28. therefore God has
ordained lay or only governing Elders.

In this Syllogism no part is sound: for first the consequence of the
proposition is naught: for by Church as it is taken in the assumption, citing
1. Cor. 12. is meant the whole body of Christ, and by the members of his body,
all Christians; among whom God has established degrees of superiors to
govern, and inferiors to obey in all societies, as well in the family and
commonwealth, as in the Ecclesiastical state.

Secondly, the assumption is false: for, although it be true that in Christ's
body there are governors Occonomicall and political distinct from the
Ministers; yet Paul does not in this place testify, that Christ has set in
his Church governors distinct from the Ministers; and much less does he
testify, that in the Church, that is the state Ecclesiastical, he has
ordained governors which are not Ministers. Nay, which is more, the Apostle
does not once mention governors in this text: for it is the fault of the
translation, for (...) and (...) that is helps and gouernements, to read
helpers and governors: it being the purpose of the holy Ghost in all the
12.13. and 14. chapters, to discourse of the diverse gifts wherewith God does
adorn the membes of his Church: and in this context, in the midsts of other
gifts, which are expressed in the abstract, he places these two, for so he
says, powers, gifts of healing, helps, gouerneme^ts, kinds of tongues. Now
it is no better reason to make two distinct offices of helpers and governors
out of these words, then to raise three others out of the other three, powers,
gifts of healing and kinds of tongues. But it were ridiculous to make three
distinct offices of these three; so is it of the other. And if the other three
are to be accounted as gifts, and not as offices; why should we not so conceive
of helpings and gouernings, that is to say, the gift of helping and governing?
Yea I say further, that although in the beginning of the verse, the Apostle
does reckon three offices, Apostles, Prophets, Teachers: yet his purpose was
not exactly to distinguish Ecclesiastical functions, but to enumerate the
diverse gifts of Gods spirit, Ephesians. 4.11.
wherewith the members of Christ's body are adorned, (...), for the common good
of the body: Some being honored with the gift of the Apostleship, some with
the gift of Prophecy, some with the gift of teaching; some with the gift of
working miracles, Chrysostom. 1. Cor. 12. (...) Acts. 20.35. (...)
some with the gift of healing diseases; some with the gift of helping and
relieuing those that be distressed, as Chrysostom expounds it, and as the
word is used, Act: 20. some with the gift of governing, some with the gift of
tongues.

For if the Apostle had meant in this place to distinguish the Functions and
Offices of the Church: then from this Text should eight distinct offices be
collected; neither should these gifts have been coincident into the same
persons; so that teachers might not govern, and governors might not teach,
Oecum (...).
etc. whereas contrariwise, it is evident, that the Apostles had all these
gifts, as Chrysostom also says: (...), Prophets and Teachers had diverse of
them, etc.

It is plain therefore, that the Apostle did not distinguish the offices of
the Church, but orderly recount the gifts and graces, wherewith the Lord does
beautify diverse members of the Church.

And whereas the Corinthians were proud of their gift of tongues, (...)
Chrysostom: in 1. Cor: 12. 1. Cor: 12.31. and 14.1.3. In 1. Cor. 12.
and despised others; the Apostle shows that among all these gifts which he
reckons, that of tongues deserves the last place: And therefore exhorts
the^ to be zealous of the better gifts, chiefly to follow after love, and to
covet after spiritual gifts, but among them to desire, rather to prophecy,
that is to preach, then to speak with tongues.

And whereas the holy Ghost does marshall in order the gifts of God, according
to their worthiness, saying: First, second, third: if by helps he should mean
Deacons, and by governments Elders, then must we hold Deacons to be preferred
before Elders, which will not be granted. If any man doubt whether helps and
governments are to be accounted gifts, Chrysostom may resolve him: who as of
the former he says, that is in especial manner ye gift of God, so also of the
latter, (...), to be fit to govern, and to administer spiritual things: and
he adds, that our duties are called Gods gifts, to teach us, that our
ability in performance of our duty, is the gift of God. So Oecumenius, (...),
which also he calls a gift, though it require our labor also and industry.

Nazianzen also reckons them among the graces of the spirit. (...).
For the spirit (says he) is one, but the graces are not equal, nor yet the
receptacles of the spirit. For to one, by the spirit is given the word of
Wisdom and contemplation; to another, the word of knowledge or revelation;
(...)
to another, firm and undoubted faith; to another, the inoperations of powers,
and high wonders; to another, the gifts of healing* (...), helps, that is,
Presidencies* or Patronages; Gouernements, that is, Poedagogies of the flesh,
kinds of tongues, interpretations of tongues.

I am not ignorant, Ambros: in 1. Cor: 12. A-Apostolos] ipsi Episcopi sunt.

Theodoretus Eccleesiaru^ administrationes per haec significauit.

Anselm: Th: Aquin: Dyonisius, Carthus: N. Lyranus. in 1. Cor: 12.


that some before our time have understood diverse of these members to have
been Ecclesiastical functions. But yet their exposition wholly agrees with
the government of our Church, not with the pretended discipline. For by
Apostles, they understand, not only the 12. Apostles, but their successors also
in the government of the Church, that is to say, the Bishops; and by helps,
they understand them, who help the Bishops in the government of the church, as
the Deanes and Archdeacons; and by gouernements, the governors or rectors of
several parishes.

These with 1. Tim: 5.17* are the testimonies of Scripture, which usually be
aleaged by the patrons of the presbytery, not one of them almost either
omitting any of them, or adding any other. Ad page: 5^
So that this Disputer might truly conclude, that this is the strength, and
indeed all the strength they have out of the Scriptures. Which how strongly or
strangely rather, they have concluded for the Lay Elders, it does sufficiently
appear to them, that have not either a strong prejudice, or a weak judgment.
Assuredly, if the Fathers be no stronger for them, then the Scriptures, then is
the cause of the Lay Elders very weak and languishing.

CHAP. XI. Answering the Allegations out of the Fathers, for Lay Elders.
OF the Fathers he also braggeth, as he did before of the Scriptures. But in
the vpshot, all the force of his arguments, either out of Scriptures or
Fathers, relyeth upon the authority of certain new writers, who are the most,
and almost all of them, parties in the cause. Which is a kind of arguing,
devised to retain the unlearned in their former opinion; that because so many
late Divines understand the Scriptures and Fathers, according to their received
opinions, they may be confirmed therein.

But is not this a strange kind of reasoning: Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Ambrose, (which are all the Fathers he names, and but names, as though with
their names he hoped to overcome us) give testimony to Lay Elders; therefore
Lay Elders were in use in the primitive church: and when we quietly grant this
consequence, and only desire them to prove the antecedent: Is it not strange, I
say, that this disputer should not produce the testimonies themselves, and
endeavor by necessary evidence to demonstrate, that they are to be understood
as speaking of Lay Elders? but to bring in a sort of new writers, the most
whereof are parties, to depose, that these, ancient Fathers say as they would
have them.

Did they hear them say so, or did they read their writings? If they read
their testimonies; are they ye same which we have in print, or some special
manuscripts, which yet are not come to light? if such, why are they not
produced? If their testimonies be upon public record, and in print, why should
not we examine the records themselves, and trust to our own eyes and
judgments, rather the^ to the opinions of them, who are partial in the cause?
Or if these new writers had reasons to persuade us, that these Fathers do
speak for Lay Elders, why are not their reasons produced?

By your leave, I will produce their testimonies for you. And because it
pittyeth me the to see well-meaning people abused (I had almost said guld) with
glorious shows: I will let them see, that not any one testimony, which you
do use to produce out of the Fathers, does conclude for Lay Elders.

And first, Sect. 2. The testimonies of Ignatius answered.
as touching Ignatius, whom he first names: because his testimonies were
(belike) too hot to be handled* yet, he puts him off fairly, saying that
hereafter he will show how he is to be understood, when he comes to answer
my quotations out of him.

But I quote him not in the question of Elders, but among my proofs for
Bishops. And if he have no stronger proofs out of Ignatius for elders, then
the selfsame that I allege for Bishops, may you not think that he is very
strong for them? The truth is, he perceived they were too weak to be urged by
him as an opponent, and therefore chose to speak to them as an answerer,
hoping to persuade the simple reader, that Lay Elders are sufficiently proved
by Ignatius his testimony, if they be not disproued thereby, as hereafter you
shall hear.

T. C. and after him the author of the counterpoison, Lib: 2. part: 2.45. H.I.
page: 67, Protestat. out of Sc. 41. Ad Trallian. Ad Trall.
the demonstrator of discipline, and almost who not? cite this sentence of
Ignatius. There is no Church which can stand without her Eldership or counsel.
Unto which, H.I. adds 2. more, out of his epistles to them of Tarsus and
Smyrna. In the 1. of these Epistles, Ignatius says, (...), be subject to the
Bishop as to the Lord: and a little after, (...), and to the Presbyters, as to
the Apostles of Jesus Christ our hope. Of the Deacons in the next words he
sath, that they be ministers of the mysteries of Christ Jesus, and not of meat
and drink. A reason of the former speech he renders in these words, the
Bishop is the type of the Father of all, the Presbyters are (...), as the
Consistory of God, and a band or College of the Apostles of Christ. Then
follows, (...), without these, that is, BB. Presbyters, Deacons, no elect
Church is, no holy congregation, no assembly of Saints.

This testimony proves, that as each Church had a Bishop and Deacons, so also
Presbyters and a presbytery. But what manner of presbyters they were, it
appears: 1. by the Bishops and Deacons, between whom they are usually ranged
by Ignatius, as the second degree of the Clergy, willing the Laymen to be
subject to the Deacons, the Deacons to the Presbyters, the Presbyters to the
Bishop, Ah Smyrn.
and the Bishop to Christ: which by the way is H. I. third testimony, and in
effect the same with the second. Ad Tarsens: Ad Philadelp


And again, let the Presbyters, and the Deacons, and the rest of the Clergy,
together with all the people, be obedient to the Bishop.

By which it is plain, they had not in those times, either Lay Elders, or
Lay-Deacons: For the very Deacons are by him called the ministers of Christ
unto the word of God, and ministers of the mysteries of Christ.

Ad Smyrn. Ad Trall.
As for the BB: they were not parish Bishops assisted, according to the new
conceit, with Lay Elders, but BB: of Cities (such as Ignatius himself, who was
Bishop of Antioch, the chief City of Syria,) having the assistance of diverse
Presbyters, who were Clergy men, or ministers; and so are in express terms
reckoned by Ignatius, as one of the degrees of the clergy, whom in the words
before alleged, and in other places, he resembles to the Apostles of Christ,
and would have them so obeyed: Ad Smyrn. (...).

ad Maguel. The Senate of the Apostles. Ad Antioch.


exhorting them with the words which Saint Peter uses to ministers, 1. Epist:
5.2. to feed the flock, (...), etc.

This is also proved by the universal consent of the most ancient Counsels,
Canons, and Fathers, who in innumerable places, me^tioning Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons, never conceive of them otherwise then of 3. degrees of the clergy, in
that very sense wherein our church does use and retain them.

And thus much concerning that most worthy martyr, and Bishop Ignatius: saving,
that I would commend a few sen^ences of his, to this disputer and his consorts.
(...), be you united to the Bishop, submitting your selves to God by him in
Chirist, (...) for whosoever are Christ's, they are with the Bishop. And again,
do not think that I speak this, as having understood the separation of some,
Ad Philadelph.
he is witness to me, for whose sake I am bound, that I have not learned this
from the mouth of man, Ibid. Sect. 3.
but the spirit has preached unto me, saying these things, (...) without the
Bishop do nothing, love unity, avoid divisions.

The testimony, which is usually cited out of Tertullian, is in his
Apologetico. Where, having said that Christians did use to meet in assemblies
and congregations to prayer, and to the hearing of the word, he adds The
testimony of Tertulli. apolog. Cap. 39.
there are also exhortations, T. C. and after him the counter poi^. cite this
testimony thus: If there be any that has committed such a fault that he is to
be put away from the pertaking of the prayer of the Church, and from all holy
matters or affairs: there d^ bear rule or be presidents, certain of the most
approved ancients or Elders, which have obtained this honor, not by money, but
by good report.
chastis^ments and divine censure: judgment is exercised with great advise, as
among those who are certain that God does see them: and it is a great
foreshewing of the judgment to come, if any shall so offend as that he shall be
banished from the communion of prayer, and of the assembly, and of all holy
fellowship. Praesident probati quique seniores honorem istum non pretio sed
testimonio adepti, the presidents of our meetings are approved Seniors, having
obtained this honor, not by reward, but by good report. By which testimony it
is apparent, that the same parties were the presidents of the assembly as well
in prayer and in the ministry of the word, as in the exercise of discipline
and censures. But Ministers and not Lay-Elde^s were presidents and Rulers of
the meetings in public prayer and ministry of the word, therefore also in
the exercise of discipline. Who these presidents were, Tertullian himself
shows else where, testifying that the Christians received the Sacrament both
in the time of their meals, and also in their meetings before day, nec de
aliorum manu quam presidentium sumimus Neither do we receive it at the hands
of any others then of our presidents. On which words Beatus Rhenanus writes
thus, Presidentes voc at presbyteros etiam alibi, the Presbyters he calls
presidents also in another place, and quoteth the place alleged out of the
Apologeticke. And whereas Tertullian imagined (though erroneously) that the
husband of a second wife could not be a Bishop or Minister, Dc c^rona militis.
his opinion he vttere^* in these words, how derogatorie from faith, Lib. 1. ad
vxorem.
and how opposite to piety second marriages are, the discipline of the Church
and the prescript of the Apostle does declare, cum digamos non siuit presidere,
when it does not suffer twice married men to be presidents that is Ministers.
And whereas the Catholics, De Monogamia: quem librum scripsit aduersus
Ecclesiam. Hierom. in Catalog.
whom he endeavors to refute, understood that rule of the Apostle as peculiar
to Bishops and Ministers, he charge them also with the breach thereof even in
that sense. Quot enim and ex digamiae president apud vos, insultantes vtique
apostolo? for how many after their second marriage are presidents among you,
even insulting over the Apostle and blush not when these things are read before
them? It is plain therefore, that the Seniors which were presidents in the
assemblies of Christians, of whom Tertullian speaks, were Ministers,
whatsoever some new writers whom he quoteth, do say to the contrary. For
whereas among others who were parties in the cause, he quoteth B. Jewel, who
indeed is no party, I answer, if he have alleged the rest no better then
him, (as for my part I mean not to search, especially seeing the chief of his
Authors are quoted at Random,) he will gain the opinion of a notable falsifier
of Authors. Page 649.
Harding blamed the translator of the Apology into English, for translating
Presbyteri Elders and not Priests; Page 650.
The translation Bishop Jewel defends, saying that Presbyter a Priest is
nothing else but Senior, and that a Priest and Elder are both one thing. And
whereas Harding affirmed, that Priests and Deacons waited only upon the
Bishops but gave no sentence in counsels (which in respect of provincial
counsels, is evidently false) he disproueth that assertion. First by Act. 15.
Page 651.
Secondly, by Nicephorus. Thirdly, by this testimony of Tertull^an, president
probati quique Seniores the judges in such Ecclesiastical assemblies be the
best allowed Elders, that is according to Bishop Jewels interpretation,
Priests, for to that end he cites the testimony, and before he had said that
Senior and Priest is all one.

D. Whitgift conceiving, as Bishop Jewel did, that these Seniors were
Ministers; T. C. obiecteth, (and it is the only thing he obiecteth) that it is
incredible, Li. 2. part. 2 Page 41.
that all the Churches, whose defense Tertullian takes upon him, and whose
usage he does describe, had such a college of Seniors that were Ministers.
Whereunto the answer is easy, that Tertullian speaks of the Churches in
cities, in which only were Presbyteries (unto which the parishes of the
country adjoining, so soon as there were any, were subject) and those wholly
consisting of Minist^rs. Neither can any testimony or example be alleged,
either of Presbyters that were not Ministers, or of Presbyteries in villages or
country parishes.

As touching Cyprian: Sect. 4. The testimony of Cyprian answered.
the disputer might have cited some testimony, or at least quoted some place
in his writings, before he had labored to prove what was his meaning. But his
concealing of the place it self, and his producing of witnesses (who are all
parties) to depose that Cyprian speaks for Lay Elders, is a plain argument
that he trusts to his witnesses, more then to Cyprian himself. For my part,
I know not what place he means: if he will approve his sincerity, let him
name one place if he can, which even in his own conscience does seem indeed
to make for Lay Elders. Demonstr. c. 12. H. I. page 67.
The Demonstrator of discipline and H. I. in his book though they take
together such testimonies of the Fathers as they thought favored Lay Elders;
yet they durst not mention Cyprian, as reposing any of their strength in his
testimony.

T. C. cites Cyprian, as noting a piece of the office of these Elders by
dividing the communion bread into equal portions, Lib. 2. part. 2.42. Cypr.
lib. 4. epist. 5.
and carrying it for the assistance of the Bishop in little baskets or trayes,
where by placing their office in this assisting the Minister, he does
manifestly shut the^ out from the ministering of the Sacrament, etc: whereof
also it comes that in another place he calls them brethren which had care
of the basket. Li. 1. epist. 9. Sportulantes fratres.


When I consider T. C. his learning and professed piety, I cannot sufficiently
wonder at his allegations out of the Fathers, Li. 4. epist. 5.
and at this among the rest. Cyprian, being himself absent in time of
persecution, writes to the Presbyters, Deacons and people of Carthage,
signifying that he and some other Bishops (whom he calls his colleagues) had
received Celerinus, and Aurelius, two notable young men into the Clergy, and
ordained them Lectores Readers, with purpose, that when they should be of age,
to ordain them Presbyters. In the mean time, know ye says he, that we have
already designed to the^ honore^ Presbyterij, the honor of Priesthood, vt
sportulis ijsdem cum. Presbyteris honorentur that they may be honored with the
wages (or as it was afterward called canonical portion) equal with
Presbyters, sessuri nobiscum, being hereafter to fit with us (namely as
Presbyters) when they shall be grown in years. And that this was Cyprians
meaning, the other place by him cited does prove. For whereas one Geminius
Victor had by his will named Faustinus a Presbyter to be a tutor or guardian;
Li. 1. epist. 9.
Cyprian does reprove it as contrary, not only to the Canons of the Church,
but also to the word of God, which would have none that is a Soldier to God
to be entangled with worldly business. 2. Tim. 2.4.
To which purpose he alleges the example of the Leuits, who for the same
cause had no possession like the other tribes. The which manner and form says
he, is still retained in the Clergy, that they who in the Church of God are
preferred to the order of Clerks, should by no means be called away from the
divine administration, nor be tied to worldly cumbers and employments, sed in
honor sportulantium fratrum tanquam decimas ex fructibus accipientes, but that
receiving the honor of brethren, who have wages of the Church, as it were
tithes of fruits, they should not depart from the Altar and service of God.
Those, Duaren. de sacr. eccl. minist. and b^n. lib. 1. c. 18. C. de sacro.
cccl. l. placet. etc. Lib. 3. epist. 14. and 15.
whom he calls sportulantes fratres, were afterward called Canonici, a
Canon, that is from the ordinary and certain pension or prebend which was
allotted to them.

And where he says the Presbyters were excluded from ministering the communion,
it is apparent in the writings of Cyprian, that usually they did administer
that Sacrament, and in diverse of his Epistles are reproved by him, for giving
the communion to some, which had fallen in time of persecution, without his
consent.

The Author of the Counterpoyson cites another testimony of Cyprian, Lib. 3.
epist. 22.
writing to the Presbyters and Deacons, signifying unto them, that in the want
of diverse of the Clergy, he had ordained new. Clero proximos.
Know ye says he that I have made Saturus Reader, and Optatus subdeacon, whom
we heretofore had made next the Clegie, when either to Saturus on Easterday we
granted once or twice leave to read, or when with the Presbyters Doctors
Readers we appointed Optatus the Teacher of the hea^ers, Doctorem audientium.
examining whether all things did agree to them, which ought to be in those who
are prepared for the Clergy. Where, because Presbyters are mentioned as
distinct from Doctors, (which he supposes to be Ministers) and Readers, he
infers they were Lay Elders. To omit his mistakings, and not understanding
the place, it is evident that Doctores audientium were Catechists, Theod.
Balsam. in Conc. Ne^ocaess. c. 5. and Ancyr. c. 20. Niceph li. 5. c. 4.
(for audientes were the inferior rank of Catechumeni) who were so far from
being chief in the Clergy next to the Bishop as Presbyters, that Cyprian
signifies, when he and the rest had appointed Optatus doctorem audientium,
they had made him next to the Clergy, that is at the next election to be
chosen into the Clergy, examining whether all things did agree to him which
ought to be in them who are prepared for the Clergy. Neither should this seem
strange, seeing Origin was Catechist at Alexandria, when he was but eighteen
year old: Who afterward coming into Palaestina, was permitted by the Bishops
there, publicly to expound the scriptures. Which when Demetrius the Bishop of
Alexandria understood, by letters he reproved those Bishops; Eusebius. lib. 6. c.
20. Niceph. l. 5. c. 14.
asking them, if ever it were heard, that Laymen, such as Origin then was,
should preach in the presence of Bishops. Therefore the distinction of
Presbyters from such Teachers, does not prove that themselus were not Ministers.

Such Teachers in Alexandria after Origin, were Dionysius and Heraclas; whom
notwithstanding, the Presbyters, who till then were wont to choose their Bishop
out of their own order, Hier. adeuagrium.
elected Bishops, as hereafter we shall show. But what manner of Seniors the
Presbyters were, whom Cyprian so often mentions, may sufficiently appear by
this one testimony, where he says, Li. 3. epist. 1.
cum episcopo Presbyteri sacerdotali honor coniuncti, the Presbyters were
joined with the Bishop in the honor of Priesthood.

What other allegations they have out of Cyprian worth the answering, I know
not. But this I protest, that I have read over Cyprian, having always an eye
to this present question; but I never met with any one testimony, that (in my
poor judgment) did seem to sound for Lay Elders.

Page 11.
As for those other places, which are in a petition directed to Q. Elizabeth,
Page 41.
and in a protestation which lately came out of the North, quoted out of
Cyprian, and other ancient writers; Perpet. govern. Chap. 11.
I find them all more then sufficiently answered by the learned and reverend B.
Bilson, to whom I refer the Reader, having my self insisted longer on this
question then at the first I intended.

Ad page 52.
Neither will I vouchsafe an answer to his new supply, either of testimonies of
new writers (though I know some of them to be falsified) or examples of other
reformed Churches, whereby he seeks to bleare the eyes of the simple. For if
this cause were to be tried by plurality of voices for witness to the truth,
or of examples for practice of it, who knows not, that we are able to
ouersway them without comparison, no writer till our age giving testimony, no
Church since the Apostles times until this present age giving approbation to
Lay Elders; but all writers and Churches before our time, giving testimony and
approbation to the government of Bishops.

To omit that as in the number of learned men we are not inferior, so in the
multitude of Churches at this day, which do not admit the Lay Elders, Lib. 4.
c. ult.
we are far superior, as hereafter shall be showed.

And thus much I hope will suffice for the first point.
FINIS.
LONDON Imprinted by Thomas Creed. 1611.

THE SECOND BOOK, PROVING That the Primitive Churches, endued with Power of
Ecclesiastical Government, The second point of the 5.
were not Parishes properly but Dioceses; The 3. point.
And that the Angels of the Churches, or ancient Bishops were not Parishionall,
but Diocesan Bishops.
The First Chapter entreating of the diverse acceptations of the words (...),
Church, Diocese, and that which is translated, Parish.
IN this second conflict I find the Refuter very confident, like the men of Ai,
(though not upon the like occasion) as though my forces were not able to stand
before him. But forasmuch as in the former assault I have taken the Acropolis
and chief hold of the Presbyterian Discipline, I doubt not, but that when he
shall with the men of Ai look back, and see the chief Tower of his defense,
I mean the Presbytery, vanishing as it were a smoke, his courage will be
abated. For the Presbytery being down, what has he wherewith to hold out
Bishops? For seeing the Primitive Churches were governed either by Diocesan
Bishops, as we hold, or by Pastors of Parishes, assisted with Lay Elders as
they imagine, who sees not that upon the overthrow of the Presbyteries, the
government by Bishops is necessarily inferred? Having therefore proved the
first point of the five, with such evidence of truth, as I am well assured all
the gainesayers thereof will never be able soundly and substantially to
confute, I need not doubt of prevailing in the rest. As for the 2. next points
which I handle, concerning Dioceses, and Diocesans; the refuter thinks they
be the weakest of all the five, Page 53.
and the worst appointed, and thereupon would take occasion to cavil at my
order, (as if I were to learn Method of him) whereas indeed his imputation of
weakness to these 2. parts, if it were true, would commend my disposition of
them as Homericall, seeing I have marshalled them Nestorio more, after the
manner of Nestor, in medio infirma, placing the weakest in the midst. The
chiefest points in my estimation being the first, and the two last. The truth
is, I did more lightly pass over these two then the rest, but not out of an
opinion of weakness in the points themselves, but partly in a conceit of their
evidence, and partly in consideration that they were not either so worthy or
so needful to be insisted upon as the rest. For first, I supposed them to be
so evident, that howsoever T. C. in whose steps our new Disciplinarians
tread, upon weaker grounds then a man of learning and judgment should have
stood upon, does deny them; yet scarsly any other man of learning and judgment
besides him would gainsay them. Secondly, that the three weightiest points
which are most contradicted, and in which these 2. are presupposed, were most
worthy in that breuity (whereto I was confined) to be stood upon. And thirdly,
that J needed not to be so careful in proving of them, seeing the chiefest
patrones of the pretended Discipline, as Calvin and Beza, etc. do herein ioin
with us against our new sect of Disciplinarians, as has already been proved.

Now whereas I brought forth these forces, intending only a light skirmish, and
velitationem quandam tanquam leuis armaturae; my adversary brings his maine
battle into the field, as if the event of this whole warfare depended upon this
encounter. I will therefore not only bring a new supply like those of the
Israelites which came upon the men of Ai, as they were pursuing the other
companies of Israel; but also cause these Arguments, which now like the troops
of Israel seem in his conceit to fly before him, to return upon him a fresh.

And forasmuch as here we are to entreat of Churches,. 2. How the word Ecclesia
is taken in the Scriptures.
Parishes, and Dioceses, it shall not be amiss to begin with the names
which are diversely taken. And first with the word Ecclesia; which signifying
generally Act. 19.32.39.40. Psalm. 22.23. and 26.5.12. and 149.1. Nehem. 5.7. in
the Greek translation.
, any assembly, company or congregation of men whatsoever, civil or
ecclesiastical, holy or profane, is in all the places of the new Testament
(excepting Act. 19.) appropriated to the Companies of the faithful. For
whereas all mankind is to be divided into two Companies; the one is the world,
which is the kingdom of darkness, containing many particular companies
which are all the Synagogues of Satan, the other, the Kingdom of God; this
latter is called Ecclesia, signifying a Company of men as redeemed, so also
called out of the world, (...)
as the Greek word imports. Ecclesia therefore is a company of men called
out of the world unto salvation by Christ, that is to say more briefly, the
Church does signify a company of Christians.

And thus it is used in the Scriptures either more Generally, to signify
either the Universal company of them that are elected in Christ, or called to
be Saints, as Ephesians. 1.22. and 3.21. and 5.23. 24.25.27.29, 32. Act 2.47.
Colos. 1.18.24. The two main parts of the universal Church Triumphant in
heaven, as Heb. 12 23. Militant on earth, as Mat. 16.18. 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephesians.
3.10. 1. Tim. 3.15, and that either dispersed in diverse nations and Countries
throughout the world, 1. Cor. 10.32. and 15 9. Act. 8.3. Gal 1.13. Phil. 3.6.
Congregated in an universal or O^cumenicall Synod


Particularly, and that either Definitely, to signify the Church of a Nation
in the number Singular. Act. 7 38. Plural. Romans 16.4. 1. Cor. 16.1.19. 2. Co.
8.1. Ga. 1.2.22 And these either dispersed or co^gregated into a Synod or
consistory. Mat. 18.17 Act. 15.22
Congregation, whether set: or uncertain as Act. 11.26. and 14.27. 1. Cor. 11
18 22. and 14.5.12.19 23.28.34.35.3. Ioh. 6.



City and Country adjoining. Act. 5.11. and 8.1. and 11.12. and 12.1.5. and
13.1. and 14.23. and 20. 17.28. 1. Cor. 1.2. 2 Co. 1.1. and 8.23. Col 4.16. 2.
These. 1.1. 1. Tim. 5.16. Iam. 5.14. Apoc. 1.4. 11.20. and 2.1.7.8.12.18. and
3.1.7.14. Village or town. Romans 16 1. Family, Romans 16.5. 1. Cor. 16 9. Col.
4.5. Philem. 2.
Indefinitely, signifying any company of Christians, not defining either the
Place, Society, whether of a Nation, City, etc. quantity, whether an entire
church or but a part, as Act. 9.^1. and 15 3.4.41. and 18.22. Romans 16.16 23.1.
Co. 4.17. and 6.4. and 11.16. and 14. 33. 2. Cor. 8.18.19.24. and ^1 8.28. and
12.13. Phil. 4.15. 1. These. 2.14. 2. These. 1.4. ^. Tim. 3.5.3. John. 9. 10.
Apoc. 2.7.17.23.29. and 3.6.13.22. and 22.16.





The significations of the word Church being so manifold in the Scriptures,. 3.
What is to be called a Church.
it may be demanded what is truly and properly a Church upon earth. Whereunto
I answer by warrant of the word, that every company of men professing the true
faith of Christ, is both truly a Church, and also a true Church. So is the
whole company of the faithful upon earth the true Church and spouse of Christ,
the pillar and ground of truth.

So is the company of Christians professing the true faith of Christ in any
Nation or part of the world to be termed by the name of a Church. For even as
the whole people of Israel professing the true religion, were one Church,
though containing very many particular Congregations or Synagogues, which also
were so many Churches: even so the whole people of England, professing through
Gods mercy, the true Catholic and Apostolic faith, is to be called the
Church of England. For whereas some allege, that the Church of the Jews was
one, because it was under one high Priest, who was a figure, and therefore
ceased: it is evident that it was one Church, because it was one people or
commonwealth, ruled by the same laws, professing the same religion, both
before there was one high Priest, and after there were through corruption more
then one. Neither was the high Priest in respect of his preeminence and
government over the priests and people a type of Christ (for then had he, as
well as Melchisedeck, been a type of Christ's government and kingly office, as
well as of his priesthood, and consequently Christ might have bin a priest of
the order of Aaron, as well as of Melchisedeck but in respect of his sacrifice
for the whole people, and intercession for them, and his entrance alone within
the sanctuary, bearing the names of the twelve Tribes: for Christ's government
appertains to his kingdom, and not to his priesthood.

Likewise the Christian people of any City and Country adjoining, whether that
which we call a province or diocese, though consisting of many particular
congregations, is rightly termed a Church, as the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch,
Ephesus, Smyrna, Sardes, Philadelphia, etc.

Jn like manner, the Christian people of one Town or Village, containing but
one congregation, which we call a parish, is truly called a church, as perhaps
that of Cenchreae. And to conclude, the company of faithful in one family do
deserve the name of a Church, as has bin showed. Indeed that any particular
Chruch of a whole Nation, City and Country, Town, Parish, or family, (family
I say being alone, and not a part of a congregation, but as an entire Church or
parish by itself) may be accounted a true visible Church, there is required
besides the profession of the true faith, wherein the life and being of a
Church consists, the ministry of the word and sacraments, and eutaxy, or
some good order of government. Not that all governors are to be placed in
every society or Church, but that the effect and benefit of the government is
to redound to every particular. For as well might an high Council of State, or
Parliament, such as was the synedrion of the Jews, which was but one for the
whole Nation, be required in every City, and a Mayor and Aldermen (such as be
in London and other chief Cities) in every village, as a Bishop and Presbytery
in every parish.

4. Visible Churches not parishes only, H. I. page 6.
All which J have the rather noted, because some having first strongly
conceited, that there is no true visible Church but a parish, nor lawful
church officers but parishionall, have haled the places of Scripture, where
Ecclesia is mentioned, to the confirmation of their conceit: and thereupon, as
their chief foundation, have built their newfound parish discipline. Of the
Jews there may, so often as there is mention of their synagogues.
Whereas in very truth, scarce any one testimony of such a congregation of
Christians, as we call a parish, can be alleged out of the Scriptures. Indeed
at the very first conversion of Cities, the whole number of the people
converted (being sometimes not much greater then the number of the Presbyters
placed among them) were able to make but a small congregation. But those
Churches were in constituting, they were not fully constituted, until their
number being increased, they had their Bishop or Pastor, their Presbytery and
Deacons; without which Ignatius says, there was no Church: meaning no
accomplished or fully constituted Church. Neither was the Bishop and the
Presbytery, which at the first was placed in any City, provided only for that
set number which was already converted; but they were there placed for the
conversion of the whole City and country thereto belonging: their ministry
being like to the leven put into three pecks of meal, which by degrees
seasoneth the whole lump. Neither was it meant, that the whole number of
Christians of each City and territory, being much increased, should continue
but one particular ordinary congregation assembling in one place; but that upon
the multiplication of Christians, division should be made of the whole Church
into diverse particular congregations, which after happened in all Churches
accordingly. But upon this division, there was not to every several
congregation allotted a Bishop and a Presbytery, but only several Presbyters
assigned, singuli singulis, some of the Presbyters continuing with the Bishop.
The Bishop himself remaining, as it was first intended, and as the Church of
God every where throughout the world expounded that intent, by their practice,
the Pastor or Superintendent of the whole City and country adjoining. Neither
are all the Disciplinarians in the world able to show, that there were, or
ought to have been, after the division of parishes and assignement of several
Presbyters unto them, any more then one Bishop and one Presbytery for a whole
diocese. But of this more hereafter.

In the mean time, 5. The acceptance of the words, ecclesia, etc. in the
ancient Writers.
having showed that the use of the word Ecclesia in the Scriptures does not
savor their conceit, who imagine there is no true Church, but a parish, the
word signifying (according to the usual phrase of the holy Ghost) any company
of Christians, whether great or small; I am now to declare the use of the word
Ecclesia, paroecia, dioecesis, (which are commonly translated, Church, parish,
diocese,) in ancient Writers. Where I am to note, that setting aside the
general signification of the word Ecclesia, signifying either the whole Church
in general, or the two maine parts of it in heaven and earth: in which sense
paroecia and dioecesis are not used, as also the largest signification of
dioecesis, containing the whole circuit of a patriarchall and archiepiscopall
jurisdiction, (as the diocese of the Patriarch of Alexandria contained all
Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, the diocese of Antioch, the East Countries,
etc.) In which sense, the word paroecia is not used, setting aside I say these
large significations of ecclesia and dioecesis: otherwise these three words,
ecclesia, paroecia, and dioecesis, are for the most part used as words of the
same signification. For as in the singular number, commonly each of them does
signify a diocese, excepting wherein the distribution of the diocese
paroecia is opposed to (...), for then only it signifies the city and
suburbs, and excepting where some addition restrains the word paroecia or
ecclesia, to the signification of a parish, as ecclesia or paroecia cui
presbyter praest: so in the plural, if they be referred to one diocese, they
signify parishes, or some parts of the diocese (though with this difference,
that dioceses do note Parishes only in the Country, but ecclesia and
paroecia, commonly, as well those in the City, as in the country) but referred
to whole Nations, or larger parts of the world, they signify dioceses.

But I will speak of them severally, The acceptations of the word (...),
paroecia.
beginning with (...) paroecia: the rather because our Refuter, and others of
his feather, finding in Eusebius the Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria,
Antioch, etc. to be termed paroeciae, straightwaies conclude, that they were
such Churches as we call parishes. Which, if they write as they think, is a
very unlearned collection. For whereas the word (...), is diversely used,
sometimes with reference to a Bishop, sometimes with relation to a Presbyter;
in the signification of a parish, it is never used as the whole Church, subject
to the Bishop, but in that sense is either referred to one Presbyter, as his
proper charge: or if it be referred to the Bishop, it does signify but one
parish among many belonging to his Bishopric. But most usually, and almost
always in ancient Writers, yea and many times, both in those of the middle,
and also of the latter age, it is taken either for the whole diocese, or for
the city and suburbs; whereto as the Bishops see, the rest of the diocese
does appertain.

And because my adversary shall not say I speak without book,. 6. Paroecia
be^okening a Bishop's charge, does signify a diocese.
I will bring pregnant testimonies to make good my assertion. First therefore,
whereas one Can. Apost. 14.
of the ancient Canons, called the Apostles, forbids a Bishop to leave
(...), his own charge, and to leap into another: and wh^reas Eusebius the
author of the ecclesiastical history, being the Metropolitan Bishop of
Caesarea, and much importuned to remove to Antioch, which at that time was the
seat of the third patriarch, refused that offer: Constantine Eusebius. l. 3. de
vit. Constantini, page 146.
the great does greatly commend him for keeping (...), the Apostolik^ canon.
Which canon the Council of Nice has reference unto, when it says Conc. Nic.
c. 15.
that Bishops removing from one City to another, or as we speak, from one See
to another, did (...), contrary to the Canon. The meaning therefore of the
Canon forbidding a Bishop to remove from one paroecia to another, was to
forbid him to remove from one Diocese to another. The council of Antioch,
speaking to the same purpose, retayneth the same words, forbidding a Bishop
Conc. Antioc. c. 21.
(...), to be translated from one paroecia to another* Where it were absurd to
understand the council as speaking of a parish, because this council being
latter then the council of Nice, it is evident that at that time, there were
not only Bishops of Dioceses, and Metropolitanes over Provinces* but also
patriarchs dividing among them the Christian world. And to the same purpose,
the council of Sardica Epist. synod. Sardic. apud Theodor. l. 2. c. 8.
noting the breach of these canons, among other unlawful practices of the
Arians, expresses it in these words, (...), translations from less Cities to
greater paroecias, that is, dioceses, or Bishoprics In the same Council it
is decreed Con. Sard. c. 15.
, that if any Bishop will ordain in any degree of the clergy, (...), out of
another paroecia, (...), a Minister belonging to another Bishop, without the
consent of his own Bishop, the ordination shall be void. The councels Conc.
Ancyr. c. ^8. Conc. Antioch. c. 18. Martin. Brac c^a^, Capi^. synod. gr. c. 10.
e^. 12.
of Ancyra and Antioch speaking of Bishops, the one, not received (...), of the
paroecia, or diocese, the other, not accepting (...), the paroecia or
bishopric unto which he was ordained, most plainly by paroecia understand
the charge of a Diocesan Bishop. Epiphanius Epiph. epist. ad Joan. Hierosol.
apud Hieronym. t. 2.
excusing himself to John the Bishop of Jerusalem, who was offended with him,
for that he had, as was supposed, ordained a Presbyter in his diocese,
answers among other things, that diverse Bishops had ordained in his diocese,
without his offense. Yea, he had exhorted Philo and Theoprobus, two Bishops,
that in the Churches of Cyprus, which were near to them, ad mea autem paroeciae
videba^tur ecclesia^ pertinere, eo quod grandis esset et lat a prouincia,
ordinare^t presbyteros, et Christ's ecclesiae prouiderent, but seemed, faith he,
to belong to the Church of my paroecia, that is, Bishopric, they would,
because it was a great and large province, ordain Presbyters, and provide for
the Church of Christ. Where it is testified, that the Churches throughout a
large Province, were but part of his paroecia, that is, diocese.

7. The like use of the word in later times.
But I will descend to latter times, wherein it was provided, that a Bishop of
another City Conc. Aruern tempore Pelag. c. 9.
, should not contrary to the canons, invade parochiam cuiuslibet episcopi, the
paroeciae, mening diocese of any other Bishop. The third Council of Toledo
Conc. Toleta^. 3 tempore Pelag. c. 3.
has these words; Si quid episcopi ecclesiis ad sua^ parochiam pertinentibus
dederint, etc. If Bishops shall give any thing to Churches belonging to their
paroecia, that is, Bishopric. Gregory the Great when he would signify, that
the ancient canons commanded that provincial synods should be held twice a
year, says Lib. 7. epist. 110.
, they had taken order, de habendis per parochias concilijs. The synod held in
England Apud Beda^. in b^st. Angl. l. 4 c. 5. can. 2. and.6.
An. 673. decreed, that no Bishop should invade the paroecia of another: and
that Bishops and other clergy men, being strangers, may not exercise any
priestly function without the leave of the Bishop, in cuius paroecia, in whose
diocese they are known to remain. In the Council of Arles Con. Arelat. sub
Carolo Mag c. 17.
, it was ordained, that once a year every Bishop should go about parochiam
suam, that is, his diocese. The Council of Mentz Conc. Mogunt. c. 31.
appoint, that every Bishop in sua parochia, that is, in his own diocese,
should make diligent inquiry, whether there were any Presbyters or Deacons
therein, that belonged to another Bishop, that they might be returned to him.
In the Council of Rhoan Conc. Rotho* mag. c. 6.
, the Bishop is forbidden principalem cathedram s^ae parochia negligere, to
neglect the Cathedral Church or chief seat of his paroecia, that is,
Bishopric. To conclude, the Council held at Worms Vorm^tien^. c. 62.
, forbids Bishops, qu^ parochias non habent, which have no charge of their
own, to exercise their function, or to ordain in alterius parochia, in the
paroecia of another Bishop, without the appointment of the Bishop in ^uius
parochia, in whose diocese they be. Whereby it does evidently appear, that
the word paroecia, being attributed to a Bishop, as his whole charge or circuit
of his episcopal jurisdiction, does signify a diocese, consisting of many
parishes. And that in Eusebius it is so to be understood, it is most manifest,
because he calls great Churches, after the division of them into many
parishes, not only in the Country, but even in the Cities, by the name of
Paroecia. To which purpose, That in Eusebius (...) paroecia signifies the
Diocese.
let us confer a few places in Eusebius, concerning the Church of Alexandria:
whereby his meaning, when he speaks of this argument, will easily appear. For
having said, lib. 6. cap. 1. that Laetus was the president of Alexandria and
the rest of Egypt, he adds Eusebius. l. 6. c. 1.
(...), but the Bishopric of the paroecia or Churches there (in Alexandria and
Egypt) Demetrius had lately received. In the eight chapter L. 6. c. 8.
he says, that Demetrius was (...), the president or Bishop of the paroecia,
that is, the Church there. For so he explaneth himself Lib. c. 26.
chap. 26. calling him (...), the Bishop of the Church of the Alexandreans: and
what he means by that speech he shows L. 6. c. 3^.
chap. 35. Where speaking of Dionysius his next successor but one, he uses
these words, (...), he takes upon him the Bishopric or charge of being
president of the Churches belonging to Alexandria. So that when he says Bishop
(...), of the paroecia, or church, his meaning is all one as if he had said
(...), or (...), that is, of such a Bishopric as contained many Churches. And
in the same sense he speaks (though in the plural number) when he
mentions (...) etc. Eusebius li. 4. c. 15. and l. 5. c. 23 The 2. signification
of Paroecia betokening the city or chief seat of the Bishop
the paroeciae or churches of Pontus, the churches of Asia, the paroecia of the
holy catholic church. Thus then we see, that in ancient writers the word
(...) in Greek, and paroecia (corruptly parochia) in Latin, is usually taken
for the whole diocese consisting of many parishes, when it betokens a
Bishops whole charge.

. 8. Sometimes it signifies but a part of the Bishopric, as when the whole
diocese is divided into (...) or (...), signifying the city or chief seat,
or see of the Bishop: and (...) or (...) the rest of the diocese in the
country or countries thereto belonging. For manifestation whereof, those two
places mentioned in the sermon are sufficient. The former is one of the ancient
Canons called the Apostles, in these words Can. apost. 34
(...), etc. The Bishops of every na^tion it behooves to agnize him that is
Primate or first among them, and to esteem him (...) as their head or chief,
and to do (...) nothing that exceeds the bounds of their own charge or
jurisdiction, without his consent, and that every one do deal in those things
alone, (...) which belong to his own Paroecia, that is, see or Church and the
cou^^ries which be subject onto it. Neither may he (that is, the Metropolitan,)
do any thing without the consent of all. So shall there be concord, and God
shall be glorified through the Lord in the Holy Ghost: Which canon is renewed
and explained in the council of Antioch, the canons whereof were part of the
ancient code In the Counsel of Chalcedo^ Act. 11. the 16. and 17. Canons of the
counsel of Antioch are out of the book of the Canons of Councils quoted as
the 96. and 97. Canon, which shows that the ancient book agrees with the
edition of Til^us, which reckoning the Apostles Canons by themselves allows
20. Canons to the Council of Nice, 25. to that of Ancyra, 15. to the Counc. of
Neocesaria and 20. to the counc. of Gangra, all which arise to 80. Whereto if
you add the canons of the council of Antioch the 16. of that council will be
the 96. and the 17. the 97.
or book of canons received in the ancient church, recited some of them in the
great council of Chalcedon, and ratified all of them in the general council
of Constantinople held in Trullo the Emperors Palace. The canon is this: It
Conc. Antioch. c. 9.
behooves the BB, of every Province to acknowledge the Metropolitan B. and
that he takes upon him the cure of the whole Province because there is a
concourse of all men who have business from all places unto the Metropolis on
mother City. Wherefore it has been thought good or decreed, that he should
excel in honor, and that without him the rest of the Bishops should do
(...), nothing exceeding the bounds of their own charge, (...), according to
the ancient received Canon of our Fathers, (meaning the before cited Canon of
the Apostles, which it recites, as you see, word for word) but those things
alone which concern his own Pa^oecia, that is, his own See or City, and the
Countries which be under it. For every Bishop has authority over his own
Paroecia, and does (...), administer according to the fear (of God) wherewith
he is endued, and has a provident care, (...), of the whole region (or
country) which is under his City (using the word (...) and (...), that is,
Paroecia and City, indifferently) so that he may ordain Presbyters and
Deacons, and order all things with judgment: (...), but beyond his bounds he
may do nothing without the Bishop of the Mother City: neither may he without
^he consent of the rest. Then which testimonies, nothing can be alleged more
pregnant, either for the signification of the word, or for the proof of our
assertion, that the Churches or charges of Bishops were not parishes, but
dioceses.

Sometimes indeed the word Paroecia does signify that which we call a parish:
9. The third signification of paroecia.
but then either it is used with such reference to a Bishop, as it is plainly
noted to be but one among many belonging to his charge, and is commonly
uttered in the plural number; C. Tolet. 3* c. 20.
or else it is referred to a Presbyter as his proper charge. To which purpose
consider these testimonies. The Council of Carthage, Carth. 4. c. 102.
which is so much alleged by the Disciplinarians, speaks, as of the Bishop of
the diocese, so of a Presbyter, qui Parochiae praeest, who is set over a
parish. The Conc. Tolet. 4. c. 25. and 26.
Council of Toledo speaks of Presbyters ordained in parochijs and per
parochias. Innocentius Inn. ^. ep. 8. ad Flor.
the first writing to Florentius a Bishop, blames him for usurping a parish
which belonged to the diocese of Vrsus another Bishop. And elsewhere Epist. l.
ad. Decent. c. 5,
he speaks

. 11. The significations of Dioecesis.
As for (...), or dioecesis, I hope I shall not need to prove, that it also
signifies a diocese. Neither do I greatly need to show, that in the
signification of a diocese, it is given to Bishops; seeing the sense of it
being diuersified according to the variety of the persons to whom it is
attributed; in the sense of a diocese, as we term it, it is properly
ascribed to Bishops. The word indeed seems generally to signify the circuit
of any man's charge or administration, who has government in the Church. For as
there is Ecclesia, a Church of a Patriarch, and of a Metropolitan, of a Bishop,
Sozom l. 8. c. 3. Ius Graecorom p. 89.
and of a Presbyter; so there is (...), or dioecesis, of a Patriarch, which we
may call a Patriarchall diocese; of an Archbishop, which we call a Province;
of a Bishop, which we call a Diocese; and of a Presbyter, which we call a
Parish.

For the two first, these few examples may suffice. The Emperor Justinian Cod.
lit. tit. 4. de Episcopali audientia.
appoints, The Diocese of a Patriarch.
that a Clergy man should not be accused at the first before the Patriarch of
the Diocese; but first, according to the sacred constitutions, before the
Bishop of the City, in which the Clergy man lives: then, if he be suspected as
partial, let him bring the party accused before the Metropolitan Bishop. But
if he also shall not allow of the accusation,. 29. Sancimus, graece (...), and
Novel. 123. c. 22.
let him bring him before the Synod of that province etc; but if still he
think himself wronged, let him appeal to the Patriarch of the Diocese, from
whose sentence there lies no appeal etc. Afterward he adds this exception;
that whereas there are two sorts of Patriarchs, some, who in the Provinces
wherein they are, bear the office of Metropolitanes, (their See being of
ancient time the Metropolis of the Province, such were the Bishops of Antioch,
Rome, and Alexandria,) others per totam Diocesin, throughout the whole
Diocese, do ordain the Metropolitanes and other Bishops who are under them,
as the Bishop of Constantinople H^rcalea was the Metropolis of Thracia, unto
which Byzantium had been subject.
, and perhaps Jerusalem; Cesarea was the Metropolis of Palestina.
) therefore the causes, which happen in the Provinces of the former sort, are
immediately from the Bishops to be brought to them as to Metropolitanes.

In the (...) Ins Graecor^m. p. 100.
, or disposition of the Churches, subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople,
made by the Emperor Leo the Philosopher, it is noted, that seven Metropolitan
Churches, were withdrawn from (...)
the Roman Diocese, with the Bishops under them, and one also, viz. Sele^cia
in Pamphylia from (...)
the Diocese of the East, (meaning of the Bishop of Antioch, for he, as
Theodoret Theod. l. 4. c. 23.
says, was (...), the ruler or chief of the Bishops in the East,) together
with 26. Bishoprics subject thereto. Epiphanius Epiph. haer. 68.
, as you heard before, testifies this to have been the custom, that the
Bishop of Alexandria should have the Ecclesiastical (...) Diocese, or
Administration of all Egypt and Thebais, Mareot, Libya, Ammoniace, Maraeotis,
and Pentapolis. It is said of Gregory the Great Joan. Diac. in vit. Greg. l. 3.
c. 13. The Diocese of an Archbishop.
, that unto the Bishoprics of his Diocese, he invited Bishops of another
Diocese, vacantes, being voided of their Bishoprics, as the Bishop of
Smyrna, he invited to a Bishopric in Sicilia.

The circuit also of an Archbishops jurisdiction is sometimes called (...) and
Dioecesis, and the Archbishop himself Conc. Chalc^. 8. and 17.
, (...), as in the Council of Chalcedon, where Archbishops are reckoned as a
middle degree, between Metropolitanes and Patriarchs; the name of Patriarch
being also given sometimes unto them. If any have a controversy with the
Metropolitan of the Province, let him go unto, either (...), the Primate of
the Diocese, or to the patriarch of Constantinople. The same Council Chalc.
c. 28.
appoints the Metropolitanes of the Dioceses of Pontus, Asia, and Thracia to
be ordained by the Patriarch of Constantinople, and the BB. of every province
in those Dioceses to be, as they were wont, according to the Canons, to be
ordained of their Metropolitans. So that according to this sense a province is
but part of a Diocese. Socrates speaking of the first Council of
Constantinople, says Socrat. l. 5. c. 8.
that they established Patriarchs, meaning Archbishops, dividing unto them
provinces. Thus of the Diocese of Pontus, Helladius the Bishop of Cesarea,
Gregorius the Bishop of Nyssa, Otreius the B. of Metileno obtained the
Patriarchship. The Patriarchship of the Diocese of Asia was assigned to
Amphilochius of Iconium, and Optimus of Antioch in Pisidia and Gregory Lib. 3.
Epist. 3.
writing to Constantius the Archbishop of Millaine, mentions diverse BB. of
his Diocese, as you heard Li. 1. c. 7.. 9 12. The Diocese of a Bishop.
before.

But we are briefly also to show that a Bishops charge is called Dioecesis. The
first Council of Constantinople decrees Conc. Constable. 1. c. 2.
, as it is commonly understood, that BB. should not go out of their Diocese
unto Churches without their bounds, and that they should not (...).
confound the Churches. Where a Diocese is attributed to a Bishop, as the
circuit and bounds of his jurisdiction; and Churches, which the Council
forbids to be confounded, are confounded with Dioceses. Again, that BB.
(...). etc.
being not called, may not go without their Diocese, to ordain Ministers, or
to exercise other ecclesiastical administrations.

In the Council of Afric Conc. Afric. c. 65. Carth. Graec. c. 101.
it was decreed that those people which never had a Bishop of their own,
should not have a Bishop but by the decree of the whole Synod of the province,
and the Primate, and by the consent of him in whose Diocese the said Church
is. Again, that one Bishop Conc. Carth. 2 c. 11. Dioecesis taken for the
country, and parts of the Diocese therein.
do not invade the Diocese of another. Thus Dioecesis signifies the whole
Diocese. But where we find it opposed to the City, or to the Cathedral church,
then does it signify the rest of the Diocese; as in the Africane Council
Con. Afric. c. 84. Conc. Carth. grae. c. 118.
it was ordained that the Churches in the Diocese converted from Donatisme,
should belong to the Cathedra or See of the Catholic B. Again, Con. Afric.
c. 38. and Carth. graec. 72. Carth. 5. c. 5.
the BB are forbidden to leave their chief seat or See, and to remove
themselves to another church in their Diocese.

Thus in the plural number, it signifies sometimes all the churches in the
Diocese, meaning the country, and sometimes any of the^ severally. It was
concluded upon in the Council of Carthage, Carth. grae. c. 14.
that the BB. which live in the unity and communion of the Church, (...), that
he should not only justly retain his own See, but also possess such
Dioeceses, that is parts of the Diocese, as had gotten to themselves a a
schismatic Bishop of their own. Again, it was decreed Conc. Carth. 2. c. 5.
that Dioceses (that is, parts of the Diocese in the country) which never had a
Bishop, should not have any: and that Diocese which sometimes had, should have
their own B. And if in process of time, the faith increasing, the people of
God being multiplied, shall desire to have a peculiar governor, with the
consent or liking of him, in whose power the Diocese is, let them have a
Bishop. We have heard it ordained Conc. Carth. graec. c. 57 sieve Cart. 3. c.
46. Afric. c. 23.
(says Honoratus and Vrbanus in the 3. Council of Carthage,) that Dioceses
(meaning but parts of the Diocese in the Country) should not obtain a Bishop,
but with the consent of him under whom they are placed. But perhaps some in our
Province when they have been ordained Bishops in such a Diocese, (...), by
the grant of the B. who originally holds the Dioceses, have challenged other
Dioceses, this ought to be amended. Epigonius answered, that which is meet, is
reserved to every Bishop, (...), that out of the company or combination of
Parishes jointly possessed, no part should be taken to have a Bishop of her
own, but by the consent of him, who has authority, meaning the Bishop of
the City, unto which the Country belongs. But if he shall grant that the
Diocese (meaning part of his own Diocese) permitted shall enjoy a Bishop of
their own; he that is so preferred may not encroch upon other Dioceses, (that
is, other parts of the Diocese,) because that one being taken (...), out of
the body of many was vouchsafed alone to receive a Bishopric of their own.
The which sentence when Aurelius the Bishop of Carthage, and president of that
Council had consented unto, was decreed by the whole Council.

And that we may know the Parishes in the Country together with the several
Presbyters set over them, belong to the Diocesan Bishop, even they also
sometimes are called by the name of Diocese. In the council Conc. Tolet. 4.
c. 35.
of Toledo Bishops are required, per cunctas Dioeceses parochiasque suas, to
go yearly through all their Dioceses and Parishes. And again Ibid. c. 32.
, so to rule their Dioceses, that is, Parishes, that they do not presume to
take any thing from their right, but (according to the authority of former
Councels) they take only a third part of the offerings and tithes. But in an
other Council Conc. Braccar. 2. c. 2
it was determined, that no B. walking per suas Dioeceses, through his
Dioceses, shall take any thing besides the honor of his chair, that is, 2^
shillings, or require the third part of the oblations in the parish churches.
Sometimes it is used for a parish Church. In which sense, a parish Presbyter is
said in the Council Conc. Agat. c. 53. and 54.
of Agatha, Dioecesin tenere. In the Council of Orleans Aurelian. 3. c. 18.
dioecesis and Basilica are used promiscuously, as Synonyma. To which purpose
it is said Aurel. 4. c. 32.
, that if any man has, or desires to have Dioecesin, that is, a Church, in
his ground, he must assign sufficient land unto it, and provide a Clerk for it.

CHAP. IJ. Proving by other Arguments that the ancient Churches which had
Bishops, were not Parishes, but Dioceses.
ANd thus much may suffice to have spoken of the names, about which the
testimonies which I have brought, have been almost so many evidences for the
Diocesan, and against the parishionall Bishops.

Now I proceed to other arguments; desiring the Reader to remember that the
question is concerning such Churches, as were endued with power of
Ecclesiastical government and jurisdiction, to wit, whether in the Apostles
times, and the ages following, they were Parishes, as we call them, or Dioceses.
And first I will show they were not Parishes, and after, that they were
Dioceses.

For, if Parishes, then the Parishes either in the Countries, or Cities were
such: but neither the parishes in the Country, nor in the City, had a Bishop
of their own and a Presbytery. Which is so evident a truth to them that have
read the Councels, Histories, and Fathers of the ancient Church, that it is to
be wondered, how men of learning and reading, being also men of conscience, can
deny it. But seeing it is denied, I must be content to prove it, viz. that
regularly, lawfully, ordinarily Bishops and Presbyteries were not placed in the
several parishes. For these words I hope may be added with the Refuters leave,
seeing neither it can be preiudicious to me what was at any time unlawfully
done, nor aduantagious to him, unless he will urge a reformation, according
to the pattern of the Churches (if there were any such) which were irregularly,
extraordinarily, and unlawfully governed.

First therefore for Country parishes, because I maintain the negative, and
the proof of the affirmative lies upon my adversary, I challenge him to
produce some proof, if he be able, within 400. years after Christ, of
Country parishes lawfully, regularly, ordinarily furnished with power of
ecclesiastical government, and governed by their own Bishops, such as they
speak of, assisted with their Presbyteries. Which if he be not able to
perform, (as I am well assured he is not) he must acknowledge his parish
Bishop to be of the same stamp. with his lay-presbyters, that is to say, a
mere counterfeit. But not expecting his proof, J will prove, that neither
they had Bishop of their own, nor yet Presbyteries. As touching the former,
it cannot be denied, but in some places the Presbyters of parishes growing
ambitious, have desired to be Bishops of their parish, and their people
vain glorious have seconded their desire. But in all well ordered Churches,
their presumption has been resisted, and their vain desires frustrated. I do
confess, that in Afric, which always brings forth some novelty, and from
whence all T. C. his news in this cause do come, some parts of the diocese
being very populous, have obtained a Bishop of their own. But when? Conc.
Carth. gr. c. 54. and 101.
when the charge was so great, as that by it self it seemed to deserve a
Bishop. And how? First, with the leave of the Bishop of the city, in whose
diocese it was. Secondly, with the approbation of the Metropolitan and the
provincial Synod. Thirdly, he which obtained the honor of being a bishop
was advanced to a higher degree, then himself had before, or other country
pastors have, and was ordained a Bishop by the Metropolitan and two other
Bishops at the least.

. 2. Decrees of the councils of Afric.
But it shall not be amiss both to recite the decrees of the Africane councels
in this behalf, though, touched before; and also to acquaint you with the
determinations of godly Bishops, and canons of holy Councels elsewhere.

Conc. Carth. 2. c. 5.
In the second council of Carthage it was decreed, that the Dioceses (meaning,
as I have said, parts of any diocese in the Country) which never received
Bishops of their own, may have none; and that diocese which sometimes had,
may still have a Bishop of their own. And if in process of time, the faith
increasing, the people of God being multiplied, shall desire to have a
governor of their own, that then they may have a Bishop with his leave, in
whose power the diocese is.

Conc. Carth. 3. c. 42. et. 43. Carth. gr. 54.
In the third Council of Carthage it is said, that it had beeen determined in
many Councels, that the people which be in the parishes or diocesses held by
the Bishops, which never had a Bishop of their own, should not receive
governors of their own, that is to say, Bishops, but with the consent of
the Bishop, (...), by whom from the beginning they have been inioied. But
forasmuch as some having obtained this honor abused it tyrannically, and
withdrew themselves schismatically from the communion of other Bishops: and
forasmuch as also certain Presbyters lifting up their necks against their BB.
used indirect means to allure their people, that themselves might be made
Bishops; therefore it was ordained, that such a people in the paroecia* or
diocese, which is subject to the ancient Bishop, and never had a Bishop of
their own, should not obtain a proper Doctor, meaning Bishop. And as
touching those which had attained to this honor unlawfully, and withdrew
themselves from the synods of Bishops, it was determined that they should not
only lose their diocese, but also their own Church. For it is fit the
Bishops which are united to all their brethren, and to the whole synod, should
justly retain not only their own Cathedra or See, but also that they should
possess such dioceses. And whereas some Ibid. c. 46. Carth. gr. c. 57.
being made Bishops in part of other men's dioceses, with their leave and
consent, did incroach upon parts of the diocese not granted unto them, it was
concluded, that he which in the diocese is preferred to be Bishop, by the
consent of the ancient Bishop, who holds the mother or cathedral Church,
shall only retain that people unto which he was ordained. Finally, in another
Council Conc. Afr. c. 65. Carth. gr. c. 101
of Afric, it was decreed, that such people as never had B. of their own,
should in no wise obtain a B. unless it be by the decree of the whole synod
of every province, and of the primate, and also by the consent of him under
whose diocese the said Church is placed.

Out of which canons, we may observe these things. First, that the Country
churches belonged to the jurisdiction of the Bishop in the City.

Secondly, that ever from the beginning, they have belonged to the Bishop of
the City.

Thirdly, that those parts of dioceses, which then had no Bishop of their own,
never had.

Fourthly, that the number of Bishoprics was not wont to be diminished, or the
circuits of them enlarged, but contrariwise, if there were cause, the number
was increased, and the circuits or dioceses lessened.

Fifthly, that when a new Bishopric was to be erected, it was erected in some
Bishops diocese, but not without his leave and liking, and also approbation of
the Primate and Provincial synod.

Sixthly, that when a new Bishopric was erected, that part wherein it was
erected, was taken, as before I noted Cart. gr. c. 54.
, (...), from all the parts jointly possessed, and as it were from the body of
the rest.

Seventhly, that he which was preferred to such a Bishopric was not a parish
Bishop. For besides his own Church, he had a diocese. Neither were they
appointed according to the new conceit to every parish, but to such populous
parts of dioceses, as might seem worthy of a Bishop.

Eighthly, that when a new Bishopric was erected, the Presbyter who obtained
this honor, was anew ordained thereto as Bishop, and so placed in a
superior degree of the Ministry, then that which he had when he was the
Pastor or Presby^er only of a parish.

3. Decrees of Fathers.
To these canons we might add the decrees of Clem. ep. 1. ad Jacob.
Clemens and Anaclet. ep. 3. c. 2.
Anacletus, ordaining that Bishops should not be ordained in Villages or
Towns, or small Cities, lest the names of Bishops should grow vile: but in
such places Presbyters were severally to be placed in each of them. But I need
not the testimonies of such as are supposed counterfeit: and yet it is to be
confessed, that the Epistle of Clemens was above one thousand two hundred
years ago translated by Ruffinus; and that which in this point either of them
decreed, agrees with the general and perpetual practice of the Church, from
the Apostles time to our age. But to let them pass: the Epistle of Leo Leo ep.
87. ad episc. Afr. c. 2.
the Great, is without suspicion, which he wrote to the Bishops of Afric,
requiring that this among all the statutes of the Canons be observed, that not
in any places or towns, Bishops should be consecrated, nor where heretofore
they have not been, seeing where the less people or smaller companies are, the
care of Presbyters may suffice. But episcopal government is only to be set
over greater people and more frequent or populous Cities, lest what the decrees
of the holy Fathers inspired of God have forbidden, the height of priesthood
should be given to villages and parishes, or obscure and solitary towns, and
the episcopal honor whereto more excellent things ought to be committed, it
self should grow vile or contemptible, by the multitude thereof. The decrees
of councels.


The canons whereof he speaks (that I may also come to them) were the Canons
of the councels held at Sardica and Laodicea. The council held at Sardica not
long after the council at Nice, assembled by the authority of the two Emperors
Constans and Constantius, celebrated by 341 BB. as Balsamo says, among whom
some of the chief had been present at the council of Nice, as Hosius and
Athanasius etc. which also confirmed the faith before concluded in the council
of Nice, at that time much oppugned by the Arians ^this council, I say,
determined Conc. Sardic. c. 6.
that it is simply (...).
unlawful to constitute a Bishop in a village or small (...).
City, unto which even one only Presbyter does suffice. For it is not needful
that Bishops should be placed there, lest the name and authority of a Bishop
grow into contempt. But the Bishops of the province (being assembled as before
was said by the Metropolitan) must ordain Bishops in such Cities as where
before had been Bishops. But if there shall any City be found so abounding
with multitude of people, that it may seem vvorthie of a Bishopric, let it
have a Bishop.

For that of Laodicea, though it were but a provincial Synod, yet the decrees
thereof were received into the ancient Code of canons, and were confirmed by
the general council Con. Constant. in Trull. c. 2.
held in Trullo. In that council Conc. Laodicen. c. 56. alids 57 (...) (for so
Balsam and some manuscripts and latin translations, read) (...).
therefore it was decreed, that Bishops ought not to be placed in villages and
country towns, but visitors: and that those which before that time had been
ordained, might do nothing without the consent of the Bishop, who is in the
City: (...).

The same has Photius, Phot. Nomecan. lit. 1. c. 19.
Ne sit omnino in parua ciuitate vel vice Episcopus.

To these we may ad the decree of the council of Toledo: which though it were
of latter times then the councels before mentioned, Conc. Tolet. 12. c. 4.
yet was held above 9. hundred years ago, being ratified and confirmed by
Eringius the King: which I do the rather mention, because whereas the Bishop
of Merida Conc. Tolet. 12. c. 4.
by the commandment of their late King Bamba, had ordained a Bishop in a
monastery standing in a small town, the said council finding it to be a
nouellous attempt, contrary to the canons of the councels and practice of the
Church, decreed that there should not continue in the place aforesaid an
Episcopal See, neither should any Bishop afterward be placed there. As for
him, that was ordained not by his own ambition, but by the Kings compulsion;
they grant to him this favor, to be removed to the Sea of some Bishop
deceasing. And in the end they make this general decree: If any man shall
cause a Bishop to be made in those places, where a Bishop never was, let him
be anathema in the sight of God almighty: So Burchardus reads decret. lib. 5.
c. 32.
and moreover let both the ordainer and the ordained lose the degree of his
order, because he has presumed to overthrow not only the decrees of the
ancient Fathers, but also the Apostolical ordinances.

This therefore is my first argument against parish Bishops in the country:
That which was judged unlawful by the canons of approved councils, and
decrees of godly Bishops, was never lawfully, regularly, ordinarily practiced:

But the placing of Bishops in country parishes, was judged unlawful by the
canons of approved councels, and decrees of godly Bishops, as I have showed:

Therefore the placing of Bishops in country parishes was never lawfully,
regularly, ordinarily practiced.



. 4. That Chorepiscopi or country BB. were not parish BB.
It may be, that my adversary, who is ready to catch at every syllable, will
from the canon of the council held at Laodicea before cited, object, that
before that time, there were Bishops placed in country towns: and thereupon
conclude, that therefore there had been, before that time, parishionall
Bishops. To this objection I answer, by denying the consequence, or the
proposition which is understood, viz. that the country Bishops (which had been
before ordained) were parish Bishops. For those Bishops, because they were
placed (...) the Countries, were called (...), as you would say,
Countrie-Bishops, to distinguish them from the other Bishops, whose See was in
the City. Now these Chorepiscopi were not in all Dioceses, much less in all
parishes; nor assigned, where they were, to one parish (as they were Bishops)
but where the Diocese was large, were ordained in some places remote from the
city, to supply the absence of the Bishop, in some such circuits as our rural
Deanries are, wherein diverse parishes were contained. These Chorepicsopi at the
first, had Episcopal ordination, by the imposition of the hands of three
Bishops, insomuch that of the three hundred and eighteen Bishops assembled
at the Council of Nice, there were fifteeene Countrie-Bishoppes: For which
fifteen, if all pastors of parishes had been Countrie-Bishoppes, there might
have been, I doubt not, fifteen hundred, if not fifteen thousand: But when
these Countrie-Bishoppes, being but the Bishops suffraganes, and
substitutes, placed in the Country to supply the Bishops room, and to
exercise some matters of less moment appertaining to the Episcopal function,
began to encroach upon the Bishops right, and to usurp Episcopal
authority, and jurisdiction beyond their commission; they were by little and
little restrained; and when they would not be kept within their compass, their
order (at least as they were Bishops) being but an humane-ordinance, devised
for the ease of the Bishops in the city, was in most places abolished.

But for so much as that which is recorded concerning these country Bishops,
does give great light to this present controversy, it will not be
unprofitable, nor, I hope, unpleasing to the reader, if I acquaint him with
that which is written concerning them.

First therefore in the council of Neocesaria, whereunto among other BB. two
Chorepiscopi subscribed, we find this difference between country presbyters
and country Bishops: (...) Conc. Neocaes. c. 13.
(...), Presbyters or Ministers of the country may not offer (...), in the
cathedral Church of the City, the Bishop or Presbyters of the city being
present, neither may they at the time of prayer deliver the bread nor the
cup: but if they be absent, and one of them alone be called to prayer, then
he may, because he is of the same Church or Diocese, as some note. (...)
Ibid. c. 14.
, but country Bishops, who are indeed after the manner of the 70. yet being
honored as fellow Ministers, they do offer. Upon which words Balsamo Theod.
Bals. in Conc. Neocaesar.
notes two things. First, where the council says they were as the Seventy,
it seems to deny that they had power to ordain ministers and deacons.
Secondly, that among other uses, for which they were appointed, they were
ordained to distribute the money to the poor, which appertained to them.
Besides, we may observe that both the country Bishops and country Presbyters,
belong to the diocese of the Bishop in the city (which hereafter will more
clearly appear) and that the country Bishop was in a degree of honor
superior to country Ministres, and yet inferior to the Bishops.

The council of Ancyra Conc. Ancyr. c. 13.
which is more ancient the^ the former, and both of them elder then the
council of Nice, perceiving the country Bishops to encroch upon the Bishops
right, determined (...) etc.
it to be unlawful for country Bishops to ordain Presbyters or Deacons.

The council of Antioch, Conc. Antio. c. 8. the Latins call them for matas
literas.
though it gave liberty to country Bishops which were blameless, to send
canonical letters (as the manner of Bishops among themselves, in those times
was) which it denied to country presbyters: yet for so much as the Chorepiscopi
still presumed to ordain, alleging that they might lawfully do it, because
they had been ordained as Bishops. It therefore determined, Con. Antioc. c. 10.
that Bishops placed in the Towns and Countries, called Chorepiscopi, although
they had received the ordination of BB yet they should know their own measure,
and govern the Churches subject unto them, and content themselves with the
care and oversight thereof: and having authority to ordain Subdeacons and
Exorcists, should satisfy themselves with preferring of them, and not presume
to ordain Presbyters or Deacons, without (...).
the Bishop in the City whereunto both himself and the Country are subject.
But if any shall presume to transgress this decree, he shall be deprived of
that honor which he has. And whereas they pretended that they had episcopal
ordination, and therefore as BB might ordain Ministers; to take away that
pretense, it determined also, that the Country B. should be ordained (not of
the Metropolitan and two or three other Bishops, as a Bishop, but as other
Presbyters or Ministers) of the Bishop of the City, unto which he is subject.
So that whereas before Chorepiscopi were Suffragan Bishops, afterward
(according to this decree) they were but Presbyters in deed, though they had
the title of Bishops; neither were they acknowledged for any more by the
Fathers and Councels of latter times.

There is an Epistle which goes under the name of Damasus, Damas. epist. 4. de
Chorepiscopis.
the Author whereof supposes, that Chorepiscopi are but Presbyters, because
they are found Conc. Neocaesar. c. 14.
to have been ordained at the first after the example of the 70. But now
because they are not necessary in regard of their diligence toward the poor,
and because they presumed above that which was lawful for them to do,
therefore they are removed from Episcopal offices. We know (says he) there
were but two orders among the Disciples of Christ, that is to say, of the 12.
Apostles, and 70. Disciples: whence this third came, we know not; for neither
are they Bishops, because they be not ordained of three Bishops, but only of
one; neither may Bishops by the Canons be placed in Country towns; neither
may they be in the City, because in one City there may be but one Bishop.
Neither will they be called Presbyters, but will be accounted more then
Presbyters. Whether Damasus were Author of that Epistle, I know not; but this I
am sure, that Leo Leo epist. 88.
the great in his Epistle to the BB. of Germany and France, does show himself
to be of the same judgment, a good part of his Epistle differing little from
the aforesaid Epistle, which bears the name of Damasus. And this judgment of
Leo was so approved of the Council of Civil, C. Hispal. 2. c. 7.
whereof Isidore was President, that it follows the same almost word for word.

. 5. The second argument taken from Country Bishops.
Now because my Adversary shall not say, that what I have alleged concerning
Country Bishops, is impertinent, he shall understand, that as the maine
question concerning dioceses in the primitive Church is from hence most
manifestly proved, as you shall hear in due place; so this present question
which we have in hand concerning parish Bishops. For surely if there were any
parishionall Bishops in the Country, then the Country Bishops were such: but
they were not such, for they were set over diverse parishes. Again, if the
Chorepiscopi were subject to the Bishop of the City, and the Country whereof
they were Bishops was part of the diocese belonging to the Bishop of the
City; then much more the Presbyters of parishes (who were inferior, and in
some things subject to the Chorepiscopi, as the Bishops substitutes) were
subject to the Bishop; and their parishes, being but a part of the Country
whereof the Chorepiscopi were called Bishops, were but a part of the diocese.
So far were either the parish Presbyters from being Bishops, or their
parishes from being entire Churches, endued with the power of ecclesiastical
government. But the former is true, as has been proved, therefore the latter.

That the Chorepiscopi were superior to them, it is apparent, because not
only they had some jurisdiction over diverse parishes, but for a time had
episcopal ordination, and had authority to ordain Subdeacons, and to place
Readers in parishes, as also they might send Formatas, or Canonical Epistles,
which the Presbyters might not do. Likewise, when Bishops were at any time
converted from heresy, Con. Nic. c. 8.
though they were not permitted to be Bishops of the City, yet they were
gratified with the name and authority of Chorepiscopi. In the time of
Theodosius and Valentinian, a certain Bishop had been ordained by two Bishops
only: but this ordination the Council of Rhegium Conc. Rhegiens. c. 1.2.3.4.
pronounced void, and censured the ordainers. As for the party ordained,
because he had of himself renounced the Bishopric, they thought good to
follow the example of the Council of Nice, and to gratify him with the name
and title of a Chorepiscopus; but so, as that he should not ordain, nor
exercise any other episcopal function, but only confirm Nouices, and
consecrate Virgins, and in all things behave himself as inferior to a Bishop,
and as superior to a Presbyter. And this was my second argument, whereby I
have proved, that Country parishes had no Bishops.

Neither had each of them a Presbytery,. 6. Parishes had not Presbyteries.
but several Presbyters assigned to them, as sufficient for such a charge as
was determined by the Council of Sardica Conc. Sardic. c. 6.
, and by the judgment of Leo Leo epist. 87.
. Yea not Presbyters only did severally govern parishes, as with us, but
sometimes Deacons also were by themselves set over charges. You heard before
diverse testimonies of the Presbyters of parishes, as namely that Conc. Carth.
4. c. 102.
of the Council of Carthage, Presbyter qui Paroeciae praest, etc. the Presbyter
which governs the parish. The like is presupposed of Deacons in the Council
of Eliberis, Conc. Eliber. c. 77.
which is supposed to be as ancient as the Council of Nice: If any Deacon
ruling a people, shall without a Bishop or Presbyter baptize any, etc.

Again, if parishes besides their Presbyter or Pastor had a presbytery, then
was it either of the Ministry, or of the Laity. But Presbyteries of Ministers
were only in Cities, and Cathedral Churches, and not any examples can be
alleged of Presbyteries in the Country, no not to assist the Chorepiscopi, much
less to assist the Presbyters of parishes: and Presbyteries of Lay men were
never heard of till this last age: Therefore the several parishes had not
Presbyteries.

Moreover, Churches endued with power ecclesiastical sufficient for the
government of themselves, The parishes had not the power of Ecclesiastical
government.
having also a Bishop and Presbytery, had the power of ordination, as
themselves also teach.

But Country parishes had not the power of ordination.

Therefore Country parishes were not endued with power ecclesiastical,
neither had they a Bishop or Presbytery of their own.

For the Assumption, let the Refuter consider with me, what course was taken
in Country parishes, when their Minister was departed. Among themselves they
had ordinarily none; or if by chance they had, they could not ordain him, but
were (as sometimes it happened in Cities) to offer him to the Bishop to be
ordained. Universities they had none from whence to fetch a learned Minister:
out of other dioceses they were not to be supplied, unless first it did
appear, that their own Bishop was not able out of his Clergy to furnish
them. To the Bishop of the City therefore they did resort, who out of the
Clergy belonging to the Cathedral Church, (wherein, as the Nurserie of the
diocese, diverse were brought up in the study of divinity) did supply their
want, assigning some one of his Clergy unto them. But if there were none fit,
(as sometimes their store was drawn dry, by supplying the wants of many) they
might not ordain a Minister of another diocese, whom they called another
Bishops Clerk, without his leave and dimissorie letters: for that in the
Canons was condemned as a great wrong; and such ordinations were to be
disanulled. If therefore the Bishop neither had of his own, nor knew not
readily where to be supplied out of a neighbor diocese, with the consent of
his neighbor Bishop, he sent to the Metropolitan, Conc. Carth. Gr. c. 54. sieve
Carth. 3. c. 42.
who either out of his own Clergy, or some other in the Province, was to
supply them. And this, as it is evident to them who have read any thing
concerning the state of the ancient Churches; so is it confessed by Calvin.
Each City (says he) Iustit. l. 4. c. 4.. 2.
had a College of Presbyters, who were Pastors and Teachers; for both did they
all discharge the office of teaching, etc. to the people, and also that they
might leave seed behind them, they were diligently employed in instructing
the younger sort of the Clergy. To every City a certain region was
attributed, which should receive their Ministers from thence, and be accounted
of the body of that Church.

It is therefore evident, that Country parishes had not each of them a Bishop
and Presbytery, nor that power of ecclesiastical government which they talk
of.

And much less had the parishes in the Cities. 7. The parishes of the Cities
had not several Bishops.
For it was never almost heard of, that there were at any time more Bishops (so
properly called) then one in a City, where notwithstanding were many
Presbyters, when schism or heresy was not the cause of setting up a second or
third against the one only lawful Bishop: excepting that in the same Church
sometimes a second either has been permitted the title of a Bishop without
episcopal authority, or else ordained as a coadiutor to the first. And when
there have been more then one by schism or heresy, yet neither the
orthodoxall and Catholic Bishop, nor yet the schismatic or heretical
Bishop, was a parishionall Bishop, but each of them was Bishop of all that were
of the same faith with them, in the City and Country adioining, there having
been diverse times in the Cities only more parishes then one, not only of the
true Christians, but also of the heretics and schismatickes, as before was
noted concerning Antioch.

I shall have occasion to speak more of this point when I shall Lib. 3. cap. 3.
entreat of the singularity of pre-eminence which the Bishop in every diocese
had for term of life. A few testimonies therefore shall suffice in this place.
In the Church of Rome there were many not only Presbyters besides the one
only lawful Bishop, but also diverse parishes and titles soon after the
Apostles times, whereunto Presbyters were assigned severally, the Bishop being
the Superintendent over them all. About the year 250. Cornelius Eusebius. lib. 6.
c. 43.
being chosen Bishop of Rome, Nonatianus a Presbyter of Rome discontented with
the election, by the instigation of Nonatus a fugitive Bishop lately come out
of Afric, not only broached the heresy of the Nouatians, or Catharists, but
procure^^ three simple B shops fetched from the uttermost parts of Italy, to
ordain him Bishop of Rome: having also inueigled by his subtilties, certain
famous men, that had been Confessors to be of his party, and to join with
him in the schism against Cornelius. Of this fact, what was the judgment of
Cyprian, of Cornelius, and other Bishops, and finally of the Confessors
themselves, you shall in few words hear. For when Nouatianus had sent his
Messengers, as to other chief Bishops, so to Carthage, to procure the
approbation of Cyprian, he disswadeth them from the schism, telling them Cypr
li. 2. epist. 11.
that a Bishop being ordained, and approved by the testimony and judgment of
his fellow Bishops, and of the people, another may not by any means be
ordained. And writing to some of those Confessors, he signifies his great
grief, Li. 3. epist. 2.
because he understood that they, contrary to the order of the Church, contrary
to the law of the Gospel, contrary to the unity of Catholic discipline, had
thought it meet, that another B. should be made, that is to say, which is
neither right nor lawful to be done, that another Church should be erected,
the members of Christ dismembered, etc.

Cornelius having called together diverse Bishops besides his own Clergy,
deposed the Bishops who ordained Nouatianus: and writing of these matters to
Fabius Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43.
the B. of Antioch, he says, this Patron of the Gospel forsooth (meaning
Nouatian) did not know that in a Catholic Church (...), there ought to be but
one B. in which notwithstanding he could not be ignorant, but that there are
46. Presbyters, and 108. more of the Clergy.

The Confessors Epist. Cornel. ap^d Cypr. l. 3. epist. 11.
afterward acknowledging their fault, among other things in their submission
confess, that as there is but one God and one Lord, so in a Catholic Church
there ought to be but one Bishop.

Now whereas Cornelius testifies, that there were besides the Bishop, who
ought to be but one, 46. Presbyters in the City of Rome, and 108. others of
the Clergy: if any man (notwithstanding it be also testified by diverse, that
there were diverse Churches in Rome, whereunto several Presbyters were
assigned) will needs hold, that the whole Church of Rome was but one parish,
and that all these Presbyters and Clerks attended but one particular ordinary
congregation; I cannot let him from being so absurd. Howbeit, this is certain,
that in the next age, in Optatus Contr. Parmen. l. 2.40. and quod excurrit
basilicas, etc.
his time, when there were in Rome above forty parish Churches, whereunto
several Presbyters were deputed, there remained still but one only Bishop.

The like is to be said of Alexandria, wherein (as Epiphanius Haeres. 69.
testifies) were before the time of Constantine many parish Churches, all
which (at least so many as were Catholic) were under one Archbishop, (...),
and over them severally are Presbyters placed, for the ecclesiastical
necessities of the inhabitants, who might each of them be near unto their
own Church, etc. Now (says Epiphanius) besides the Church called Caesaria,
which was burnt in Iulians time, and reedified by Athanasius, there are many
others, as the Church of Dionysius, of Theonas, of Pierius, of Serapion, of
Persaea, of Dizya, of Mendidius, of Amianus, of Baucalis, and others. In one of
these was Colluthus Presbyter, in another Carpones, in another Sarmatas, and
Arius (...).
in another, namely, that which is called Baucalis.

The same is testified by Nicetas Choniates, L. 5. Orthod. fid. c. 1.
affirming, that in Alexandria there were of old many Churches subject to the
B. of Alexandria, committed severally to Presbyters, as that which is called
Baucalis, and those which have their names from S. Dionysius, Theonas, etc. and
that Arius being the governor of the school in Alexandria, was by Achilles the
B. (the predecessor of Alexander) set over the Church called Baucalis. And
although there be not the like evidence for multitude of parishes in other
Cities immediately after the Apostles times; yet is it not to be doubted, but
that in every City when the number of Christians was much increased, the like
division of parishes was made, unto which, not BB. but several Presbyters were
appointed: there remaining in each City but one Bishop, as the practice of all
Churches in the Christian world from the Apostles times to our age does
inuincibly prove.

8. The Churches which had Bishops set over them were dioceses.
But now suppose, that the Church of each City had been but one parish, which
is most false; yet for so much as to every City there was as Calvin truly says,
a certain region allotted, which belonged to the Bishops charge, and was from
the Presbytery of the City to receive their Ministers; who sees nor, that
the charge of a Bishop was not a parish, but a diocese? And that is the second
thing which J promised to prove.

For, Churches containing within their circuit not only Cities with their
Suburbs, but also whole Countries subject to them, were dioceses.

But the Churches subject to the ancient Bishops in the Primitive Church,
contained within their circuit not only the Cities with their suburbs, but
also the whole Countries subject to them.

Therefore they were dioceses.

The assumption is proved by these reasons: first, The circuit of a Bishops
charge was anciently divided into these parts, the City with the suburbs, and
Country subject to it. For proof whereof, you heard before two most plain
testimonies: The former, in one of the Canons of the Apostles Ca^. Apost. 34.
(so called) charging the Bishop with his own Paroecia, and the Countries
which be under it: The other in the Council of Antioch, Conc. Antioch. c. 9.
which reciting the same words, adds this reason: For every Bishop has
authority over his own Paroecia, and does (...), that is, perform the duty
of a Diocesan, having a provident care or superintendencie of the whole
Country which is under his City, so that he may ordain Presbyters and
Deacons, and order all things with judgment. To the same purpose is the
division of Churches subject to each Bishop, into the Church of the City
called Cont. Carth. Gr. c. 54.72.
(...), or N^trix Ecclesia, and all other parish Churches within the diocese
called (...). And hence arises the distinction of Presbyters subject to the
same Bishop that others were Conc. Neo^^sar. c. 13.
(...), Presbyters of the city, or as in some Latin Councels they are called
Cont. Agat^. c. 22.
, Ciuitatenses, others (...), Country Ministers, or dioecesan^, Ministers of
the diocese.

Secondly, The second reason.
neither was the jurisdiction over the parishes in the Country by usurpation
of the latter Bishops, but a right from the beginning, belonging to the very
first Bishops of the City. For evidence whereof, call to mind what before
was proved, that dioceses were not wont to be enlarged, or the number of
Bishops lessened; but contrariwise those parts of the Country which ever had
a Bishop, were still to retain him; and those which never had, if they were so
populous, as that they seemed to deserve a Bishopric, a Bishop was with the
consent of the ancient Bishop of the City, and the authority of the
provincial synod, and the Metropolitan set over them. This is sure, that all
Countries were under their several Cities, and whosoever were from the
beginning Bishopps of the Cities, were Bishops also of the Countries belonging
unto them. Neither might the Bishop of one City encroach upon the Country, or
parishes subject to another City; but they were to be governed by them, to
whom they had belonged from the beginning. Jn the general Council of Ephesus
Cont. Ephesians. p^st. aduent. epist. Cyp.
, when complaint was made, that the Bishop of Antioch had encroached upon them
of Cyprus, for the ordination of their Metropolitan, who ever from the Apostles
times, were in that and other matters of greatest moment, ordered by their own
prouinciciall synods, his attempt was censured (...).
as an innovation contrary to the ecclesiastical laws, and Canons of the holy
Apostles. And therefore this general decree was made by the Council for all
dioceses and provinces, that no Bishop shall take upon him any other province
or country (...), which for the time past, and from the beginning has not
been under him or his Predecessors. And again, that to every province or
country their right should be kept pure and vnui^lable, which had belonged to
them for the time past, and from the beginning, according to the custom
anciently received. Likewise in the Council of Carthage Conc. Carth. gr. c. 54.
, that the people in the Country which never had a Bishop of their own, should
not receive a Bishop, but by the consent of the Bishop, by whom (and his
antecestors) they have bin (...), from the beg^nning possessed. And where some
had schismatically seized upon some part of a diocese, and being guilty of
their wrong, would sequester themselves from the meetings and synods of the
Bishops, it was decreed, that the lawful Bishop should enjoy, not only his
See, but also such dioceses. And again, it was demanded Ibid. c. 57.
, what course should be taken if a Bishopric being erected in a part of the
diocese, by the consent (...), of the Bishop who has held the dioceses from
the beginning, the new Bishop should encroach upon other parts of the diocese,
which were not intended to him. Answer was made, that as that part which he
had, was taken (...), out of the company of parishes jointly possessed, and as
a member (...), out of the body of many by the consent (...), of the Bishop who
had authority or power: so the new Bishop should not encroach upon any other.

The great council of Chalcedon Conc. Chalced. c. 17.
, determined, that country parishes should vnremoueably remain to the Bishops
which held them. Which Canon was renewed in the council of Constantinople in
T^^^lo. c. 25.
, with this addition, if the said Bishops held them quietly and without
contradiction for the space of thirty years.

9. The third. reason.
But nothing does more evidently prove, that in the primitive Church dioceses
were subject to Bishops, then the ancient institution of country Bishops
Confessed by Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c 4. 2. and Bez^ de grad. c. 24.
, called ch^repiscopi. Who where the country seemed larger, then that the
Bishop by himself could perform all episcopal offices, were for the more
ease of the Bishops, and commodity of the country Churches, appointed in
certain places as their suffragans or vicegerents, and to perform under them,
and for them, some episcopal duties of less moment: but yet so, as the
chorepiscop^^ might do Conc. Ancyr. c. 13.
nothing of weight without the appointment of the Bishop, Conc. Antioch. c. 10.
neither might he ordain without the Bishop of the city, (...), unto which
both himself and his Country is subject.

Fourthly, The fourth. reason.
this truth is also demonstrated, partly by the perpetual successions of
Bishops in all the Apostolical Churches, singularly succeeding from the
Apostles times, to the latter ages, plainly euincing that even in the greatest
Cities and Churches, where there has always been a great multitude of
Presbyters, there has been but one only lawful Bishop at once successively;
and partly by the universal consent of all Churches, not only in former ages
both catholic and heretical (for even the Nouatians, the Donatists, the
Arians, etc. retained the government of the true Church by Bishops) but also of
all almost at this day being established in peace, retaining for the most part
the ancient distinction of Churches, according to dioceses and provinces, which
has continued ever from the first conversion of them: not any one example
being to be produced in the whole world, neither in, nor since the Apostles
times, until our age, of any Church governed according to the newfound parish
discipline. Yea the Church of Geneua it self, which has been a pattern to
others, though it has abolished the episcopal government, notwithstanding it
remains a diocese under their one only Presbytery, as well as it was wont
under their one only Bishop: the authority and jurisdiction of their
Presbytery being not confined to any one parish (nor any one parish allowed a
Presbytery) but is extended to all the parishes both in the city and territory
thereto belonging, having the same circuit that the Bishop was wont to have.

Finally, it may be alleged, that as with us Bathe and Wels, Couentry and
Lichfield, London and Co^chester, so in the primitive Church more cities then
one, with the countries thereto belonging, have sometimes made but one
diocese. For when to the general Council of Ephesus Exempl. libelli syn.
Ephesians. oblati ab Euprepio and Cyrillo Episcopis.
, petiton was made by certain Bishops; that whereas it had bin an ancient
custom in the provinces of Europe, that diverse Bishops should have each of
them two cities under them, as the Bishop of Heraclea had both Heraclea and
Panion, the Bishop of ^yze had also Arcadiopolis, the Bishop of C^^la
Callipolis, the Bishop of Sabsadia, A phrodi^ias, and the latter of these
Cities never had a proper Bishop of their own, but ever from the beginning
were subject to the aforesaid Bishops: and whereas now they feared some
innovation, they referred the cause to the Council. The Council therefore
determined, that there should not then, nor afterward be any innovation, but
the aforesaid Bishops should according to the ancient custom, which has the
force of a law, retain the said Cities. And likewise it may be added, that
some whole nations in the primitive Church were subject to one Bishop, not as
the primate or Patriarch, for that was ordinary (so was Ignatius Ignat. epist.
ad Romans
Bishop of Syria, Liberius Socrat. l. 4. c. 12
of Italy, Cyprius Nazianz. encom. Cypr. Conc. Constable. Trull. c. 2.
of Afric, Diodorus Theodor. l. 5. c. 4.
of Cilicia, Basil Sozum. l. 5. c. 1^.
the Great of Cappadocia, etc.) but as having one only Bishop: as the nation
of the Scythyans Sozum. lib. 6. c. 21.
having many cities, towns, and castles, had all of them by ancient custom
one only Bishop, which was the Bishop of their chief city Tomis.

CHAP. III. Maintaining the first Argument in the Sermon, proving that the
seven Churches of Asia, etc. were Dioceses.
THese testimonies and proofs hitherto produced, are so evident and
demo^stratiue for dioceses and diocesans, as that if no more could be said,
they are sufficient, if not to persuade, yet at the least to convince the
gainsaiers. But if besides these, the arguments which the Refuter has in
chase, shall be made to return upon him, and to drive him and his consorts
like the men of Ai, upon these new forces; and if the forces which he brings
to maintain his quarrel, shall be found to be of no force, and altogether
unable to endure the least encounter; then do I hope, that our Disciplinarians
themselves will be persuaded to speak no more for the new found parish
Discipline. But before I enter into this second conflict, I am to take a survey
of his forces, which I perceive are divided into 2. troops, the one
encountering with my forces, the other fortifying their hold of the parish
discipline.

In his encounter or refutations; Page 53.
first he finds fault, that I do not conclude in this second part, what he
would have me to conclude according to his forced Analysis. For answer whereof
let my words be considered.

( Sermon. s. 1 page 17. I come now to the second: which is, to show that in the
Apostles time and in the ages following, the Churches whereof the Bishops are
called Angels, (or to use their own words, the visible Churches endued with
power of Ecclesiastical government) were Dioceses properly, and not parishes.
This is proved out of this place etc.) The assertion which I endeavor to
prove in the four first points of my Sermon, was this, that the Angels or
governors of the primitive Church, were Diocesan Bishops, and for the substance
of their calling, such as ours be. This assertion, after I had proved it in
the first point (...), by disproouing their Presbyteries: in the three next
points I endeavor to prove it (...), showing that they were such as ours are,
both in respect of the largeness of their authority; to which end I show that
their Churches were Dioceses in the second point, and themselves Diocesans in
the third: and in respect of the height of their authority and Pre-eminence,
that they were superior in degree to other ministers etc. which I prove in
the fourth. In this second point therefore, if I endeavor to prove that the
primitive Churches, which had Bishops, and Presbyteries, and were endued with
power of Ecclesiastical government, were not parishes properly, but Dioceses;
nothing could be more directly, and pertinently delivered. But the only thing,
which I seek to prove and maintain in this part, as every man sees, is,
that the Churches which had Bishops and Presbyteries, etc. were not parishes
properly, but Dioceses. And this I first prove by mine own arguments, and
secondly maintain against theirs.

. 2. That the 7. Churches were Dioceses.
My arguments were two. The former grounded on the text, and is thus to be
framed: Churches, whose circuit contained not only cities, but also countries
adjoining, were Dioceses.

The circuit of the 7. churches, whereof the 7. Angels were Bishops, (and
whereto other Churches having Bishops, and Presbyteries, endued with power of
Ecclesiastical government, were like) contained the cities and Countries
adjoining*

Therefore the 7. Churches etc. were Dioceses.



The proposition I did not express, but did presuppose it, and take it for
granted. Likewise that part of the assumption (enclosed in the parenthesis)
affirming that to the 7. Churches, all others which had Bishops, and
Presbyteries, and consequently were endued with the power of Ecclesiastical
government, were like, I also presupposed: because it is not to be doubted but
that the primitive Churches endued with the power of Ecclesiastical
government, were of the like nature and constitution. And upon this hypothesis,
the only argument which this great disputer brings to make good his cause,
Page 66.
is grounded: affirming that it is clear by all learned (I know not what) that
the constitution of the visible Churches, was at the first one and the same in all places.

Now that the 7. Churches within their circuit contained both the cities and
Countries thereto adjoining, it is proved; first, jointly. For if the 7.
Churches within their circuit comprised all the Churches in Asia, then all both
in cities and countries: but the first is true; for our Savior Christ writing
to the churches in Asia compriseth all under these 7. as being the principal,
and containing within their circuit all the rest.

Then, severally: The church of Ephesus, contained a great and ample city
(indeed a Metropolis or mother city) and the country subject to it: the church
of Smyrna a mother city and the country belonging to it: the church of Sardes a
mother city and the country adjoining: the church of Laoidcea, a mother city
and the country under it: the Church of Pergamus, or Pergamu^, a famous city,
(which had been the fear of the Kings of Asia) and the country belonging to
it: the churches also of Thyatira and Philadelphia contained a cities with
their territories.

Now let us see how our refu^er cauilleth with these arguments. The first he
frames thus: If the churches of Asia to which our savior Christ writ,. 3.
were great and ample cities, and not the cities alone, but also the countries
adjoining, then they were dioceses properly and not parishes:

But the churches of Asia were such. Therefore they were Dioceses etc.



Of this syllogism (says he) the assumption is on the eighteenth page, and
the conclusion on the seventeenth. The proposition is of necessity so to be
supplied. To which I answer, that the consequence thereof is naught. Even so
in your conceit be almost all that you make for me. Ad page. 54. His answer to
the proposition.
But ^s your necessity or need such, that you cannot frame a syllogism with
hope to answer it, unless the proposition have consequence which you may deny?
Let me entreat you, that the proposition may be simple as even now I propounded
it, and the^ deny it if you can. Churches whose circuit contained not on the
cities but also the co^ntries adjoining were Dioceses. This proposition will
stand immovable, when the fo^^dation of your discipline will be raced. And so
will the co^seque^ce which your self propou^d, being grounded on this
proposition as the hypothesis thereof. But why is the consequence naught? for it
will not be amiss to take a breef view how he plays with it. 2. reasons he
renders 1. Because it presupposes that al Churches in the world at that time
were ^mple and great Cities. Which as it appears to be manifestly false to
all that are of any understanding; so it, and some other places in his book
do plainly bewray that he does not know, V^de infir. lib. 4. c. 4. 3. What
is the hypothesis of of a co^uexiue proposition.
what is the hypothesis or thing presupposed in a connexiue proposition. The
which that he may know here after, let him dispose his connexiue proposition
in an enthymeme; and what part of the syllogism is wanting, let him understand
that to be presupposed as the hypothesis whereon that consequence is grounded.
And if that hypothesis be false, let him know that the consequence is naught.
But if it be true (as always it is in their argumentations who do not dispute
sophistically, for they presuppose and take for granted nothing but that which
in their opinion is certain and manifest) then is the consequence necessary.
As for example, let his connexiue proposition be disposed in this E^thymeme:
The 7. churches contained within their circuit, not only the Cities but the
countries adioining:

Therefore the seven Churches were dioceses.

That which is presupposed in this consequence is the proposition of the
syllogism which is understood: viz. Churches which within their circuit
contained not only cities but the countries adjoining, were dioceses. Which
being a certain and manifest truth, the consequence was necessary. But if I
should say thus:

Churches whose circuit contained both cities and countries adjoining, were
dioceses: Therefore the 7. churches were dioceses: in this consequence the
assumption were presupposed, viz. that the circuit of every of the seven
churches contained both the city, and country adjoining. Which parts of
Syllogismes omitted in Enthymemes* if the refuter would add to make up a
simple syllogism, either in his arguing or analyzing, he might spare both
himself and his adversary a great deal of superfluous trouble about his
consequences. He must therefore unlearn that art (if he would not be
accounted a trifler) of flinging all arguments into a connexiue Syllogism,
that he may have a consequence to cavil with.

But so far is the proposition which he propounded from presupposing that
all Churches in the world were great and ample Cities, that it does not so much
as presuppose those seven in Asia, which it mentions, to be such. That is not
presuppo^ed in the proposition, but is assumed or affirmed in the Assumption.
Nothing is presupposed in the Consequence of the proposition, but the simple
proposition, which I said was the hypothesis thereof. If it be said, that what
I say of the seven churches, I would have understood of all other churches, and
so seem to presuppose (though not in my proposition, yet in my argumentation)
that which the Refuter does object: I answer, that as in other places I am not
to be blamed for concluding from other Churches to these seven: so neither
here for concluding from these seven, to all others. For the form and
constitution of all the Primitive Churches, being one and the same, as the
Refuter confesses; it is evident that what is truly said of other Primitive
churches in respect of their constitution, is verified of these seven: And what
is verified of these seven, may be truly affirmed of the rest. Not that all
churches had within their circuit great and ample Cities, (that was spoken
concerning five of these in Asia) it is sufficient that they had Cities with
the countries adioining. And so had all Churches which had a Bishop and a
Presbytery, or were (as you speak and mean) endued with power of
Ecclesiastical government. 4. Their insta^ce concerning Cenchreae.
Neither can you give instance in any one to the contrary. Yes, that they can.
T. C. has an instance: this disputer also has one instance, page 57. and one
in this place, and in some others. And yet all is but this: Some church was not
a City, as for example, Cenchrea. He might have said Cenchrea. Their reason is
thus explicated: Cenchreae was not a City,
Romans 16.11.
Cenchreae was a Church,
Therefore some Church was not a City.


J distinguish of the word Church. For I deny not but the company of
Presbyters in a family is a Church, much more in a village or town. But the
question is of such a church, as had a Bishop assisted with a Presbytery, and
had, as they speak, the power of Ecclesiastical government. Such a Church
was seated only in Cities, or great towns answerable to Cities. And therefore,
if they mean (as they do: or else they might as well hold their peace) that in
Cenchreae was such a Church; I deny the assumption. Cenchreae was subject to
the church of Corinth, as al other towns thereabouts, and never had a Bishop
or a Presbytery of her own. Yea, but she had a Deacon. Suppose that were so,
what then? several Deacons, and several Presbyters were placed in parish
Churches, where was neither B. nor Presbytery, nor the power (which they speak
of) of Ecclesiastical government. And yet their Deacon was but a Diaconisse,
namely Phoebe. Of whom also it may be doubted, whether Paul calls her (...),
one that ministered to the Church in Cenchreae, in respect of an office imposed
upon her to minister to the needy, and to entertain strangers on the churches
cost, or in regard of her voluntary ministering to the faithful there, of her
own substance. For if she were, as Bullinger, and diverse before him report,
nobilissima and ditissima foemina, a most noble, and most wealthy woman; it is
not like, that she was a widow maintained of the church; Luke 8.3.
but one, which (like to Mary, Ioanna, Chusa, and Susanna mentioned in the
Gospel, which (...) ministered to Christ of their goods) did maintain and
relieve the poor of the Church there, and give entertainment to Christian
travelers of her own cost. In which respect Paul says of her, Romans 16.2.
that she had been (...), a patroness of many, yea of the Apostle himself.
Neither is it likely that a widow maintained of the church, as having little
or nothing of her own, should have such business in Rome, or (as it is thought)
at the Emperors Court, as that the Apostle should write to the faithful in
Rome to assist her in her affairs. But it may be you desire to hear some
further reason of his denial of that consequence: you shall hear it. For,
says he, though it were granted, that these 7. were great Cities, and the
Countries adjoining; ^et there might be diverse others, which were small, etc.
See you not how he seeks about for starting holes? What if there were (and
that is more the^ might be) other small churches? (as indeed there was none such
as we speak of, but they were seated in the Cities, neither was any so small,
but if it were endued with power of ecclesiastical government, it was of the
same constitution with those which were greater). What is that to this
consequence? If these Churches contained each of them not only the City, but
the country adioining, then they were not Parishes properly, but Dioceses. His
answer if it be well weighed, is an exception against the conclusion. As if
he should say, though I would fain wrangle with your proposition, but cannot
(for how is it possible, but that if these churches did contain ample Cities
with the countries, such as we call shires, belonging to them, they were not
dioceses but parishes?) and although your assumptio^ should be granted,
namely, that these churches contained not only the cities, but countries:
notwithstanding your conclusion is to be excepted against. For though these
were dioceses, yet others might be parishes. Such a froward adversary I have
met withal; who in other places accusing me, for not concluding what these
churches, or the angels of the^ were, here finds fault that J conclude what
they were. But both his accusations are alike unjust; seeing the constitution
of them, and all others (endued with power of ecclesiastical government) was
the same; and what is said of the one, is to be understood of the other.

His second reason why the consequence is naught:. 5.
because it does not appear, (neither is it true) that every one of these
Churches was divided into diverse several ordinary asblies, all of the^
depending upon some one as the chief, without power of ecclesiastical
government apart in themselus. Is this the denial of any thing but the
conclusion? is not the denial of the conclusion, an evidence that the answerer
is confounded? and is not confusion a manifest sign of one that writes
against his conscience, resolved not to be persuaded, though his conscience be
convicted?

As touching his assertion opposed to my conclusion, that they were not
Dioceses, because they were not divided. etc. it contains three branches:
First, that they were not divided into diverse ordinary assemblies. Secondly, If
they were, yet they did not all depend upon some one as the chief. Thirdly,
That they had the power of ecclesiastical government in themselves. These
assertions would have been proved by them that are opponents, and will needs
persuade us to admit of their parish Discipline. But I am well assured that
they are notable to prove any one of them. And although it were sufficient for
me to deny these assertions, and to put them to prove them: yet because I
desire from my soul to satisfy our opposites in this cause, as Brethren; and
because they contain the very grounds of the parish-discipline, I will briefly
disprove them. For, as touching the first, I have often wondered what our
brethren mean to argue from the example of the churches which were not divided
into parishes; to those that be. Would they have the Church of a City, and
country belonging to it, to be all but one congregation, asse^bling ordinarily
in one place? If they would, the^ are they too absurd to be thought worthy to
be confuted. But though they would, the ancient christians would not; who when
their multitude was increased, in all places of the world were divided into
diverse particular assemblies. If they would have them divided, as of necessity
they must: then let them tell me, whether we (that do, and of necessity
must, consist of diverse congregations) are to follow the example of any ancient
church, as it was before it was divided, or as it was after it was divided. If
the former, then are they absurd again: If the latter, then have I that which
I desire. They will say perhaps, that each congregation after the division, was
as that one before. Nothing less: Let them prove that, and I will yield in the
whole cause. The one before had a Bishop, and a Presbytery, as they will
confess which were to attend the whole flock, but after the division, not
each parish had a Bishop and a Presbytery, but one of the Presbyters assigned
to it, the rest remaining with the Bishop, who (as before) assisted with his
Presbytery, had a general superintendencie over them, as well divided as
undivided, and was but one in every diocese, as well after the division as
before. Which is so manifest a truth, so confirmed by testimonies before cited,
so testified by the general consent and practice of the Christian world, not
one instance to be given to the contrary, as that it cannot but convince the
conscience, I hope also it will persuade. For tell me I pray you, were not
parishes distinguished in Constantines time and before, as well as now? Yes
questionless. Were any other assigned to them severally, then several
Presbyters, even as they be now? That also is out of doubt. Was it ever, or at
any time otherwise, after the division of parishes? No without question. There
remained but one Bishop, and one Presbytery for the whole city and country, as
well after the division as before. And that is so evident a truth, by that
which has bin said, that no man of learning can with a good conscience any
longer deny it.

But it will be said,. 6.
that the Churches before they were divided, were not dioceses. Whereto I
answer, that the circuit of the Church, in the intention of the Apostle or
first founder of it, was the same as well before the division of parishes, as
after. Even as the subject of the leaven is the whole bach, in the intention of
him that puts it into the lump, though the loaves be not yet divided, yea
though but a little of the dough be yet (after it is newly put in) seasoned.
If you ask me how J know this? I answer. First, because the whole Church of
God, ever since the Apostles days unto our age, has so understood the
intention of the Apostles, and of their first founders: the circuit of every
Church having from the beginning included not only the city, but the country
thereto belonging. Secondly, because that division of Churches which was three
or four hundred years after Christ, with their limits and circuits, were
ordinarily the same which had been from the beginning, as before has been
testified by diverse ancient Councels. Thirdly, because it is confessed by Bez.
de grad. c. 24.
Beza, and testified by Doctor Rain. and. H. 542.
Rainolds, and others Caes. Baron. an. 39.10. Wolfg. Laz. de rep. Romans l. 2. c.
12. Beat. Rhena^^. in lib. Not^t. prouinciar. imp. Romans in descriptione
Illyrici.
, that the distribution of the Church did usually follow the division of the
commonwealth: insomuch that those countries which were subjected to the civil
jurisdiction exercised in any city, were also subject ordinarily to the
ecclesiastical: and as they were accounted of the same county or province, in
respect of civil government, so of the same Church or diocese in regard of
spiritual. And as the Church followed the civil distribution at the
beginning, so also if there were any new city erected by the authority of the
Emperor, it was decreed by the Council of Constantinople Constable. in Trullo. c.
38. (...).
(following therein the canon of their forefathers) that the order of
ecclesiastical things should follow the civil and public form.

Therefore though these Churches had not been divided into several
congregations, yet had they each of them been dioceses. But now I add, that at
the time of writing the Revelation, which was almost an hundeed years after
the birth of Christ, it is more then probable, that they contained diverse
congregations. For when Paul had continued but two years at Ephesus, the holy
Ghost Act. 19.10.
restifieth, that all which inhabited Asia (so properly called) did hear the
word of the Lord Jesus both Jews and Gentiles. Well, Paul having placed many
Presbyters among them, and having continued among them for the space of three
years, afterward Act. 20.31.
sends Timothy to be their Bishop, who ordinarily continued among them
until his death. And that you should not think there was but that Church at
Ephesus in Paul's time, he makes mention 1. Cor. 16.19.
of the Churches of Asia. Saint Peter likewise had preached, and by his
preaching converted many in Asia, to whom among others, he directs 1. Pet.
1.1.
his first Epistle. After the death of Peter and Paul, because those Churches
were as Paul had foretold, much annoled with heretics, Saint John Testified by
Origin. Eusebius, Epiphanius, Chrysostom. Nazianz. apud Caes. Baron. in a^. 44.29.
, by the direction of the holy Ghost, went into those parts, preached the
Gospel for many years, ordained Bishops and Presbyters where need was. To
the ministry of the Apostles, add the preaching of the Bishops and
Presbyters ordained by them, and disciples which they had instructed: by whose
ministry, not only many particular Christians, but some Churches were
brought to the faith. As that of Colossae, (which was in the confines of
Phrygia, bordering on this Asia) in Paul's time, planted by the ministry of
Epaphra^ Coloss. 1.7.
, as their founder; watered by the ministry of Archippus, as their Bishop.
Now I appeal to the conscience of every indifferent Reader, whether it be not
unlikely, that not in any one of these famous Churches, no not in that of
Ephesus, there were in the whole city and country belonging to it, any more
then one ordinary congregation, after the preaching of such, and so many for
the space of forty five years.

And so much for the first of his assertions: the other two I will join
together. For if there were but one Bishop for the Church, both of the city
and country, (as there were but seven in all these seven Churches) and but one
Presbytery: if the Churches both of the city and country were subject to the
Bishop of the city: if the parishes both of city and country had neither
Bishop nor Presbytery, but Presbyters severally assigned to them: if the
Presbyters of the country were ordained by the Bishop of the city, and not
only they, but the rural Bishops also were subject to his authority; all
which, I have by most evident arguments and testimonies proved already: then
did the several congregations and parishes, which J have also proved were all
but members of one body, depend upon the chief Church in the city as the
head, which afterward was called Matrix ecclesia, cathedra episcopi, or the
cathedral Church, neither had the power of ecclesiastical jurisdiction
whereof they speak, as I have also proved before.

. 7. His answer to the assu^ption.
I come to the assumption, wherewith he cauilleth egregiously, because I said
that the Churches whereof the seven Angels were Bishops, were not only the
cities, but the countries adjoining, that is, as I expressed my meaning in the
syllogism before, that the circuit of every one of these Churches contained
both the city and country: which assumption I have made good by necessary
proof. But, says he, Who ever said that the Church of Ephesus was a great
City? Who knows not that the City is one thing, and the Church another? But
this might serve M.D. turn to dazell the eyes of the simple, etc. As touching
this foul imputation (that I may begin with it) J thank God, I am free,
both from desire, and intent of daz^ling the eyes of the simple. But as in my
conscience I am clearly resolved of the truth of these five points contained
in the Sermon: so I have endeavored with plain evidence, to uphold and
maintain the truth, against the nouelty of your inventions, and the subtilties
of your sophistications, wherewith you have too long both dazeled and seduced
the simple. So much of that by the way.

If he discerned the speech which I used, to be improper, had he not so much
neither Art, I mean either Rhetoric, or Logic, nor grace, I mean charity,
as either to conceive me to have spoken by a trope, or to explane my speech by
such an enunciation, as the nature of the arguments does require? When it is
said in my text, the seven stars are the Angels; will he say, who ever heard
that stars were Angels? Or when Christ says, This cup is my blood that is
sh^d, or, the new Testament in my blood: will he say; who ever heard that the
cup is blood or the Testament? When I said the Churches are the cities and the
country; could he neither understand me as speaking (after that most usual
metonymy) of the Christian people in the city and country: nor yet explane my
words, as the nature of the arguments contained in the speech does lead him? If
I should say, a man is not only body, but soul also, or, the body is not one
member alone, but many, you would understand me thus: Man consists of body
and soul; the body consists not of one member alone, but of many. Or thus;
Whole man contains these two parts: the body contains not one member
alone, but many. Even so the Church or diocese of Ephesus is (that is,
contains) not only the City, but the Country.

But is that so strange a thing with our learned Refuter,. 8. Churches called
Cities.
that the name of the City should be given to the Church? Let him look back
to Apoc. 1.11. and he shall find, that the seven Churches were, Ephesus,
Smyrna, etc. And so usual is it with good Authors speaking of BB. to say they
were Bishops of such or such a City, as I might fill a Volume with quotations
to this purpose. These few testimonies may suffice: Eusebius Eusebius. Chr. an.
45. Ann. 71.
says, that Euodius was the first Bishop of Antioch, and that Ignatius was the
second Bishop of Antioch, etc. The Council of Nice writing to the Church of
Alexandria, makes mention Socrat. lib. 1. fol. 177. a.
(...), of the Bishop of Alexandria. Athanasius Epist. ad Epise. Afric.
calls Damasus, (...), the Bishop of the great City Rome; and Dionysius, De
sentent. Dionys.
the B. of Alexandria. The first Council of Constantinople Conc. Constable. 1. c.
1.2.3.
mentions the Bishop of Alexandria, the Bishop of Constantinople, and the
Bishop of Rome. And more plainly in the Council held in Trullo, Constable. in
Trul. c. 2.
Nectarius is said to have been the Bishop of the City of Constantinople,
Dionysius the Archbishop (...), of the great City of Alexandria. Look into
the subscriptions of Bishops unto Councels, as to that of Nice subscribed Osius
the Bishop of the City of Corduba, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, etc. to the
Council of Sardica, Athanasius Bishop of the great City of Alexandria,
Alexander Bishop of the City of Mesenia; and in like manner all the rest,
stiling themselves Bishops of the Cities. Look into the inscriptions of
epistles written either by Bishops, or unto Bishops: Ignatius styles himself
thus: Ignat. ad Polycarp.
Ignatius (...), the Bishop of Antioch. Leo Epist. 1.2.3. etc.
in his Epistles styles himself sometimes Bishop of Rome, sometimes Vrbis
Romae, of the City of Rome. Basil writes to Eusebius the Bishop of Samosata,
to Athanasius the Bishop of Ancyra, to Ambrose the Bishop of Millaine, and
writing to the Bishops of France and Jtaly, calls himself the B. of Caesar^a.

This title given to Bishops after the division of parishes, plainly proves
also, that they were not Bishops of any one parish, but of all the Churches in
the City, and of the whole diocese.

My assertion therefore, that each of the seven Churches was not only the
City, but the country also adioining, would according to the true meaning
thereof have been consuted, if he had been able, and not the words fondly
cauilled with. But not contended here with, he stretches my words beyond that
which his own conscience would tell him was my meaning; as if I had said, that
all the people in the City and Country had been at this time Christians. Which
could scarcely be verified of any City and Country for 200. years after and
more, I mean until Constantines time. Nevertheless, this was an assertion
which he found himself able to confute. And therefore full soberly he goes
about it, telling us, that there were not then so many Christians as
inhabitants, nor it was not then in Ephesus, as it is now in London. And very
learnedly out of h^s reading tells us, that Polycarpus Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
was put to death by the rage of the heathen multitude, in the sight of his
people: when every body knows, that in all Cities and Countries, for the
space of almost 300. years, the Christians were persecuted by the Gentiles.

If any man ask, how it may be said, that the Church contained the City and
Country, when but a few Christians, in comparison of the heathen, were in
either of both: I answer (as before) that the circuit of the Church or diocese
was the same, when there were few, and when there were many, yea when all were
Christians. Neither were there more Bishops set over the City and Country when
all were Christians, then when there were but a few; the same Bishop of the
City having jurisdiction over all the Christians both in the City and
country, as well when all were Christians, as when but a few: which J proved
before by the general consent and perpetual practice of all Christendom ever
since the Apostles times; which ought without comparison to prevail with us
above the authority of a few selfe-conceited persons among us, who are not so
singular for learning, as they are singular in opinion; whose pride and
arrogancy in advancing themselves against the judgment and practice of the
universal church in all places, and in all ages since the Apostles times, is
intolerable.

Yea but says he, the Church of Smyrna writing Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
of the said Martyrdom of Polycarpus, intituleth her self the Church of God
which is at Smyrna. Was there a whole Diocese or Country of Christians
inhabiting Smyrna? Which is an objection scarce worth the answering. For
whether by the Church of Smyrna you understand the whole Diocese, it was
seated chiefly in the City (as the soul, which is in all the body, is said
to be in the head; and God, who is in all places, to be in heaven) or but that
part which did inhabit the City, you are not to marvel, if the whole company
of Christians inhabiting a City, are called a Church, seeing the company of
Christians in a parish, or in a family, deserves that name. Neither does the
naming of it self the Church which is at Smyrna, exclude the Churches in the
Country from being of the same body or diocese with it. And thus much may
suffice to have spoken concerning the first syllogism which he framed for me.

Now are we to examine the second. 7. The 1. proof of the assumption, viz.
that the seven Churches contained both the Cities and Countries adioining.
M.D. (says he) perceiving that this assumption wanted strength, sought to
fortify it by two reasons. This is my adversaries usual, though odious,
fashion, sophistically to argue every assertion of weakness, for which I bring
proof: when rather the proof (if it be good, as hitherto he has not been
able to disprooue any) does argue the weakness of their judgment, who deny
or doubt of the truth which is proved, and the strength also of the assertion,
which is armed with such proof.

Ad page 55.
The former reason he propounds thus: If our Savior writing to the Churches
of Asia, numbreth but seven, and some of them mother Cities, then were they
great and ample Cities, and not the Cities alone, but the Countries adioining.

But our Savior writing to the Churches of Asia, numbreth but seven. etc.

To let pass his unmannerly gibing, not worth the mentioning, and to refer
you to the manner how this Syllogism is to be framed, before Supr.. 2.
mentioned, let us see how he deals with this frame which himself has
fashioned. He denies, after his usual manner, both the proposition and the
assumption. So hard is my hap, that scarce any one proposition or assumption,
which he frames for me, may be acknowledged to be true: and yet so hard is
his hap, that he is not able to prove any one either proposition or
assumption of mine to be untrue.

The proposition he would confute by an (...), though it were granted that our
Savior wrote these epistles to all the Churches of Asia, yet it will not
follow, that therefore all the rest depended upon these, as children upon the
mother. To which he adds the (...), in denying the former part of the
assumption, viz. that our Savior did not write to all the Churches of Asia.
His denial of the consequence he confirms by putting a case: If the Emperor
finding some abuses commonly reigning in the whole Country of Asia, should have
written to these principal and mother Cities for the reforming of those
abuses, with intent (says he) that all other Cities and Towns should be
warned by his reproof of them, (which put-case with that intent is worthy to
be put into a cap-case) might a man conclude thereupon, that all other Towns
and Cities of Asia were subject to the government of these seven? But say I,
put the case, that the Emperor so should do, with that intent, which is, and
also has been usual in such cases, that is, to the intent that what he
writes to them, might by and from them be notified to those Towns and
Villages which were within the circuit of their jurisdiction: would it not
strongly prove, that all those other towns and villages were subject to them?
Come we to our selves. When the King or his Counsel would have any thing
intimated to all his Subjects in certain Counties, are not warrants directed
to the Lieutenants of each County, from them to the high Constables of every
hundred, from them to the Constables of every town? and does not this show
that the officers of the town are subordinate to those of the hundred, and
much more to the governors of the County? In like manner when the Archbishop
would have any thing imparted to every parish, he directs his letters to the
Bishops, they, to the Archdeacons, they, to the officers in every Dean^y, they
acquaint (in particular) every Parish. Even so by Christ his writing to the 7.
Churches, what he would have imparted to all the particular Churches, it may
be gathered, that the rest of the particular Churches were subject to them.
And it may well be, that when our Savior writing to every one of the Angels
severally, and concluding each Epistle with this Epiphonema, Let him that has
an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, would have it understood
what he writes to the Angel, he writes to the Churches, which be under his
charge.

And thus you have heard, how he has fared with the Proposition. The
Assumption he distinguishes into two parts, the former, 10. Whether Christ
wrote to all the churches in Asia.
affirming that Christ wrote to all the churches of Asia: the latter, that some
of these seven Churches were Mother-Cities: both he denies as false. The
former, because it is unlikely, as he says, if not impossible, that our Savior
writing to that third part of the world which was not much less then both the
other, Africa and Europe, would write but to these 7. which were all together
in one little corner of it. Here I appeal to my adversary, if he be a man of
learning, whether he does not cavil against the light of his conscience,
seeing he could not be so ignorant* as to think, that by Asia mentioned in the
Apocalypse, and else where in the Epistles and Acts of the Apostles, is not
meant Asia the great, nor yet that which is called Asia minor, being the whole
Chersonesus, now called Natolia, bounded on the north with Pontus Euxinus, on
the west with the Hellespont, and mare Aegaeum, on the south, with the
Mediterranean sea, including* according to Ptolemey, eight countries, whereof
Asia (so properly called) is one. And albeit he knows (as I am persuaded)
that by Asia in the Apocalypse, is meant only that, which is so properly
called; yet he makes a great flourish, partly to show some small skill in
Geography; but chiefly (that I may use his own term,) to dazell the eyes of
the simple; Ad page 56.
showing how unlikely it is, either that the great Kingdoms of Asia mayor
should be Parishes under the seven Churches: or that those many famous
Churches of Asia Minor, as the Churches of Derbe, Lystria, Iconium, Antioch in
Pisidia, Pergain Pamphylia, of Galatia, which were many, were but dependants
upon these seven. If he does not know, that none of these Countries are
contained in that Asia whereof the holy Ghost speaks: let him compare but
these few testimonies of Scripture. Act. 2.9.10. and 6.9. and 16.6.7. and 1.
Pet. 1.1. and he shall find, that Cilicia, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Bythinia, Phrygia, Pamphylia, and Mysia, (meaning Mysia mayor, or Olympina)
being all parts of Asia minor, are reckoned as diverse countries from that Asia,
which is mentioned in the Scriptures. If the refuter would needs have shown
his skill in Geography, he should have done well to have set down the bounds
and limits of this Asia, whereof we speak. For the Authors that write
thereof, whom I have seen, do not agree with the Scriptures. The Romans,
when Attalus Strabo Geograph. lib. 13.
Philomator the King of Pergamus, and the countries adjoining, had bequeathed
his Kingdom to them, and they had recovered it from Aristonicus who claimed it
as his inheritance, they reduced it into a Province, and by the name of the
continent called it Asia, hoping it would be an introduction to the rest.
Erasmus Erasmus Annot, in Romans 16.
says, it is evident, that when Asia is named absolutely, that part of Asia
minor is signified where Ephesus stands. And Erasm. in Act. 16.
on Act. 16. where Paul and his company were forbidden to preach the Word in
Asia, the holy Ghost means (says he) that Asia, not which by the general
name is called minor, environed on each side, but on the East, with the Sea,
and which comprehends Phrygia, Pamphylia, Galatia, and some other Countries;
but that which is near to Ephesus; for that properly is called Asia- minor.
But he does not tell us how much of the Country, which is not far from
Ephesus, is contained within the circuit of Asia. Those which write of
Geography, give a larger circuit unto it, then agrees with the Scriptures,
bounding it northward on Bithynia, westward on Propontis, Hellespont, and the
Aegean sea, which in those places is called the Icarian sea: Southward, on the
Rhodian sea: Eastward, on Lycia, Pamphylia, and Galatia. And by this means,
they include within the limits of it. Phrygia, both the greater and the less
(wherein Troy stood,) and Mysia, both the greater, which is called Olympina,
and the less, which is called Ptolem. calls Mysia Pergamene, mayor.
Pergamene. When as Phrygia is in the Scriptures distinguished from Asia, and
only the borders or frontiers of it, where Laodicea (according to their
opinion) stands, are reckoned in it, and likewise Mysia, Olympina, and
Phrygia minor, (which is also called Epictetus or Troas) are reckoned apart
from Asia. So that according to the scriptures, Asia seems to include, Ionia,
Mysia* Pergamene, Lydia, or Maeonia, and perhapps Caria; for thereof is no
mention. In Ionia stood Ephesus, and from it northward, Smyrna. In Mysia
Pergamene Mysiae principatum Pergamum obtinuit. Aen. Sylu. in Asia minor. C 62.
Acolis quondam Mysia appellata. Plin. l. 5. c 30. Ptolemy among the Cities of
Lydia, and Maeonia reckons Thyatira, Sard^s and Philadelphia.
stood Pergamum northward from Smyrna: and southward from it Thy^tira, which
Strabo calls Mysorum vltimam. In Lydia (which Strabo, Ptolemy and Pliny, l.
5. c. 29. take to be all one with Maeonia) stood Sardo^ (which Strabo calls
Lydorum caput) southward also from Pergamus. In the confines of Mysia and Lydia
stood Philadelphia. The borders of Phrygia, Caria and Lydia are hardly
distinguished, says Strabo l. 13.
Strabo, because they meet together, and are confounded in the midlands, (as
Aeneas Syluius says,) and this confusion is increased, says Strabo, because
the Romans have divided these countries, not by the nations, but according to
the administrations ((...)) that is, circuits of jurisdiction, wherein Courts
are kept, and judgments exercised according to law. Now in these confines
stands Laodicea, which according to Ptolemey Ptol. l. 5. c. 2.
is a City of Caria, and by the testimony of the holy Ghost in the Apocalypse
is a part of Asia, though by the most Geographers it is said to stand in the
borders of Phrygia. Eunapius In Maximo.
speaking of Clearchus made proconsull of Asia, by Valens the Emperor,
describes the circuit (...), of that which now properly is called Asia, that
it beginning at Pergamum, and comprehending the sea coasts, ends in the
continent at Caria, the mount Tmolus circumscribing the borders thereof on
Lydia. So that according to this description the circuit of Asia is less then
that which is limited in the Scriptures, Lydia, and Caria being excluded. And
accordingly in the subscriptions Subscript. Con. Nicen.
, to the Council of Nice, not only Phrygia, but Lydia also and Caria are
reckoned apart from Asia, that we should not marvel, that a less circuit is
assigned unto it in the Scriptures, then the Geographers do describe, seeing
within a less compass then that which the Scriptures assigned thereunto, it
is circumscribed by others.

Seeing therefore Asia is gathered into so small a compass, let us see what
the refuter can object, why our Savior writing to these seven Churches, should
not under them comprise all the Churches in Asia. Because even there or near,
says he, we find diverse other churches: as those of Colossa, Hierapolis, and
Troas mentioned in the Scripture; to let pass Magnesia, and Trallis recorded
in other writers. But none of the three former are mentioned in the scripture
as parts of Asia: Troas being the same with phrygia minor, and Hierapolis, and
Colossae, Cities of Phrygia mayor. It is recorded by Eusebius In Chronico.
, that in the year of Christ 66. and tenth of Nero Tacitus says in the 6. of
Nero, and so as it is thought within two years after the Epistle to the
Colossians was written. Tacit. l. 14 codem anno Scil. 6. Neronis exillustribus
Asiae vrbibus Laodicea tremore terrae prostrata, nullo a nobis remedio proprijs
opibus reualuit.
these three cities Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colossae, were overthrown with
earthquakes. And although we read that Laodicea was quickly reedified, and
flourished again, when Saint John wrote the Revelation, and Hierapolis not
long after, seeing we read that Papias Saint John's Scholar was by him made
Bishop there* yet of Colossae, as Call. in argum. epis. ad Coloss.
Calvin observes, that shortly after the Epistle was written to them, that
Church with the rest perished; so that it stood in Saint John's time, I read
not, neither do I remember any mention of it, or of the Bishops thereof, in,
or near those times. Howbeit in process of time it was reedified, and called
Conae, or Chonae, whereof Nicetus the writer of the annals, because he was of
that city is called Coniates. Oecumenius In Coloss. 1.
says that Colossae was a city of Phrygia (...), which is now called Chona,
and by that name (...), is reckoned among the Bishoprics as they are digested
by Le^ Iur. graecor^m. page ^8. number. 54.
the Emperor. That Colossae was no part of Asia Theodoret shows: For being
of opinion that Paul had been at Colossae, he proves Prefat. in Epist. ad
Coloss.
it because it is said that he went through Phrygia. Neither says he let any
man object that Paul was forbidden Act. 18.
of God. For Luke speaks of Asia and Bithynia, not of Phrygia.

As touching Magnesia, and Trallis; it appears not, that they were as yet
converted unto the faith* when they were converted (as not long after I
confess they were, seeing Ignatius a little before his death did write unto
them) they were* inferior to those seven which Saint John names as the
principal, and both of them subject to the Bishop of Ephesus; as appears by
the subscriptions in the Council of Chalcedon Action ^.
where Eutropius the Bishop of Ephesus subscribing, as other Metropolitanes
did, for himself and the Bishops which were under him being absent, among
twenty others mentions Alexander of Magnesia, and Maximus of Trallis.
Likewise in the distribution of the Churches made by Leo the Emperor Iu^.
graecevom. page 90.
among the Bishops subject to the Bishop of Ephesus (...), the Bishop of
Tralles, and of Magnesia, upon Maander are numbered. Upon these weak premises
the Refuter infers a very confident conclusion. It is clear therefore,
says he, that our Savior intended not to write to all the Churches of Asia,
but only to those seven which he names; to no^e of which, so many and so
famous Churches could belong. Whereto I answer, according to that which I
have proved, that every Church that was in Asia in these times, was either one
of these seven, or depending on them. As for those Churches which he mentions
in Asia mayor, or Asia minor, yea even those which were in Phrygia minor, or
Troas, or in Phrygia mayor, as Hierapolis, and Colossae, were not any of them
in Asia so properly called: there remain only Magnesia, and Tralles to prove
his conclusion. Which either he cannot prove to have been Churches at this
time; or if they were, he cannot disprooue, that they belonged to one of these
seven. So that nothing, which he can object, does hinder, but that under these
seven, our Savior did write to all the Churches in Asia.

. 12. That some of the seven Churches were mother Cities.
Thus the former part of the assumption remains true; and so will the latter,
though he say it is utterly false: for his reason is no other, but that which I
have already confu^ed, that they were neither mother cities, nor cities at
all. And whereas he obiecteth, that the Epistles were directed to the Angel of
the Church in Ephesus, in Smyrna etc. and not of Ephesus the Church, Smyrna the
Church, as of the whole cities were the Churches: I answer, that although the
whole city of Ephesus meaning Civitas, was not the Church until it was wholly
converted to the profession of Christianity: notwithstanding the whole city,
meaning vrbs, was contained within the circuit of the Church intended by the
Apostles, and acknowledged by the judgment and practice of that Church,
conformable to the judgment and practice of all other churches in
christendom. Neither is that material that the church is said to have bin in
Ephesus (as it also was when the whole city was converted to christianity)
seeing in vrbe, in the city, the church was chiefly seated, as was said before.

Now that some of these were Metropoleis, that is, as I said, not only mother
cities, but also Metropolitan churches, I will briefly declare. Those cities
which were capita (...), the heads of the civil jurisdiction, where the
preside^ts of the Roman provinces held their assemblies, and kept their courts,
were mother cities to the rest, which were under the said jurisdiction. But
such were five of these, as has been heretofore noted out of Pliny: Plin.
l. 5. c. 29 et 30.
viz. Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Sardes, and Laodicca. Where also Philadelphia
is noted as one of the cities subject to Sardes: and Thyatira to Pergamus. This
distinction the Church followed in all, excepting Pergamus, which it self was
subjected to Ephesus: and Thyatira, which had belonged to it, sometimes to
Synada (for in the council of Chalcedon Actio. 6.
Marmianu^ the Bishop of Synada among the BB. which were under him, reckons
Helladius of Thyatira) sometimes to Sardes, as in the Emperor Leo Iur.
gracorom. page 90.
the Philosophers time. The Bishops of the other 4. in the council of Chalcedon
Actio. 3.
in the condemnation of Dioscorus, are styled Metropolitanes; and in the diverse
subscriptions to that council, are placed among the Bishops of the mother
cities. In the (...) Iur. graecora^. 88.
or distribution of the Churches by the Emperor Leo, Ephesus is a Metropolis
Page 90.
having 36. Bishoprics under it, among which Pergamum is the 19. Sardes
likewise is a Metropolis, having under it 24 Bishoprics, whereof Philadelphia
is the first and Thyatira the third; to Laodicea likewise page 94.
21. Bishoprics were subject, and to Smyrna, page 100.
7.

And so much may suffice for the first argument grounded on the text.

CHAP. 4. That Presbyters were appointed, not to parishes, but to dioceses.
THe Analysis of the 2. argument is mistaken by him, to say no worse: for he
should have looked to the end of that, which though he make the 3. section,
should have been joined to the 2. Where he should have found this to be the
main conclusion of all that which follows the first argument (concerning the
7. churches), to that place. viz. That the Presbyteries in the Apostles times,
were not appointed to parishes, but to dioceses. From whence the principal
question of this part, is thus to be inferred. The Presbyteries ordained by the
Apostles were appointed not to parishes, but Dioceses: therefore the churches
endued with power of ecclesiastical government were not parishes, but
dioceses. This consequence the refuter gra^teth, in gra^ting the connexiue
proposition of the syllogism, which he frames p. 58. l. 1. If he did not, it
might easily be confirmed by adding the assumption, viz. to visible Churches
endued with power of ecclesiastical government the Presbyters ordained by the
Apostles were appointed.

The antecede^t (which is also the proposition of the syllogism if the
assumption be added) I prove by 2. arguments. The first concluding thus: They
who were appointed to whole cities and countries to labor so far as they were
able, the conversion of all that belonged to God, were appointed to dioceses,
and not to parishes.

Ad page 54.
This proposition I omitted also, as taking it for granted. As for his cauils
against his own proposition which he framed for the nonce to cavil withal,
they are not worth the refuting. For besides that he absurdly cauilleth with
me, as though I had said, that al in the city and country were in S. I^bus time
converted: he alleges that there is no necessity, that they which were
converted, should be of the same church with the^, who did convert them. As for
example they of Ceuchrea received the gospel from Corinth, and yet were a
distinct Church: For it is called the church of C^nchrea. Ro^. 16. 1. But I
spoke of them which did accidentally convert others, but of such as by whose
means the conversion of the city and country was originally intended. And I
say, that they whose ministry was intended for the conversion of the city and
country; to their care or charge, both for the first converting of the^, and
government of the^ being converted, the city and country belo^ged. As for
Cenchreae, though it be called a church, (as every company of christians may so
be termed) yet it was not such a church as they speak of, endued with power of
ecclesiastical government; but subject to the jurisdiction of the Church of
Corinth.

Now follows the assumption: But the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles
were appointed for whole cities and countries thereto belonging, to labor so
far as they were able the conversion of all that belonged to God.

This assumption confirmed with 2. arguments, is set down p. 18. the one, the
end intended by the Apostles in appointing presbyters in cities, which was the
conversion of the nation, for which themselves first preached in the chief
cities: the other, is the (...), or as they call it causa (...), their hope, by
the ministry of the Presbyters placed in the city, to convert them which
belonged to God both in city and country, grounded on the force of the gospel
restified by our Savior. The words are these: for it is evident that the
Apostles when they intended to convert any (...), they first preached to the
chief cities thereof* Wherein when through Gods blessing they had converted
some, their manner was to ordain Presbyters* hoping by their ministry to
convert not only the rest of the city but also in the countries adjoining so
many as did belong to God. Mat. 13.53.
The Kingdom of heaven being like a little leaven, which being put into any
part of the (...), seasoneth all.

These words thus set down at large, be the assumption of the syllogism which
he has framed (for what cannot he bring within the compass of his
syllogisms?) and thereof he makes 3. parts. About the first, he says, he will
not strive, viz. the Apostles beginning to p^each in the chief cities of every
nation, which (though he think I cannot prove) is most easy to be proved,
because it was the most wise and likely course to be taken for the conversion
of nations: as also because it is manifest both by the scriptures and other
ancient records, that they took that course: As Paul inte^ding the conversion
of Asia, where he stayed three years, continued in Ephes^s all the time: Act.
20.1^.31.
intending the conversion of Macedonia, went to Thessalonica and Philippi: of
Achaia, to Corinth etc. The second also he franckly yields, that the Apostles
ordained Presbyters in cities where they had converted some to the truth. But
the 3, which is indeed the assumption it self, and which is inferred on the
former as I set them down (that if the Apostles intending the conversion of
the nation, as they began themselves to preach in the chief cities, so they
placed Presbyters to the same intent, hoping by them to convert both city and
country: then were they appointed and it was their duty to labor the
conversion of all belonging to God both in city and country) the assumption, I
say, it self he does deny, saying, it was the office of those Presbyters, to
attend upon the flock, that is, the company already converted, but that it can
never be showed, nor may reasonably be thought that it was any part of their
proper duty to labor the conversion of the residue either in city or country.
By which few words the deep wisdom of the parish-disciplinarians may easily
be sounded. 1. They conceive that churches in the first constitution of the^
when there were but a few converted, and before parishes were distinguished,
were in the same estate that now they are being fully constituted, al being
converted to the profession of the faith, and parishes distinguished, pastors
being severally assigned to certain particular ordinary set co^gregatio^s. 2.
That the flock over which they were set, was only that number of christians
already converted, and not the whole number which in those parts pertained to
God. But our Savior calls the elect not converted his sheep. John 10.
And the Lord in Corinth had much people, when but a few were as yet converted.
3. Acts 1^.10.
That their proper office was to attend them only which were already
converted, and not to labor the conversion of the rest. As though the Apostles
intended by their ministry the conversion and salvation of no more, then of
those few which at the first were converted. But for the better manifestation
of their wisdom, they shall give me leave to appose them with a few
questions. The Presbyters which the Apostles ordained, were they not ministers
of the word? Calvin confesses it; and if you should deny it, I have manifestly
proved that they were not lay, nay that there were not any lay presbyters. Were
not the presbyters many? in some places more, in some fewer, according to the
proportion of the cities, or countries where they were placed? were these many
Presbyters (who at the first were sometimes as many, as those who were besides
converted, the Apostles conueying by imposition of hands the gifts of the
spirit, on them whom they had first converted, who thereby were enabled for the
ministry, as Acts 19.6.) Were they, I say, being many, intended only to attend
that small number which at the first was converted? Did not the Apostles in
ordaining many Presbyters, when few others were converted, intend the
conversion of more then those few? and was it not their office the^ to labor
their conversion? Jf they were not to labor their conversion, how were they to
be converted? Nay if they did not labor it, how were they converted? Were all
these Presbyters pastors properly of that one flock, or was there but one who
properly was the pastor or Bishop; the rest being his assistants, as the
Presbytery? When therefore more were converted then could well assemble
together in one ordinary congregation, were not the congregations divided?
Upon this division was there a Bishop and presbytery assigned to every
several congregation, or only a Presbyter; the Bishop assisted with his
Presbytery having a general superintendencie over all, not only to attend
those who were already converted, but also to procure the conversion of the
rest; and still as people in diverse places were converted, to furnish them with
a Presbyter, and to guide and govern both them and their Presbyter after their
constitution to be a several Church, and his institution to be their
Minister. To imagine therefore that the state of the Churches and charge of the
Ministers was so the same before the division of parishes and after, that as
either before there was over one congregation a Bishop and presbytery, so
there should after to every particular congregation be assigned a Bishop and
presbytery: or after, as the proper office of the ministers appointed to their
several charges was to attend them; so before the Bishop and presbytery
should have been provided properly for that number alone which was converted,
and they should not have thought it to belong to their charge, to seek or to
labor the conversion of the residue: I say, to think this, argues the
parish-disciplinarians to be of shallow judgment, and the parish-discipline
to consist of vnd^sgested fancies.

Upon the proposition therefore and the assumption before propounded, this
conclusion notwithstanding al his cauills, does follow: Therefore the
Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, Ad. Page 5^.
were appointed not to parishes but to Dioceses.

( Sermon. sect. 3. page 18. Neither were the parishes distinguished etc. to page
19. l. 5) The second argument whereby the same assertion in these words is
proved may thus be framed: When the Churches were not divided into several
parishes nor Presbyters assigned to their several titles or cures, but werein
common to atte^d the whole flock feding them that were already converted, and
laboring the conversion of the rest, so far as they were able both in city
and country: then were not the Presbyteries appointed to parishes, but to
dioceses.

In the Apostles times the churches were not divided into several parishes,
etc.

Therefore in the Apostles times the Presbyteries were appointed not to
parishes, but to dioceses.



The proposition seems to be of necessary and evident truth: for when there
were no parishes distinguished, how could the Presbyters be assigned to
several parishes? And if they were appointed to labor the conversion of all
which belonged to God, both in city and country, how were they not appointed
to dioceses? For can he think, that all the people which belonged to God in
the city and country, and which after also were converted, belonged to one
parish? Is it not evident, that after their conversion they were divided into
many both in city and country? And what though at the very first all the
Christians in the city and country, if they had been assembled together,
would have made but a small congregation? were they therefore of one parish
before there was any parish at all? Was not the circuit of the Church, as
before has been proved, and of the Bishop and Presbyteries charge, the same
in purpose and intention at the first, when they were but a few, which it was
afterward in execution, when all were converted?

The assumption also is that which the Refuter himself holds, that there
were not in any Church many parishes in the Apostles times. Howbeit, I except
the Church of Alexandria, as after you shall hear. But though he know not how
to answer directly to either of both, yet he wrangleth with both, and as a man
confounded, yet resolved to contradict, though against the light of his
conscience, he denies the conclusion, and contradicts himself.

The proposition after his perpetual manner, he propounds connexiuely: If
the parishes were not distinguished, etc. then were not the Presbyters
appointed for parishes, etc. The force of the connection, as it infers they
were appointed to dioceses, he suppresseth, leaving out the words of greatest
force, viz. that they were appointed to labor the conversion of those that
belong to God, so far as they should be able, both in the city, and in the
countries adioining. And as it infers that they were not appointed to
parishes, he answers not: only he makes a flourish with the show of
regestion; which kind of answer best fitteth him that is at a Nonplus.
Howsoever the world goes, the consequence must be denied: that is resolved
upon, though he have nothing to oppose against it. Yes he has two things to
oppose; the first a question, What if every one of the Churches then were but
one parish? As if he should say, What if the maine question between us be
true, in that part which we hold, viz. that the Churches were parishes, and
not dioceses? Where are you then? Why, but I prove they were not parishes,
because the presbyteries were not appointed to parishes, but to dioceses. And
come you now with this question, What if they were? Yea but I will prove they
were. You will need your proofs in a fitter place. Yea but in the mean time
I disprooue your consequence. You will say something perhaps to bleare the eyes
of the simple: but you do not indeed deny, and much less do you disprooue
the consequence. The denial of the consequence were this: Though it be
supposed that parishes were not distinguished, and that the Presbyteries were
appointed for the conversion of all both in City and Country; yet it does not
follow, that they were appointed to dioceses, and not to several parishes: and
not this, nay but the Churches were each of them but one parish. This is to
deny the maine conclusion which is already proved. Yea but the proof of this
denial disprooueth your consequence. The consequent perhaps, which is the
conclusion, but the consequence it cannot, without supposing as it does not,
those things which are supposed in the proposition, thus: Though there were no
parishes, yet they were assigned to parishes: though they were appointed both
for City and Country, yet they were not appointed for dioceses. You deny
therefore, as a man amazed, the maine conclusion: the consequence of the
proposition you touch not.

But let us see how he disproueth the conclusion,. 4.
though his argument come out of time, and be here used only for a poor shift.
It may thus be framed: Such as are the French and Duch Churches here in
England, such were the Churches in the Apostles times. But the French and Duch
Churches here in England are not diocesan, but distinct parishionall
assemblies. Therefore the Churches in the Apostles times were not diocesan, but
distinct parishionall assemblies. First, I deny the proposition, not only
because the circuit of the Churches (in the Apostles intention) was not
included within a City, as of the French and Duch Churches with us; but
chiefly because the French Church (for example) in London is but one Church,
among many professing the same religion, being a certain and set number,
having a Presbytery consisting for the most part of lay men, placed among us,
not with purpose to convert either the City or Country to them, but to attend
them of their own Church; whereas contrariwise the Churches in the Apostles
times, before the division of parishes, were not each of them one among many,
but were planted among heathen people, having a Bishop and a Presbytery of
learned men placed among them, as leaven is put into the lump, with purpose to
convert the rest both in City and Country. The Church which had the Bishop and
Presbytery first placed in it, was Matrix Ecclesia, as after it was called,
begetting other Churches and spiritual Fathers for them; which being begotten
in City and Country, were all (even when the whole City and Country were
filled with her offspring) to be subordinate and subject to her, as their
mother. But no such thing can be imagined of the Duch and French Churches among
us.

As touching the assumption, I say, that the French and Duch Churches with us
are not properly parishes, nor such as the ancient parishes were, after the
first division of them, seeing the members thereof dwell in many distinct
parishes, either of them being endued with power of ecclesiastical
government, and not subordinate to another Church as members thereof, but
being entire bodies by themselves are models (as it were) of diocesan Churches,
having a Presbytery (as the Church of Geneua has) to supply the want of a
Bishop, which once Alasco.
they had, and still might have, in imitation of the ancient Christians, who
when the City where they dwelt was replenished, and the Mother Church occupied
with men of another faith, (as with Arians sometimes in Antioch and Alexandria)
as ours be with men of another Language, had a Bishop of their own in all
respects like other Bishops, saving that they held not the Mother Church, and
therefore had neither the like Clergy, nor the like revenues to maintain
them.

The second thing which he opposes, is (as I said) a show of regestion: which
he propounds with great confidence, as if he had me at no small advantage
saying, that I pull down with one hand that I set up with another. If there
were at that time no parishes, how could there be dioceses, seeing every
diocese consists of diverse distinct parishes? Thus (says he) the light will
break out, though men shut their eyes against it. You see how brag he would
seem to be. But good sir, what is this to my consequence? If there were no
parishes in the Apostles times, then the Presbyteries were not appointed to
parishes. You answer, If there were no parishes, then there were no dioceses.
To what end is this spoken? To deny my consequence, or the maine conclusion?
Assume, But you say there were no parishes, therefore there were no dioceses;
which is the contradictorie to the maine conclusion. But where do I say there
were no parishes? Not in the proposition, where it is only supposed; but in the
assumption: for that which is supposed in the antecedent of the proposition, is
positiuely set down in the assumption. Therefore when he would seem to deny
the consequence of the proposition, he does not so much as touch it. But by
taking a supposed advantage, against the Assumption, he denies the principal
conclusion.

But let us examine his argument. If there were no parishes in the Apostles
times, there were no Dioceses. This consequence I deny. For the Diocese was
the same before the Parishes were divided and after. And the circuit of the
spiritual jurisdiction intended the same before parishes were divided, with
that it was after they were divided, that is answerable to the civil. The same
circuit belonging to the Church both in the intention, before all were
converted, and in execution after all were converted, which belonged to the
civil state, Yea, but says he; every Diocese consists of distinct
Parishes. It is true after the distinction of Parishes, but not before, as a
bach of bread consists of many distinct loaves after the distinction, which
before it contained vndistinguished in the lump. A man consists of many
distinct members after they are distinguished, which at his first conception
were not distinct.

The Proposition being thus recovered out of his hands, J am now to rescue the
Assumption.. 6.
Which says that the Churches in the Apostles times were not divided into
parishes, etc. Which is to be understood, (...), as true of the most Churches.
Here I expect a direct answer. were they divided into parishes, or were they
not? If they were (as at Alexandria it seems to have been, even in the
Apostles times) then was not every Church but one parish: if they were not,
then the Presbyters were not assigned to several parishes, and so the
assumption is true. Nay, rather then the assumption shall go for current, we
will deny each Church to have been but a parish. Is it credible that any man
should be so transported with the spirit of contradiction, as that he should
not care so he may gainesay his adversaries present assertion, how shamefully
he contradicts himself? yet thus it fares with our refuter. In oppugning
the proposition he said, and labored to prove it, that each church was but
one parish, the same he says, and says again, in defending their objections,
and propounding his own only argument. And yet here, this assumptio^ must be
censured, as having no truth in it, for that it denies Parishes to have been
distinguished in the Apostles times, and the Presbyters to have been assigned
to their several titles or cures. They be his words in the conclusion of his
answer to the assumptio^. And the same he repeateth, page 71.

But let us see what he obiecteth against the assumption. First, Ad page 59.
he finds an error in it before noted, concerning the end of the Presbyters
ordination, which he says, is here repeated, and (therefore not of ignorance
by him omitted in the proposition) the which though he call an error, yet I
proved to be an evident truth, and discovered the shallownes of their
judgment, which do deny it. Besides that error, he charge the maine points
in the assumption as altogether void of truth. The points are these: 1. that
parishes were not distinguished in the apostles times 2. that Presbyters were
not then assigned to their several titles or cures: 3. that they were in
common to attend the whole flock converted. For that which is added of
laboring the conversion of the residue, etc. is the error forsooth which
before he noted. How proves he these points to be false? Thus: whom can M.D.
persuade that the Apostles would either appoint or allow of such confused
assemblies, wherein the teachers and hearers should every day so disorderly be
changed? And then puts the like case of a school, himself being worthy to
be put into a cloake-bagge. For in which of these points does this orderly and
unconfounded man, note such disorder and confusion? or was not the confused
conceit he speaks of, in his own brain? Let him call to mind what even now
he said in oppugning the proposition; that every one of the churches then, was
but one parish, which by reason of the multitude of the people had many
teachers. Do we not see the like, says he, in the French and Duch churches
here in England? and concludes, that such Parishes there were in the Apostles
times, and none but such. Tell me then, is the French or Duch Church in London
distinguished either of them into several parishes, which is the first point?
If they be, how are they but one Parish? Are their ministers, supposing them to
be as he says many, (as there were many Presbyters in the Apostles times in
each Church before the division of the parishes) are they assigned to several
titles, that is, parishes or cures? If their Church be not divided into diverse
parishes, how can their Presbyters be assigned to diverse? which is the 2.
point. Thirdly, do not their ministers communi consilio and mutuo auxilio, by
common counsel and mutual help attend their whole flock, none of them being
appointed to a several charge? And yet all this (I hope) without disorder or
confusion. That therefore which he bableth in the greatest part of the page,
concerning disorder and confusion, is wholly to be ascribed to his own
distemper and confusion.

Yea, 7.
but M.D. tells us that the Presbyters were to attend the whole flock. So
says S. Luke, Act. 20.28. What of that? if they were to attend the whole
flock in common, then were they not assigned to several parishes, which were
but parts of the flock, Act. 20.28.
to which purpose the place of the Acts was quoted. Does either of them say,
that a flock was any more then one ordinary assembly, and might not that be a
Parish as well as a Diocese? Either of whom? he had mentioned none but S.
Luke only. But let that pass. For to what purpose does he ask, whether Luke
said, that a flock was any more then one assembly? If the flock were but one
asse^bly, that which I proposed is the more confirmed. For if they were to
attend al one assembly, the^ were they not assigned to several parishes. But
yet I would have him know, that the word flock, the word ecclesia or church
which there, and the word people, which in other places is used as a word of
the same signification, is of a larger exte^t then to signify only one
assembly. The flock is that, for which Christ the good shepherd did give his
life; Ioh. 10.16.
unto which appertained the sheep which his father gave him, not only among the
Jews, but the Gentiles also. And this flock is that Church which God (meaning
Christ, Act. 20.28.
who is God) in that place of the Acts is said to have redeemed with his blood,
and that people of his which he saves from their sins. And as this is spoken
of the Church in general; so the company of them that belong to Christ, Mat.
1.21.
in any Nation, Province, Diocese, City or Parish, may be called the Flock,
the Church, the people of God. Neither do I doubt, for the reasons before
alleged, but that the flock in which those Presbyters, Act. 20. were set as
overseers, was the people belonging to God in the City of Ephesus, and the
Country adjoining, where he says, the word (...), is ordinarily used of beasts
and fowls that heard and flock together. I confess it is beyond the compass
of my reading, who never read (...), applied to fowls, but have found the word
used properly for a flock of sheep, and metaphorically for the flock of
Christ's sheep; but that flock is not one only particular congregation. For
Luke 12.32. John 10.16. as touching the word Ecclesia, which he denies to
signify any other outward company of men, then a particular congregation only,
I have already said more to confute that ignorant conceit then will be answered
in have. But hear his conclusion: Sup. cap. 1.
if my, (that is, if the word Ecclesia does not signify any other then a
particular congregation) what truth is there in his assumption, Ad page 60.
that denies parishes to be distinguished, (he would have said to have been
distinguished,) in the Apostles times, and the Presbyters to have been assigned
to their several titles or cures? This conclusion I desire may be kept in
remembrance, until as you have seen him deny it before, so you shall see him
again and again to deny it. Jn the mean time I beseech you how is it
inferred? If the word Church signify only a particular congregation, (and
such a one was that flock in which the Presbyters were set, Act. 20.28.)
therefore there is no truth in the assumption which denies the parishes to
have been distinguished, and the Presbyters assigned to their several titles
or cures. Who sees not, that the contrary is to be inferred? Jf the word
Church did signify one congregation, and was in every City but one, and if
such was the flock which the Presbyters were appointed to attend wholly and in
common, then it follows that the flock was not divided into particular
parishes, nor the Presbyters assigned to several cure^. And so the assumption
by his own inference is proved to be true.

This and thus weakly, says the refuter, has M.D. proved the point of so
great importance: And thus and thus stongly, say I, has our refuter disproued
it. Now let the judicious Reader judge, whether my weakness has not been of
sufficient force to overthrow his strength.

CHAP. V. Answering their objection, who say, that in the first two hundred
years, all the Christians in each great City, were but one particular
congregation, assembling in one place.
NOw we are to examine their proofs. And first, that which I objected for
them, and then that which the Refuter brings for himself.

( Sermon. sect. 4. page 19. Against this which has been said, they do object,
that in the first two hundred years, etc. 16 lines*) Here the refuter charge
me, that I making show of taking away what ever can be said against my
assertion, do propound but one only bare objection, whereas diverse
testimonies and reasons both from scriptures and fathers have been alleged by
others, etc. Thus makes he no conscience, either of belying me, who only
intended to answer that, which I took to be their chief objection, and had
of late been most urged: or of outfacing the truth with vaunts of diverse
testimonies and reasons, which are scarce worth the answering; blaming also me
for bringing but one reason for them, when himself after all his brags,
brings but one, and that not so strong, though you add thereto the
testimonies which he vaunteth of.

In the objection, which J bring for them, he puts such confidence, that if
he can make it good against me (whereof he doubts not, such is his tried
valor) all my labor about my Sermon will prove nothing worth. No doubt he
would appear to be some tall man, if he durst show his head. But let us hear
his dispute: for he has taken the objection out of my hands, because I did not
urge it strongly for them, obiecting no more then J knew my self able to
answer: and yet all that he adds is but loss of time in multiplying of
words.

First, he premiseth a syllogism concluding the maine question, that the
Churches in the Apostles times (he should have added as I did, and the age
following, for themselves in their question include two hundred years) were
not dioceses properly, but parishes.

If the Presbyteries and presidents thereof in the great Cities ^ere assigned
but to one particular ordinary congregation assembled together in one place:
then the Churches in the Apostles times ( and in the age following) were not
dioceses properly, but parishes. But the Presbyteries and presidents thereof in
the great Cities were assigned but to one particular ordinary congregation
assembled together in one place.

Therefore the Churches in the Apostles times ( and in the age following) were
not dioceses properly but parishes.

The consequence of the proposition is clear by that I answered a little
before, where I said that ad^cesse must needs consist of distinct congregations.

But if this proposition have no better hypothesis to support it, I may deny
it: seeing I have proved before, that there were dioceses in the first
conception of the Churches before distinction of parishes. So that the addition
of this syllogism has made his cause somewhat worse then it was before.

The assumption is th^^^r^^^d: If all the Christians in any one great City did
make but one such congregation: Ad page ^^.
then both the Presbyteries and presidents thereof were assigned but to one
congregation: he should say to one particular ordinary congregation assembled
together in one place.

But all the Christian^ in any great City ( understand in the first 200 years)
did make but one such congregation.

Therefore both the Presbyteries and presidents thereof of were assigned but to
one congregation.



The former syllogism for breuity I omitted, desiring in few words to bring
their argument to the issue, presuming that any man might from my conclusion
deduce the maine question, after this manner: They were provided but for one
particular ordinary congregation assemb^ing together in one place.

Therefore not for a diocese.



The second which contains the issue, I propounded as forcibly as he has
done. But my adversary is one of those disputers, who when the consequence of
an Enthymeme is denied, make it good by a connexiue syllogism. When as an
Enthymeme, for disputation, is by so much better then a connexiue syllogism, by
how much it is shorter: the consequence being the same with the connection of the
proposition, the antecedent all one with the assumption, and the consequent the
very same with the conclusion of the connexiue syllogism. Such disputers are
good to waste paper, and spend time.

But to the point.. 2. His consequence denied.
I deny, as before, both the consequence and the antecedent of the Enthymeme;
so now, both the proposition and the assumption of his syllogism. The proof
of the consequence he slubbereth over, for his faculty is better in denying
consequences, then in proving of them. For, says he, seeing the denial is
upon this ground, that the Prestbyters were appointed not only to take charge
of them that were converted, but also to labor the conversion of the rest,
which we have showed to be false, it will remain good notwithstanding.

But I have proved that it is an undigested fancy and rare conceit of shallow
(if not giddy) heads, which see no further then their nose end, to imagine that
the Apostles intending (as they cannot deny) the conversion of the city and
country, did place in the city a Bishop and Presbytery, to take charge only of
that small number which at the first was converted; but chiefly from hence to
infer, that every particular parish should have the like Bishop and Presbytery.
The ancient Church of God in all places understood the Apostles intent as I
expound the same. And therefore when all both in city and country, were
converted to the profession of the faith, they acknowledged the general care
and inspection over them all, to belong to that one Bishop of the city, and
themselves as I said in the Sermon, to be part of that Church: and never did,
unless it were in time of schism or heresy, set up another B. and Presbytery
within the diocese: but every congregation contented it self with a learned
Presbyter, if it could be so well provided for. And this is so manifest a
truth, that I doubt not to pronounce him void either of a sound judgment, or
good conscience, that shall deny it. This consequence therefore will never be
made good. And therefore the Refuter might have saved his labor if it were
ought worth, which he spends upon the assumption, until he had proved the
proposition.

Yea but this consequence belike might have been made stronger. For he did
wisely, says he, to dig the pit no deeper, but that he might be able to fill
it again: so could he not have done, had ^e gone as low as we do, who thus
frame our reason: All the Christians in any one great City and the towns
about it (unless there were distinct Churches in those towns) did make but
one particular ordinary congregation, assembled in one place.

Therefore both the Presbyters and Presidents thereof, were assigned but to one
congregation.



I mislike not his addition of the towns about, so he will be pleased, as he
adds them to strengthen his consequence, so not to forget (as I doubt he
will) to take them into the defense of his antecedent. But where he speaks of
his digging deeper; others as good Pioners as he, to undermine the state of
our Church, went no deepeer: and I durst not add more to their antecedent, as
he has done, lest I should make it too absurd.

But what means that parenthesis, (unless there were distinct Churches in
those towns?) I fear to be circumuented with this enclosure. Belike there
were more congregations then one in the cities and towns (as he said before
Cenchrea was a distinct Church from Corinth) and then, how shall all both in
city and country, be said to be but one congregation? Tush, we have a bush
for that gap. We will except all other congregations but that one, and so they
being excepted, all will be but one. Ridiculum caput! As if you had said, all
the congregations of Christians both in city and country were but one, unless
there were more then one. I promise you you have dug well, and have hedged
your ditch with a strong enclosure. But why had you not the like hedge or wall
rather for the city? (unless there were distinct Churches in the city) for
then all had been cockesure. This hedge for the towns, and this wall for the
city, would have sufficiently fenced the antecedent. But then the consequence
had been ridiculous: and as it is now propounded, (with this enclosure in the
antecedent) is altogether as weak as it was before. For to what purpose are
the towns added, if the parishes be excepted? And by this enclosure the
antecedent it self is bewraied of falsehood. For if there were in the city and
country more distinct Churches, or parishes, (as here is supposed) and these
all subordinate to one (as I have manifestly proved before) then all these will
make a diocese. I say therefore again, that though their antecedent were
true, yet the consequence were to be denied.

3. The Church of each city not one parishionall congregation onl^.
( Sermon. sect. 5. page 19. But the Antecedent is not only false, but also
unreasonable, and incredible, etc. 20. lines, to, one day.) The reason whereby
I disprooue the Antecedent, is by the Refuter framed after his fashion, and
propounded at large. It shall suffice to turn his proposition into an
Enthymeme; thus: He should have added, and the towns about. Ad. Page 62.
The number of the Christians in the greatest Cities was very great, (he
should have said, greater then could ordinarily meet in one assembly) the times
such for persecution, as would not permit them ordinarily to meet in great
multitudes, and the places of their meeting private and incapable of any great
multitude, (I say such multitudes:)

Therefore in the first two hundred years, all the Christians in any great
City (and the towns about, which he should have added) did make more then one
particular congregation ordinarily assembling in one place.

Did not I tell you that he would forget to add to the Cities, the Towns
about them, which he did add to his Antecedent to make the former consequence
good, but dares not add it now for fear of marring all?

But what does he answer to it, as it is? First, he cauilleth, and merely
cauilleth with the consequence, obiecting such things as he is persuaded in
his own conscience, neither were in the primitive Church, nor ought to have
been. Themselves do teach, that parishes ought to be so well compact and
trussed together, T. C. H.I.
as that all of the same Church may conveniently and ordinarily meet together;
and also that where the multitude is greater, then that all can well meet
together, they ought to divide themselves into diverse congregations. And now he
tells us of great parishes, either in the suburbs of London, or in some parts
of the land, which were at their setting out nothing so populous as now they
are: both which sorts being so mightily increased in respect of the number of
their parishioners, himself I dare say is of opinion that they ought to be
divided. And therefore ought not (but that he meant to cavil) to have
supposed the practice of the primitive Church (which he and his consorts do
always urge as a precedent for imitation) to be suitable to those instances,
which though he gives, yet he and all his partners do utterly mislike, as
swaruing from the practice of the primitive Churches. And where he says, M. D.
does mistake the matter, whiles he thinks that we hold, that all and every
of the Christians in the great Cities did, or could always meet in the same
place: he utterly mistaketh me in so conceiving (though I am not ignorant they
hold very strange things) but this J conceive you to hold, that each visible
Church was, and still ought to be a particular ordinary constant congregation
of Christians, which not only may conveniently, but also must necessarily, (if
they be not by sufficient causes hindered) assemble together ordinarily to
prayer, and to the ministry of the word and Sacraments. And I say, that in
respect of the number, or rather innumerable company of Christians (which T. C.
himself thinks to have been greater in those times then now) in respect of
the times wherein they lived, raging with persecution, and in regard of the
places, incapable of such multitudes, it is incredible, yea impossible, that
all the Christians in the greatest cities and countries about them, should make
but one particular congregation, ordinarily and constantly meeting in one
place. Neither does that further his cause, which he professes to be their
assertion, that the Christians which dwelt in and about any great City, and
were called the Church of the City, were members of one body: for not only
they, but also those that dwelt in the remotest parts of the Country (though
distinguished into many particular congregations) did not hold themselves to
be entire bodies by themselves (unless they were schismatickes or heretics)
but all members of the same outward body and visible Church, whereof the mother
Church in the city was the chief or head, by which they were denominated, and
also distinguished (as now they are) from other Churches.

4. Of the number of Christians in one City. Ad page 63.
Having thus cauilled with the consequence, he proceeds to the antecedent,
(which is the assumption of his syllogism) denying every particular branch
thereof. And first for the number: he would examine my proofs: but what
should he speak of proofs, when all I say is but upon imagination? Verily,
for ought I see, my imaginations are better reasons then your strongest
proofs. And that here appears where you weaken my imagination, J will not
say falsify it, by propounding it after your manner. But could a man professing
sincerity, so cast off all shame, as to affirm that all I say, is but upon
imagination, when of that which I say there are four proofs set down in the
Sermon? first, by comparison of the less to the greater: secondly, an instance
of Rome: thirdly, the testimony of Cornelius: fourthly, the testimony of
Tertullian. The first he propundeth thus: If the multitude of Christians at
Jerusalem within a few weeks after Christ was very great, then was it great in
such cities. But the former is true: Therefore the latter.

It is your fashion to make my consequences not to exceed the proportion of
your own imagined ability in answering them. My reason stands thus: If the
multitude of Christians at Jerusalem was very great within a few weeks after
the ascension of Christ; then in all likelihood the number of Christians in
greater cities having the like (though not always so great) means, was within
two hundred years increased so much, as to exceed the proportion of one
particular assembly, ordinarily meeting in one place.

But the former is true: Act. 2.41. Act 4 4. Act. 6.1.7.
(for at the Feast of Pentecost 3000. were converted in one day, and shortly
after their number was grown to 5000. which afterward daily and mightily
increased) therefore the latter.



In my argument (as you see) comparison is made not only between Jerusalem
and other greater Cities, but chiefly (which was omitted by the Refuter)
between the short time of a few weeks, and the continuance of 200. years. Jf
at Jerusalem, within a few weeks, the Christians were become many thousands;
how may we think they were increased before the end of 200. years, in Rome,
Alexandria, Ephesus, Antioch, and such like Cities? So that I doubt not, but
the consequence is strong enough (containing an argument from the less to the
greater) though I prove none of those four things which he would have
proved: as first, that all which were converted in Jerusalem at that time,
remained members of that Church.Which makes not against the consequence, but
rather for it, seeing those which remained not in Jerusalem, were by
persecution dispersed to other Cities, to help forward the plough of Christ
there. Secondly, that all the great Cities had the like means to that of
Jerusalem: which needs not to be proved, seeing the means which had been
used, and the miracles which had been wrought at Jerusalem, were also
effectual in other places, and are at this day, besides the like means of
their own. Thirdly, though the means were alike, that yet the effects were
answerable:which also needs not to be proved, seeing we know by the report
of the best Writers, how wonderfully and miraculously the Church was multiplied
in the greatest Cities within that time. Fourthly, that there was never any
apostasy in any of those Churches with which Paul (in his conceit) does seem
to charge them of Asia, 2. Tim. 1.15. Which exception also is frivolous, 2.
Tim. 1.15.
seeing not only the Churches of the greatest Cities, Rome, Alexandria and
Antioch, but even these seven of Asia, were famous in those times for the
profession of the faith. Thus you see, how he seeks all the corners of his
wit, to find, if it were possible, some starting hole, whereby to escape the
force of this consequence. But these points are not worth the standing on.

. 5. Page 57. and 63. Whether all in Asia made an apostasy from the faith in
Paul's time.
Only whereas now he charge, the second time, all them of Asia, with
apostasy from the faith, because S. Paul says, that all who are in Asia had
forsaken him; he must be admonished to reform his judgment. For first, Paul
speaks not of all the Christians of Asia, but only of all those Asians of
note, who had been in Rome since his imprisonment: of which number (says he)
are Phygellus and Hermogenes. Neither does he speak of an apostasy from the
faith, but of their forsaking him in his affliction, as the Disciples had
shrunk from our Savior Christ: for else, when he says in the fourth chapter
of the same epistle, In my first Apology no man stood with me, 2. Tim. 4.16.
but all ^id forsake me, we might in like manner collect, that all were
Apostares from the faith. But what kind of desertion Paul means, whereinto
those of Asia did fall, it appears by the contrary practice of Onesiphorus,
whom he commends in the same place, who often refreshed Paul, and was not
ashamed of his chain: but when he was at Rome, he was so far from shrinking
from Paul, that he most diligently sought him out and found him. The others of
Asia (of whom he complains) when they were in Rome, shrunk from him, as
being ashamed or afraid of his chain. Thus Chrysostom expounds it, that
Paul when he was apprehended, Chrysostom. in 2. Tim. 1. hom. 3.
was forsaken of his friends: (...): it is likely there were many then in Rome,
from the parts of Asia; but none, says he, stood to me, no man would know
me, all were estranged from me. Theophylact likewise: When Paul was apprehended
of Nero, he was forsaken of all the faithful in Asia. who from Asia had gone
to Rome with him. O^cumenius in like manner: When Paul was apprehended of Nero,
his friends of Asia did forsake him: for there were in Rome many of Asia which
were followers of Paul, or otherwise faithful men; but all (...), withdrew
themselves, and as we say, drew their necks out of the collar, after Nero had
laid hold on him. (...), (says he) (...): those in Asia, that is, those of
Asia. It is likely (says Theodoret) that some of those which in Asia had
believed were at Rome, but avoided the company of Paul for fear of Nero.

As for the assumption,. 6. Of the number of Christians at Jerusalem. Ad page
64.
viz. that the multitude of Christians at Jerusalem within a few weeks was
great, it makes nothing (says he) for him, or against us. Which is a strange
speech, seeing it is one of the premises whereupon the conclusion is inferred,
and which being granted, their assertion cannot be true. But here again he
tells us of the great parishes about London, saying, that they of Jerusalem
did all meet together as well as they. Which is spoken against reason, and
against sense: for first, it was not intended, that they of Jerusalem should
meet, as those of London which be of one parish, after their multitude was
increased. Secondly, neither might they (being under persecution) meet in great
multitudes, as those of London, which through Gods goodness enjoy peace and
liberty. Thirdly, neither had they such places of meeting for great multitudes.
But where I said, it was not intended, when their multitude should be great,
that they of Jerusalem should assemble together, as they who are of one parish
about London; that needs some explanation. The parishes about London, and
every where from the beginning, are each of them one among many, severed from
the rest, with purpose that all within that precinct should make an ordinary
set congregation, having one Presbyter, and not a presbytery, much less a
Bishop assigned to them: whereas contrariwise, the Church of Jerusalem,
whereunto James was appointed Bishop, assisted with a presbytery of Ministers,
was never intended to be one parish among many, but to be a mother Church,
which should by Gods blessing beget others to be severed from it in particular
assemblies, and yet to remain subordinate and subject unto it, as children to
the mother. It was never meant, neither in Jerusalem, nor in any other City,
that the Bishop and his presbytery should be set over no more but one
particular congregation; or that as more congregations should be constituted,
every one should have a Bishop and a presbytery. But they were provided for
the people of God, that either then were in the City and Country, or after
should be; which as it increased, was to be divided into several
Congregations, whereunto Presbyters severally were to be assigned; all being
members of one body, subjected to the Bishop and Presbytery of the mother
Church, which was (as it were) the head of that body.

. 7. He retorteth my argument.
The Refuter not contented thus to have cauilled with my argument, does also
threaten (as though he had wrested my weapon out of my hands) to turn the poem
of it (such is his cruelty) to the very heart of my cause. But his minaces are
but words, and his words but wind: for this is all he can say or do: If the
Christians in Jerusalem were not so many but that still they continued one
parishionall assemblis, meeting together in one place; then the Christians of
other Cities might be, and did so in like sort.

But the antecedents is crew: therefore the consequent.



Of the consequence (he says) no reasonableman can make any doubt: and so
takes it for granted, wanting reason to prove it.Me thinks there is great
reason, why I should not only doubt of it, but plainly deny it: for when he
says, At Jerusalem they were not so many etc. he should have said when; and
that still they continued, etc. he should have said how long; that being
compared with other Cities at the same time, and of the like continuance, the
reason of his consequence might appear. There be three reasons to be given,
why the Church at Jerusalem should not be at the end of one hundred or two
hundred years, so great as in other Cities. First, the persecution begun
with the martyrdom of Steven, and continued until the destruction of
Jerusalem: upon the beginning of which persecution, Act. ^.1. Romans 9.10.11.
all the faithful in Jerusalem (except the Apostles) were dispersed into other
parts. Secondly, ^he reiection of the Jews, (for the generality of them) when
the Gentiles were to be called. 3. The destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, After
which time the BB of Jerusalem were of the Gentiles, who till then had been of
the circumcision.
about the year 72. and final extirpation of the Jews out of Jerusalem by
Aelius Hadrianus about the year 137. who called it Aelia after his own name,
prohibiting any ^ew to come any more within that City. So that if it were true,
that the number of the Christians in Jerusalem within the first 200. years had
never exceeded the proportion of a parishional assembly: yet hereof it would
not follow, that the number of Christians in other Cities, should for 200.
years continue so small. No reasonable man therefore would look to have that
consequence granted him.

The Assumption also is false. 8. The church of Jerusalem not parishionall.
The Church of Jerusalem, whereof James was Bishop, never was a Parish; so far
was it from continuing so still. But as the people both in the City and Country
were under one high Priest; so was it intended, that all the Christians, both
in the City and count^y should be under the Bishop of Jerusalem, and so
continued until the destruction thereof. Afterward, because that City being
destroyed, Caesarea was made by the Romans the Metropolis of Iewry; it came to
pass (the church following the commonwealth) that the Bishop of Caesarea was
the Metropolitan. The Bishop of Jerusalem having the Bishopric of the City,
and the places adioining. Howbeit, in process of time, the Christians
honoring the place, granted the prerogative of the 4. Patriarchship to the
Bishop of Jerusalem or Aelia, Conc. Nic. c. 7.
reserving to Caesarea the Metropolis, her own dignity.

Nether is it probable, that the Church at Jerusalem after they once came to
the number of 5000 (as quickly it did, and continued with great increase until
the death of Steue^) did ordinarily meet all in one place. We read of some
Panegyricall meetings, as it were, in Salomons porch, and in the temple, such
as be the meetings at Paul's Cross, or at the Spittle; but their ordinary,
and as it were parishionall meetings, were by companies in more private places.
Nay, I say further, that the meetings either of the 12. Apostles, (who never
were intended to be members, either all, or any of them, of one parish) with
the Disciples, Act. 6.1. or of some of them with the Presbyters, and whole
assembly, Act. 15.22.26. (which places are by the refuter alleged) were not
parishionall, but rather Synodicall.

As for those other places in the Acts: some of them are ignorantly, some
absurdly alleged. In the 2. of the Acts he quoteth three places, viz. the two
first verses, 6. and 44. In the first, it is said, that when the day of
Pentecost was come, they were all with one accord in the same place. All, that
is, all the Apostles, whose mutual society, and conuersing together is noted.
So do some old Manuscrpts read, says Beza, (...), all the Apostles. For to
them alone had Christ promised, that they should be baptized, Act. 1.5.
after a few days, with the holy Ghost, and to that purpose he commanded
them to stay at Jerusalem, expecting the performance of this promise. Luke also
shows, who they were, verse 14. saying, that Peter stood with the eleven, and
the people who wondered at them, seem to in^inuate, saying, are not all these
men of Galilee? Is it not strange then, that the conuersing of the Apostles
together in one house, should be alleged as an example, yea pattern of a
parishionall assembly? Or if by all, were meant the 120. Disciples assembled
before the descending of the holy Ghost; how does it prove, either that they
were a parishionall assembly, wherein the 12. Patriarchs of Christendom were
met; or that they continued for an 100. or 200. years, so small a company as a
parishionall assembly; seeing within a few days, yea the very same day, they
grew to be many thousands?

In the 6. verse it is said, that when this voice or rumor was spread in the
streets concerning the Apostles, speaking with variety of tongues, great
multitudes of people flocked together, not of Christians (to make a
parishionall assembly,) but of all sorts to behold this wonder: whereat when
some had wondered, and some had scoffed, by Peter's sermon, 3000. of them were
converted.

In the 44. verse, Luke says, that all they which believed, were (...), and
had all things common, and sold their possessions, etc. Where (...), does
either signify they conuersed together in one place, and kept company one with
another, and so speaks not of their assemblies, for verse. 46. he speaks of
their meeting in the temple, (where they could not meet alone,) wherein
national, rather then parishionall meetings used to be assembled: or else it
signifies they were in one, that is, they were joined together in heart and
affection, as it is said Act. 4.32. which sense Calvin prefers. There
remains Act. 21.22. where the Presbyters of Jerusalem, who were with James
their Bishop, when Paul came to him, tell Paul that it cannot be avoided, but
the multitude would come together, hearing that he was come. Understanding by
the multitude, either the multitude of the people of Jerusalem, as well those
which believed not, as those which did, (for they direct him to go into the
temple, there to show himself to be an obseruer of the law) or the company of
believers only, who when they would flock together to see him, should find
him in the temple conforming himself to the law of Moses. But to the
absurdity of alleging these places, this is added, that none of them reach
any thing near the time which we speak of. For the 2. of the Acts speaks of
that which was done within a fortnight after Christ's Ascension. The 6. before
the martyrdom of Steven: the 15. above 20. years, the 21. about 15. years
before the destruction of Jerusalem, that is, almost 150. years before the
period of that time whereof we speak. And yet in Act. 21. there is mention of
I know not how many ten thousands of believing Jews; ver. 20. You see, say
they to Paul, (...), how many ten thousands there are of believing Jews, etc.

My second argument to prove,. 9. My Instance from the City of Rome.
that in some Cities the multitude of Christians did not ordinarily assemble in
one place, as one set particular congregation, is a particular instance of the
City of Rome, in these words.

( Sermon. Sect 6. Page 20. At Rome about the year 100. the Company of
Christians being much increased etc. Euaristus divided them into diverse
Parishes, etc. to Apolog. c. 37. page 21. To this instance his answer is
twofold. First, that it is but a tale of no credit, nor truth. Of no credit;
because, both the author deserves no credit, and the matter reported by him,
is unlikely and untrue. The Author, either because wrongfully he bears the
name of Damasus; or if it be Damasus himself, he is not to be credited in
reporting a matter done 300. years before his time. So that we are resolved
to deny it, let the author be who he will. Yea, but the Venetian Edition of
the Councels charge that Author (but he says not where) with disagreement
from other approved histories, (but he says not wherein.) Does he in this
particular disagree from approved histories? Or is there any reason, why he
should be suspected of forgery in this particular? In all writings of the
Romanists, which are suspected of forgery, there is something contained which
seems to be coined, or foisted in for an advantage. Now I would gladly know,
to what end they should feign this particular? serves it to magnify the
Papal supremacy, or to maintain any of their corruptions, or to contradict
their opposites in any thing which they held in former times? Nothing less.
For to begin with the last; It could not be counterfeited with purpose to
contradict any body; for, that one and the same Church, was and ought to be
divided into Parishes, and that Presbyters were and ought to be severally
appointed to them, never any man that J have read or heard of, denied before T.
C. Not Calvin, nor Beza, nor any other favorer of the pretended Discipline
before him. Likewise, that which is reported, was a godly and necessary act,
which had been practiced long before this in Alexandria (though I knew not so
much when I made the Sermon, but you shall hear of it in due place) which also
was practiced upon the like occasion in all the Churches of the world: that is
to say, when the number of Christians was so increased, that they could not all
conveniently meet in one place; they were by their B. divided into diverse
assemblies. Was not this done in all Churches whatsoever yea ought it not to
have been done? In Rome it was done, long before the time of Damasus (for
before his time there were above 40. parish Churches built in Rome) and no
doubt but it had a beginning, and a beginner; which, if it were not Euaristus,
let it be showed who it was. It was done, as J will straight ways note, before
Tertullians time, who flourished about the year 180. And therefore if not by
Euaristus, the^ by one of the other ancient BB. within the compass of the
limited time, who were godly BB. and famous Martyrs.

That it was Euaristus his act (to let pass Damasus, and the volumes of the
councils which report it out of him, Platina, Onuphrius before cited, and
Sabelliciu testifying the same: Ennead. 7. l. 4.
) others as opposite to Popery as our refuter, have believed, and accordingly
reported. John Bale reports of Euaristus, that he shining with the grace of
God, even in the time of persecution increased the number of the sacred
assemblies of Christians. De viti^ R. po^tif. in Euaristo.
Likewise Robert Barnes that famous Martyr says, Presbyteris Rome, titulos
distribuit: He distributed the titles or parishes to the Presbyters. To these
I might add the testimony of a Protestant writer, who for 30. De vitis po^tif.
years together studiously labored in penning a Chronology (though it be not
printed) wherein among other things he reports of Euaristus (who as he notes
was made Bishop of Rome in the year 99. Will. Harison Prebendary of Windsore.
) that he brought the places of the assemblies of the Christian brethren in
Rome unto 7* congregations* and appointed to each of them several pastors and
teachers, that they might by such means remain more secret, live in better
security, and hear the word with more ease and profit, then otherwise they
could (considering the iniquity of the time) if they did meet in greater
numbers.

As touching the matter, he says. 1. it is unlikely that the Presbyters
attended the flock promiscuously,. 10.
and the people met in diverse places uncertainly: and yet that which he
excepteth against as the matter, is not so much as material. The question is,
whether Euaristus divided the Church of Rome into diverse several
congregations, and assigned several Presbyters to them, as Damasus reports.
But whether the Presbyters before attended them promiscuously, or the people
met uncertainly, that is not the question. But seeing he is pleased to except
against those words which are not in Damasus, but Onuphrius and my self added
as a reason of Euaristus his act; let him also be pleased to answer me, whether
the whole Christian people of Rome in the city, suburbs and country adjoining,
did usually and ordinarily meet together in one assembly throghout the whole
term of 200. years; or in diverse assemblies, as they could most conveniently.
If they always or most usually met together; then, whether always in one
certain place, or in diverse uncertainly and occasionally. The former himself
denies. If the latter, then the Presbyters had not charge of them severally,
but of them al promiscuously: then also the people met uncertainly. If they did
not ordinarily meet all together, but in diverse assemblies (which is the truth)
then, whether were the several meetings set and certain, and several
Presbyters appointed to them: or were the meetings and Presbyters for the
instructing of those assemblies, appointed uncertainly, as occasion and
opportunity served. If the latter, which seems to have been the use before
Euaristus his time: then that is true, which he excepteth against. If the
former, which was brought to pass by Euaristus, then the maine assertion which
he oppugneth, is true.

Secondly, he would prove it to be false, and that by 2. testimonies, the
former of Justin Martyr, an. 142. Who directly affirms of the Church of Rome
in special (as in general of all other Churches) that they used upon the
sabbath day all to assemble together in one place. Ad. Page 65. Just. Mar^.
Apolog. 2.
His words are these: On the sunday as it is called, all the Christians
dwelling in the cities, or abroad in the countries, do come together in the
same place. He speaks not of the Church of Rome in special, but of the
practice of all Christians in general. Is therefore the word all to be taken
collectiue, or distributive? if in the former sense, then his meaning should be
that all Christians in the world, whether they dwelt in cities or countries,
did on the Lords day meet in one place; which is absurd. If the latter, then he
means all them distributiuely, who, whether they lived in the cities or
countries, belonged to one congregation. As if one of us speaking of the
custom of our times should say, (...), on Sunday so called, there is a coming
together of all into one place who do dwell in the cities or the countries:
that is, all in every place that belong to the same congregations. And that it
is so to be understood, it appears by the word (...) Cities, propounded in
the plural number. For his meaning never was, that the people of diverse cities
did meet ordinarily together: and the note of disiu^ction ^ or, added to the
word (...) cuntry, does signify that those of the country did not al meet with
the^ of the City; for then he would have said (...): but that al did meet in
their several congregations, whether they lived in the cities or countries.

His other testimony is of Platina,. 11. Plat. de vit. pontif. in Dionysio.
affirming that Dionysius about 160. years after Euaristus, did first divide
and set (out) parishes, and therefore he refers him and Damasus to
Onuphrius to be reconciled. But well may this refuter with shame enough hide
his head, who shameth not so often to falsify the authors which he quoteth.
This is that which Platina reports of Dionysius, that he being made B.
straightwaies divided the Churches and coemiteries (which were the places of
christian meetings) in the city of Rome to the presbyters: Presbyteris ecclesi^
et coemiteria in vrbe Roma statim diuisit.
but he says not that he first did it; neither was it his mening: for he had
said the same before of Euaristus. Abroad also, says he, in the country, he
distributed parishes and dioceses (so country parishes are called) to the end
that every one should be content with his bounds and limits. Agreeable hereunto
is the report of Dionysius himself (if it be himself) in his epistle to Seueru^
the B. of Corduba. Dionys. epist. ad Seueri^.
For whereas Seuerus had asked his direction, what course was to be taken
concerning parish churches throghout the province of Corduba: he wishes him to
follow that, which he had lately done in the church of Rome, ecclesias vero
singulas, singulis presbyteris dedimus, several Churches we assigned to several
presbyters, and divided to the^ the churches and coemiteries, and ordained that
every one should have his proper right, in such sort as that none may invade the
lands, bounds or right of another parish, but that every one should be content
with his own bounds, and so keep his church and people committed to him,
that before the tribunal of the eternal Judge he may give an account of all
committed to him, and may receive glory and not judgment for his deeds.

De episcopat. et titul. etc.
Now these reports are easily reconciled, with the before cited testimony of
Damasus. For, as Onuphrius also has observed, Euaristus first divided the
parishes to the presbyters, the number whereof by Hyginus not long after was
augme^ted an. 138 After who^ nothing was altered until the time of Dionysius:
an. 260. who increased the number of the parishes, which afterward were
multiplied by Marcellus, about the year 305 etc. Besides, though Euaristus
first divided the parishes in Rome; yet Dionysius might be the first that set
out the country parishes. Which distinction, if it will salve their credits, who
have said that Dionysius first divided parishes, I will not be against it. His
2. answer is, that if Euaristus did any such thing, he divided the titles to
only governing elders etc. A likely matter. For the titles were the sacrae
aedes, the places of metings unto Gods worship, in which the Presbyters, or as
Dionysius calls the^, sacerdotes the Priests, were ordained to feed the
people committed to them, with the ministry of the word and sacraments, and
go before them in the worship of God. But of lay elders I have sufficiently
spoken before, if any thing will suffice, to persuade men, that there never were
any such in the church of God.

. 12. The testimony of Cornelius.

Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43


My 3. proof, is the testimony of Cornelius the B. of Rome: who, as he says,
there were 46. Presbyters at that time in the Church of Rome, and 108 others of
the clergy, and 1500. poor people maintained al of them by the contributio^ of
christians: so he calls the Christian people in Rome (...), a very great and
innumerable people. Did the B. and 154. clergy men attend one parishionall
assembly only? was there 1500. poor christians, besides 154 of the clergy,
together with the B. maintained of one parishional congregation? was an
innumerable people, the people of one particular ordinary congregation
assembling in one place? This testimony, says our refuter, is quite besides
the purpose, a fifth part (meaning 50. years beyond the time we speak of. The
limitatio^ of the time, whereto they have co^fined the primitive church was
devised for a poor shift, because they knew there was not the like evidence for
the 2. century, as for the 3. Otherwise, what reason can be re^dred, why there
should be diverse parishes under one B. in the year 250. if it were not so in
the year 200? especially, seeing they, which of purpose have written of these
things, do profess that there was no difference in the number of the parishes
in that time, and 10. years after. What reason can be given, why the christian
people which was innumerable in the year 250. should have been in the year
200. the people of one particular parish? especially, seeing good authors
before the year 200, do acknowledge as much as if they had said, that then
they were innumerable.

To which purpose in the 4 place I quoted Tertullian, The testimony of
Tertullian.
whom J needed not, if we will believe the refuter, to have cited, seeing (says
he) he speaks vnlimitedly of the christians in the Roman Empire, and says
nothing herein that w^e deny, nor ought for M.D. profit. By his good leave
therefore, I will recite the words. For after that he had professed that
christians then (contrary to the judgment and practice of the Papists now)
thought it unlawful for them to avenge themselves on their persecutors,
Tertul. apol. c. 37.
he says: For if we should show our selves to be open enemies and not secret
auengers, should we want either number or strength? we are aliants from you, et
vestra omnia implenimus, and we have filled al places that are yours, cities,
Islands, Castles, towns, assemblies etc. only your temples we leave unto you.
If we should but depart away from you, the loss of so many citizens would
amaze you. Without doubt you would be astonished ad solitudine^ nostra^ at the
solitarines which our abse^ce would make, you would seek the relics of a dead
city, wherein you might rule, more enemies then citizens would remain unto you;
but now you have the fewer enemies by reason of the multitude of Christians,
pene (...) ci^ium, being almost all citizens, pene omnes ciues Christianos
habendo, by having almost al your Citizens Christians. Let the Reader judge
what the number of Christians were in those times, and whether Tertullian does
not speak chiefly of the city of Rome; and let him consider whether almost all
the citizens of Rome (of whom ordinarily there were diverse hundred thousands)
besides christian strangers, servants, and the female sex, were like to be the
people of one parish.

Ad Scapulam.
The same author speaking to the same purpose in another place, says, it may be
sufficiently manifest unto you that we deal according to the doctrine of
divine patience Seeing we being so great a multitude of men, even the greatest
part almost of every city, do carry our selves in silence and modesty.

And so much concerning the multitude of the people.

13: The time and place.
( Sermon sect. 7. p. 21. Ad to the multitude of the people, the consideration of
the times, raging for the most part with persecution etc. to the end of the 2.
point.) As touching the times, the refuter answers, that how furiously soever
the times raged with persecution: yet the christian people did usually assemble
together. Whereof I doubt not But the question is, whether in diverse
congregations, as I say, and as it is most evident; or altogether in one place,
which is altogether incredible. As for the places, wherein the christians in the
first 200. years used to assemble, especially in time of persecution; whereas
I say they were private houses, vaults and secret places not capable of such
multitudes, as have bin spoken of; for refuge he flies to the v^lts and holes,
as he calls the^, which he supposes were capable of great multitudes, but
omitteth private houses, and other small rooms turned to this use. And whereas
J say they were not capable of such multitudes, as were the whole companies of
Christians in the greatest cities, proved before to have bin in a manner
innumerable, he only says great multitudes. But what we are to conceive of
this point, let us enquire of Hospinian a Protestant writer, De origin.
templor. c. 6.
who has traveled in this argument. He therefore says, in the time of the
Apostles, and some while after, the places of meetings which Christians had,
were simple houses, neither were they permitted by the cruelty of tyrants, and
rage of the people, to build, I say not magnificent, but not mean Temples. The
places therefore of public meetings in those times were base, more like dens
and secret corners, then magnificall Temples, as Eusebius ^estifieth. And
Tertullian plainly affirms, that in his time the Christians had no other
temples but simple houses. Lib. 5. de invent. c. 6.
Polydor Virgil testifies, that the Christians were so far from having any
temple built in these times, that all was secret, and their places of meeting
were chapels, and those hidden and for the most part under the ground, rather
then in open and public places. De orig. err^rum. lib. 1. c. 21.
Bullinger likewise says, that the ancient Christians under Constantine the
Great, were wont under the quire of the temples to build crypta^, vaults, in
memory of the persecutions, whereby the Christians under the Emperors before
Constantine, were not suffered sometimes to come abroad; and therefore they were
forced to hold their assemblies, and perform the sacred exercises in secret,
sometimes in dens and other privy places.

But, says the Refuter, Let them be as little as he would make them, yet it
does not follow hereof, that the Churches in the Cities alone, contained many
particular congregations or parishes. Ad page 66.
To which purpose again, he alleges his chapels of ease for a mere evasion,
seeing himself is persuaded there was none such in those times. And where he
says, that although there were diverse places of meeting in those times, yet
all appertained to one congregation; I confess it to be true: for even after
the distinction of parishes both in city and country, all of them belonged to
one Church, as members of the same body. Yea but, says he, if there were many
particular congregations in every city, how chances it, he told us before,
that the parishes were not distinguished? Distinguish the times, and the
answer is easy. In the first hundred years, though Christians met in diverse
places, as they could; yet neither, were there in the most cities certain set
places of meeting, nor certain Presbyters assigned to them, as to their
perpetual and peculiar charge. But at the end of the first hundred years,
Euaristus divided to several Presbyters in Rome, titles, that is, the set
places of meetings, which we call parish Churches, whereof they were entitled,
and called the Presbyters of such and such a title or parish.

And thus have J maintained my arguments and answers against his cauils. Now am
I to defend my assertion against his proofs.

CHAP. VI. Answering the Refuters arguments.
ANd first, because you shall know what he means to conclude, he propounds
the question; which is, says he, whether in the Apostles times and the age
following, that is, the first two hundred years, the visible Churches endued
with power of ecclesiastical government, were parishes or no. In which
question, seeing he and his consorts restrain the times of the primitive
Church to the first two hundred years; the Reader will I hope expect, that he
should conclude, that for this whole term at the least, the churches were each
of them but a parish, and that in all this time there were no dioceses.

His argumentation contains two ranckes of instances: the former taken out of
the scriptures; the latter out of the Fathers. The former he concludes thus:
The Refuters first argument.
If the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus and Antioch (being visible Churches endued
with power of ecclesiastical government) were each of them but one parish (
understand for the whole term of 200. years) then the other visible Churches
(...) with the like power, were also each of them ( during the same term) but
one parish.

But the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus and Antioch, (being visible Churches
endued with power of ecclesiastical government) were each of them but one
parish ( for the first 200. years.

Therefore the other visible Churches endued with the like power, were also (
for the like term) each of them but one parish.



The proposition I will be content to yield to my adversary, so it may be
lawful for me to use the like: for then I would conclude thus: If the Churches
of Alexandria and Rome were not parishionall Churches in the first 200. years,
neither were the Churches of other Cities.

But the antecedent is true: therefore the consequent.

The consequence is the same with his, and grounded on the same hypothesis:
viz. that all Churches endued with power of ecclesiastical government, were at
the first of the same nature and constitution.

The former part of the assumption, concerning Alexandria, I will manifestly
prove when I come to the third point, concerning Diocesans: viz. that it was
not one parish, but contained diverse parishes, even in the first 100. years.
Concerning Rome, I have proved already, that within the first 200. years it
was divided into many parishes: and therefore although there be not so good
evidence for other Cities in particular, yet the like is to be concluded of
them, seeing they were all of the same constitution.

Passing by therefore his proposition, I take hold of his assumption, and do
plainly deny, the Churches he speaks of, or any other, which had a Bishop
and Presbytery, to have been for the first two hundred years, no more but
parishes: for J doubt not, but it is easier to prove that within this term,
not only the Presbyters and people in the said dioceses, but also the Bishops
in the same Provinces, were subject to the Bishops of these three Cities. For
as it is evident of Antioch, by the testimony of Ignatius, who calls
himself the Bishop of Syria; so no reason can be alleged why the Bishops of
Ephesus and Corinth, who in the third centurie, and in the ages following, were
Metropolitans, were not so in the second; or if they were Metropolitans in the
third, and in the ages following, (as most certainly they were) why they
should not have been Diocesans at the least in the second.

The assumption ( he says) appears plain by the proof of the particulars.
2. Whether the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Antioch were each of them but
a parish.
But what does he prove of the particulars? Are his syllogismes so soon come
to an end? His chief proofs be, that in the Apostle Paul's time each of them
used to assemble in one Congregation. Was this your assumption? You that are so
strict in exacting syllogismes and direct proofs, should not have sought to
carry away the matter, as it were, in the clouds. Yea but that which he
proves, does prove the assumption. That shall thus be tried by his own
form of argumentation: If those Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Antioch, in
the Apostle Paul's time, were each of them no more then ordinarily assembled in
one place, then were they for the first 200. years each of them but one parish.

But the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Antioch, in the Apostle Paul's time,
were each of them no more then ordinarily assembled in one place. Therefore for
the first 200. years they were each of them but one parish.



The proposition is omitted by the disputer, as taken for granted: but therein
he has played the sophister; for he that means truly, does not use to omit
any part of his argument, but that which is certain, or confessed. But the
consequence of this proposition is worse then naught: for if he had only said
thus, If in the Apostles times they were each of them but one Congregation,
therefore for 200. years they were so; the consequence had been stark
naught: or if he had only said, If in the Apostles time they were each but one
Congregation, then were they each one parish; that consequence also had been
naught: but when he says, If in the Apostles times each was but one
Congregation, therefore for 200. years each of them was but a parish; that
consequence is, as I said, worse then naught.

That the first of the two consequences is naught, it is evident: for though at
the first conversion of any great City, and for a while after, the number
usually was so small, that they might have assembled in one place; yet it is
certain, that within 200. years, their number was grown to be almost
innumerable, as has been showed, and therefore too great to make one
ordinary congregation. This one exception (if no more should be added)
ouerturneth all his dispute.

As touching the second: though it should be granted, that each of these
Churches in the Apostles time, did ordinarily assemble together in one place;
yet would it not follow, that therefore each of them was but a parish; and much
less (which is the end of all this disputation) that all Churches endued with
ecclesiastical power should be but parishes; and consequently, that every
parish should have a Bishop and presbytery. The reasons of my denial of these
consequences I have before set down at large, Chap. 3. 5. and 6. and therefore
this disputation I have sufficiently overthrown already. For a surplussage I
add these two reasons:

First, If these Churches, because they were each of them but one Congregation,
were parishes before the division of parishes; then were they such Churches, as
after the division, parishes were. This consequence may not be denied,
especially by them who would have all parishes framed to the constitution of
the first Churches. But they were not such: for the parishes, after their
division, had not a Bishop and presbytery, but only a Presbyter assigned to
them: neither was the Pastor thereof superintendent over others, neither was
any of them intended to be a mother Church. Secondly, if that assumption was
false which denied parishes to have been distinguished in the Apostles times,
then these Churches were not only many congregations, but many parishes also.
Page 60.
But he said before, that that assumption had no truth in it. These two just
exceptions I have against his consequence. If against the former it be
objected, that some of his testimonies do seem to prove, that after the
Apostles times these Churches were each of them but one congregation: I answer,
that his maine argument and proofs thereof, do speak of the Apostles time.
Those which are extended further, shall be further examined.

3. Whether the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Antioch, were each but one
congregation. His proof out of Scripture.
Now I come to his assumption; for though I do not deny, but that at the
first, and namely in the time of the Apostle Paul, the most of the Churches so
soon after their conversion, did not each of them exceed the proportion of a
populous congregation; yet I cannot yield to all his proofs. His proofs be
either allegation of Scriptures, or other testimonies.

His Scriptures for Corinth, are out of the first epistle to the Corinthians,
and Romans ^6.1. for Ephesus, Act. 20.28. for Antioch, Act. 14.27. Now let us
consider the date of his testimonies, and then what is testified in them.

The date of them is ancienter then Paul his going to Rome, which was in the
year 5^. or ^6. Which I do note, to show to what time his proposition is to
be restrained: as if he had said, In respect of Antioch he might have said
45.
If before the year 55. or ^6. they were but one congregation, then they were
no more until the year 200.

The thing that is testified for Corinth, 1. Cor 11. is such, as might be
written to the Church of England, as verse 18. Corinth was situated in Isthmo,
between two seas, having on either side a port, the one Cenchreae, serving
more properly for Asia; the other Lechaeum, serving for Italy and other parts
of Europe: Strab. l. 8. Ad page 67.
When you come into the Church, I bear there be schism^s among you: verse. 20.
When you come together in the same place, this is not to eat the Supper of the
Lord: verse. 33. When you come together to eat, expect one another. Romans 16.
There is mention of the Church of Cenchreae, whereof mention has been made
now thrice, to no purpose, unless it be against himself: for if C^nchreae
were a parish subordinate to the Church of Corinth, as most certainly it was,
it self having not a Bishop or presbytery, but a Presbyter assigned to it;
this will proo^e, that the mother Church of Corinth was diocesan, (as all
Cathedral Churches be) and that parishes distinguished from the Cathedral,
as children from the mother, were such as that of Cenchreae.

That which is testified for Ephesus, Act. 20.28. is such as upon like occasion
might by all. in his visitation be applied to a^^ the ministers of a diocese;
that they should attend the stock, etc. For must the word stock, which may be
extended, either to the universal, or national, or provincial, or diocesan
Church; must it needs signify only the congregation of a Parish? and yet he,
that breathes nothing but novelties, says it is a new conceit, to suppose a
Diocesan flock. But this calumny of nouelty I have by plentiful testimonies
of antiquity (before cited) wiped clean away.

As touching Act. 14.27. cited for Antioch; where it is said, that Paul and
Barnabas gathered together the Church, to relate unto them, what God had done
by them, since they had laid their hands upon them, and had commended them to
the grace of God: it is apparent; that not all the Church consisting of
husbands, and wives, their children and servants, but some of the chief and
principal, perhaps not many, perhaps not any, besides those of the Clergy,
were called to that meeting.

These were his proofs out of the Scripture. 4. His testimonies out of humane
writings.
His other testimonies are out of Eusebius, Ignatius, and some of our own
Writers, all which testimonies are scarce worth the mentioning. Eusebius
calls the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus and Antioch (...). Of the ancient use
of this word, sometimes signifying the whole Diocese, sometimes the whole City
and Suburbs, I have spoken sufficiently heretofore, as also of that which he
obiecteth, concerning the Parish in Ephesus. Whereto I add, that Eusebius, as
he used the preposition (...), so sometimes (...) to the same purpose.

Ignatius writing to the Church of Ephesus Ignat. ad Ephesians.
, the multitude whereof he calls (...) (as if he had of purpose noted it to
be a Church consisting of many multitudes or congregations) exhorts them, as
one might in like manner the faithful in London, (though divided into many
congregations) to come often together to (...).
give thanks and glory to God: for when you come often together into one place,
the power of Satan is weakened, etc.

His other testimony out of Ignatius, is out of his Epistle to Hero, where he
calls the Church of Antioch (...), the Synagogue, that is, the church or
congregation of the Lord. The word being used in the same signification with
Ecclesia, whereof I spoke before. But whether Ignatius were Bishop only of one
Congregation, or parish, let his own words testify. Remember me says he,
Epist. ad Magnes.
(in his Epistle to the Magnesians) in your prayers, and the Church which is in
Syria, whereof I am not worthy to be called the Bishop. And in the Epistle to
the Romans toward the latter end Igna. ad To.
, Remember in your prayer the Church in Syria, the which, in stead of me, has
the Lord to be her pastor, who says I am the good shepherd. Or, if these
words be not plain enough, he calls himself in the Ad Romans
same Epistle, (...), the Bishop of Syria. Now let my adversary tell me, what
manner of Parish Syria was. And let me hear also, what he can object against
these two Epistles of Ignatius to the Magnesians, and Romans. For even they
P^rk. problem.
, which suspect his Epistle to Her^, which the refuter cites, and four
others, acknowledge these two to be no bastards Eusebius Eusebius. l. 3. c. 35.36.
mentions both. And that to the Romans, he not only mentions, but also
cites a good part thereof.

Thus leaving that most pregnant, and authentic evidence of Ignatius to my
adversary to muse upon; J come to his testimonies of our new writers, all which
(excepting two testimonies of Tindall) he most childishly alleges, to prove,
that the Churches of Ephesus, and of other the like Cities, were each of them
but a Parish; because they call a Church a Congregation; using the word
Congregation in as ample sense, as before I proved the word Ecclesia (whereof
that is the English) to be used. The ancient English Bibles, never almost use
the word church; but in stead thereof do use the word congregation, not only
where is mention of particular Churches, but of the universal or catholic
Church. As Mat. 16. Upon this rock I will build my congregation. Ephesians. 1. He
has made him head of the Congregation, which is his body. Ephesians. 5. Ye husbands
love your wives as Christ loved the congregation. And so in the Communion
Book, both in the Prayers and translation there used. As in the Prayer for the
King, before the Epistle; have mercy on the whole congregation. In the
solemnization of Matrimony, out of Ephesians. 5. I speak of Christ and the
Congregation.

But you shall hear his particulars; First Tindall translateth the word
Ecclesia by congregation: thus, to the angel of the congregation of Ephesus,
etc. 2. John Bale translateth and expounds the word Candlestick and Church,
by Congregation.

The reasons why the first Translaters of the Bible into English in these
latter times did avoid the name Church, and instead thereof used Congregation,
do seem to have been these two. The first, because Church or Kyrk, being
derived from the Greek (...), or, (...), does more properly signify the place
of meeting, then the congregation it self, which is meant by ecclesia: and
therefore the word Congregation thought to be the fitter translation. The
second, because the Papists had abused the word Church, whether it were
generally used, to signify the Romish Church; or particularly, to import the
Romish clergy. So says Tindal; Because the clergy had appropriated to
themselves the name Church, Tindal. page 250.
therefore I translated the word Ecclesia, by this word Congregation. For when
the people understood, that by Church was meant the company of men professing
the faith of Christ, the name Church is every where used, as the translation of
ecclesia.

Thirdly, Yea, but D. Fulke justifying the translation of Ecclesia, Ephesians. 5.23.
by congregation, argues plainly, that he held the Church of Ephesus to
consist but of one particular congregation only. Which allegation shows
extreme want, either of judgment, or honesty: for what church or congregation
is there mentioned? the Church of Ephesus, or the universal Church of Christ?
when it is said, as Christ is the head of the Church? Upon which words, when
the Rhemists had noted it as a corruption of the first English Bibles, which
did not use the word Church, but congregation in stead thereof. D. Fulke
answers; D. Fulk. in Ephesians. 5. ^. 2.
that the Translator rather used the word Congregation then Church, to avoid
ambiguity, because this word Church is commonly taken for the house of the
assembly of Christians: and that the people might know, that the Church is a
gathering together of all the members into one body, which in the name of church
does not appear. But after the people were taught to distinguish of the word
Church, and to understand it for the mystical body of Christ, the latter
translations used that term; not that the other was any corruption; or the
latter, any correction; but to declare, that both is one. Is it not plain,
that he by congregation understands the universal Church, which is a
gathering together of all the members into one body, but of the Church of
Ephesus speaks never a word?

Ad page 68.
In the 4. place the notes of M. Perkins sermons on the Apocalypse, taken from
his mouth, are alleged* wherein it is said, that the seven Churches were
particular congregations, meaning thereby (that which I do not deny)
particular churches, and that every particular congregation is a Church, and
has privileges of a Church belonging to it, which is also true.

Fifthly, the great Church Bible reads thus; John to the seven Congregations.
Lastly, D. Bilson says, that the church is never taken in the old or new
Testament for the Priests alone, but for the congregation of the faithful.
From which allegations to infer, that each church is but one particular
congregation, is (as I said) most childish.

But those 2. out of Tindall, the one, that a Bishop was the governor but of
one congregation: Tindal. page 135.250.
the other, that he was the ouerseer but of a Parish, to preach the word to a
parish: was not a childish mistaking, but a wilful misalleadging of the
Author, who in the former place has no such thing. Or if he have any where,
he uses the word Congregation in as large a sense as Ecclesia, whereof it is
the translation. In the latter, speaking of such a Bishop as is described, 1.
Tim. 3. that is, of such a one as (in his conceit) was but a Presbyter; he
says, by the authority of the gospel, they that preach the word of God in
every Parish, and (perform) other necessary ministeries, have right to
challenge an honest living: Vid. infr lib. 4. c. 7. 9.
Neither is the Refuter content once to have falsified the testimony of this
holy Martyr; but again in the end of his book he alleges him to the same
purpose.

After he has thus doughtily proved his Assumption concerning these 3.
Churches, 5. His second rank of instances.
he brings a new supply of testimonies out of Ignatius, Tertullian, and
Eusebius concerning others. Ignatius exhorts the Magnesians, Ignat. ad Magnes.
that they would all come together into one place to prayer; all, as with us,
that belonged to the same congregation. And persuading the Philadelphians to
unity, Ad Philadelph.
exhorts them, that they would use one faith, one preaching, one eucharist,
because the body of Christ is one, and his blood one, one cup, and one bread,
one Altar for the whole Church, and one Bishop with the Presbytery and Deacons:
for there is but one God the Father, etc. one faith, one baptism, and one
Church, which the Apostles have founded from one end of the world to another,
etc. In which words, none favors the Refuters conceit, but that of one altar
serving for the whole Church: the word Altar being expounded for the Communion
Table, which is not likely, and too much sauoureth of popery. But by one altar,
is meant Christ, who sanctifies all our sacrifices or oblations, and makes
them acceptable to God: as Ignatius expounds himself in his Epistle to the
Magnesians; all as one, run together into the Temple of God, (...), unto one
Jesus Christ as it were unto one altar. Ignat. ad Magnes.
But that which he alleges out of the same Epistle, that they were to gather
themselves together into one place to choose their Bishop: Ad Philadelph.
if it were rightly alleged, would prove, not their ordinary and parishionall,
but extraordinary and panegyricall meeting to such an end: but this needed not:
their Bishop at this time was come to Ignatius in his iourny toward Rome, as
appears by the beginning of the Epistle, as it were upon an honorable
embassage from the Church, as were the BB. of other Churches. But he says, it
becomes you as being a Church of God, to do as other Churches have done; that
is, as he shows in the words following, to appoint a Bishop, that he may
(...) Antioch perform the ^mbassage of God, that it may be granted to them
being gathered together into one place, to glorify the name of God From whence
also the Re^uter gathers, that a Bishop is Gods Ambassador to a people that
are together in one place. Which is true, so often as he preaches. But Ignatius
means nothing less, then that they should appoint the Bishop of Antioch; but
only wills them to send a Bishop, as it were upon embassage thither. Ignat.
ad S^yrn.
His meaning is more plainly expressed in his Epistle to the S^yrneans, where
he writes to the same purpose, that seeing the Church of Antioch after his
departure had some peace, (the persecutors contenting themselves to have taken
him who was their ringleader from among them) he exhorts them to ordain
(...), a sacred Ambassador, who when he should come into Syria, should rejoice
with them, because they had peace.

Tertull. apolog. c. 39.
Tertull^^^ also is made to speak for them, as though he said the Christian
Churches were all one body, and came all together into a company and
congregation. By which testimony, if it were truly alleged, all Christian
Churches, as they are one body of Christ, so all should meet together to make
one parish. His words be these: I will now set forth the practices of the
Christian party: That having refuted the evils (objected) I may declare the
good. We are a body consenting in the knowledge of religion, in the truth of
discipline or doctrine, and the covenant of hope: We come together into a
company and congregation. Which words may be verified of the Christians of
these times, which in every Church are divided into several congregations.

Eusebius.
Out of Eusebius he has nothing to allege, but that which before I came to
his arguments I sufficiently answered; that he calls the Church of Jerusalem
the parish of Jerusalem, the Church of Alexandria, the parish of Alexandria,
etc.

To which J answer, that Eusebius indeed calls each of the Churches by the
name (...), but he calls none of them a parish, as we understand the word
parish. In the place which he quoteth concerning Jerusalem, Eusebius says,
Eus. l. 3. c. 11.
that after the martyrdom of James (who no doubt from an Apostle, had been
preferred to be a parish Bishop, because he was Christ's kinsman) the Apostles
and disciples of Christ, which yet remained, did from all places come together,
with those who were of Christ's kindred, to consult, whom they might think
worthy to be James his successor; and that with one consent they made chuce of
Simeon the son of Cleophas, as worthy the throne of that (...), that is,
Church, because he also was our Saviors kinsman. All this was done (no doubt)
in a parish meeting, to set a parish B. in his throne. In which throne of
James, reserved, as Eusebius says, till his time, the BB. of Jerusalem, having
the honor of Patriarchs, did succeed.

As touching Alexandria, it is evident by that which before has been showed,
that Eusebius speaking of the Bishop there, calls him sometime the Bishop of
the Church or paroecia, sometimes of the Churches or paroeciae, belonging to
Alexandria, and all in one and the same sense: which plainly shows, that by
(...), he does not mean that which we call a parish. Which will then better
appear, when I shall prove that from Saint Marks time, there were more
Churches or parishes there, and yet but one Church and one Bishop.

But suppose it were granted him, that each of the Churches for a time did not
exceed for their number, the proportion of an ordinary congregation; yet this
would not prove them to have been parishes, as has been showed.

Thus and thus weakly, to use his own words, the Disputer having proved his
cause, notwithstanding concludes with a stout brag.Now let any man, judge
whether M.D. has better proved, that the Churches in those times were
dioceses, or I, that they were parishes. So say I, let any man now judge, who
is of judgment; and if there be any comparison between the plain evidence
which I have brought, and his slender proofs, let me be taken for a man of no
judgment.

6. The Refuter obiecteth that we have no diocesan, because we have two
provincial Churches.
Yea but (says he) the worst is still behind: for his cause indeed, but to
mine, advantage. For if there were not only diocesan, but also provincial
Churches, and that within the first two hundred years; then is it absurd to
imagine, that there were no Churches, but parishional. Neither did, or does the
being of provincial Churches, hinder dioceses, or diocesan BB. These be the
shallow conceits of this disputer, and his fellow challengers of disputation:
First, that every visible Church has a sufficient and independent authority,
immediately derived from Christ, for the gouer^^ent of it self in all causes
ecclesiastical. Secondly, that every parish is or ought to be such a Church.
From the former of these, this disputer seems to infer, that if diocesan
Churches and BB. be subordinate to the provincial Churches, and BB: that then
the provincial be the only Churches. And by the same reason when the
provinces were subject to the Patriarchs, none but patriarchall Chuches, (as
that of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem) were to be
esteemed Churches. But let us hear the disputer. Ad page 69.
Admit the Churches were then diocesan, what is that to us, who have none such
in these days, if G.P. say true? And how is this proved? because he says the
BB. of either province in England are Suffraganes, or rather Curates to the two
Arch-bishoppes in their several provinces, even their deputies exercising
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, from and under them. It shall not be amiss
therefore for M.D. to confute him the next time he writes. In the mean time
you should have answered for your selves, and not put off the confutation of
his reioynder to others. But though you cannot confute him, yet you can abuse
him, as by reuiling and scornful terms in other places of your book; so
here by notorious falsifying of his words* For where does he say that our
Bishops be but Suffraganes or Curates to the two Arch-bishoppes, as you
without shame or conscience do belie him? says he, or means he any more
but this, that during the time of the Archiepiscopal visitation, whereby the
jurisdiction of the Ordinary is suspended, that ecclesiastical jurisdiction
which he practices, he does exercise from and under the Archbishop as his
deputy? And what is this to our purpose? Yea but, If we may judge (says our
Disputer) by the outward practice, we have only two Churches, and they are
provincial, the one of Canterbury, the other of York, vnsubordinate either to
other, or to any other ecclesiastical power, and so entire Churches (such as
he would have every parish to be.) Here by the way let the Reader judge, with
what conscience the Refuter has so often objected against our Bishops, that
they be petite popes, having sole and supreme authority, seeing now himself
confesses, that according to the order and discipline of our Church, they are
subject to the Metropolitanes. But to the point: none of these things which he
obiecteth, do hinder the being of dioceses, or diocesan Bishops; no not
though they had been by G.P. called the Archbishoppes Suffraganes. For whereas
the Bishops have been by authors which have written within these nine hundred
years, called Suffraganes to the Archbishoppes, they mean thereby
comprouinciall Bishops* who in the election of the Metropolitanes, and in the
provincial synods held by the Metropolitanes, did give their suffrages with
them: not that they be such as commonly we call Suffraganes, but are as
absolute Bishops as have been since the first appointment of Metropolitanes;
and they were actually acknowledged, as they were at the first intended, so
soon as the diverse cities of one province had their Bishops. In all which, as
there was consociation among themselves, as being all of one body; so also
subordination to the Bishop of the Metropolis, or mother City, as being their
head. Thus was it provided in the canons, which for their antiquity, are called
the Apostles canons, that the Bishops of every nation must acknowledge him that
in the first or primate among them, and esteem him as the head, and that they
should do nothing exceeding the bounds of their own jurisdiction, without his
consent. And that every one may do those things alone which belong to his own
Church and the Countries which be under it. Neither may he (meaning the
Primate) do any thing without the consent of all. The same is repeated and
explaned, as ye heard before in the Council of Antioch; C. Antioch. c. 10.
The council of Sardica calls the metropolitan the governor of the province.
(...) c. 6. (...).
calling the Primate, (...), the Bishop which governs in the mother City,
appointing him to have the care of the whole province, because there is
concourse of men, who have business from all parts of the country to the
mother City. And although they forbad Bishops to attempt any thing beyond
their compass, without his consent, according to the ancient canon, yet they
say, Every Bishop has power or authority of his own diocese, to administer
or govern the same according to his conscience, and to have provident care of
the whole Country subject to his City, and to ordain Presbyters and Deacons,
and to dispose of all things with judgment.

7. Of Metropolitanes, when they began.
It is apparent then, that the being of provincial Churches does not hinder the
diocesan, nor the authority of Metropolitanes take away the jurisdiction of
diocesan Bishops. Neither is any Church in the world, more agreeable to the
form and government of the most ancient and Apostolical Churches, then this
of England. For at the first, Metropolitanes were not subordinate to any
superior Bishops, but were, In Conc. Constant. 1. c. 2.
as Balsa^^ says, (...), heads by themselves of their provinces, being
Bishops of their own peculiar dioceses, and yet having a general
superintendencie over the whole province. I cannot deny, but that long before
the Council of Nice, there were Patriarchs above Metropolitanes, whose
original, as it seems, proceeded from humane policy; Conc. Nic. c. 6.
as the cause of their ratification and continuance is ascribed to ancient
custom. But the superiority of Metropolitanes was either intended by the
Apostles, as I think, when they appointed Bishops over mother Cities, who
though at the first actually were but Bishops of their own diocese, yet
upon the conversion of other Cities in the province, were to be ackowledged the
chief; De gradib. c. 24.
or at least, as Beza supposes, they were ordained, not by authority of
Councels, but s^^dente natura, and necessitate flagitante; nature aduising, and
necessity requiring it. For it was convenient, or rather necessary, that there
should be consociation of Churches within the same province; and that the
governors of the several dioceses, should meet for the common good; as also
that the wrongs offered to any by the Bishops within their dioceses, might
be remedied. By consequent therefore it was necessary, especially before there
were Christian magistrates, that one in every province should be held as
chief, or primate, who should assemble the synods, moderate them being
assembled, see the decrees executed, and have a general superintendencie over
the whole province. Beza therefore speaking of the aforesaid Canon of the
Apostles, De. grad. c. 20.
says, quid aliud hic statuitu^ quam ordo ille, quem in omnibus ecclesiis
restitutum cupi^^^? What other thing is here ordained, but that order, which in
all Churches we desire may be restored?

That there were Metropolitan Bishops within the first 200 years, it is
evident by those prouincial councels, which in the second Century were held
concerning the feast of Easter, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23
being assembled and guided by Metropolitanes. As the president of the
provincial synod held at Rome, was Victo^ the Metropolitan Bishop of Rome;
of those in Palestina, Theophilus the Metropolitan of Caesarea, and Narcissus
Bishop of Jerusalem; of that in France, Irenaeus the Bishop of Lions; of
that in Achaia, Bacchylus the Bishop of Corinth; of that in Asia, Polycrates
the Bishop of Ephesus. And so of that in Osroene and of diverse others. Now it
is to be noted, that Eusebius speaking of the synod held in France, says,
there was a meeting of the Churches in France, (...), of which Churches
Irenaeus was B. Such a parish B. was he. Ex Balsam. in Conc. Ephesians. c 8. and
exemplar. suggest. de Cypri. Episcopis and ex Decreto Conc. Ephesians. post
aduentum Episcoporum Cypri.


That there have been Metropolitanes, and provincial Churches ever since the
Apostles times, this one evidence among many, which might be alleged, may
sufficiently euince. In the time, of the first Ephesine Council, Dionysius
the governor of the East, whose chief seat was Antioch, having appointed
Theodorus to be the Lieutenant of the Isle of Cyprus, the Patriarch of
Antioch, because the ecclesiastical jurisdiction for the most part followed
the civil, challenged authority over the Isle of Cyprus, and power of
ordaining the Metropolitan Bishop of Constantia, the mother city of Cyprus. To
which end, the clergy of Antioch procured from Dionysius letters, both to the
clergy of Constantia, and to the Lieutenant of Cyprus, to interdict them from
choosing their Metropolitan, the Sea being then void: or if they had already
chosen their Bishop, that both he and they should repair to the Council at
Ephesus, hoping that by the Council they should be ouerruled, according to the
Bishop of Antioch his desire. Reginus therefore, who was chosen Bishop, with
other Bishops of Cyprus, Can. Apost. 35.
put up a Supplication to the Council, complaining that the Bishop and
clergy of Antioch had sought, contrary to the Apostles Canons, and contrary to
the determination of the Council of Nice, Conc. N^c. c. 5.6 Constant. 1. c. 2
to bring them in subjection to them: and therefore requested, that as ever
since the Apostles times, Trodus, Sabinus, Epiphanius, and qui ante Illos
sanctissimi Episcopi, and quia sanctis Apostolis erant omnes orthodoxi ab his
qui in Cypro Constituti sunt.
the provincial synod had ordained their Metropolitan; so their ancient right
might not now be infringed. Whereupon the Council having censured the attempt
of the Bishop of Antioch, as (...) innovation, contrary to the laws
ecclesiastical, and ca^^^s of the holy Apostles, decreed, not only that the
Bishops of Cyprus, but also of all other dioceses and provinces, should
retain their ancient right; and that no Bishop should challenge unto himself
any province, which had not bin (...), in former times from the beginning,
under his predecessors jurisdiction. It has seemed good therefore to the
sacred and economical synod, that to every province her right, which ^^er from
the beginning it has had, shall be kept pure and i^^iolable, according to the
ancient received custom. Every Metropolitan having good l^a^^ to take a copy
of this Act for his own security. Whereby it appears, that the Isle of
Cyprus had a Metropolitan from the Apostles time. And that no Metropolitan
had, or ought to have, the government of any province, which had not always
from the beginning been subject to his Se^.

And that Metropolitanes were either actually appointed, or at the least
intended by the Apostles, appears hereby: That ever since their times, in all
provinces, throughout the Christian world, there have been Metropolitanes,
never misliked or contradicted by any, until this our age.

And whereas the Refuter obiecteth, 8. Metropolitan Churches are proofs rather
then disproofs of Diocesan.
that this makes against Diocesan Bishops, I say it makes for them. For every
Metropolitan is also a diocesan Bishop: having a peculiar diocese of his own,
whereof he is Bishop; as the Archbishop of Canterbury, has Canterbury, and
part of Kent, besides some other peculiar Churches; the Archbishop of York,
has Yorkshire (excepting the County of Richmond, which belongs to the
Bishop of Chester) and the County of Nottingham.

To his question therefore demanding, where then are our Diocesan Churches
become? I answer, there remain 24 of them, where they were wont to be, for
any thing that he can say to the contrary, besides the Churches of Canterbury
and York; which, as they be provincial Churches in respect of the 2.
provinces; so are they Diocesan in respect of the peculiar dioceses belonging
unto them. And where he says, the Cathedral Churches are as it were parishes,
he says he knows not what. For Cathedral Churches, which are the mother
Churches of every diocese, neither are, nor ever were parishes; nor the
Bishop, nor Presbyteries of them, ever intended to one parish. And if it so
fall out, that to some part of the Cathedral Church a particular parish
belong; thereto a several Presbyter is appointed as to other Parishes. The
meetings in Cathedral Churches whereof the Bishops have been presidents, were
never Parishionall, but rather Panegyricall, even in the most ancient and
purest Churches, under the best and most renowned Bishops since the Apostles
times.

In the conclusion the Refuter pusheth at me with a Dilemma, as it were with a
pair of rams horns. For such is his wisdom, that he thinks diocesan and
provincial Churches (which are subordinate one to the other) to be so
opposite, as that to hold the one, is to deny the other. And therefore if I
yield there be provincial Churches, then I must confess there be no diocesan:
or if I will needs hold there be diocesan Churches, then I overthrow the
provincial. So that what may soever we look, says he, I see nothing against
us, but all for us. Thus has he brought himself into a fools paradise, where
I leave him to feed upon his own fancies, and to solace himself with the
conceit of his imagined conquest.

CHAP. VII. Proving the third point of the Sermon, that the Bishops of the
primitive Church were Diocesan Bishops.
( Sermon. sect. 1. Now these Presbyteries in the Apostles times, as the
Presbyterians confess, had, etc. ad lin. a fine 4.)
THe Refuter has acquitted himself, in his own conceit, so valiantly and
victoriously in subuerting my former assertion concerning dioceses, which he
supposes to be the foundation of my building; that as he looks for no
strength in the rest of the building to resist his forces, (the foundation it
self being so weak and tottering) so he promises to himself assured success
in overthrowing the rest. But if my building be founded, as it were, on a
rock, against which his maine forces could not prevail at al, but like the
waves and billows of the sea, though they beat against it with great noise,
return back with froth and foam, (as I hope it appears to every indifferent
and judicious Reader) then may I promise to my self the like success in
withstanding his future assaults. And the better hope J do conceive hereof, Ad
page 70.
because he seems to confess that if I can demonstrate that the ancient
Churches, were dioceses, that then the other points will follow of their own
accord. But, that I have so demonstrated, that I never expect any sound answer
thereto. As for this point which now I have in hand, it is not only
demonstrated already, in the proof of the former, but is also by necessary
consequence deduced therefrom. My purpose therefore is to be as brief in
propugning this truth, as he is in oppugning the same.

J will therefore omit his frivolous cavil, which now the fourth time he
repeateth for my not concluding, what he, according to his forced Analysis,
would have concluded: because the Reader cannot but discern, that I directly
conclude what before was propounded, viz. that the Angels or Pastors of the
primitive Church were diocesan Bishops, which I prove in the Sermon by
degrees: first severally, before the division of parishes, and after the
distribution of them, both in the city and in the country: then jointly, both
before and after. For having concluded the former point with these words, that
the Churches contained many particular congregations, unto all which there was
but one Presbytery, or College of Presbyters assigned: and having here
signified, that by the confession of the most learned Disciplinarians, each
Presbytery had a President, which S. John calls the Angel of the Church, and
the Fathers, a Bishop; I prove from that which has already been proved, that
the President of the Presbytery, the Angel, of the B. of the Church, was not a
parishionall, but a diocesan Bishop.

But before I come to the proof contained in this section, I am to note, how
those last words of the former part, which are very material, are by this
refuter passed over in silence. For it would be known, whether there were in
Cities (where were many congregations) yea in whole dioceses, any more
Presbyteries or Colleges of Presbyters, then that one belonging to the mother
Church in the City. If to show either his ignorance, or want of good
conscience, he shall say there were (as indeed that is their assersion, that in
every parish both in city and country, there ought to be a Presbytery or
senate of ruling Elders) let him give but one approved instance to prove his
assertion in the first four hundred years, and I will yield, that where was a
parish Presbytery, there was a parish Bishop. If Calum and the reformers of
other Churches, according to the pretended discipline, had been of that
judgment, they would not have appointed one only Presbytery for many
parishes. If he shall confess that in a whole circuit, which we call a
diocese, there was but one college or senate of Presbyters, consisting of
those who were called the Presbyters of the city, (which is a most certain
and undeniable truth) then must he confess his platform of parish discipline
to be a mere nouelty, and an vndisgested fancy, having no warrant of
scriptures, nor testimony of antiquity; and contrary wise, that there was but
one Presbytery, and one Bishop set over a whole diocese. He that catches at
every word, yea at the least letter whereat he hops to have the least
advantage, (as at the term pagani in this passage, and at the little letters,
in the word Cretians) would not swallow up in silence such pregnant arguments,
if silence were not his best answer.

. 2. This third point deduced from the second.
But though he would not see that argument, yet in my propounding of the
question here to be concluded, he has spied a syllogism, which I did not
intend, out of that which I propounded in axiomaticall disposition, as taking
it for granted. But the Refuter makes me reason thus: The presidents of the
Presbyteries were diocesan BB. The Angels of the seven Churches were
presidents of the Presbyteries.

Therefore the Angels of the seven Churches were diocesan BB.



Which is the hansomest syllogism he has bestowed on me as yet, neither will I
refuse to maintain any one part of it, if he will be pleased to take notice of
that, which even now was proved; that there was but one Presbytery for a whole
diocese. So the proposition will be manifest, that the presidents of
Presbyteries (which were provided for whole dioceses) whom the fathers call BB.
were diocesan BB. for so much might have been added to the proposition out of
my words.

The assumption I have made good before by the confessions of Calvin and Beza.
But he begins with the assumption, saying that he has good cause to doubt
of it, and that I do but threapen kindness on them when I talk of their
Confessions. For plentiful proof whereof I refer you to that which before
has been alleged out of Calvin and Beza. Lib. 1. cap. 2.. 16.
But what will not this Refuter quarrel with? for if the Churches had been
such as he conceipteth, that is to say parishes, having every one a Bishop and
a Presbytery of governing Elders; would any man doubt, either that the Bishop
was called the Angel of the Church, or that he was president of the Presbytery?

Now to the proposition (says the Refuter) for answer whereto in one word, Ad
page 71.
I say it is false: let us examine the proof of it, and then frames a
syllogism, the conclusion whereof is this; therefore the Bishop who was set
over a whole diocese, and who was President of the Presbytery, allotted to a
whole diocese, was undoubtedly a diocesan Bishop. Was this the proposition
which he denied? or was he so unreasonable to deny it? What can be more
evident? But he sees by this time what a goodly analysis he has here made.

To return therefore to mine own analysis. In this section I prove, that the
ancient Bishops were diocesan Bishops, even before the division of parishes, by
three arguments, which for breuity sake I joined together.

The first. If the Churches whereof they were BB. were dioceses, and not
parishes, then were they diocesan BB. But the Antecedent is true, as has
already been proved in the second point.

Therefore the consequent.

The second: If the parishes were not distinguished in the Apostles time, nor
ministers appointed to peculiar titles or several cures, then there could be
no Parishionall Bishops in that time.

But the former has already been proved; Therefore the latter is true.

The assumption is to be understood, (...), as I said before, that is, as true
for the most part. For it admitmitteth some exceptions, as namely the Church of
Alexandria, (and perhaps some others) wherein I acknowledge^ the parishes to
have been distinguished in the Apostles times; but so, as several Presbyters
being assigned to them, there remained one Bishop over all.

The third. If the Presbyteries were allotted to whole dioceses, and not to
several parishes, then the Bishops who were Presidents of those Presbyteries,
were not parishionall, but diocesan.

But the first is true, as has been already proved: Therefore the second.

To all three, he answers by denying the assumption: the truth whereof
depends upon the proofs of the second point, which have been so many, and so
manifest, as I hope to hear no more of the newfound parish discipline.

. 3.
( Sermon. sect. 2. page 22. Howbeit in the end of the Apostles times, parishes
began to be distinguished in Cities, and afterward in the Country, etc. to
page 24. line 3.) The analysis of this section and that which follows.
Here I prove, that after the division of parishes, the Bishops were diocesan:
albeit in this section is contained but part of my argument, which stands
thus: Those Bishops who were over all the parishes both in the city and
country, were diocesan, and not parishionall Bishops.

The ancient Bishops in the first two hundred years, were over all the
parishes both in the city and country, viz. after they were distinguished:

Therefore the ancient Bishops in the first two hundred years were diocesan,
and not parishionall Bishops.



The proposition is most evident. The assumption stands on two parts: first,
that the Bishops were over all the parishes in the city, after they were
divided. The second, that the Bishops were over all the parishes in the
country, after their division. The former I prove in this section by induction
of particulars: the latter in the next.

The Analysis being here mistaken by him, Ad page 72. and 73.
I will not meddle with that, which he has thereby taken occasion to speak
besides the purpose: because here I find him more modest, then hitherto he
has showed himself: neither will I shame him with his own friends, when for
an evasion he supposes, that in the primitive Church, some Ministers might
have more Churches under them, like our double beneficed men and pluralists,
even those that have tot quot, and yet be no Bishops. Only I will touch those
things, which contradict that which I have delivered. And first, he observes a
contradiction in my speech. I said, that parishes (in cities) were not (for the
most part) distinguished in the Apostles times. Here I ^ay, that in the end of
the Apostles times, viz. about the year one hundred, they began to be
distinguished at Rome, by Euaristus the Bishop there. A shrewd contradiction J
promise you, especially if you consider, that all the Apostles, but S. John,
were dead before this time, and that this was in the very end of S. John's time.
Yea but after I say, Tit. 1.12.
that Titus was Bishop of the Cretians, (I cry you mercy, I should have said
Cretans, and yet by his leave, the Geneua translation and others, read
Cretians) and Timothy of them in Asia, therefore parishes were distinguished in
the Apostles times. Neither is this a contradiction: for although Timothy was
Bishop of Asia, and Titus of the Churches in Creet; yet it follows not, that
the parishes in the Churches of Asia or Creet, were distinguished. They were
both by Paul's direction, as well by letter as example, to ordain Presbyters in
the several cities; but that they placed any in the country, or assigned the
Presbyters to several cures in the Cities, we read not.

That the Bishops had the charge of all the parishes in the city after they
were divided or set out.
To return therefore to my proofs: The induction stands thus: In Rome, and
Alexandria, and so in other cities, the parishes being once divided, were
assigned to several Presbyters, the Bishop remaining superintendent over them
all:

Therefore the Bishops were over all the parishes in the cities, after they
were once divided.



As touching Rome, I show that the parishes were first distinguished by
Euaristus, about the 100. year; and not a Presbytery, but several Presbyters
assigned to them, as has been proved heretofore. At Alexandria I prove,
that the Bishop had the charge of many Churches, within the first 200. years.

But what I say concerning Alexandria, Ad page 74.
might well have been spared (for that is his usual censure of such proofs
as he knows not how to answer) because that Church is excepted against By T.
C. pa. nusquam.
, as the beginner, and breeder of diocesan government. Excepted against? why?
what was done in Alexandria, which all the Churches in the world did not
practice, so soon as the parishes were divided? But what if this order began
in S. John's time? what if by S. Mark, who died five or six years before
Peter and Paul? let Eusebius, alleging the reports of them that went before
him, be witness; viz, Euse. l. 2. c. 15
that Mark being sent into Egypt did preach the Gospel there, and was the
first which did constitute (...).
the Churches in Alexandria it self. Then ever since S. Marks time, there have
been Churches in Alexandria, which all from the beginning were subject to the
B. Of these Churches Euse. l. 5. c. 9
, as J alleged in the sermon, was Iulianus Bishop in the first year of
Commodus, viz. 180. In the 10 of Commodus, Demetrius was Lib. 5. c. 2^.
Bishop (...), of the Churches in Alexandria. And again more fully, that in
the 10. year of Seuerus, Lae^us was president of Alexandria, and the rest of
Egypt Lib. 6. c. 1.
: (...), but of the Churches there, Demetrius had lately received the
Bishopric after Iulianus. In the third year of Philippus, after Heraclas had
been sixteen years Bishop, Dionysius received Lib. 6. c. 35.
(...), the Bishopric of ruling the Churches in or about Alexandria. So it is
said of Peter Socra. l. 2. c. 6
the famous B. of the Curches of Alexandria. Eusebius. l 9. c. 6
of Alexander, that he was Bishop of the Churches belonging to that City.
Constantius requested of Athanasius the Bishop Ruf. l. 1. c. 19
, one of the Churches, which were many, at Alexandria, for the Arians. Valens
by his letters signified, that Athanasius might safely retain the government
Socr. l. 4 c. 13.
of the Churches. What these Churches were, Epiphanius before in part declared,
Epiphan. haeres. 69.
signifying that they were of ancient assigned to several Presbyters; all of
them which were Catholic, or orthodoxall, being under the Bishop.

Neither should this seem strange, that the Churches in Alexandria were
subject to the Bishop, seeing the rest in Egypt were under his jurisdiction.
Neither was this a thing peculiar to the Bishop of Alexandria, but common to
others, especially who were Bishops of mother Cities. Ignatius was Bishop not
only of Antioch, Epist. ad R^
but of Syria, as you heard testified by himself. Irenaeus the Bishop of
Lions, was Bishop of the Eus. l. 5. c. 23
Churches in France. And to omit others, as Diodorus the Bishop of Tarsus, to
whose charge was committed the Theo. l. 5. c. 4.
nation of the Cilicians, Amphilochius, who governed the whole Li 4. c. 11.
nation of the Lycaonians, Photinus Bishop of the Socr. l. 2 c 18
Churches in Illyricum, Agapetus Bishop of the Soc. l. 7. c. 3.
Churches which were under Synada etc: Eusebius testifies of Eusebius. l. 3. c 4
Titus, and in the next age after of Philippe Lib. 4. c. 21.
, that he was B. of the Churches in Creet. Theodoret says the like, Theodor.
in 1. Tim. 3.
and of Timothe that he was Bishop of the Asians, whose metropolis was
Ephesus. It is manifest, says Chrysostom in 1. Tim. 5.19.
that to Timothy was committed the rest of the Church, or (...). Ad page 75.
The refuters answer to these testimonies.
that whole nation of Asia.

To these testimonies of Eusebius and Theodoret, (I name so many as were cited
in the sermon) the refuter answers: First, that Eusebius lived 230. years,
after Timothy and Titus; and Theodoret 330. What then? the question is not
whether the witnesses lived in the first 200. years, but whether within that
time, there were diocesan Bishops? It is a very uncharitable and unlearned
part, that I say no worse, to imagine that Eusebius and Theodoret would, of
their own heads, testify these things, and not by the relation of those which
lived in former ages: especially, seeing Eusebius says (...), it is recorded
in histories. But suppose the testimonies of these 2. were not sufficient; what
will he say to that cloud of the ancient and most authe^tick witnesses, which
with one co^se^t do testify, that Timothy was B. of Ephesus, and those parts
of Asia; and that Titus was B. of Creet? But of this more hereafter. In the
mean time, let it be acknowledged, as a point of intolerable impudency, that
in a matter of fact, so agreeable with the scriptures (I mean especially the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, written to them, as to Bishops) any of us should
deny credit to the constant, general and perpetual consent of the ancient
writers, whereof some lived 13 or 1400 years before us.

2. Yea but if these testimonies be true, Titus and Timothy were Archbishops.
So is Titus called in the subscriptio^ of that Epistle. And that they were
Metropolitanes, appears by all their successors, who were Bishops of Gortynae
and Ephesiu^: the one, Metropolis of Creet, the other of Asia. How D. Bilson
denies this, let the reader see page. 409. of his book, (the other which the
refuter cites being misalledged) where he cites Chrysostom H^mil. 1. in.
Tit.
and Jerome De script. ec^les. in Tit^.
testifying that to Titus was committed a whole Island, and the judgment of so
many Bishops; Praefat. in 1. ad Tim.
Theodoret, that to Timothe Paul committed the charge of Asia. Now if there
were Metropolitan Bishops in the Apostles times, who besides their own peculiar
diocese, had the oversight also of other Dioceses and Bishops; it should not
seem strange, that there were Diocesan Bishops, who besides their cathedral
churches, had many parishes and Presbyters subordinate to them. To which
purpose Epiphanius Epist. ad Io^n. Hieros. apud Hierony^. ^. 2.
also was alleged, who says that each Bishop had diverse churches under them:
to whom many other might be added; as that of Optat^^, Lib. 2. cou^r. Par^en.
that in the city of Rome (where was but one only Bishop) were above forty
Churches: the Epistle of Constantine Eusebius. in vita Constable. Theod. l. 1. c. 19
to Eusebius, mentioning those diverse Churches which were under him, and
signifying as the multitude of Christians did increase, so the number of
Churches was to be multiplied: the testimony of Theodoret In epist. ad Leon. M.
the Bishop of Cyrus, who affirms, that it was his lotte to be pastor of 800.
Churches: for so many parishes, says he, has Cyrus. Yea but Epiphanius was
390. years after Christ. Will any wise man therefore infer that in the first
two hundred years it was so? Good sir, saving your wisdom, you shall seldom
read in ancient records of enlarging of dioceses: but of the contracting of
them, by erecting new Bishoprics, very often. It was testified before, Ex Cont.
Ephesin. Et Asrit. etc.
that the circuits of dioceses were from the beginning of the Churches: and
therefore what circuit was of any Bishopric in Epiphanius his time, the same
ordinarily, if not greater, was in the first 200. years.

Sermon. sect. 3. page 24. As touching country towns,. 6. That the B. had the
charge of the parishes in the country.
they were indeed converted after the cities etc. to page 25. ad lin. 8. In
this section I prove the latter part of the former assumption, concerning
country parishes. viz. that the Bishop of the city was over them also: which I
prove by this Enthymeme: The B. and the Presbytery of the City in all places
acknowledged t^em to belong to their charge: Therefore the Bishop was over
them, as being part of his Diocese.

The antecedent I prove by their care over them, both before they were
converted, and after. Before, because they labored their conversion; after,
because the Bishop out of his Presbytery assigned to each of the^ a Presbyter,
not a Presbytery, or a B. 2. Where the diocese was large, he substituted a
Chorepiscopus, or country B. Of these points, the last, our refuter weary
conscionably concealeth: all the former, very learnedly he denies. He denies,
I say: 1. That the Bishop and Presbytery of the city acknowledged the country
to belong long to their charge. Which, as it is a most ignorant conceit, as
has been proved before: so would it have been most precious to the church of
God, if the BB. and Presbyof those times, had so conceived. Now that both they
and the country churches so conceived, as J said, the universal and perpetual
practice of the church of Christ, subiecting in all places the country parishes
to the Bishop of the city, does ineuitably prove. 2. That they did not labor
their conversion by virtue of their office, but were to attend those who were
converted. As if the Bishop, and presbytery had been ordained only for those
few, that were at the first converted; and were not rather, as leaven put into
the meal, to season the whole lump. I would gladly know therefore, who after
the death of the Apostles and apostolical men (which labored in the cities)
were appointed or provided for the conversion of the country towns? If it were
not the office of the Bishop and Presbytery of the city, to which they were
subject; much less was it the office of others, who being neither Apostles,
nor Evangelists, were tied to their own charges, and might not by the most
ancient canons of the church, exercise any mysteriall function out of their
own bounds. Besides the bounds of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction followed the
civil ordinarily; so that those countries were subject to the Bishop of the
City in respect of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which were subject to the city
it self. And therefore as they were actually under the Bishops charge, after
their conversion; so were they intentionally, before. This is a point clearly
confessed by Calvin, as you shall hear. So is the third, though this learned
man deny it; viz, that Presbyters were by the Bishops of the city assigned to
country parishes out of the clergy of the city. For the clergy of the city was
the seminary of the ministry for the whole diocese. Neither was there any
other ordinary means to supply the Churches which wanted. Scholars of their
own, fit ^o be ministers, country parishes had not: universities there were
none: learned men from other dioceses were not to be expected, unless the
Bishop of the city were not able out of his clergy to furnish them. But hereof
I have spoken before:

As touching the last, that where the diocese was large, the Bishop in
certain places appointed Chorepiscopos, as his substitutes, who together with
their charge remained subject to the Bishop of the city (which is a thing most
notorious, and confessed by Calvin and Beza, being also a most evident proof,
that the churches were dioceses, and the Bishops diocesan, as J have showed
before) our refuter passes it over in silence; with what conscience, let the
refuter Judge.

Passing therefore by this, which in no wise he was able to answer,. 7. That
the B. of the city assigned several Presbyters to the country parishes. Ad
page 77.
he oppugneth the 3. point, bringing an insta^ce of his own, and taking
exception against my proof. We have, says he, a plain instance to the
contrary in the churches of Cenchrea and Corinth. A plain instance? to what
purpose? that Cenchrea had a Bishop and a presbytery, and not a several
presbyter assigned to it? that when it wanted a presbyter, it was not furnished
from the clergy of Corinth? It is evident that Cenchrea was a village belonging
to Corinth and subject unto it, as were al other towns and villages in those
parts: and as the rest, so it (even by his Page 57.
own confession) received the gospel from Corinth. That it ever had a Bishop
it is incredible: for by the laws of the church, those churches which at the
first had Bishops, were to have them still. Let him show, that ever it had a
Bishop or a presbytery, or that it was not subject to the Bishop of Corinth, as
well as other towns and villages of Achaia; that ordinarily it received not
their presbyter from Corinth, from whence, by his own confession, it received
the Gospel; and I will yield to him. If none of these things can be necessarily
proved; nay if none of them be probable or likely, how could he say that this
was a plain instance to the contrary. And yet this is the fourth time that the
church of Cenchreae has been objected to no purpose, unless it be to confute
himself.

Against my allegation of the council of Sardica, he takes great exception,
obiecting two contrary things unto me: whereof, if either were true, the one
would take away the other. The former, is subtilty and craft, as though I went
about to delude my auditors at Lambith, and readers every where. For, says he,
when was this Council held? was it not about the year 347. almost 150. years
after the time in question? If I had alleged that canon, only to testify the
practice of the Church at that time, not permitting Bishops in country towns
and villages, there had been some small color for this objection: and yet but
a color, seeing they do not (as you shall hear) prohibit the ordaining of
Bishops in any Church where they had formerly been. And therefore the practice
of the Church for multitude of Bishops now, was as it had been before; saving
that by this canon order was taken for erecting Bishoprics, where none had
been, but not for dissoluing of Bishoprics, where any were. But it was the
judgment and determination of that Council, which chiefly I alleged; which
was, that one Presbyter is sufficient for a village or town. And therefore
nothing was in this respect to be innouated, but as they had hitherto no
Bishops or Presbyteries, but Presbyters severally assigned to them, so they
should continue. The judgment of these men (I hope) was not much inferior to
theirs, who lived in the first two hundred years. This being a council of
three hundred orthodoxall Bishops who confirmed the decrees of the council of
Nice, among whom was Osius the famous confessor, Theod. l. 2. c. 15 (...).
and Athanasius (then whom there has not been a more famous Bishop for piety,
wisdom, learning and soundness in religion since the Apostles times) whose
judgment also in this particular was approved, as has been showed, by the
decrees of other councils, by the judgment of other fathers, by the practice of
all churches, and never gain said or misliked by any in the former ages, nor
yet by the reformers of the church in our age according to the pretended
discipline, T. C. and perhaps some one or 2. others excepted. Now I would
gladly know, what either reasons our refuter has to confute their judgment,
or testimonies to ouerweigh their authority. There was therefore no subtle
purpose in me to delude any in this allegation, but an evil conscience in him
that sought with so frivolous an evasion to elude so plain and pregnant
evidence.

The other thing which he obiecteth is simple folly, in alleging a Canon,
which, as he says, makes so much against me. For, says he, what greater
proof can there be, that villages or little cities or towns usually had BB.
over them even till that time, viz. the year 347, then that the council of
Sardica was feign to make such a decree against it? For the untruth of which
objection, his ignorance must be his best excuse. It is plain, that in that
canon direction is given chiefly for erecting of new Bishoprics; authorizing
the Metropolitan and the other Bishops of the province, if the people of
cities and populous places desired a Bishop, to erect a new Bishopric: but
forbidding this to be done in villages or petite cities or towns, for which
they judged the ministry of one Presbyter to be sufficient. Besides, the
council of Nice had decreed, that the privileges of all churches should be
preserved; and the councils of Afric more then once determined, that what
Church soever had in former times had a Bishop, should still have a B. and the
ancient custom of the church was ever held as a law among them, in this
behalf. So that I hold it for a certain truth, that what Church in the end of
the first 400 years had not a Bishop, the same had none in the beginning: and
what Church soever had in the first 200. years a B. was at the end of 400.
years acknowledged to have right to a B.

Indeed I do confess that the people of country towns sometimes being
vaineglorious, Balsans.
have desired a Bishop of their own, and the ministers being ambitious, and
as it is said in the council of Carthage, c. 54. graec.
lifting up their necks against their Bishops, have inflamed their desires:
but these attempts were esteemed unlawful, and therefore as in councels they
were prohibited, so in well ordered Churches they were not allowed. But hereof
also I have spoken before.

Yea but,. 8. The refuters instances of parish Bishops answered.
says he, this canon was not universally observed, as may appear by the often
renewing of it, in other councils, and the practice of the Churches to the
contrary afterward. Here J ask him, first, when this was done? for will he
prove, that the irregular and unlawful practices of vaineglorious people, and
ambitious ministers in the fourth or fifth century after Christ, were the
lawful and ordinary practices of the purest churches in the first two hundred
years? Secondly, whether it were lawfully done, or not? if yea, then does he
contradict the judgment of approved councils, the authority of orthodoxall
Fathers, the general consent of the ancient churches of Christ, having nothing
to oppose thereto but vain surmises, and unlikely likelihoods. If not, why are
they alleged? shall irregular and unlawful practices be commended as paterns
for imitatio^?

But let us hear his instances, which T. C. with great labor and long study
gathered. The 1. Was not Zoticus Bishop of a small village, called Coman? If I
say no, how will he prove it? Eusebius is alleged Eus. l. 5 c. 16.
lib. 5. c. 16. where Apollinarius speaking of certain approved men, and BB.
who came to try the spirit of Maximilla (one of Montanus his truls) mentions
(...), Zoticus of (or from) the village Comana, whose mouth Themiso stopped:
noting the place, not whereof he was Bishop, but whence he came or where he was
borne, for he was Episcopus Otrenus in Armenia, says Caesar An. 205.27.
Baronius, ex vic^ Comana in Armenia ori^ndus, Bishop of Otrea in Armenia,
borne at the village Comana in Armenia. Jn the eighteenth chapter of the same
book of Eusebius Eusebius. l. 5. c. 18.
Apollonius reports the same story; which Nicephorus Lib. 4. c. 25.
also reciting, uses these words: Apollonius reports that Zoticus Ostrenus
when Maximilla began to prophecy at Pepuza (a place which Montanus called
Jerusalem) endeavored to convince her evil spirit, but was hindered of those
which were her fauourits, meaning Themiso. Indeed Apollinarius calls him
(...); whereupon Nicephorus supposed him to be but a Presbyter: but though
Apollinarius being B. of Hierapolis calls him in one place (...), as 1. Pet.
5.1.
Peter calls himself, being more then a Presbyter, and as BB. usually call one
another Consacerdotes: yet afterward he expresselie calls him a Bishop.
And thus the village, the little village Coman has lost her Bishop. For
little the Refuter added of his own, to make his instance the greater. The
second: Was not Mares (he should have said, Maris) Bishop of Solica? Of
Solica? Truly I cannot but smile that so great a clerk has learned his
letters no better; for though the first letter be not unlike an S. yet is it
the D. used in that print, as he might have learned of a T.C. l. 2. page 519.
Deacon in the same page. But this shows that our refuter takes his
allegations at the second hand, not consulting with the author. Theodoret L. 5.
c. 4.
says, that Eusebius Vercellensis ordained Maris Bishop in Dolicha, which he
says was but a small town, using the word (...), which I will speak of, when
I come to Nazianzum, which also is termed so. For, says Theodoret, Eusebius
being desirous to install Maris, a man worthy commendation and shining with
many sorts of virtues (...), in the Episcopal throne, he came to Dolicha, by
which phrase it appears, he did not ordain him the Presbyter of a parish,
but such a Bishop as others were, at least of that time, being the fourth
century after Christ, So far has our refuter also ouershotte his mark. For
though Dolicha were but a small city or town, as some of our Bishops Sees in
England and Wales be: yet that hinders not, but that it might have a diocese
belonging thereto, as well as ours have, though perhaps not so great.

The third, Apud Hier. tom. 1. Forte Baie^sit.
Asclepius of a small town in Afric. For this, T. C. quoteth Jerome tom. 1.
catalog. Gennadij vir. illustr. Gennadius indeed says, that he was vici non
grandis episcopus. But Ioannes de Trittenhem in his book de scriptorib.
ecclesiast. says that he was Vagensis teritorij episcopus; so that although
his seat was no great town, yet his diocese was that whole territory. But when
was this? about the year 440. so far does my adversary, who complains of
my ouershooting my mark when J alleged the council of Sardica, ouershoot me:
for when he will scarce suffer me to shoot tenscore: he, as if he* were shooting
for the flight, shoots 22, even tweluescore beyond the mark. I say unto him,
it was not so from the beginning. But by councels of Africa held toward the
end of the fourth century permitted, Conc. Carth. graec. c. 54. et 57. et. 101.
Afric. c. 20. et 23. et 65.
namely, that in part of the diocese belonging to the B. of a city, new
Bishoprics might be erected, if the people of those parts being populous
desiring so much, and the Bishop of the city consenting thereto, it were
agreed upon by the provincial Synod. But the Bishops of the fifth century so
much exceeded in their indulgence that way, in granting popular requests,
against the canons of other received councels, and ancient practice of the
Church: that Leo the great Bishop of Rome, Leo epist. 87. ad Episcopos Afric.
c. 2.
was feign to write unto the Bishops of Afric to stay that excess.

The fourth: What was Nazianzum, but a small town where that famous Gregory
the Divine was B? For which T.C quoteth Socrat. l. 4. c. 20. But what if
Nazianzum were a City? what if Gregory the Divine were not B. of Nazianzum?
Nazianzum, Socrat. l. 4. c. 26.
though Socrates make mention of it as (...), a mean city, yet he calls it a
city: and though somwhere it is called (...), that is, a little city or town,
yet was it such a city, that the Emperor Leo the Philosopher, reckons it
among the seats of the Metropolitan BB. not that I think it had any other
cities or Bishoprics subject unto it. Iur. graecorom. in (...). page 88.
I will not stand to argue that question, whether Gregory the Divine were
Bishop of Nazianzum. For although diverse good Authors affirm it; Greg. epist.
42. et 65 Caes. Baron. an. 366. number. 10.
yet I believe Gregory himself, who says, he was not B. but only coadiutor
to his Father there. He was by his dear friend Basil the great, made Bishop of
Sa^^^^, partly against his will, and after was made Bishop of Constantinople;
but leaving both the former, being seized upon by Anthimu^ the Bishop of Tyana,
who placed another there; the latter, resigning it into the hands of the
council of Constantinople, which preferred Nectarius to be his successor; he
returned unto Nazianzum, where finding the Sea void, obtained of Helladius, who
was the Bishop of Caesarea after Basil, that Eulalius might be ordained
Bishop there. But I will not dispute this question; seeing it is confessed,
that Nazianzens father was B. of that diocese.

These be all the instances which T.C. brings in this cause, excepting one
more out of the canon law, which our refuter thought not worth the obiecting.
But his inference hereupon is worth the observing. All this M.D. could not
choose but know, if he had read but so much as M. Cartw. 2. reply with as good a
mind, as he did D. Bilson. Whereto I answer: that I read with resolution to
yield to the truth whersoeuer I find it. But God has given me so much
judgment, as not to be persuaded by mere colors, such as I signified in my
preface T. C. arguments in this cause to be, and such as in this treatise I
have proved many of them to be, and so will the rest, if the Refuter shall
urge them, or take upon him to maintain them.

Having so substantially answered the substance of my argument, 9. Why the
heathen are called Pagani.
he takes occasion to show his learning, in giving a more learned reason why
the heathen are of Christians called Pagani, then I did. I said, and, I am
sure, have read it in some learned author, Master Hooker is of the same
judgment, l. 5. Pagani quasi ex eodem font bib^ntes.
that they are so called, because the people who lived in the country villages
(which are properly called pagani, a pag^, and that of (...), as Pomp. Festus
says, quia eadem aqua vterentur) remained for the most part heathenish, after
the cities, for the most part, were converted to Christianity. He thinks the
heathen were called pagani, because they are not Christ's Soldiers; induced so
to think, because Tertullian says, Apud hunc, tam miles est paganus fidelis,
quam paganus est miles infidelis. De Corona militis.
Which he englisheth thus, as well a faithful Soldier as an unbelieving
soldier is a pagan. Which if it were Tertullians meaning, as well Christians,
as infidels should be called Paganes. But Tertullian is (...) dark, and
writes (as it seems) above some men's capacity. With Christ, says
Tertullian, as well a believing pagan is a soldier, as an unbelieving
soldier, is a pagan; meaning by Pagan, according to the use of the Romans,
him that is not a Soldier. Whereas therefore among the Romans, and all
warlike nations, those who were Soldiers, were greatly honored (as the use
of the word miles and armiger with us does show) and contrariwise those who
were not Soldiers; were of base esteem, called Pagani, perhaps in some such
sense as Villani with us, that is to say, villains, clownes, boores:
Tertullian dissuading Christians from going to war under infidels, persuades
the^ not to be moved with this respect, of being honored, if they be
soldiers; and dishonored, if they be not: for, says he, with Christ, a
faithful man, though despised in the world as a pagan, is highly esteemed and
honored; and also an unfaithful man, though honored as a soldier, or
cheuallier in the world, is of base account with Christ. But how heathen people
should from hence be called Pagani, I know not, unless christians were also
called milites or cheualliers: for Pagani here, as a base term signifying
villains or clownes or boores, is opposed to milites, as a name of honor.

. 10. Ad. Page 78. BB. both before, and after the division of Parishes were
diocesans.
( Sermon. sect. 4. page 25. Thus then parishes were distinguished both in the
cities and countries, and several presbyters particularly assigned etc. to,
promiscuously, page 26.) In this section, I prove that the BB. both before and
after the division of parishes, were diocesan: and first I answer an
objection: for whereas some might imagine, that Bishops before the division of
parishes were parishional, after, diocesan, as being set over many churches: I
show (which before has been proved) that the circuit of the Bishops charge, or
diocese, was the same before the division of parishes, which it was after,
etc. And to this purpose I declare, that the circuit of the B. charge from the
beginning, contained (...), meaning thereby the City whence he has his
denomination, and (...), that is the country subject unto it. And whereas some
understand (...) to signify a parish, according to the vulgar use of the
English word, I showed that in the best authors, even after the division of
parishes, it signifies the whole city with the suburbs. My reason stands
thus: To whose jurisdiction both (...) (that is, the city and suburbs, though
containing many parishes) and (...) (that is, the whole country belonging to
the same city) is subject, he is over the Churches both in city and country,
and consequently a diocesan.

But to the jurisdiction of the ancient Bishops, both (...), the city and
suburbs, and (...), the country thereto belonging, were subject.

Therefore the ancient BB. were over the Churches both in the city and
country, and consequently were diocesans.



The proposition is of undeniable truth, the word (...), being so understood,
as I proved before.

The assumption J prove by two most pregnant testimonies; Can. Apost. 34. Conc.
Antioch. c. 9. C. 35.
the one, being one of the ancient canons called the Apostles; the other a
canon of the council of Antioch, whereof I have also spoken before. But to
them we may add the next canon called the Apostles, C. Antioch. c. 22.
which is also recited in the council of Antioch: That a Bishop may not
presume out of his own limits, to exercise ordinations, to Cities and
Countries not subject to him. And if he shall be convinced to have done this
without the consent of them, who hold those Cities or Countries, let him be
deposed, and those also whom he has ordained.

This syllogism being too strong to be refuted, his best course was not to see
it. Notwithstanding he cauilleth with some points therein. For whereas his
chief proof before, was, that the Church of Antioch, of Ephesus, of
Jerusalem, of Alexandria etc. were each of them but one particular congregation
etc. because Eusebius calls each of them (...), thereby abusing the Reader,
as if Eusebius had by that name meant that which we call a parish; here he
disauoweth the authority of Eusebius alleged according to his true meaning,
unless he had said it was of that signification in the end of the Apostles
time, and the age following. Which is a silly shift: seeing Eusebius speaking
of the Churches of whole Cities in the first two hundred years, even of such
as he had expressly mentioned as containing many Churches, he calls them by
that name. As at Alexandria he acknowledged the Churches to have been
instituted by Saint Mark, and yet he comprehends them all afterward, yea
after the number of them was increased, under the name of the paroecia in
Alexandria, as I have showed before. And where besides Eusebius, I quote
Epiphanius, and the Council of Antioch, he says, It is to no purpose to cloy
the Reader with multitude of allegations, concerning the decrees or practices
of latter ages. Which also is a very frivolous exception, seeing it is easy to
show, that the dioceses or circuits of Churches were usually lessened: but that
they were any where is enlarged, he will hardly show. Therefore, look what the
circuits of the Churches or Bishops charges were in Eusebius or Epiphanius his
time, the same, at the least, they were in the first two hundred years.

. 11. Of the Canons called the Apostles.
And whereas I allege one of the ancient canons called the Apostles, nor that I
think they were of the Apostles own penning, but that for their antientnesse
and authority they are so called, and by all sorts of writers so alleged, he
charge me with seeking to bleare men's eyes with the name of the Apostles
Canons. In that I said they were so called, it does sufficienttly both here and
where after I cite them, show my meaning. But let us hear what he can say
against them, for my mind gives me, he will leave them in better credit then
he found them. If we were so simple says he, as to take them for their
doing, yet should not a man of his profession so abuse our simplicity: He
knows there was a time, when Rome her self saw too much in them, to
acknowledge them for the Apostles: See Gratians decree did. 15. c. sancta
Romana, and did. 16. cap. canones. In both places it is said, that they are
apohryphall (as we call the books of Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom) not because
they are either false or counterfeit, but because they are not acknowledged to
be of the Apostles own writing: for if they were, they ought to be esteemed of
canonical authority, like the other scriptures. Notwithstanding they are
ecclesiastical canons, which for their great antiquity and authentike
authority, are commonly called Apostolical, received of ancient Fathers, and
approved by Councels. And although some of them may be suspected, As the last
of all which leaves out the Apocalypse, and reckons Clements Epistles and
Constitutions as canonical. For the Counsel in Trullo which receives the 85
Canons, notwithstanding rejects Clements constitutions.
as foisted in, or depraved by heretics, yet those which are specially cited
by Fathers and Councels as authentike, are without exception; being of as great
credit as any other ecclesiastical writings whatsoever. Such is the canon we
speak of, the words whereof which I cited being verbatim, recited in the
Council of Antioch. I will not discuss this controversy, wherein much may be
said on both sides. Only this J will say, that as Damascen de orthod. fid. l.
4. c. 18. in fine. (...).
exceeded the truth, in reckoning them with the canonical scriptures: so some
learned and judicious men have been much ouerseene in too much censuring of
them: as first, that they are condemned in the canon law, when indeed the very
scope vid gloss.
of the 16. distinction is to authorize them, and to acknowledge them, though
not as canonical scriptures, yet as authentical canons.

Secondly, that Isidor condemns them: Whereas indeed the words of Isidor
Praefat. in co^. cil. vid. did. 16. c. 4.
, in the true copy are these. That by reason of their authority, we prefixe
before the other councels, the canons called the Apostles (although of some
they are called apocryphal) because the greater part receive them; and the holy
fathers have by synodall authority ratified them, and placed them among
canonical constitutions.

Thirdly, that they are condemned by the Council in Trullo Conc. Constable. in
Trullo. c. 2.
: when as indeed that Council rejecting (...), the constitutions of Clement,
(which also were called Apostolical) because they were depraved by heretics,
authorized the canons, decreeing that the 85. canons shall remain firm and
sure, which of their Tilius his Edition being here defective, is out of ye
manuscript copies thus to be supplied, (...).
holy and blessed forefathers were received, and confirmed, and delivered unto
them in the name of the holy and glorious Apostles. And whereas some think,
that Epiphanius is the first that mentions them; I find it to be otherwise.
For diverse of them are cited before his time, being sometimes called absolutely
the canons, sometimes the ecclesiastical canons, sometimes the ancient
received canons of our Fathers, sometimes Apostolical canons, as I have partly
noted before Ex Conc. Nic. c. 15 and 16. C. Antioch. c. 9 and ex ep. Constable.
. Neither is the authority of the general Council held at Ephesus, though
after Epiphanius his time, to be neglected, which calls them Conc. Ephesians.
post aduent. Episcoporum Cypr.
the canons of the holy Apostles. So much of those canons, and also of this
section, which though it do most directly and necessarily conclude, Ad page 79.
that Bishops were set over dioceses, yet he calls it a needless discourse,
which, because he knew not how to answer, he takes leave to pass by it.

. 12.
( Sermon. sect. 5. page 26. These three points whereof hitherto I have entreated,
are of such evident, etc. to page 28. line 6.) Caluins testimony consenting
with us in the three first points handled in the Sermon.
In this section I conclude the three first points with the testimony of Calvin,
whom I produce, not as this sophister cauilleth, as a captive by way of
triumph, but as one that takes part with us, against our new sect of
Disciplinarians, especially in the second and third point, (which their
dissenting from Calvin, Beza, and other learned Authors of discipline, he
always cunningly dissembleth.) And that his authority may be of more weight,
as I confess him to have bin a worthy servant of Christ, whose memory with me
is blessed; so I profess him to have bin the first or chief founder of the
Presbyterian or Geneuian discipline: in setting up whereof, the Bishopric
being dissolved, and the common weal reduced to a popular State, I acknowledge
him to have dealt very wisely, his project of discipline being the best, that
that City did seem at that time capable of, there being no hope, that either
a Bishop or a Presbytery consisting wholly of Ministers, would be admitted. But
he cannot endure to hear, that Calvin should be esteemed the first founder of
this discipline. For co^futation whereof, he tells us (what we have heard an
hundred times, but never shall see proved) that this discipline was both
practiced in the Apostles times, and primitive Church, and has testimony from
many learned men, Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, etc. Wickliffe, the
Waldenses, Luther and diverse others hereafter to be named, that lived before
Calvin writ: he should have said, that writ before Calvin lived, and then not
one word of all this goodly speech had been true; which as I have manifested
already in respect of Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Luther, so far
as they have been alleged: so shall I in respect of Wickliffe and the
Waldenses, whoneuer once dreamed of their lay presbyteries, and much less of
their newfound parish discipline.

Neither can he abide that Calvin should be said to agree with us in these
three points; but he must abide it, for truth will prevail. But that were
exceeding strange, says he, that he should overthrow that discipline which he
was so careful to establish. Let him not abuse the Reader; his agreeing with
us in the second and third point, overthrows the newfound parish discipline,
but agrees with the doctrine of the learned Reformers, and with the practice
of Geneua, understanding by B. (as they do) the President of their Presbytery:
their Church being a diocese consisting of many parishes, over which one
Presbytery only is appointed. Of which Presbytery, if the President were
perpetual, ^as he was in Caluins time, and (as always he was in the primitive
Church, there being not one instance to be given to the contrary; which order
Beza misliketh not, but sometimes wishes it were restored) then should they
come nearer the practice of the Apostolical Churches, then now they do. In
the mean time, as their Church is a diocese, and their Presbytery serving for
the whole diocese; so the President for the time being, is diocesan. But
whether that be so or not; once, Caluins judgment agrees with mine in these
three points: Ad page 80.
It may be, says he, for the latter end of the first two hundred years. But
the conscience must ground it self upon the commandment and example of the
Apostles in the word of God. As though we were destitute thereof, and they
contrariwise, for their discipline, had the precept and practice of the
Apostles. Which well may they take for granted, but never will be able to
prove: and as though the universal and perpetual practice of all the
Churches in Christendom, and consent of all the Fathers in the first three
hundred years, were not a sufficient demonstration to persuade a man that has
a sound judgment, joined with a good conscience, what was the doctrine and
practice of the Apostles. For if any man shall say, that all the Apostolical
Churches, and all the godly Fathers, and glorious Martyrs, did ever from the
Apostles times observe a discipline and government of the Church, repugnant to
that which the Apostles had prescribed; I doubt not to say of such a man, that
as he is void of modesty, so has he no great store either of judgment or
honesty.

. 13. Calu. in tit. l. 4. c. 4. sect. 1. Let these words, before the papacy, be
observed of them who say we have received our government from the Papists.
But how far forth Calvin agrees with us, will appear by that chapter which
I alleged, the title whereof is this; Concerning the state of the ancient
Church and the manner of governing which was in use before the papacy. The
which, as he says in the beginning, will represent unto our eyes a certain
image of the divine institution. For although the Bishops of those times made
many canons, whereby they might seem to express more then was expressed in
the holy scriptures, notwithstanding with so good caution they framed their
whole administration according to that only rule of Gods word, that you may
easily perceive, that they had almost nothing in this behalf, diss^nant from
the word of God. This is a good testimony, you will say, given to the
discipline of the primitive Church: but does he testify, that the three
points you speak of are agreeable thereunto? that shall you now hear. And
first, concerning the Presbyteries he says, as before I alleged, every
City had their College of Presbyters, who were Pastors and Teachers, etc. The
Refuter repeateth the words, which I cited out of Calvin thus: that the
Presbyteries consisted of Ministers. Thereof giving this censure: Craf^ily, or
carelessly is this spoken. The former, if wittingly he left out, only; the
latter, if he did not heed it. Who denies that the Presbyteries consisted of
ministers? Will it follow thence that therefore there were no other
gouerning-Elders? No man can be so ignorant, or so shameless, as to say, that
Calvin was of opinion, that the Presbyteries consisted of Ministers only,
either in the Apostles times, or in the age following. What shall become of m^^
now, no man being so ignorant and shameless? I hope to salve both presently.
I confess, good sir, that Calvin collecteth two sorts of Elders out of 1. Tim.
5.17. I confess also, that speaking in general of the practice of the Church,
he says coldly and in few words, the rest of the Presbyters were set over the
censure of manners and corrections. But when he comes more particularly to
relate the practice of the ancient Church, he gives full testimony to the
truth. For can any man understand Calvin, as saying, they had any other
Presbyery, besides the college of Presbyters in every Church? Does not Calvin
plainly say, every city had their college of Presbyters, who were Pastors and
Teachers? Yes that he does: but the word only was either craftily, or carelessly
omitted. Hear then the words of Calvin: Habebant ergo singulae civitates
Presbyterorum collegium, qui pastores erant ac Doctores. Nam and apud populu^
munus docendi, exhortandi and corrigendi, quod Paulus episcopis iniungit, omnes
obibant: and quo semen post se relinquerent, iunioribus, qui sacra militae
nomen dederant, crudiendis, nanabant operam: Every city therefore had a
college of Presbyters, who were Pastors and Teachers. For both they exercised
all of them the function of teaching, exhorting, and correcting, which Paul
enioyneth to Bishops, and also that they might leave a seed behind them, they
employed their labor in teaching the younger sort, who had given their names,
to serve in the sacred warfare, that is, the younger sort of the Clergy. Thus
therefore J reason: The College of Presbyters, according to Caluins judgment,
consisted only of Ministers;

The Presbytery of each City was the college of the Presbyters:

Therefore the Presbytery of each City, according to Caluins judgment,
consisted only of Ministers.



The assumption is evident: The proposition himself proves, when he says
omnes, all of them exercised the offic^ of teaching, etc. which Paul
prescribes to BB. etc. What can be more plain? For where there are none but
Ministers, there are Ministers only: where all exercise the function of
teaching and preaching to the people, which Paul enjoined Bishops; and
instructing the younger sort of the clergy, there are none but Ministers.
Therefore where all exercise the function of teaching and preaching, etc. there
are Ministers only.

14. Caluins testimony that the Churches were dioceses.
As touching the second, Calvin most plainly gives testimony to it in the next
words following: Vnicuique ciuita^i erat attributa certa regio, qua Presbyteros
jude sumeret, and velut corpori ecclesiae illius accenseretur: To every City
was attributed a certain region or country, which from thence should receive
their Presbyters, and be reckoned as being of the body of that Church. What can
be more plain, that each Church contained the city and country adjoining,
that both city and country made but one Church, as it were one body, whereof
the head was the city, the other members the parishes in the country: that the
Presbyteries were only in cities, and that the country parishes received each
of them their Presbyter, when they wanted, from thence? Who therefore (to use
his own words) could be either so ignorant as not to see, or so shameless as
not to acknowledge, that the Churches in Caluins judgment were dioceses? How
does he avoid this? Forsooth Calvin does not name dioceses.But does he not
mean dioceses, when he speaks of Churches containing each of them a city
and country adjoining? Yea but he does not tie the power of ecclesiastical
government to the Bishops Church. No does? he acknowledges no Presbytery but
in the cities, of which the Bishops were Presidents. As for country parishes,
they had not Presbyteries, but several Presbyters: and those they had, as
Calvin says, from the Presbytery of the city. Besides, when he makes the
city and country to be but one body, it cannot be doubted, but that he meant
the Church in the city was the head of this body, and the rest of the parts
subject unto it. Whereto you may add that which after he says of chorepiscopi
placed in the diocese, where it was large, as the Bishops deputy, in the
country subject to him. But what Caluins judgment was in this behalf. let the
Church of Geneua, framed thereby, test^fie. Which is as much a diocese now, as
when it was under a Bishop, there being but one Presbytery, unto which all the
parishes are subject. But let us hear what this Refuter does confess Calvin
to have acknowledged in this behalf: He neither names dioceses, nortieth
power of ecclesiastical government to the Bishops Church, but only
acknowledges that for orders sake some one Minister was chosen, to be, not a
diocesan, but a titular Bishop. Thus it fares with men that wrangle against
the light of their Conscience, being convicted with evidence of truth; but
desirous to make a show of opposition, when they know not what to say against
it. Does not Calvin plainly say, that to each citt^ was attributed a certain
region, and that both were one Church as it were one body? To what purpose does
he then say, that he only acknowledges that for orders sake, etc. Is not his
answer in effect this, Calvin does confess that the Churches indeed were
dioceses, and that the Bishops had under their charge both the city and
country adjoining, (for that also he confesses in the next point) but they
were not Bishops having such authority as you speak of? that is, I confess he
(...) with you in the second and third point, as you say; but yet in the fourth
(which also you confess) he dissenteth from you. Howbeit he expresses his
mind absurdly, when he says, not a diocesan, but a titular Bishop.For was not
the Bishop a diocesan, if his Church was a diocese? if he had under his charge
both the city and country adjoining? Yea but he was not a diocesan, but a
titular Bishop. Though Calvin acknowledges the Bishop to have been only
President of the Presbytery, like to the Consul in the senate of Rome (which
you call a titular B.) wherein (being the fourth point) he dissenteth from us;
yet does he acknowledge, that under his Bishopric, was contained both the
city and country, and consequently that he was a diocesan Bishop, unless he
that is Bishop of a diocese, be not a diocesan Bishop.

His testimony therefore to the third is clear, 15.
especially if you add that which follows, concerning the Ch^repiscopi, or
country Bishops. Calums testimony that the Bishops were diocesan BB.
For Calvin says, If the country which was under his Bishopric, were larger
then he could sufficiently discharge all the offices of a Bishop in every
place, rural Bishops were substituted here and there to supply his place.
Which is a most pregnant testimony, both against the parish discipline and also
for the diocesan. For if every parish had sufficient authority within
themselves, what needed rural Bishops to ouerlooke them? If the Bishop of the
City had been Bishop but of one parish, why does Calvin say the Country was
under his Bishopric? Why does he say, that the Bishopric was sometimes so
large, that there was need of Country Bishops as his deputies, to represent
the Bishop in the province or country? But what says the Refuter to this? he
confesses (not ingenuously, but as it were (...) Minerua, as if it stuck in
his teeth) that Calvin says somewhat to that purpose. But that somewhat is as
good as nothing: for he does not say they were diocesan Bishops: (O
impudency!) neither does he speak of the Apostles (...), of which all the
question is, for the feeling of a Christian conscience in the (...) of
government. All the question concerning the Apostles times? do not your selves
extend your assertion to 200. years? And if nothing will settle the conscience
but what is alleged from the Apostles times, what have you to settle your
conscience for your opinion, who can allege no sound proof neither from the
Apostles times, nor afterward? But to what purpose should I spend more words
in this matter, seeing I have heretofore proved, that the circuit of every
Bishops charge, was from the beginning as great, if not greater, then
afterward? And if nothing may be in the Church, but as it was in the Apostles
times, then ought not the whole people of any country be converted to the
profession of Christianity, because none was then: and as well might they
allege, that no whole country ought to be converted to the profession of the
faith, because none was in the Apostles times, as to deny the people of a whole
country to be a Church, because it was not so in the Apostles times.

Thus have I manifestly proved, that Calu^^ gives testimony to the first
point; and in the two latter, that he wholly agrees with us. So does ^eza, as
I have showed before, testifying the Churches were diocese^, Bez. de grad. min.
c. 24.
and that in the chief town of every diocese, the first Presbyter, who
afterward began to be called a Bishop, (he speaks therefore of the Apostles
times) was set over his fellow Presbyters, both of the City and country, that
is the whole diocese. And because sometimes the country was of larger extent
then that all upon every occasion could conveniently meet in the City; and
forasmuch as all other small Cities and towns did need common inspection, or
over sight, they had also their Chorepiscopi, that is, country or vice-Bishops.

Yea but ( says he, Ad Page 81.
being guilty to himself of untruth in denying Caluins consent with us) it had
been nothing to the purpose if Calvin had agreed with him in all, seeing he
affi^meth withal, that they were but humane ordinances, and aberrations from
the word of God. That which Calvin speaks of the superiority of Bishops in
degree (which is the fourth point, wherein I confess he dissenteth from us,
and from the truth, supposing it to be of custom, and humane constitution)
that the ^^futer extends to all his reports concerning the ancient Church
government; when as he plainly testifies, that with so great (...) they had
composed the government, that there (...) it almost diss^nant from the word of
God. Do^^ (...) where say or insinuate, that it is an aberration from the word
of God, either that their college of Presbyters did consist wholly of Pastors
and Teachers? See Calu. in Act. 20.17.28. and in Act. 14.23.
Or that to each City was attributed a certain region, being portion of the
same Church? Or that the Bishop had the superintendency over the City and
country? It will never be showed.

And now are we come to his conclusion, containing a most vain bra^ge,
proceeding either from pitiful ignorance, or extreme vnconscionablenes: That
having answered my arguments (in such sort as you have heard) and wanting
indeed proofs, worth the producing, he shall not need (the untruth of this third
point is so evident) to bring any proof for the maintenance of the contrary
assertion. And so I leave him, conceiving hope of victory, like the King of A^,
between these old forces, which I have made to retire upon him, and the new
supplies marching toward him.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK, proving the superiority of Bishops above other Ministers.
CHAP. 1. Confuting the refuters preamble to the fourth point, and defending
mine own entrance thereinto.
( Sermon. sect. 1. page 28. In the fourth place therefore we are to entreat of
the superiority of BB. over other Ministers: for although the Presbyterians
and we agree in this etc. almost to the end of the page 29.)
OF the five points which I propounded, three have already been handled: the
first concerning Lay Elders, against both sorts of Disciplinarians, as well the
elder, as the younger; though between their opinions there is this difference,
that the elder require such a presbytery in each City or Diocese; the
younger, in each Parish. In the second and third concerning Dioceses, and
Diocesans, I had to deal only with our new sect of Disciplinarians, who urge
the newfound parish-discipline. In the fourth and fifth which remain, I
propounded to my self the confutation of the elder and more learned sort of
disciplinarians, not greatly regarding, what our innouatours in these 2. points
do hold, or deny; their proper opinions concerning the parish discipline, being
in the three former points sufficiently confuted. The which I do the rather
note, for 2. causes. The one, that the reader may understand the refuters
euasions, in disauowing such assertions as I ascribe unto the disciplinarians,
to be to no purpose; seeing they are held by men more learned and judicious,
with whom principally I had to deal. The other that he may discern the
poverty and weakness of their cause; the chief, and almost only strength
thereof, being the allegation of diverse protestant writers, (whom I called the
learneder sort of Disciplinarians) who are parties in the cause.

As touching the fourth point; the refuter, before he come to my words, makes
an idle flourish: the sum whereof is this; that were it not, that by
confuting the superiority of Bishops, he should overthrow the Supremacy of the
Pope, he would scarce have vouchsafed an answer to my discourse. Here
therefore he shows two things; first, that by confuting the superiority of
Bishops, he shall withal refute the supremacy of the Pope. 2. that otherwise,
an answer to me in this fourth point were needless.

In the former, he seems ignorantly, and yet maliciously to presuppose, that
the superiority of Bishops, and the supremacy of the Pope, hang as it were
upon one pin; and that he which grants the one, must needs hold the other.
For the Basis or ground of his dispute, is this, such as is, and ought to be
the government of the whole Church, such is, and ought to be the government of
the parts or several Churches; and contrariwise. from hence he has two
inferences: the first thus: Such as is, and ought to be the government of the
whole Church, such is, and ought to be the government of the parts or several
Churches.

But the government of the whole Church is Aristocraticall, and not
Monarchical: therefore the government of the parts or several Churches is,
and ought to be Aristocraticall, and not Monarchical.

The proposition he takes for granted, 2. Whether the government of the whole
Church, and of the parts, must be of one form.
noting it as an absurdity in me, To fight for that in the particulars, which
in the general I wish overthrown.



But it would be known, what he means by the particulars, or parts of the
Church, whose government he would have aunswerable to the universal or whole
Church. If he mean only parishionall Churches (as he needs must): For, there is
no other visible Church endued with power of Ecclesiastical government in his
conceit but a Parish; Parishes (no doubt) may be proud of the comparison: for
then, as some of them have written in stately manner, as Rome had her Senate,
Lacedaemon her Seigniorie, Athens her Areopage, Jerusalem her Synedrion, Venice
(which our Refuter adds) her council of State; and lastly, (which exceeds
all) as the universal Church has her Oecumenicall synod, so the Church of
every Parish, in every street, and in every hamlet, must have an
Ecclesiastical senate. But what parts soever he understand, whether
Parishionall, National, or Diocesan Churches, the proposition is untrue: for
of Provincial, or National Churches, the Metropolitans, and Bishops of
dioceses, are, and ought to be the governors. But howsoever, in that respect
the form of government may seem to be Monarchical; yet in respect of the
manner of governing, the Metropolis using the advice of the National, or
Provincial synodes, the Bishop of his Presbytery, they may be
Aristocraticall. Who knows not that the common wealth of Rome sometimes was
popular, and likewise that of Athens (for it is an error of the Refuter to
reckon Athens with Venice, as an example of Aristocracie;) yet the several
provinces were ruled by several governors, as Propraetors, and Proconsuls.
The government of this whole Island (blessed be God, for uniting the two
Kingdoms in the person of our Sovereign) is Monarchical: yet the government
of several parts by Counsels, and Presidents thereof, may seem so far
Aristocraticall. The government of the whole Church in Heaven and earth is
Monarchical under one head and Monarch, which is Christ our King. And for the
government of the whole Church upon earth, he has no Vicar general, but the
holy Ghost, who appoints governors under him, which may govern the several
parts of the Church in some respect monarchically, though the whole Church, by
the mutual consociation of her governors for the common good, and by the
concurrence of them to an Occumenicall synod, is governed Aristocratically:
for the whole Church being but one body, there ought to be a Christian
consociation of the governors thereof for the common good of the whole body.
If among the Princes of the whole world, there were the like consociation, the
universal world should be governed in that respect Aristocratically, though
the several parts for the most part Monarchically. So much of the proposition.

The assumption he proves by the testimonies of our writers against the
Papists,. 3. The government of the whole Church Aristocraticall.
with whom himself, and his copartners do not agree. For, first, when they say
that the regiment of the whole Church is Aristocraticall; they mean in respect
of the governors of the several Churches, who as being severed rule their
Churches severally, there being no one visible Monarch over all; so being
congregated in an Oecumenicall Synod, do make one Ecclesiastical Senate. But
our new Disciplinarians do hold, that every parish is an entire body by it
self, having within it self, for the government of it self, sufficient
authority vnsubordinate and independent: and therefore do not acknowledge any
lawful authority in Synodes to define, determine, or command, but only to
deliberat, and advise, as H. I. in his book urging reformation, and other the
Christian and modest challengers of disputation, together with the humble An.
1609.
petitioners suing for a toleration, do teach.

Secondly, Our writers hold the government of the Church universal to be
Aristocraticall, because as our Savior Christ ascending into Heaven, left his
twelve Apostles, as it were twelve Patriarchs, aunswerable to the Princes of
the twelve tribes Cypr. de Simplic praelatorum: Hoc erant vtique caeteri
Apostoli quod suit Petrus, pari consorrio prae^liti and honoris and pot^statis.
, furnished with equal authority and power, whose college was the supreme
Senate of the universal church: so they committed the Churches to Bishops, as
their successors, being equal in degree; Eiusdem sacerdotij. Hier. ad Euagr.
who as they govern the Churches severally, so jointly (with other governors)
are the highest Senate of the universal Church. But it was never practiced in
the Church of God, that any presbyters or pastors of parishes should be called
to general councils, to have right of suffrage and authority to judge and
determine those matters which were debated in those councils; but both they and
Deacons (I mean some of them) were to attend their Bishop, to assist him with
their private counsel and advice: which one argument (by the way) does notably
set forth the superiority of Bishops over other ministers.

But as his assumption crosses the conceits of our new Disciplinarians, so is
his conclusion repugnant to their assertion, who ascribing the supreme
authority in their several Churches to the whole congregation, stand for a
popular state, rather then Aristocraticall. Whereas indeed the government of
Churches, as they are provincial, are according to the ancient Canons which
are in use with us, governed by provincial synodes, and therefore by a
regiment Aristocraticall.

So that of this syllogism, the proposition is false, the assumption is
gainesaid by themselves, and the conclusion, confuting their own assertion,
agrees with the practice of provincial churches with us. Though the
government of several Churches be monarchical, yet it follows not that
therefore the government of the Universal Church should be monarchical.


. 4. His other inference is this: If the government of the seurall Churches may
be monarchical, then by the same reason the government of the whole Church may
be monarchical. But the government of the whole Church may not be
monarchical: therefore the government of the several Churches may not.

This consequence is unsound, there being not the like reason of the whole
Church and of the parts. And that is the answer, which ou^ men do make to the
papists, when they urge this reason; as there was but one high priest, for the
government of the Church under the Law, so there should be, but one chief
Bishop for the government of the whole Church. They answer, there is not the
like reason between the Church of one nation, and of the whole world. Call.
Inst. li. 4. ca. 6. s. 2. Gentis vnius and totius orbis long diuersa est
ratio, perinde est, ac siquis contendat totum mundum a praefecto vno debere
regi, quia ager vnus non plures praefectos habeat. For of the universal
Church, Christ only is the head; which supreme and universal government, if
any man shall assume to himself, as the Pope of Rome does; thereby he
declares himself to be Antichrist, or emulus Christi, sitting in the Church
of God, as God, and lifting up himself above all that is called God. But as
touching the several Churches, those who be the lieutenants of Christ, may be
called the heads or governors thereof, as sovereign princes of all states and
persons within their dominions, Metropolitans of provincial Churches, Bishops
of their dioces, and Pastors of their several flocks.

Secondly, whereas particular men are enabled by God to govern several
churches; no mortal man is able to weild the government of the whole Church:
which is one of the maine arguments, which our writers use against the
monarchical government of the whole Church: which this refuter seeks in
vain to infringe. The Roman Emperors, when their Empire was at the largest,
and they esteemed themselves Lords of the world, enjoying indeed not one third
part of the whole, yet finding themselves unable to weild so great a burden,
were feign to assume colleagues unto them with whom they parted the Empire,
when they might have retained the whole.

Thirdly, the monarchical government of the whole Church would prove dangerous
and pernicious to the same, if that one head or Monarch thereof should fall
into error or idolatry; especially, he being so above the whole Church as that
he should not be subject to a general Council.

But the heads of several Churches, if they err or fall, may by the Synodes
of other Bishops be brought into order, or deposed. Examples whereof we have in
all, even the chief seats of Bishops, as of Marcellinus at Rome, Paulus
Samosatenus at Antioch, Dioscorus at Alexandria, Nestorius and Macedonius at
Constantinople. etc. Cyprian writing to Stephanus Bishop of Rome about the
deposing of Martianus Bishop of Arles says, Lib. 3. Epist. 13.
Idcirco copiosum corpus est Sacerdot^^ concordi^ mu^na glutino atque vnitatis
vinculo copulatum, vt si quis ex collegio nostro haeresim facere, and greg^m
Christi l^cerare and vastare tentauerit, subueniant cateri, etc.

Fourthly, to the head of several Churches the members may have easy and
speedy recourse, for clearing of doubts, and deciding of controversies etc.
But from all parts of the world men could not without infinite trouble, besides
manifold inconveniences, repair to one place. These reasons may suffice for
the confutation of the proposition.

The assumption is false in respect of Christ, who is the Monarch of the
Church; otherwise I acknowledge it to be true, Ad page 82.
but without any disadvantage to my cause: the odious consequence of the
proposition (which is so often urged) being unsound.

If therefore he can no better disprove the Supremacy of the Pope, then he does
the superiority of Bishops, it were better he should be silent, then busy
himself in matters above his reach.

The other part of his idle flourish is a vain brag, that were it not for
that cause, he should not need to busy himself in answearing, or examining
this point. For if neither the Churches were dioceses, nor the Bishops
Diocesan, to what end should we enquire what power or jurisdiction they had?
But the Churches were dioceses and the BB. diocesan, as I have manifestly
proved before, and as those Disciplinarians do confess, with whom chiefly I
deal in this point: who granting that the Churches were dioceses, Wherein the
Disciplinarians do agree, and wherein they descent from us.
and the Bishops diocesan, do notwithstanding deny the superiority of Bishops
in degree etc.

. 5. Now that the state of the controversy betwixt us and them may appear, I
show wherein the Presbyterians agree with us, and wherein they dissent from us.
But first he finds fault that I call them Presbyterians, as sometimes I do
also Disciplinarians; though thereby I mean no other, but such as do stand
for the Presbytery, and for that discipline, being loath either to call them
adversaries (whom I acknowledge to be brethren) or to offend them with the
title of Puritans, wherewith others do vpbraid them. And howsoever he in
bitter scorn does say, that of my charity I do in scorn so call them: I do
profess unfeignedly, that out of a charitable mind, I did term them
Presbyterians, not knowing how to speak of them, as dissenting from us, more
charitably. And whereas I say they agree with us in this, that by divine
institution there was in the primitive Church, and still ought to be, one set
over the Presbyters, he says; I had need to be as mighty in eloquence as
Pericles, if I would persuade that. But small eloquence may serve, where there
is such evidence to prove the truth. Only the Reader must remember, that I
speak not of my adversary, and other new fangled disciplinarians, who are not
to have the credit of coming so near the truth; but of men of greater
learning, and better desert in Gods Church: who as they agree with us, that the
Churches were dioceses, and the Presbyteries with the Presidents thereof
provided for diocesses, (which ^ have showed before) so they consent in this,
that the Presbyteries had by divine ordinance a President set over them: the
which I will prove straightwaies, after I have noted his ce^sure concerning the
three points wherein I said they differ from us. The first, that they make the
Bishop superior in order only, and not in degree. 2. That they assign a
superiority or presidentship unto him for a short time, and that by course. 3.
That granting unto him a priority of order, they deny unto him a maiority of
rule or power.

To the first he says, If by degree I mean dignity only (as never any man
did) they do not deny the President to be superior indignity and honor,
during the time of his presidentship: which is nothing else but to grant unto
him a priority of order, which Beza calls (...), the prerogati^e or
precedence, Ad page 33.
and to go before in honor. But if I understand degree, of office and ministry
distinct from Presbyters, as theirs is from deacons, then he professes
themselves to dissent from us. And so let them: for he cannot be ignorant, that
I maintain the ancient distinction of the ecclesiastical Ministers into three
(...) degrees, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. As for those Presidents of
Presbyteries, which were superior to the other Presbyters, in order and not in
degree; such were they whom they were wont to call, sometimes (...), sometimes
archipresbyteri, sometimes (...), that is to say, Deanes, and not Bishops. And
it was a great oversight in these learned men, under the name and title of the
ancient Bishops, to describe unto us Deanes.

To the second, he says; It is manifestly false: for we tie not the
presidentshippe to any short or long time, nor give it to all presbyters by
course, as if it were a matter of divine institution: howsoever, where all are
fit for that service, (as no doubt but in Vtopia they all are) we think it
perhaps (for he does but guess at things which he knows not) in discretion
(he might have said, indiscretion) confirmed by experience, not amiss to have
the business so carried.

To the third he says; That it also is untrue: for we give (says he) the
President, during the time of his presidentship, as priority of order, so
maiority of rule; though not supreme and sole authority, as none but Papists
do, and they to none but to the Pope.

As touching their agreement with us,. 6. They hold that there must be a
President of the Presbytery. lib. 1. cap. 2. 16. and 17.
and the second point wherein they differ from us (for of the first I have
spoken at large before, showing the judgments of Calvin and Beza therein) you
shall hear the opinion of a chief patron of the discipline, in a treatise,
which he has written in defense thereof. Beza therefore teaches, that it is a
divine ordinance, both that there should be a president of each presbytery, and
also that his presidentshippe should be but for a short time, and by course.
The former, which is the order it self, he says De grad. Minist. cap. 23.
, is not only an ordinance divine, but also essential and immutable. The
latter, which is ordinis modus, though it were of divine institution, yet it is
but accidental, and so mutable. And when he distinguishes Bishops into three
sorts De grad. Minist. c. 24. p. 177
, he calls them only divine, which have a priority of order only, and that
for a time and by course. As for those which had a perpetual presidentship,
whereunto they were preferred by election, by whom the priority of order (as he
imagines) was changed into a superiority of degree, and were such as he will
not absolutely Ibid. c. 23. p. 144. 156.
condemn: yet such (in his opinion) are but humane: and to these he supposes
the name Bishop first to have been appropriated. Such divine Presidents he
acknowledges these seven Angels to have been, and before them Timothy at
Ephesus. And whereas Ierom says, at the first the Churches were governed (...)
Presbyterorum consili^; by the common counsel of Presbyters: N^^ confuso,
says he, and perturbat^? What Page 139.140
, says he, confused and disordered: so as when the Presbyters did meet, none
should be President among them? That is not likely: therefore even then the
Presbytery had a President. And where it was objected by D. Sarauia, against
that opinion of Jerome, that these seven Churches had each of them an Angel by
divine ordinance set over them, to whom a more eminent authority belonged in
the regiment of the Church; to what purpose, says Beza Page 159.160
, do you urge this against Jerome? For when he said, the Churches were
governed at the first by the common counsel of Presbyters, we may not think,
that he so doted, as to dream that none of the Presbyters was President over
that assembly.

As for the third and the last, nothing is more evident Vide supr. l. 1. c. 2.
16.
, then that Calvin and Beza, They deny to the President maiority of rule.
as they deny the Bishop to be superior to other Ministers in degree, so also
in rule and dominion. For he was not so superior in honor and dignity (says
Calvin Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 4 s. 2.
) as to have dominion over his Colleagues. And again; that he did go so
before others in dignity, that himself was subject to the assembly of his
brethren. Beza Beza de grad. p. 156 157.
acknowledges their superiority to have been the dignity or honor of the
first place, but no degree of rule over their compresbyters. And is not this
part of H. I. his second maine assertion, that the ancient Bishops in the first
two hundred years differed from other pastors only in priority of order, and
not in maiority of rule? T. C. T. C. l^. 110.
likewise speaking of him that was chosen to moderate the meeting of Ministers,
says, If any man will call him a President, or Moderator, or a Governor, we
will not strive, so that it be with these cautions; that he be not called
simply Governor, or Moderator, but Governor or Moderator of that action, and
for that time, and subject to the orders that others be, and to be censured by
the company of the Brethren, as well as others, if he be judged anyway fault^.
And that after that action ended, and meeting dissolved, he sit him down in
his old place, and set himself in equal state with the rest of the Ministers.
Thirdly, that this government or presidentship be not so tied to that
Minister, but that at the next meeting it shall be lawful to take another.
The untruths therefore which the Refuter has bestowed upon me here, he must be
entreated to take to himself.

To prove their dissent from us in this fourth point,. 7. Beza dissenting from
us in this fourth point, but with more moderation then our Disciplinarians use.
I alleged Beza his distinction of Bishops into three sorts: and because it is
an odious distinction, I concea^^d his name, and to salve his credit, J showed,
that although he came far short of Caluins moderation, yet he is more
moderately affected toward our Bishops, then the Disciplinarians among us
usually be: who, as they speak despitefully of them, calling them
Antichristian, pettite Popes, etc. so do they wish and labor for the
extirpation of them, whereas Beza speaking reverently of them, prays for
their continuance.

But both his distinction and his wish, by the Refuter are perverted,
expounding him as though he had accounted for humane, those which had only a
priority of order: whereas indeed he acknowledges such a presidentship as you
have heard, to be a divine ordinance; and understands his prayer, where he
wishes the continuance of the Bishops, as if he had wished that so long as
England has Bishops, they may be such as may give their lives for the truth,
as they did. Where, whiles he understands Beza as wishing our Bishops to
be Martyrs, he indiscreetly makes him to wish that our Princes may be
persecutors, which God forbid. That which he adds concerning my saying Am^^
to the like wish for the Churches of France and Scotland, and yet be no
maintainer of their presbyteries, is merely idle; for I did not bring in Beza
as a maintainer of Bishops, but rather did note him as one of their chief
opposites, citing his differences from us, and mentioning that distinction of
Bishops: howbeit I acknowledge his proposition to be with more moderation, then
is commonly to be found in the Disciplinarians among us.

. 8. The refuter seeks starting holes.
Now I am to descend with him into the particulars which I propounded to be
handled: first to show, that the Bishops or Angels of the primiti^e Church,
were as well as ours, superior to other Ministers in degree: and secondly, to
declare more particularly, wherein their superiority did consist.

Ad page 84.
But before he enters the combat, distrusting himself and his cause, he
seeks (as such champions use to do) which way (if need be) he may make an
escape: and having to this purpose looked well about him, he has found out two
starting holes, whereby he hops to find some evasion. The former has these
windings and turnings in it: He would restrain the Primitive church unto the
Apostles times.
1. That the primiti^e church is to be confined to the Apostles times, and not
extended to the whole 200 years. 2. That the question is ^^ be ^nderstood of
the Angels of the 7. Churches. 3. That I must p^^^^e these Angels to have had
sole power of ordination and jurisdiction. The first of these argues extreme
diffidence: for Calvin, and others, in this question, within the limits of the
primitive Church, include the times of Constanti^e, at the least; yea Calvin
includes all the time Just. l. 4. c. 4.
a^tepapa^^m, before the Papacy; in which time he acknowledges the form of
Church government, to have had nothing in it almost disso^ant from the word of
God. And whereas, says he Parag. 4.
every province had among their Bishops an Archbishop; and whereas also in the
Council of Nice, there were established Patriarchs, who in order and dignity
were superior to the Archbishops, that appertained to the preservation of
discipline. And although he misliketh that the government so established, was
called Hiera: ^hy; notwithstanding, if omitting the name, says he, we look
into the thing, we shall find that the ancient Bishops would not frame a form
of Church government differing from that which God prescribed in his word. And
Beza Confess c. 5. 29.
confesses, that those things which were ordained of the ancient Fathers,
concerning the seats of Bishops, Metropolitanes, and Patriarchs, assigning
their limits* and attributing unto them certain authority, were appointed
optimo zelo, out of a very good zeal. And therefore (no doubt) out of such
zeal, as was according to knowledge; otherwise it would have been far from
being optimus, the best.

Zanchius De relig. c. 25. 11.
entreating of the diverse orders of Ministers in the primitive Church, as
Presbyters, Bishops, Archbishops, etc. faith, they may be defended. Against
which, some learned man (I will not say Beza) having taken exception, Zanchius
makes this apology. Obseru. in cap. 25. aphor. 10.11.
When I wrote this confession of the faith, I did write all things out of a
good conscience, and as I believed, so I freely spoke. Now my faith is grounded
chiefly and simply on the word of God: Something also in the next place on the
common consent of the whole ancient Catholic Church, if that be not repugnant
to the Scriptures. I do also believe, that what things were defined and
received by the godly Fathers, being gathered together in the name of the Lord,
by the common consent of all, without any gainsaying of the holy scriptures,
that those things also (though they be not of the same authority with the holy
Scriptures) proceeded from the holy Ghost. Hence it is, that those things that
be of this kind, I neither will, nor dare with good conscience mislike. But
what is more certain out of histories, Councels, and writings of all the
Fathers, then that those orders of Ministers, whereof I spoke, were
established, and received by the common consent of all Christendom? Quis a^tem
ego sim, qui quod tota Ecclesia approbaui^, improbem? And who am I that I
should disallow that which the whole Church allowed? etc.

Neither do I see any reason,. 9. The Church under Constantine to be imitated
of us.
why the Church in Constantines time should not rather be propounded as a
pate^^e for imitation, to Churches that live under Christian princes, and
flourish through Gods blessing in peace and prosperity; then the Churches of
former times, which were not in all things established and settled according to
their desires, but were hindered by persecution. For in time of persecution,
their government was not always such as they would, but such as they could
attain unto. And unless we would have the Churches to live always under
persecution, it is madness to require them to be imitated in all things. But
what was by general consent received, and practiced in the time of peace and
prosperity, was that which in their judgments ought to be done, and is of us
being in the like case, to be imitated. Now that in Constantines time the
Bishops had superiority over other Ministers in degree, and a singular
pre-eminence of power and authority, it is most evident. Neither was their
superiority and authority increased by the accession of the Christian
Magistrate, as their wealth was, but rather diminished, seeing while there was
not a Christian Magistrate, they were feign to supply that defect, and by their
own authority did many things, which afterward were done or assisted by the
Magistrate. The same form of government, and the like authority of diocesan
B.B. throughout all the times of the primitive Church.
But though there can no color of a good reason be given, why the superiority
and authority of Bishops, as they were diocesan, should have been greater in
the fourth century, then in the third; or in the third, then in the second; or
in the second, then the first; the first Bishops in all likelihood, having had
rather a more eminent then less authority, yet our new Disciplinarians, for a
poor shift and evasion, deny this superiority of Bishops in degree and
maiority in power to have been in the first two hundred years, because they
conceive there is not the like evidence for the second, as for the third. Now
our Refuter perceiving there is better evidence then he imagined for the second
century, will needs have the times of the primitive Church restrained to the
time of the Apostles. And when they are driven from that, they were best to
fly to the time of Christ's conversation upon the earth.

For my part, I make no doubt, but that Anianus, who succeeded S. Mark at
Alexandria, being a man (...). Eusebius. l. 2. c. 24
beloved of God, (...), every way admirable, had the same episcopal authority
which S. Mark had before him, and that he, and those which succeeded him, even
in the Apostles times, viz. Abilius and Cerd^ had no less authority as
diocesan Bishops, then those which came two hundred years after them. Indeed,
when the Churches multiplying, there was a consociation of dioceses in the
province, the Bishop of Alexandria became actually a Metropolitan Bishop, which
from the first might be intended: and when there was a consociation of
provinces subjected to him, he became a Patriarch, the ancient Fathers in godly
policy so thinking it necessary. Now if any man shall think, that the Bishop
of Alexandria was but a parish Bishop at the first, and upon cons^ciation of
parishes subjected to him, became a diocesan, he is to understand, that the
diocese, and the mother Church of the diocese, was before any parish; that
parishes arise out of the distribution of the diocese; that the Bishop and his
Presbytery of the mother Church were appointed not for one parish, but for the
whole diocese; that at Alexandria, in, and from S. Marks time, who constituted
the Churches there, there have been more Churches then one subjected to the
Bishop of Alexandria.

Unlearned therefore and ungrounded is that distinction of Bishops into six
sorts,. 10. Of H.I. ( page 7.) his distinction of BB. into 6. sorts.
viz. 1. Parishionall: 2. Diocesan titular Bishop, being the President or
Moderator over the Pastors of a diocese: 3. Diocesan ruling Bishop, though not
solely: 4. Diocesan L. Bishop: 5. A Patriarchall Bishop: 6. An universal
Bishop. Of the first sort, it is said, all were in the first two hundred
years. Of the second, there began to be some in the end of the second
century. The third began about the year 260. The fourth shortly after
Augustines time. The fifth (for he knew not how to distinguish betwixt
Metropolitans, whom he outskippeth, and Patriarchs) sometimes before the
Council of Nice. And how is all this proved? It is strange to see, how strong
some men's conceits can be, when their reasons are full weak. The proofs for
the parish Bishop, J have before disproued. How is the second proved? Such
perhaps first of all was Iulianus the tenth Bishop of Alexandria. Perhaps! But
why he rather then S. Mark, or Anianus, or any other of his predecessors?
Because in his time first mention is made by Lib. 5. c. 9.
Eusebius, that there were diverse Churches in that City, and he Bishop of
them. This would have gone for a stout reason, no doubt, had not Eusebius Lib.
2. cap. 15
himself testified, that Saint Mark constituted the Churches in Alexandria it
self: which ever from S. Marks time had but one Bishop at once. How is the
third demonstrated? It may be this began at Alexandria with Dionysius Anno 260.
, the thirteenth Bishop of that place. Very well; perhaps, it may be; these are
very good proofs. But why may it be? It seems to be Ieromes meaning, where he
says, that some priority in Bishops continued there from Mark to Heraclas and
Dionysius. Hear Ieromes words Ad Euagrium.
: Even at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, unto the Bishops Heraclas and
Dionysius, the Presbyters always having chosen one from among themselves, and
placed him in a higher degree, called him Bishop; even as an army chooses a
General. Which words Jerome wrote to magnify the calling of Presbyters, and
to prefe^re them before Deacons; both because they chose their Bishop, as also
because they did elect him from among themselves, until Heraclas and
Dionysius. But it is a world to see what is collected from these words, both by
that Author, and also T. C. By that Author, first, That some priority in
Bishops continued there from Mark to Heraclas and Dionysius. As if Jerome had
given any the least signification of the less authority of Bishops before
Heraclas, then after, and had not signified some difference only in their
election. For Heraclas and Dionysius, who had been Origens scholars, and
succeeded him one after the other in his office of Catechist, or Teacher in
Alexandria, in respect whereof, they were no more Presbyters, then Origin Vide
supr. l. 1. c. 11.. 4.
himself had been; notwithstanding for their excellent learning, the
Presbyters (who till then had ever chosen one out of their own number to be
Bishop) made choice of these two, one after the other, although at the time of
their election, they were not Presbyters. But what follows? At Heraclas (it
is probable) was a period of one sort, viz. of titular diocesan Bishops: and
with Dionysius began another, viz. of ruling diocesan BB. Priority of order in
one Bishop Had the Bishop priority of order only in respect of his parishioners?
over a parish, seems to have continued exclusiuely, from Mark to Iulian^^s
(for he was ashamed to say, that Saint Mark, who, as the same Jerome
testifies, was the Bishop of Alexandria, was but a parish Bishop:) over a
diocese, from Iulian^^ to Heraclas (...), and the maiority of ruling in the
diocese, to have (...) with Dionysius. O acumen! But the proof is admirable,
and the conclusion passes all. The proof is this: Nothing l^^teth us, but
that thus we may probably think. More is the pity. For true learning and a
sound judgment, would have let you from entertaining, and much more from
broching such unlearned and ungrounded fancies. Yea but, by this means,
Eusebius and Ieromes relation shall well agree. I answer, though these fancies
had never been heard of, there had not been so much as any show of
disagreement betwixt them.

The conclusion: Howsoever it is, this is certain, that neither the one, nor
the other, was known before these times. As if he had said; Perhaps Iulianus
was the first titular Bishop. It may be the ruling diocesan Bishops began
at Alexandria with Dionysius. At Heraclas, it is probable, was a period of one
sort, etc. Nothing lets us but that thus we may probably think. But how
soever uncertain our premises be, we are resolved upon a certain
conclusion, it is certain, etc. Is it not strange that so certain a
conclusion should be inferred upon so uncertain premises? especialle seeing it
is most certain that before Dionysius his time, there were not only diocesan,
but also Metropolitan BB.

But will you also hear what T. C. gathers out of these words of Jerome? 11.
T. C. his collection out of Ierom^ words.
Godly (...) m^slik^d this order of giving the name Bishop to one in a
Church, and by all likelihood broke it: which Ieromes words Ad Euagr.
do apparently import. This custom was in the Church of Alexandria, from Saint
Mark, until Heraclas and Dionysius: for unless there were some change then,
why should he not rather have said, From Saint Mark to his time? First, to
his assertion, I say it is untrue, that godly men misliked the giving of the
name Bishop to one in Church, neither was there any reason why they should
mislike it. For first, as the name of Angels, being common to all Ministers, is
by the holy Ghost appropriated to Bishops, in such sort, as though every
Minister be an Angel, yet only one is the Angel of the Church: so by the
same reason, Episcopi being in the scriptures a title common to al Ministers,
is so appropriated to one in every Church, that whereas all Ministers are
Bishops in a general sense, one only is the Bishop of that Church: neither
was it arrogance, but modesty rather in Bishops, who assumed this name. For
whereas in the Scriptures they are called sometimes the Angels of the Churches,
sometimes the Apostles of the Churches, sometimes (...), Rulers, sometime
(...), sometimes episcopi, they contented themselves with the title of least
honor, and left the name (...), importing the honor of the Ministry in
general, to other Ministers. Neither is there any more reason (as D Raynolds
Conf. p. 462.
also says) why the appropriating of the name Bishop to the Angels of the
Churches, should be misliked, then of giving the name Minister to Presbyters,
which is common to Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. Besides, it is most
certain, that in the writings of Ignatius, and others, who lived in, or near
the Apostles times, the name episcopus was appropriated to the Angel of each
Church. Jerome plainly testifies, that from S. Mark^ time, who was the first
Bishop, whom three other succeeded in the Apostles times; one, who was set in a
superior degree, was called Bishop. But that the custom of giving this name to
one, in the Church, (which from S. Marks time had continued) should begin to be
misliked in the time of Heraclus and Dionysius, is against reason; unless it
may be thought, that the estimation of Bishops then decreased; which ill
agrees with H I. conceit. What ancient Writer mentioning Dionysius, does not
call him Bishop of Alexandria? Eusebius so terms him. Athanasius, Chron. ^n.
251. and hist. l. 6.35. etc.

Athanas. de sentent. Dionysij Episcopi Alexandrini.


who was one of his successors, does not only call him Bishop oftentimes, but
also acknowledges him to have bin a Metropolitan B. or rather Patriarch. For
when as the Bishops of Pentapolis began to favor the heresy of Sab^llicus,
Dionysius to whose charge those Churches did appertain, sought to reform them,
You have heard T. C. assertion.

His reason is this, some change there was therefore in the name Bishop. How
weak a reason this is I shall not need to note, seeing I have showed wherein
the change was, there being less likelihood of alceration in this kind, then
in any other. For could any man at that time mislike, that the Bishop of
Alexandria should be called a Bishop, seeing at that time he was without the
mislike of any a Metropolitan Bishop, yea a Patriarch?

But to return to H. I. who says his Diocesan L. Bishop ruling alone, 12. H.
I. diocesan BB. when they began,
who was not established in Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustines time, took place
soon after. And how is this proved? He says, he doubts not of it: though he
be not able to show, neither where, nor when, nor by whom, nor how the Bishops
authority was increased after Augustines times. What if in Augustines time the
authority and pre-eminence of Bishops was abated and restrained, namely in the
fourth Council of Carthage, more then ever before? For whereas the ancient
Canons refer the power both of ordination and jurisdiction to the Bishop,
without mentioning the assistance of the Presbytery: And whereas Bishops
before, such as were peaceable and well disposed, did voluntarily use the
advice and assistance of their clergy: by that Council the assistance of the
clergy, both in ordination and jurisdiction in the Churches of Africa, became
necessary. Neither do I know any reason, why the authority of diocesan Bishops
after Augustines time should be thought to have increased. For as by the
lawful authority of Christian Kings and Princes, to whom they were
subordinate, in regard of the common good of the kingdom, whereof they were
members: so much more by y^ usurped supremacy of the B. of Rome, after the year
607. y^ authority of bishops was lessened and impaired.

We are to come to his fifth step, Of Patriarchs, and when they began.
which is of patriarchal BB. but he has clean marred the stairs that the
refuter and his consorts use to talk of, whereby the Bishops of Rome, from
being as they say a parish Bishop, did arise to the papacy; partly by denying
such BB. as he esteems ours to be, to have been till after Augustines time;
and partly, by outskipping the Metropolitanes. For it cannot be denied, but
that there were diocesan Bishops, such as ours be, before there were
Metropolitanes, or Primates actually; and there were Metropolitanes before
there were Patriarchs. Now it would be known, Conc. Nic. can. 6.
when Patriarchs begun. In the Council of Nice (held about the year three
hundred twenty four) it is acknowledged to have been an ancient custom,
which there was ratified, that the Bishop of Alexandria should have authority
of Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis: and the like custom for the Bishop of Rome in
the West, and of Antioch in the East is mentioned; and the ancient privileges
to each Church, espcially to each Metropolis reserved. To say nothing of Rome,
whereof the Papists say too much: it is plain by that testimony of the Nicene
Council, of Epiphanius before alleged, of Athanasius even now cited, that the
Bishops of Alexandria had of old, long before their time, patriarchall
authority. For that of Antioch, the testimony of Ignatius added to the
authority of the Nicene Council, Ignat. Epist. ad Romans
is sufficient, calling himself the Bishop of Syria; whereby we cannot
conceive him to have been less then an Archbishop. Now if I should ask H.I.
or this Refuter, when Metropolitanes first began; they would not be able truly
to assign their original after the Apostles times. And therefore cunningly
were they omitted by H. I. though I cannot accuse him of any great skill in
making a doubt, whether Caesarea in the Council of Nice, be reckoned as one of
the four seats of the Patriarchs. For express mention is made of Aeli^,
which was the new name given by Adrian to Jerusalem; Conc. Nic. c. 7.
to which, according to ancient custom, the next place of honor after Antioch
was granted; the proper dignity notwithstanding to the Metropolis (which indeed
was Caesarea) being reserved. But if Metropolitanes had not their beginning
after the Apostles times, as no man is able to show they had, then can it not
be doubted, but that diocesan Bishops, much more were in the Apostles times:
for every Metropolita^ was originally B. of his peculiar diocese, being not
actually a Metropolitan, until diverse Churches in the same province, being
constituted, there was a consociation among themselves, and subordination of
them to him, as their primate.

There was therefore no such difference between the first two ages of the
Churches, and those which followed, as that either H. I. or the Refuter should
restrain the times of the primitive Church, either to the end of the second
century, or of the first, with hope to escape that way. Wherefore what proofs
I bring from the third or fourth, yea or fifth century, for the superiority of
Bishops, they are to be esteemed such as do directly and sufficiently prove
the question, unless they shall be able to show, not only that no such thing
was in use, but also that it was not intended in the Apostles time, and the age
following: for what was received and practiced by general consent in all
Christendom, so soon as God gave peace unto his Church, was undoubtedly
desired and intended from the beginning.

The second corner of his first starting hole, 13. The Refuter would restrain
the question to the seven Angels only.
wherewith the second also meets, is, that the question is of the seven
Angels. And what, of no other? Is it not lawful to ascend from the hypothesis,
to the thesis? especially when it is confessed by the Refuter, that the
primitive Churches were all of the like constitution? And therefore what may be
said either of the seven Angels, in respect of the substance of their calling,
may be concluded of other Bishops: and what may be said of the office of other
Bishops in the primitive Church, may be verified of these Angels.

The third, that I must prove these Angels to have had sole power of ordination
and jurisdiction: which also is repeated in his second evasion. But where do I
say in all the sermon, that the Bishops had the sole power of ordination and
jurisdiction? Where do I deny either that the BB. did, or might use the
assistance of their Presbyters, for either of both, or that in the defect of
Bishops, both the one and the other might be performed by Presbyters? In a
word, where do I deny all power either of ordination or jurisdiction to
Presbyters? But let the Reader understand, that there are two maine
calumniations, whereby this Resuter and his consorts do use to disgrace my
Sermon with their followers. The one, that I hold the tenure of our episcopal
function so to be iure diuino, as though no other manner of government were any
way, or any where lawful. The other, that J ascribe so the sole power of of
ordination and jurisdiction to BB. as though the Presbyters had no
jurisdiction, or as though those Churches had no lawful Ministers, which have
not such BB. to ordain them.

His other, (...), or starting hole, is that which he has already four times
run into; His second starting hole.
and making use of it now the fifth time, in the beginning of the next section,
desires the Reader, that it may not be tedious to him, that now the fifth time
he does find fault with me, for not concluding what he (according to his
forced analysis) would have concluded: though all men see, I do directly
prove, what before was propounded, for the proof of my first assertion, viz.
that the Angels, or BB. of the primitive Church were diocesan Bishops; and (for
the substance of their calling) such as ours be. Having therefore proved that
their Churches were dioceses, and themselves diocesan; it remained that J
should prove that they were, as well as ours, superior to other Ministers in
degree, etc: which if I did not endeavor to prove directly, he might have had
some quarrel against me.

CHAP. II. That Bishops were superior to other Ministers in degree.
( Sermon. sect. 2. page 29. That Bishops were superior to other Ministers in
degree, all antiquity with one consent, if you except Aerius, etc. to the end
of page 31.)
MY reason he frames thus: Ad page 85.
If all antiquity (except Aerius, who for dissenting in this point, was
counted an heretic by Epiphanius and Augustine) with one consent do
acknowledge, that Bishops were superior to other Ministers in degree: then
Bishops were superior to other Ministers in degree. But the former is true;
therefore the latter. First he cauilleth with the consequence, (which no man
bearing the face of a Divine, I had almost said of a Christian, would do)
calling it, sore, poor, feeble, and insufficient, unless the consent of the
Apostles and Evangelists be added. Where let the Reader consider, what is the
question which is here concluded, viz. That the Bishops of the primitive Church
were superior to other Ministers in degree. This question plainly is de facto,
of what was: for de iure, that is, of the quality and lawfulnes, I entreat in
the second assertion. Now for a man to deny credit to all antiquity in a
matter of fact not gainsaid by scripture, it is a plain evidence that he is
addicted to nouelty and singularity, rather then the truth. Does all antiquity
testify with one consent, that the Bishops in the primitive Church were
superior to other Ministers in degree; and has any of us the forehead to deny
it? Neither is the consent of the Apostles wanting, as ^ prove in the sermon
both in the particulars of the superiority in respect of the fact, as also in
respect of the right, in the demonstration of the second assertion. Where I do
with such evidence demonstrate, that the Bishops, described in the first
assertion, are of Apostolical institution; as I am well assured that this
Refuter, with all his partakers, will never be able soundly and substantially
to confute. For there is nothing written with such evidence of truth, but that
captious persons may easily cavil with it. And although it had been sufficient
for the demonstration of the first assertion, to have produced such evidence as
does testify only de facto; yet many of the allegations which I bring, do
also give testimony to the right. Thus much of the authority of antiquity,
whereon the consequence is grounded.

2. The first argument, proving that BB. were superior in degree, because
Aerius was counted an hertike for denying it. Epiph. haer. 75. Aug. haer. 53.
Now to the thing testified, which is the assumption: which I prove by five
arguments. The first: If Epiphanius and Augustine do reckon Aerius among the
heretics, condemned by the ancient Catholic Church, for denying the
superiority of Bishops: then the ancient Church does give testimony to the
superiority of Bishops, not only de facto, but also de iure. But the first is
true; therefore the second.



Against the argument it self he has nothing to say: but where I said all
antiquity, besides Aerius, did acknowledge the superiority of Bishops: against
this he obiecteth, that either Jerome is against Bishops as well as Aerius, or
Aerius is brought in by me to no purpose. For de facto Aerius denied the
superiority of Bishops, no more then Jerome did. And de iure Jerome denies it
as well as he. For that which he adds of diverse others consenting in
judgment, is a vain flourish: let him name but one other in the first six
hundred years (I think I might say 1000.) and I will yield the cause. And
those latter Writers which consent with him, use his words, and build upon his
authority: so that the whole weight of this cause lies on Ieroms shoulders,
who^ if I can disburde^ thereof, there can nothing at all be produced out of
antiquity against the superiority of Bishops. First, then I say, that they
abuse Jerome, who match him with Aerius: for besides that Aerius was a damned
heretic, being a most perfect Arian (as Epiphanius says, who lived at the
same time) living in a Church of Arians, (...). Epiph. in (...). haer. 75. Aug.
haer. 53. Epiph.
standing in election for the Bishopric against Eustathius, who also was an
Arrian; out of a discontented humor (the common sourse of Schism and heresy)
broached this heresy (as Epiphanius and Augustine censure it) Presbyterum ab
Episcope nulla differentia debere discerni: (...): denying the Superiority of
Bishops, both de Iure, as Augustine reports his opinion; and de facto, as
Epiphanius; alleging that there is no difference between a Bishop and a
Presbyter. For there is one order (says he) of both, one honor, and one
dignity. The Bishop imposes hands, so does the Presbyter: the B. gives the
lauer (of Baptism) so does the Presbyter: the B. does administer Gods worship,
so does the Presbyter: the B. sits on the throne, so also does the
Presbyter. But Jerome was not so mad (to use the refuters words of Aerius, who
indeed, as Epiphanius says, was (...), a frantic fellow) as to deny the
Superiority of BB. de facto, which oftentimes he does avouch; neither does he
deny it de Iure. And therefore the refuter here has delivered two untruths:
the one, that (he says) Aerius did not deny the Superiority of BB. de facto:
which most manifestly he did, and did it no doubt with this mind, that though
he missed of the Bishopric, which ambitiously he had desired; yet he would be
thought as good a man as a Bishop. The other, that he says, Jerome denied the
Superiority of BB. de Iure. For it is most evident by many testimonies alleged
in the Sermon, that Jerome held the Superiority of Bishops to be lawful and
necessary. For though somewheres he says that Bishops are greater then
Presbyters rather by the custom of the Church, then by the truth of Divine
disposition; yet he acknowledges that custom to be Ad Euagr.
an Apostolical tradition; and therefore either he may be understood as
holding the superiority of BB. to be not Diuini, but Apostolici iuris: or he
may be interpreted as speaking of the names, proving by diverse testimonies of
the Scripture, that Presbyters are called Bishops. But hereof we may not
conclude, that therefore Presbyters and Bishops are all one; for not only
Bishops, but also Apostles 1. Pet 5.1. 2. John 1. and 3. John 1.
, are called Presbyters, and the Apostleship Act. 1.20.
is called Bishopric.

For howsoever all Presbyters are in the Scriptures called Angels and Bishops;
yet that one among many, who had singular pre-eminence above the rest, is by
the warrant of the holy Ghost, called the Angel of the Church; and by the same
warrant, may be called the Bishop. Now whereas Aerius for denying the
superiority of Bishops, was by Epiphanius and Augustine judged and heretic,
hereby it appears that this alleagation not only proves the superiority de
facto, but de iure: for seeing there is no heresy which is not repugnant to
Gods word, it is evident that they who judged this opinion of Aerius to be an
heresy, did also judge it contrary to Gods word. Neither did Epiphanius and
Augustine alone condemn Aerius for an heretic; but as Epiphanius Here Is. 75.
reports, all Churches both in City and Country did so detest him and his
followers, that being abandoned of all, they were forced to live in the open
fields, and in wods.

3. Objections for Aerius answered.
And whereas some object against Epiphanius and Augustine in defense of Aerius,
that his opinion is not heresy, because Epiphanius did not sufficiently answer
one of Aerius his allegations out of Scripture, where Presbyters seem to be
called Bishops; and that Augustine followed Epiphanius, himself not
understanding how far the name of an heretic is to be extended: these are
very slender exceptions to be taken by so learned Epist. ad. ^.K.
a man. For be it, that Epiphanius did not sufficiently answer some one of
Aerius his allegations: is that sufficient to excuse Aerius from being an
heretic; seeing that testimony Phil. 1.1.
may be sufficiently answered, as J have showed; and seeing every testimony
alleged by each heretic, has not always been sufficiently answered by
every one that has written against them? The Allegation which Aerius brings
out of Phil. 1.1. does only prove, that the Presbyters were called Bishops at
what time, he which was the Bishop of Philippi, namely Epaphroditus Phil. 2.25.
Vide Theodor. (...) Phil. 2.25.
, was called their Apostle. And it is confessed by many Chrysostom. Hieronym.
Ambros. Theodor. Oecum. etc.
of the Fathers, that howsoever there were many in Philippi, which in a
general signification were called Bishops: yet there was but one, nay, that
there could be but one, which properly was called the Bishop of Philippi.

And as touching Augustine; I marvel, that learned men could derogate so much
from him, as that he, at that time especially, would write upon the authority
of others, what himself understood not: For Augustine was no youngling or
nouice at that time; but he wrote that book in his elder age, even after he
had written In Epist ad Qu^dvul^de u^.
his books of Retractations, at what time he had written 230. books, besides
his Epistles and Homilies. Neither does Augustine write any thing in his
preface of that book, whereby it might be gathered, that he was in doubt,
whether any of those particulars which he notes, were to be judged heresies;
only he says, that what makes an Heretic, can in his judgment hardly, if
at all, be set down in an accurate definition. Notwithstanding, he
distributeth his intended Trea^ise into two parts: The first, of the heresies
which after Christ's ascension had been contrary to his doctrine, and which he
could come to the knowledge of: among which, the heresies of Aerius have the
53. place: in the latter, he promises to dispute what makes an Heretic. But
though he came not to that, or if he did, what he wrote of that point is not
come to our hands; yet in the conclusion of his Treatise, which is extant, he
says thus August de haeres in fine.
; What the Catholic Church holds against these (meaning all the 88. heresies
which before he had recited) it is but a superfluous question: seeing it is
sufficient in this behalf to know, Eam contra ist^ sentire, nec aliquid horum
in fidem quenquam d^bere recipere, that the judgment of the Church is contrary
to these, and that no man ought to receive any of these into his belief. And
again; Omnis itaque Christianus Catholicus ist^ non debet credere, etc.
wherefore it is the duty of every Catholic Christian to believe none of these.

But it will be said; do you then hold every one to be an heretic, who is of
Aerius judgment in this point? Whereunto I answer: first, that although I
hold them to be in an error, yet I do not judge them to be heretics, who do
not with pertinacy defend their error. And secondly, I make great difference
between errors in the articles of faith, and fundamental points of Religion
(such as was the error of Aerius as he was an Arrian, and such as is the error
of those who deny our justification by Christ's righteousness) and in matters of
Discipline: for these though they be dangerous, yet they are not damnable
errors; and it is no great disparagement to men, otherwise learned and
orthodoxall, to have been ouerseene in matters of Church government; so that
they do not for the same leave the Church and make separation: for such also
be counted heretics by the Councels, 1. Constant. ca. 6. As for the refuter;
it is at his choice whether he will be accounted an heretic, or not. In my
judgment he were best to say, Errare possum, I may err (as in this
controversy hitherto to has done) sed h^reticus esse nolo, but I will ^e no
heretic, by obstinate defending of that, wherein his conscience is convicted.

4. Other objections answered.
Now to help the Refuter, because I desire to give the Reader satisfaction, I
will not conceal, that somewheres I find besides Jerome, the testimonies of
Chrysostom, Augustine, and Ambrose objected as favoring the opinion of
Aerius: but unworthily. Chrysostom In 1. Tim 3. hom. 9. and 10.
is alleged, as if he should say, There is in a manner no difference between
a Bishop and a Presbyter. Indeed Chrysostom understanding by Episcapus, 1.
Tim. 3. him that is properly called a Bishop, asks why Paul speaking of
Bishops, and Deacons, makes no mention there of Presbyters. Whereunto he
makes answer, (...), because there is no great difference: for they also
have received doctrine and government (...).
of the Church; and those things which Paul said concerning Bishops, agree to
them. But does it hence follow, that in Chrysostomes judgment, there was no
difference betwixt a Bishop, and a Presbyter? does not Chrysostom in the next
words acknowledge, that the Bishops are superior to Presbyters in respect of
ordination? And as touching singularity of pre-eminence; does not he teach,
that in one In Phil. 1.
City, or Church, (where are many Pre^byters) there ought to be one Bishop?
and so he ^old Sisi^^ius the Nouatian Socrat. l. 6. c. 22.
Bishop at Constantinople, (...). And though he ascribe government of the
Church to the Presbyters under the Bishop; does he not Homil. 20. ad pop.
Antioch. in initio.
acknowledge the Bishop to be the governor of the Presbyters? and when he was
Bishop himself did he not exercise Theod. l. 5. ca. 28.
great authority over them?

But what says Augustine? Quid est Episcopus, nisi primus Presbyter? what is a
Bishop but the first Presbyter? does he not expound himself? primus Presbyter,
Aug. quast. noui and vet. test. 101. t. 4.
h. e. (...) Sacerdos, the first Presbyter, that is, the high Priest? such a
one therefore in Augustines judgment, is the Bishop to Presbyters, as the high
priest was to the other priests: for in the same place also he compares the
Deacons to the Leuits, and the Presbyters to the Priests.

Yea, but Ambrose says, Of a Bishop and a Presbyter, there is one order, for
either of (...) a Priest; but the Bishop is the first. The words are not in his
book de dignitate Sacerdotali, as it is quoted; for there I find the
contrary: for, Ambrose says Ambr. de dignit. Sacerd. cap. 3.
, There is one thing which God requires of a Bishop, another of a Presbyter,
another of a Deacon. And again, he signifies Cap. 5.
, that as Bishops do ordain Presbyters, and consecrate Deacons; so the
Archbishop ordains the Bishop. But they are found in his commentary on the
first to Timothe cap. 3. Ambr. in 1. Tim. 3.
Where asking the same question with Chrysostom, why after the mention of the
Bishop, he presently adds the ordination, or order of Deacon? because, says
he, of a Bishop, and Presbyter, there is one ordination, or order: for either
of them is a Priest: but the Bishop is the first: so that every Bishop is a
Presbyter, but not every Presbyter a Bishop: for among the Presbyters, the
Bishop is the first. Now what he means by the first Presbyter, may else where
be showed in his writings. In the Bishop, says he In ^^ph 4.
, are all orders, because he is primus Sacer^^^s, hoc est, Princeps est
Sacerd^tum, the first Priest, that is, the Prince of the Priests: and in the
place alleged, he signifies In 1. Tim. 3.
that Timothe the Bishop, was the first Presbyter at Ephesus. And such
presbyters I do confess our BB. to be.

So much of Aer^us: concerning whom, I have often marvelled, what some learned
men do mean, to go about to salve the credit of such a frantique fellow, as
Epiphanius describes him, being also an absolute Arian, and schismaticke or
Separatist from the true Churches.

Now, says the refuter, let us take a view of his great army of antiquity; the
whole number of them is but five, and 4. of them almost 200. years under age.
Mark here, either the skill, or conscience of this great Analyser. The first
argument, which indeed is unanswerable, that he swalloweth. And in stead of
analyzing and answearing the rest, he cauils at the number, and at their age. I
will therefore propound my arguments and withal answer his cauils. And first,
for their number; besides the five he speaks of, I produced the testimonies
of Epiphanius and Augustine, delivering not only their own opinions, but the
judgment of the Church; Epiphanius reporting, that all Churches did reject and
condemn Aerius; and Augustine testifying, that the Catholic Church did hold
the contrary to Aerius his assertion; that as I said, was my first argument.

The 2. argument. Antiquity acknowledges 3. degrees of Ministers*
My second argument is this: Antiquity did distinguish the ministers of the
Church into 3. degrees; viz, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, answerable to the
high Priest, the Priests and L^^ites under the Law: Therefore it gives
testimony to the superiority of BB. over other ministers in degree.

The antecedent I prove by the the testimony of the Council of Sardica, of
Optatus, of Ignatius, and generally by the testimony of Fathers in Councils; in
which, as I said, nothing is more usual then the distinction of Ministers into
these 3. degrees. That clause, if it had pleased the refuter to have taken
notice of, it might have prevented his cavil concerning either the number, or
the age of my witnesses. But he (such is his conscience) passing by it,
b^aggeth (wi^h what face I know not) that I have no antiquity, which
distinguishes the ministry into 3. degrees. Here therefore 3. things are to
be shown, which are so many arguments. 1. That antiquity distinguishes the
Clergy into 3. degrees. 2. That it terms them (...), degrees. 3. That they
compare them to the high Priest, Priests and Leuits.

As touching the first: this distinction of Ministers is so frequent in the
ancient Canons, that if a man do but open the book at all adventures, he shall
not often light upon such a place, where this distinction is not to be found.
Jn the ancient Canons, called the Apostles, it is mentioned 20. times at the
least in the Council of Nice, 3. or 4. times; in the Council of Ancyra, and
Antioch often, and so in the rest.

Which of the ancient Fathers does not acknowledge this distinction of
Ministers? Ignatius, as we shall hear, gives plentiful testimony to it.
Clement Epist. 1.
in his Epistle to James translated by Ruffi^^^, testifies this to have been
the Doctrine of Peter according to the institution of Christ, that Presbyters
should be obedient to their Bishops in all things. And again, Epist. 3.
that Presbyters and Deacons and others of the Clergy must take heed, that they
do nothing without the license of the Bishop.

Dionysius Eccl. Hierarch. c. 5.
an ancient and learned writer (if not the Areopagite) propounds the same
distinction under the names (...)

Tertullian De fuge in persecut. and de Baptismo.
acknowledges it. Orogen Homil. 7. in Ierem
likewise, terming the Bishop him q^^totim Ecclesia a^cemobtinet. So does
Cyprian, and Cornelim, and almost who not?

. 6. Adpag B6. B7. B8.
Yes, says the Refuter, Anacletus and Damas^^^ Epist. 2. vivisuque.
, afform^ there were but two degrees, Bishops and Priests; and Ignatius Ad
Phil. and Trall.
divides the offices of the Church into Bishops and Deacons. But having thus
(as he thinks) set them and others of the Fathers together by the ears, he
will not go about to part them. Let them (says he) agree about the matter as
they can. Howbeit, the reconciliation is easily made. For Anacletus (if that
were his Epistle) speaks only of Epist. 3. Sacerdotum (fratres) ordo
bipartitus est.
Priests, and of two orders of them, ordained by Christ: but Deacons were not
called Sacerdotes, as Bishops and Presbyters were: Sacerdotes being usually
distinguished into maiores, which be Bishops; and minores, which be Presbyters.
Neither were Deacons ordained by Christ himself, but by the Apostles. And with
this distinction of Anacletus those unsuspected Cyprian. Ambrose. Jerome.
Augustine.
fathers agree, who hold, that these two degrees of ministers were ordained by
Christ, when he appointed twelve Apostles (whose successors are the Bishops)
and the three score and twelve Disciples, whom the Presbyters succeed. Now, if
the Bishops succeed the Apostles, and the Presbyters succeed the 72. Disciples,
as diverse of the ancient approved Fathers do teach; then it cannot be denied,
but that the calling of Bishops, and their superiority, as also the inferior
degree of Presbyters, is of Christ's own institution. The like is to be said of
Damasus Epist., 4.
, who acknowledges but two Orders among the Disciples in Christ's time, the
twelve Apostles, and the 70. disciples; and by that reason rejects the
Ch^r^piscopi, because they neither were Bishops, as he proves; nor Presbyters,
as themselves pretended. Among the Disciples of Christ, says he, we know but
two Orders, that is, of the twelve Apostles, and so^mentie disciples. Whence
this third order is (...) we know not.

As for Ignatius, his testimony is falsified. In his Epistle ad Tralli^^os
Ignat. ad Trall.
, he wishes them. To (...) without their Bishop, to be subject to their
Presbyters, and to please their Deacons, as being the ministers of the
mysteries of Christ. Again, He that does any thing without the Bishop, and the
Presbyters, and the Deacons, such a one is without: For what is the Bishop; but
he that has power above all? etc. What the Presbytery, but a sacred company,
counselors, and coassessors of the Bishop? What the Deacons, but imitators of
the Angegelicall powers? etc. he that disobeyeth these, rejects Christ, and
impeacheth his ordinance. And in the end: Farewell in the Lord Jesus being
subject to your Bishop, and likewise to the Presbyters, and Deacons. His other
Epistle ad Phil. is so wisely quoted, that I know not whether he mean the
Philippians, or Philadelphians. But it is no great matter, whether he mean:
for as neither of both does testify that, for which he quoteth them: so both of
them does mention the distinction of ministers into Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons. In the Epistle to the Philippians Ign. ad Philipp.
he exhorts them to be subject to the Bishop, Presbyters, and Deacons. And
toward the end, he saluteth Vitalius their Bishop, the sacred college of
Presbyters, and his fellow ministers, the Deacons. The Epistle to the
Philadelphians Ign. ad Philadelph.
he directs especially to them, who were one with the Bishop, Presbyters, and
Deacons. In the Epistle it self, that al who be Christ's, are on the Bishops
side. And besides that testimony alleged in the Sermon, he says, attend to
the Bishop, the Presbyters, and Deacons. To conclude, in these 3. Epistles
Ignatius gives testimony to this distinction into 3. degrees, noting their
callings, 9. times, and not once lets any thing fall, which may seem to
insinuate any such thing as the refuter alleges; and therefore with what
conscience he cites authors let the reader judge.. 7. The three orders of
ministers called (...) degrees.


Now that these three orders were called (...) degrees, it should not seem
strange, seeing the Apostle uses that word in that sense 1. Tim. 3.13. noting
the Deaconship to be a degree to the Presbytery, 1. Tim. 3.13.
as it is with us.

Cyprian Li. 4. Epist. 2. Ad sacerdotij sublime fastigium cunctis religionis
gradibus ascendit.
says of Cornelius, that he came to the Bishopric not suddenly, but having
been promoted through all the Ecclesiastical offices, he ascended to the
height of Priesthood by all the degrees of Religion.

In the Council of Sardica Sard. c. 10. lat 13.
, it is decreed, That if any rich man o^ Rhetorician (...), Rhetoricae vacans.
Balsa^.
, be from the court desired to be Bishop, he shall not be ordained, until he
have performed the ministry of a reader, Deacon and Presbyter, that so through
every (...).
degree of he be thought worthy he may by way of promotion ascend unto the
height (...).
of Bishopric, and the degree of every order shall have a good time, etc. and
he being thought worthy of the diu^es: Priesthood, shall be made partaker of the
(...).
greatest honor. The same Council Theodor. l. 5. c. 8.
in their Synodicall Epistle report of the Arians, that they had not only
received thos^ who had bin expulsed for Arianisme, but also preferred them to a
(...).
greater degree, as from Deacons, to be Presbyters, and from Presbyters, to be
Bishops. The Councils of Conc. Ephesians. c. 1.2.6.
Ephesus and Chal^. c. 2 and 12.
Chalcedon, diverse times for a penalty threaten Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons, with the losss of their degree. And most plainly the Council of
Carthage Con^. Carth. Gra^. c. 3. Sieve Carthag. 2. c. 2.
mentions (...), these three degrees, (...) Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons.
And again, Con^. Carth. Grae. (...). Carth. 6. c. ^.
all the degrees of Clerks from the hiest to the lowest.

The like testimony to that which Cyprian gave to Cornelius, does Nazianzen In
Encomio Athanas^^.
give both to Athanasius, that he (...), having gave through all the degrees in
order, and having been in every of them, as Theodoret L. 1. c. 26.
says, (...) Admirable.
, was chosen Bishop; and also to In vita Basil.
Basil, that he ascended to his Bishopric, by the order and law of the
spiritual ascent; and Socrates L. 7. c. 41.
to Pr^clus, that he was first a Reader, then by A^ticus preferred to the
Deacon-ship, afterward, when he was Presbyter, he was by the same Attic^^,
made Bishop of Cyzicum. Op^a^us Contr. Parme^. lib. 1.
, as I alleged in the Sermon, assigns to Deacons, the third ministry, to
Presbyters, the second, to BB whom he calls principes omnui^^, the first.

Burchardus Decret. l. ^. c. ^5.
cites this saying of Augustine being a Bishop: You Presbyters know ye, that
your degree is the second, and next to ours: for even as Bishops have the place
of the Apostles in the Church; even so the Presbyters of the other disciples:
the former, have the degree of Aaron, the high Priest; the latter, of his
sons.

In which words the third point also is testified. Whereunto Jerome Ad E^agr.
in fine. Ad Nepoti. Epist. 2. Quod Aaron and falios eius, hoc Episcopum and
Presbyteros esse nouimus.
himself in more places then one gives testimony, affirming that in the
Church, the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons are answerable to the high Priest,
Priests, and Leuits.

Now to reject these testimonies, as being under age, as though they did
historically relate only what was in their own times, and not dogmatically set
down the orders, and degrees of the ministry, perpetually observed in the
Church of Christ; is a very unlearned shift. If any one of these, as namely
Jerome, shall but seem to favor any of their assertions, though in their sense
he contradict himself, and gainsay all others, both Councils, and fathers;
against such a testimony no exception, either of minority of age, or
singularity of opinion will be admitted; but that authority must ouerweigh
all, that himself, and others say to the contrary. It is a world to see how
Jerome in this case is magnified, and preferred before all antiquity: Who can
tell better then Jerome? who better acquainted with the history of the Church
then Jerome? etc. But when most pregnant and plain testimonies are produced out
of Jerome, proving the superiority of Bishops, agreeable with all antiquity,
then Jerome is a youngling, and under age.

But where I said in the judgment of antiquity, 8. BB. Presbyters, Deacons,
answerable to the high Priest, Priests, and Levites.
Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, are answereable to the high Priest, Priests and
Leuits, he says, This gay reason Cardinal Turr^cremata, and Bellarmine out of
him, bring to prove, that there must be one Pope over the whole church, as
there was one high Priest among the Jews: and it proves that as
substantially, as it does this. The which is wickedly spoken, and desperately,
as many things of late have been uttered by that faction; as that the Papists
arguments for the Popes Supremacy, were as good as ours, for the superiority
of Bishops. But of these blasphemous speeches, whereby they match the ordinance
of Christ by his Apostles, with the height of Antichrists pride; I hope this
Refuter, and his consorts will one day have the grace to repent. I confess it
is ordinary with the Papists, to allege out of the Fathers for the Popes
supremacy, what they testified for the superiority of Bishops. But will any be
so desperate, as to say, the same testimonies abused and detorted by Papists,
do as substantially prove that for which they are alleged besides the true
meaning of the fathers; as that, for which they are truly and faithfully
alleged? Good reason therefore had Calvin, and the rest to refute that
argument, because, as Calvin Inst. l. 4 c. 6. s. 2.
says. There is not the like reason between one small people, and the whole
world. The whole Church has no head, or universal Bishop, but Christ: But
each several. Church may have their head, and several Bishop, answerable to
the high Priest of the Jews, as diverse of the Fathers have taught: Therefore
Ignatius requires the Smyrneans to honor the Bishop (...) as the high Priest:
and it is an usual thing with the Fathers, not only to apply those things which
were spoken of the high Priest to Bishops, but also to call the Bishop (...),
po^tificem, Sacerdotem summum etc. and Bishopric, (...).

9. The Testimonies of Ignatius.
There remain yet the testimonies of Ignatius to be discussed, which I produced
in this 2. argument. The authority whereof the refuter first calls in
question. Wherein he may seem to prejudice his own cause: for T.C.W.T.D.F.H.I.
and others of that alphabet, have often times dragged some testimonies out of
him: yea this refuter himself often times does cite him; and once I remember
Page 51.
he threatened to prove his lay Presbyters out of Ignatius, when he should
come, to answer my allegations out of him: which how it will be performed, the
reader is now to expect. In the mean time, little reason had he so much to
cleuate the authority of those godly and learned epistles: for his own
confession, that they are recorded in Eusebius, is a good proof they are not
counterfeits.

But he is pleased to hear him speak. And whereas Ignatius Ad Smyrn.
teaches, that the lay (...) must be subject to the Deaco^s, they to the
Presbyters* and the Presbyters to the Bishop: the refuter denies the
Presbytery, and Deaconship to have been degrees of the ministry, but
understands such Deacons as were only employed in looking to the poor, and
such Presbyters as were only governing elders. The vanity of which conceit J
have sufficiently declared before, if anything will suffice. And I am ashamed
for the refuter, that he should be either so ignorant, as not to know; or so
unconscionable, as not to acknowledge, that these three, Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons, have always since the Apostles times been esteemed three degrees
of Ministers, by the universal and perpetual consent of all Christendom
until our age.

Notwithstanding, his arguments, such as they are, must be answered. And first
for Deacons (he says) they were no Ministers of the word, That Deacons were in
a degree of the ministry.
but employed only in looking to the poor: and that he proves, by the
confession of D. Bilson. What manner of men the Deacons were, of whom Ignatius
speaks, Ignatius himself sufficiently declares, in his Epistles to the
Trallians (...).
, where he calls the Deacons, the ministers of the mysteries of Christ; and
to the Smyrneans (...).
, Deacons of Christ unto the word of God; to the Philadelphians (...).
, ministering to the Bishop in the word; to the Antiochians (...).
, the sacred Deacons. Neither does D. Bilson deny it. Only he makes question
of the 7. which were elected Act. 6. whether they were such, as properly were
called Deacons, and are the third degree of the ministry, or such as were
chosen only to be overseers of the poor: to which purpose he cites the
general Council held in Trullo Conc. Constable. in Trullo ca. 16.
, correcting the Canon of the Council held at Neocaesaria Conc. Neocaes. cap.
15.
, which appoints that in every Church there should be 7. Deacons, in
imitation of the act Act. 6.
of the Apostles, in ordaining 7. But (say they) we comparing the sense of the
Fathers, with the speech of the Apostles, do find, that they spoke not of men
(...).
serving at the mysteries (such as properly be called Deacons) but at tables;
alleging Chrysostom, who enquiring what the office of these 7. was, plainly
denies, that they were Deacons: whereupon they denounce (as D. Bilson has
alleged) that the foresaid 7. Deacons, must not be taken for those that served
at the mysteries, but for such as were trusted with the dispensation of the
common necessities of those that were assembled together. And verily to me it
seems more then probable, that these 7. were not such as S. Paul speaks of
1. Tim. 3. and were in use in the primitive church, being a degree inferior to
Presbyters: for these 7 or the most of them, were, as Have s. 20. mis^t etiam
alios 72. ad praedicand^m, (...).
E^^phaenius, and others do testify, chosen out of the 70. Disciples, and were
(no doubt) principal men among them, full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, being
before this ministers of Gods word. For as the Apostles, the chief and
principal ministers, thought it to appertain to their duty to take care of the
poor; so when the Apostles were disburdned thereof, that care was committed to
7* others, who were chief men among the disciples. Neither may it be doubted,
but that as Steven was a worthy preacher; so the rest (when their te^porary
function at Jerusalem was ended by the dispersion of the faithful upon the
death of Steven) gave themselves to the preaching of the word, as appears in
Philip Act. 8.5 and 21.8.
, who was one of the 7. And whereas the Refuter says, that D. Bilson Cap. 15.
confesses the Deacons to have bin only employed in looking to the poor; the
contrary is evident: for speaking eue^ of those 7. he collecteth by S. Paul's
precepts concerning Deaco^s, that their office was not only a charge to look
to the poor, but also to attend the sacred assemblies and service of the
Church, and even a step to the ministry of the word, meaning, as I suppose, to
the Presbytery.

. 10.
As for those who properly are called Deacons; it is most evident by innumerable
testimonies, that they were the third degree of the ministry, whose office was
a sacred ministry (...), themselves (...), their duty (...). Ignat. ad Trall.
Can. Apost. 15. Conc. An^yr. cap. 2.
, helping the Bishop or the Presbyter in the divine service, offering the bread
and the cup, and performing as it were the office of a crier in the Church,
(which is (...)) in dismissing those which were to depart, in commanding
silence, and exciting the people to devotion, and attention. In the Council of
Nice Cap. 18.
, fault is found with Deacons, who in some Cities did give the Eucharist to the
Presbyters: but they are commanded to contain themselves within their bounds,
knowing that they be the Bishops ministers, and are inferior to the Presbyters,
and to receive the Communion after the Presbyters, at the hands either of the
Bishop, or the Presbyters.

Iustine Martyr Apol. 2.
, speaking of the Eucharist, says, after the president has given thanks, and
the people has blessed, they, who with us are called Deacons, do give and
communicate to every one that is present, of the bread and wine, and do carry
it to those which are absent. And having repeated the same again, he speaks
of the collections for the poor: showing that what was collected, was
committed (not to the Deacon, but) (...) the President, by him to be
distributed. Tertullian Tertull. de Bapt.
says, The chief Priest, which is the Bishop, has the right of giving
Baptism, then the Presbyters, and the Deacons, but yet not without the
authority of the Bishop. Cypr. passim.
Cyprian every where speaks of the^, as being of the sacred ministry. The
ancient Council of Eliberis has this canon Conc. Elib. ca. 77.
, If any Deacon, ruling, or having the charge of a people, without either
Bishop or Presbyter baptize any, those the Bishop by his blessing must
accomplish. The council of Carthage Carth. Gr^c. ca. 25. sieve Carth 5. ca. 3.
(...).
, speaking of BB. and other inferior orders, which do handle the sacred
mysteries, reckons Subdeacons, Deacons, and Presbyters. Jerome has these
words Aduers. Lucifer.
, If at the prayer of the Bishop alone the holy Ghost descends, they are to
be lamented, who in villages, and towns, and other remote places, being
baptized by Presbyters, and Deacons, do sleep, or depart this life, before they
be visited of the Bishop. The safety of the Church depends upon the dignity
of the chief Priest (meaning the Bishop.) To whom, if a power peerless, and
eminent above all be not given, there will be as many schisms in the Church,
as Priests. Hence it is, that without the Chrisme, (which the Presbyters and
Deacons were wont Conc. Carth. 4. ca. 36.
to receive from their own Bishop) and commandment of the Bishop, neither
Presbyter nor Deacon has right to baptize.

In the 4. Council of Carthage, which is so often alleged by the
Disciplinarians, there is direction given for the ordination Conc. Carth. 4. c.
2.3.4.
of the Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, and other of the Clergy. The Deacon Ca.
37.
is taught to acknowledge himself to be the minister as well of the Presbyter,
as of the Bishop. The Deacon Ca. 38.
is authorized even in the presence of a Presbyter, if there be necessity, and
he be comanded, to deliver the Eucharist of Christ's body to the people, and to
wear Ca. 41.
an Albe only in time of oblation, or reading. To conclude, Cyprian, and other
of the fathers, when they term the Deacons Leuits, and make them answerable to
the Leuits, as they do the Presbyters to the Priests, do evidently declare,
what they thought concerning the office of Deacons.

That the Presbyters were not ministers of the word,. 11.
the refuter proves thus.

The Refuter denies Presbyters to have bin minsters of the word.
They who might not preach, nor baptize, nor do any pastoral duty without the
Bishops license were not ministers. The Presbyters might not preach, nor
baptize, nor do any pastoral duty without the Bishops license:

Therefore they were not Ministers.

The proposition is proved by 2. reasons. First, because it were a mockery of a
ministry to deny Ministers power to execute their office.

Secondly, because every popish Priest had potestatem ordinis, that is, power
to do all things that belong to his order.

First, to the proposition it self, I say it is very false, and that the
contradictorie in all the parts of it is true: viz that they who might, yea
ought to preach, baptize, administer the Lords supper, and perform any other
pastoral duty, being thereto licensed of the Bishop, were ministers. From
which we may assume and conclude thus: But the ancient Presbyters might, yea
ought to preach, baptize, administer the Lords supper, and perform any other
pastoral duties, being thereto authorized by the Bishop: Therefore they were
ministers.

And that the proposition is false, it may appear by the practice of our own
Church, and of all the ancient Churches, whose Presbyters are, and were
Ministers (as I have sufficiently proved before, for the conviction, I doubt
not, of the refuters conscience) and yet neither may, nor might preach,
baptize, administer the Lords Supper, and perform other ministerial
functions, but by leave or authority from the Bishop. Neither yet is the
ministry of our clergy now, nor of the Presbyters in times past, a mockery,
because it agrees not with his fancy: but his fancy is a mere nouelty,
disagreeing from the general practice of the most ancient Churches. For
howsoever afterward he malepertly charge me with not understanding the
distinction of ecclesiastical power, in potestatem ordinis et iurisdictionis;
into the power of order and jurisdiction: yet does he both here and there
bewray himself not to understand it. For though every Minister, as he is a
Presbyter has potestatem ordinis; yet it does not follow, that he may at his
own pleasure exercise that power. We must therefore take knowledge of two
distinctions: the one, of the power of order and of jurisdiction: for every
minister has the power of order as he is a Presbyter simply; but the power of
jurisdiction, as he is praelatus, or pastor. The former he has given him in
his ordination; the latter, in his institution. By the former, he is qualified
and authorized to preach and administer the sacraments, and to do other
^spirituall actions peculiar to his order, which another man, who is not of
that order, neither can do, nor may have leave to do. But he may not
perform these duties which belong to the power of his order to any
congregation, as the Pastor thereof, unless that flock be assigned and
committed to him by the Bishop, who has the charge of the whole diocese. A
presbyter therefore though he have potestatem ordinis, may not perform pastoral
duties to any congregation, which are part of the Bishops charge, unless he
be authorized thereto by the Bishop; from whom he receives potestatem
iurisdictionis, curamque animarum et regimen ecclesia parochialis, in his
institution.

Again, we must distinguish between the power it self and the exercise and
execution of it. For although every minister has the same power of order which
is common to them with Bishops in respect of preaching the word and
administering Baptism and the Lords Supper, yet the exercise of their power is,
and always has been subjected to the authority of the Bishop, to be
permitted, directed, restrained and suspended by him. This subordination and
subjection of the presbyters to the Bishop, for the exercise of their power,
which ever has been practiced in the Church, does not make either their
function to be a mockery of the ministry, as the refuter malepertly speaks,
nor themselves to be no ministers. But plainly proves the contrary, as I have
showed.

For whereas he obiecteth out of Tertullian De baptismo.
,. 12.
that any lay man might baptize by the Bishops (...) he falsifies his
testimony. His words be these: Dandi baptismum ius ^ab^t summus sacerdos qui
est episcopus, etc. The chief Priest, which is the Bishop, has the right to
give baptism. Then the presbyters and deacons; but not without the authority
of the Bishop for the honor of the Church; which being safe, peace is safe
^lioquin etiam laicis ius est.
. Otherwise even laymen have right. Where Tertullian shows, that the ordinary
right of baptizing appertains to Bishops, Presbyters, deacons, as belonging
to the power of their order; though for the honor and peace of the Church, the
Bishop be superior in the exercise of that power, which the Presbyters and
Deacons are not to exercise without his authority: otherwise, that is,
extraordinarily, and in case of necessity, the lay man, even without the
Bishops leave, has right (in Tertullians judgment) to baptize. Where he
says, That in Tertullians time, who was himself a Presbyter, Presbyters and
Deacons were not ministers, and much less in Ignatius time; I hope he will
r^call this foul error, proceeding from extreme ignorance, when he has read
what before has been alleged to the contrary. And whereas the last testimony,
which I alleged out of Ad Philadelph.
Ignatius for these three degrees of the ministry, plainly excludes their
lay Presbyters and lay Deacons, reckening Presbyters and Deacons as degrees of
the clergy; he answers two things; the first, That the Epistle strongly
sauoureth of corrupter times, Of the word Clerus, or Clergy.
then those Ignatius loved in, by that very word clergy appr^priated therein to
the ministers, which is of a far latter breed. He should have done well to have
showed, how late the breed is. For I am well assured that Cypr. passim.
Cyprian uses the word clerus for the clergy ordinarily, who was little more
then a hundred years after Ignatius. And Origin, In Ierem. hom. 7.
before him, mentions this distinction of the clergy and laity. Tertullian,
who lived in the same century with Ignatius, distinguishes each company of
Christians, as sometimes De fuga in persecut. Quam ipsi authors. i. ipsi
(...), and presbyteri and episcopi fugiunt, quomodo Laicus, etc. Cum duces
fugiunt quis de gregario numero, etc. Cum ecclesia distituitur a clero.
, into gregem and duces, the flock and the guides; ecclesi^ ordinem and
laicos, the order of the Church, meaning those which were in orders, and the
lay people: so sometimes in ecclesia^ and cleru^, the assembly and the clergy.
The clergy also or guides, he distinguishes into these three degrees, Deacons,
Presbyters, Bishops. The ancient Canons, called the Apostles Can. Apost. 2.11.
and 12. etc.
, often mention those of the clergy, as opposed to the laity. But if I should
say, that S. Peter uses the word (...) in the same sense, when writing to
Bishops, whom he calls Presbyters, and himself their Compresbyter, he wills
them, (...), not exercise lordship over the clergy, I should deliver that which
is agreeable to the interpretation of the ancient Oecum. (...).
Writers, and as I am persuaded to the truth. Neither do I doubt but the use
of the word clerus, was first taken from that place of Peter, who therein
followed the phrase of the old Testament, wherein it is often said, that the Lord
was (...), the portion or the inheritance of the Priests and Levites. For
therefore are they called Clerici, says Jerome Ad Nepotianum.
, vel quia de sort sunt Domini, vel quia ipse Dominus sors. i. pars clericoru^
est: Either because they are the Lords portion, (which notatio^ some late
writers do mislike, not without cause, the people also being Gods inheritance)
or because the Lord is their portion: which is agreeable with ye scriptures.

His other answer is,. 13. Presbyters and Deacon^ in our Refuters conceit, of
the Clergy, but not of the ministry.
that though the Presbyters and Deacons were of the clergy, yet they were not
Ministers: for there were many of the clergy which were not Ministers.Let him
therefore tell me whether there were any Ministers in the clergy adioined to
the Bishop or not: if he say no, he is worthy to be hissed at: if yea, who
were these Ministers, if the Presbyters and Deacons were not? Besides, it is
plain, that the Clergy of the ancient Churches consisted wholly of scholars,
which were trained up in learning: the Clergy belonging to each Bishop,
being the seminary of the whole diocese: out of which, not only every parish,
both in the City and Country, was to be furnished with Ministers, but also the
Bishop himself, in the vacancie of the Sea, was to be chosen. Moreover,
ordinarily those of the clergy ascended by degrees from the lower to the
higher, the Bishop being chosen out of the Presbyters and Deacons, (for even
Ignatius his successor was his deacon, Her^:) the Presbyters and deacons out of
the inferior orders, as of sub deacons, or readers, etc. Whereby it is most
evident, that presbyters and deaco^s were not such, as the lay elders and
lay-deacons which are now adays in some reformed Churches; but men brought up
in learning and service of the Church, having attained degrees of the sacred
Ministry, such as Presbyters and Deacons are with us. And so much of my second
argument.

The testimony of the Council of Chalcedon.
The third is taken from the testimony of the great Council of Chalcedon, and
may thus briefly be framed: It is sacrilege to reduce a Bishop to the degree
of a Presbyter.

Therefore BB. were superior to Presbyters in degree, not only de facto, Page
77.
but also de iure. But what is this, says he, to the Apostles times, and the
age following? Indeed, if the Council had testified the superiority of Bishops
de facto only, there had been some color for this exception, especially if he
could have proved an alteration in the state of Bishops, and the advancement of
them to a higher degree, to have begun after the first two hundred years. But
seeing no such matter can truly be alleged, and seeing also that famous
Council gives testimony to the superiority of Bishops, not only de facto, but
also de iure, and that in such sort, as it deemeth it sacrilege to reduce a
Bishop to the degree of a Presbyter; it cannot therefore be denied, but that
this is a most pregnant testimony, if it be rightly alleged. Let us therefore
consider the occasion of those words, which in the copy whereon Th. Balsamo
does comment, and in some manuscript Greek copies, is the twenty nine canon of
that Council. When Eustathius Bishop of Berytum (for so I find him termed
diverse times in the Acts Acts 4.5.6.9.
of that Council, in Euagr^m Euagr. hist. lib. 2. cap. 2.
, in Photius Ph. N^m^can. tit. 9. c 11.
, and Balsamo Balsam. in Conc. Chalc. c. 29.
) and not of Tire, (as in Tilius his Greek edition it is corruptly printed)
when Eustathius J say, had withdrawn diverse Bishoprics from the Metropolitan
Church of Tyrus, deposing the Bishops, whom Photius the Bishop of Tyrus had
ordained, and bringing them down to the degree of Presbyters: complaint was
made to the great Council of Chalcedon, and the matter therein in propounded
by the Princes, in these words Act. Council. Chalced. de Photio and Eustathis
episcopis.
: Concerning the Bishops ordained by Photius, and degraded by Eustathius, and
after they had been Bishops, commanded to be Presbyters, what is the sentence
of this holy Synod? Whereto Paschasinus and Lucentiu^ Bishops, and Bonifaciu^
Presbyter, vicegerents of the Church of Rome, answered (...).
: To reduce a Bishop to the degree of a Presbyter, it is sacrilege: if any just
cause depose them from their Bishopric, neither ought they to retain the
place of Presbyters. But if without any crime they have been removed from
their honor, they shall return again to their episcopal dignity. Ana^olius
the Archbishop of Constantinople said, These Bishops who are said to have
descended from the episcopal dignity unto the order of Presbyters, if for just
cause they are condemned, neither are they worthy of the honor of Presbyters.
But if without any reasonable cause they have been dejected to a less (...).
degree, they are worthy, if they be blameless, to (...).
recover again the dignity and priesthood of their Bishopric. If you think
that these were but the private opinions of these men, hear the censure of the
whole Council: All the reverend Bishops cried; (...).
Righteous is the judgment of the Fathers, we all say the same things; the
Fathers have decreed justly, let the sentence of the Archbishops hold.

My fourth argument is drawn from the testimony of Jerome:. 15. The testimony
of Jerome.
whose authority in this cause ought to be of greatest weight, because he is
the only man almost among the fathers, whom the Disciplinarians can allege
against the superiority of Bishops. Jerome therefore says, Ad Euagriu^.
that at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, unto Heraclas and Dionysius
Bishops, evermore the presbyters having chosen one from among themselves, and
placed him in exce^siori gradu, in an higher degree, called him Bishop* even as
an army chooses a General. This testimony the Refuter eleuateth in two
respects. The first, because Jerome is under age. Which is a very simple
evasion. For Jerome does not only testify what was in his time, but also
gives plain evidence, that in the first two hundred years, even from S.
Mark until Heraclas, Bishops were placed in a superior degree above
Presbyters.

Secondly, because Bellarmine alleges the some testimony to the same purpose,
whose allegation is answered by Ch^mier: whose answer if I like not, he bids me
try what I can say in defense of Bellarmine against it. To omit how odiously
this is set down, I do profess, that I may with better credit agree with
Bellarmine, wherein he consents with all antiquity, then the Refuter and his
consorts can agree with Aerius; wherein he dissenting from all antiquity, was
by Epiphanius, Philaster, Augustine, and all the Catholic Church in his time,
condemned for an heretic. But let us hear his answers. First, that Jerome
proves by the practice of the Church of Alexandria, that which before he had
demonstrated out of the Scriptures, to wit, that a Presbyter and a Bishop
differ not. Neither does he call Mark a Bishop, but an Evangelist.

This answer might become our refuter better then Chamier. For first it is
untrue, that Jerome in these words proves that a Bishop and a Presbyter differ
not. For does he not plainly say that the Bishop was placed in a higher
degree? and does he not compare him in respect of the Presbyters which chose
him, to the Chieftaine or General, chosen of the Army?

Secondly, he fails in setting down Ieromes purpose; which was not to prove
there was no difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters; but to prove, that
Presbyters were superior to Deacons. That he proves by many arguments. First,
because the name Episcopus, Bishop, in the Scriptures is given to Presbyters.
Secondly, because the Apostles and Bishops are in the Scriptures called
Presbyters: to which purpose he alleges 1. Tim. 4.13. 1. Pet. 5.1. 2. John 1.
and 3. John 1. 2. John 1. 3. John 1.
And thirdly, whereas it might be objected, the Bishops were set over
Presbyters; he confesses it was done for avoiding of schism; but yet so, as
by the Presbyters the Bishop was chosen out of the Presbyters, ever since S.
Marks time, until Heracla^ and D^^^ysius, as a General by the Army, or the
Archdeacon by the Deacons, out of their own company. Whereby he would also
insinuate, that a Presbyter is so much better then a Deacon, as a Bishop is
superior to an Arch deacon. Thirdly, where he says, that Jerome does not call
Mark a Bishop, but an Evangelist, and says else where, that he planted that
Church: It is plain, that in another place Prooem. in Matthaeum.
he confesses Mark to have been the first Bishop of Alexandria. If Mark
therefore were superior in degree to the Presbyters at Alexandra, as no man
will deny; then must the same be confessed of Anianus, and the rest of his
successors, as Jerome plainly testifies.

Secondly he answeareth, That the order by which the Presbyters chose a Bishop
from among themselves, continued to Heraclas and Dionysius time, whom he
therefore calls Bishops, to the end he might signify, that in their days
after one hundred and forty years were expired from Marks coming to
Alexandria, that order was changed. Then at the soonest, says the refuter,
began M. D. superiority of Bishops to creep in, etc. Which answer, if his
meaning be as our refuter conceiteth, is unsound. For first where he says the
order was changed in Heraclas and Dionysius, that is spoken but by guess,
because Jerome names them. Upon which conjecture, T. C. and H. I. as you have
heard, did build their two diverse fancies. For Ieromes meaning was not to
signify that the superiority of Bishops was altered: but as I have showed,
that until Heraclas and Dionysius, who were not Presbyters, but Teachers of
the school in Alexandria, the Presbyters ever since S. Marks time, did choose
one out of their own number. That which the Refuter adds, is absurd, and
against Ieromes plain words: Then at the soonest began M. D. superiority of
Bishops to creep in: for the superiority I spoke of, is superiority in degree.
And Jerome says, that ever from Saint Mark, and therefore even in the
Apostles times, the BB. had been placed in a higher degree.

My fifth argument is also from the authority of Ad Euagriu^.
Jerome,. 16. Another testimony of Jerome.
which yields a double proof; the former, that the superiority of Bishops
over Presbyters, and Presbyters above Deacons, is an ordinance or tradition
apostolical.

Secondly, that as the high Priest was in degree superior to the other
Priests, and they to the Leuits: so by an apostolical ordinance the Bishop is
superior to the Presbyters, and the Presbyters to the Deacons. That we may
know, says he, the apostolical traditions are taken out of the old testament,
look what Aaron The like he has ad Nepotian. Quod Aaron and filios eius, h^c
episcopum and Presbyteros esse nouerimus.
, and his sons and the Leuits were in the Temple; the same let the Bishops,
Priests and Deacons challenge in the Church. To this testimony containing two
impregnable proofs for the superiority of BB. not only de facto, but also de
iure; the refuter thought it his wisest course to say nothing.

To these arguments this may be added: That as the new ordination of a Deacon,
when he was made a Presbyter, does prove that he was advanced to a higher
degree of the ministry: even so when a Presbyter was chosen to be Bishop, he
was by a new ordination promo^ed to the Bishopric, as to a higher degree. The
two first canons, among those which are called the Apostles, appoint Can.
Apost. 1. and 2.
, that a Bishop should be ordained of two or three Bishops: but let a
Presbyter, say they, be ordained of one Bishop, and likewise a Deacon, and the
rest of the clergy. Valeriu^ the Bishop dealth with the Primate, the Bishop of
Carthage, by letters entreating him that Augustine (who then was Presbyter)
might be ordained Bishop of Hippo: which being obtained Possidon. in vita
Augustini.
, Augustine took upon him the care of the Bishopric, and maioris loci (...),
and ordination of a greater place. The council of Sardica Con. Sard. c. 10.
, takes order, that before a man may be a Bishop he must first perform the
ministry of a Reader, then of a Deacon, then of a Presbyter, that so (...), by
every degree, if he be worthy, he may arise (...), unto the height of the
Bishopric. Theadoret Lib. 4. c 18.
testifies, that John (Chrysostom) having been the chief of the Presbyters
at Antioch a long time, often times might have been chosen to the Bishopric
(which he calls (...), the Apostolical presidency) but always did fly
(...), that principality. So that though he were (...), the chief of the
Presbyters; yet he was no Bishop, neither durst he for a long time take upon
him that degree of principality. So much of the superiority of Bishops in
general.

CHAP. III. Showing wherein the superiority of Bishops did and does consist: and
first of the singularity of preeminence.
( Sermon. sect. 3. page 32. But let us consider more particularly wherein the
superiority of Bishops did and does consist, etc. ad lin. a fine 6:
THe superiority of Bishops over other Ministers, I place in three things:
singularity of preeminence during life, the power of ordination, and the power
of jurisdiction: all which I ground on Tit. 1.5. But where I say, during life,
he says, Ad page 89.
This addition needed not, seeing it is grounded upon an erroneous conceit of
mine own, whereby I charge them as holding the contrary. Secondly, that it is
not proved out of the place alleged. In the former he shows how audacious
he is, seeing, Beza the chief patron of the pretended discipline, holds that
the Presidents of the Presbyteries (which afterward, as he says, were called
Bishops) ought to be but for a short time, and that by course, and esteems
them which had a perpetual presidenship, to be Bishops humane Lib. 1. cap. 2..
17.
, as I have showed before. The practice also of those Churches where the
discipline is used, does prove what their Founders thought was agreeable to
Gods word. This their conceit is evidently confuted by the Epistles to Titus
and to Timothy. For seeing they do confess, that they were the (...), in the
Churches of Creet and Ephesus; it is evident, that they continued in this
Presidentshippe, whiles they lived there. For it is absurd to imagine, that
Titus was sent to Creet, and Timothy to Ephesus, to be presidents there in
their turns, and when their turns were ended, to be subjected to other of the
Presbyters there in their course. But these things the refuter does but cavil
at by the way. For he grants that Titus had this superiority which we speak
of: his maine answer is, that Titus was not a Bishop. Which afterward J prove
in the Sermon, by the common consent of the ancient and most approved Writers
of the Church; with whose affirmation, in a matter of fact, if this Refuters
denial shall be weighed in the balance of an impartial judgment, it will be
found as light as vanity it self. But of this question more hereafter Lib. 4
cap. 4.
. In the mean time, J will but desire the Reader to take this for granted,
because it cannot be denied, that if Titus was Bishop of Creet, then Bishops
had this threefold superiority which I speak of.

Where I commend this order of Church government, consisting in the
superiority of Bishops, and inferioritie of other Ministers; this grave and
learned Refuter makes a scorn at it, saying, It is a toy to please children,
and a gay Epiphonema wanting a note of exclamation (he would have said,
acclamation) to grace it. The which argues his spite against the government of
Bishops, rather then his might, being neither able to endure the just
commendation of episcopal government, nor yet to confute it. For what has he
but trifles and toies to object against it? For where he says, I beg the
question, supposing each Church to be a diocese; the conscience of the Reader,
I hope also of the Refuter, will testify, that what I suppose in this behalf,
has been before sufficiently proved. Besides, those with whom I principally
contend in this point, do confess the Churches endued with power of
ecclesiastical government, to have been dioceses Lib. 1. cap. 2.. 14
, as has been showed. I say then (which also I proved afterward by the
testimonies of Cyprian and Jerome, whereto the authority of Basil, epist. 67.
ad Ancyr. professes that the members of the Church are by the government of
the Bishop, as it were of the soul, united and knit together. Whether the
unity of each Church, depend upon the unity of the B.
Basil may be added) that the unity of each Church, meaning a diocese,
depends of the unity of the Bishop: and the setting up of a second,
unless it were by way of coadiutorshippe, has ever been esteemed the making
of a schism in the Church. But of this more anon.

. 2. But let us hear, if it be worth the hearing, what more particularly he
obiecteth against these three points. And first he trifleth to no purpose, when
he asks, If there be not as much unity in a parish under one Pastor, as in a
diocese under a Bishop. For though each parish, if it were, according to the
new conceit, an entire body within it self, vnsubordinate to any other, may
perhaps have unity within it self: yet in the Church of the diocese or
province, that may happen (which Jerome affirms is like to happen, where is
no Bishop) that there shall be as many schisms as parishes. And surely what
man of judgment and moderation, can without horror think of those manifold
schisms and divisions which would ensue, if every parish should have
(according to the new conceit) sufficient authority within it self
vnsubordinate and independent, for the government of it self, in all causes
ecclesiastical? Yea but says he, If there be not as great unity of the
Church in a parish under one Pastor, as in a diocese under one Bishop, then
the more Churches are under one government, the greater is the unity. But the
consequent is false, therefore the antecedent. The consequence of the
proposition is true, being not extended without the limits of the question. The
more particular Churches in any one visible Church are subordinate to one
Bishop, the greater is the unity. But by one visible Church I mean the
Christian people of one diocese, or of one province, or at the most of one
Nation. For the Christian people living under diverse laws, as they be diverse
Nations, so are they diverse visible Churches, though the faithful in them all
are members of one and the same Catholic Church.

Let us hear how he proves the assumption. If the more Churches are under
one government the greater unity, then welfare the Pope, who if this be true,
makes unity of all Churches in the world. As who should say, all the Churches
in the world are under the Popes government: so that whiles he denies the
superiority of Bishops, he seems (else there is no sense in his speech) to
hold the Popes supremacy. If any man shall say, that as the unity of each
Church depends on the singular preeminence of the Bishop: so the unity of
the whole Catholic Church by the same reason shall depend of the Popes
supremacy, (which seems to have been the Refuters meaning, who desires as
much as may be that the superiority of Bishops and supremacy of the Pope
may seem to be of one tenure:) I answer, that the unity of the whole Church
stands in this; that it is one body, under one head Christ. And as in a
diocese, to set up a second head, is to set up an Antibishoppe, and to make a
schism from the true Bishop: so in the whole Church, to acknowledge a second
head, is to set up Antichrist, and to make an apostasy from Christ. Neither
was it ever the meaning of our Savior, that as every particular Church should
be under one Pastor, so the whole Church should be under one visible head, or
earthly Monarch. For then would not he have furnished his twelve Apostles with
equal power and authority, as I have said before.

. 3.
As touching the second, he confesses all that I said, namely that from the
power of ordination the perpetuity of the Church depends; and yet cauilleth
with me, as if either I had said, there could be no ordination at all without
a Bishop, Ad page 83.
or that the Bishop had the sole power thereof. Thus being resolved to wrangle,
if he find not matter to cavil at, he will feign it. I did not say there
could be no ordination without a Bishop: but that ever since the Apostles
times to our age, it has been the received opinion in the Church of God, that
the right of ordination of Presbyters and Deacons, is such a peculiar
prerogative of BB. as that ordinarily and regularly, there could be no lawful
ordination but by a Bishop: otherwise I do confess in the sermon, that
extraordinarily, and in case of necessity, Presbyters may ordain in the want
of a Bishop.

Concerning the third, he says it is enough to preserve good order in
Churches, if jurisdiction be in the ministers and Presbyters. He means in
the several parishes, which may after a fashion be governed, where the
supreme ecclesiastical officer^ (I mean the parish minister) assisted with
such a senate, as each parish is like to afford, has the reins of government
in all causes ecclesiastical committed to them. But I pray you, how shall
there be any good order in the government of the Churches of a diocese, or
province, when every parish is so according to the new conceit an entire body
of it self, (indeed a member by Schism rent from the the rest) as it has
neither consociation with* nor subordination to others? For they are not
governed by consociation, who deny the definitive power of synods, as our new
Disciplinarians do; neither do they acknowledge any subordination: for their
Pastor forsooth is the supreme ecclesiastical officer, and the power of each
parish is independent, immediately derived from Christ. Now, how is it possible
there should be good order in the government of so many parishes in a Kingdom,
where is no subordination; no superiors, nor inferiors, but all equal? But
this is enough for our Disciplinarians, if they might be subject to no
superiors, but that each of them might be the supreme ecclesiastical officer
in every Church.

( Sermon. sect. 4. page 32. As touching the first, BB. superior in singularity
of preeminence for term of life.
whereas there were many Presbyters in one City, etc. to page 36. l. a fine
8.) Jn this section I prove, that the Bishops of the primitive Church were
superior to other Ministers in singularity of preeminence for term of life.
Which is a point very material, proving both against the new Disciplinarians,
that the BB. were diocesan, there being but one for each diocese, as has been
touched before: and against the elder, that the BB. were not such as their
Presidents of the Presbytery, or Moderators of assemblies among them, whose
preeminence is but a priority of order, and but for a short time, Lay
Presbyteries and parity of Ministers, the two pillars of the new discipline.
and against both, disprouing the parity of Ministers, which is the other maine
pillar of the pretended discipline. Here therefore it behooved the Refuter, if
his cause were such, as indeed he could maintain with soundnes of learning,
and evidence of truth, both to have disproued this superiority of BB. and to
have proved his parity of Ministers. But he passes by in haste, touching only
upon the points, as a dog by the river Nilus, not daring to stay by it; and
yet so brag he is, that he would seem to haste away not for fear, but rather
in disdain, as not vouchsafing to waste time in a matter either so impertine^t,
as the former part of this section, or so needless, as the latter. For this is
his usual guise, to cast off those points of the Sermon, which indeed are most
material, as impertinent or needless. The former is impertinent, because it
is not proved to belong to those seven Angels, nor within the first two
hundred years. Which is a mere evasion, unlearned, and J greatly doubt also
unconscionable. Do I not plainly note that these seven Angels had this
singularity of preeminence, when as I say the holy Ghost teaches, that whereas
there were many Presbyters* who also were Angels in every Church: yet there was
but one, who was the Angel of each Church? For to his objection of their not
being diocesan Bishops, I have answered before. And for the time, do I not
affirm, that Timothy had this singularity of preeminence at Ephesus, Titus in
Creet, Epaphroditus in Philippi, Archippus at Colosse in the Apostles times? As
for the rest of my witnesses, they do either testify de iure, which in their
judgment is perpetual; or if they speak de facto, it is of that which was in
the Apostles times. Cornelius the worthy martyr, who was Bishop of Rome about
the year two hundred fifty, avouches, that there ought to be but Epist
Cornel. apud Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 43.
one Bishop in a Catholic Church, though the number of Presbyters and other
clergy men were very great, and imputes it as a matter of great ignorance to
Nouatian, that he did not know (...), there ought to be but one Bishop in a
Catholic Church, wherein he knew there were forty six Presbyters, etc. This
testimony is rejected, because it was given fifty years after the date: which
were but an evasion, if it did testify de facto only. But seeing Cornelius
speaks de iure, of what ought to be, I hope that which ought not to have been
in Cornelius his time, was not lawful before, unless the Refuter can show,
that before Cornelius his time, plurality of Bishops in one Church was counted
lawful.

. 5. The Council of Nice Conc. Nic. cap. 8.
(whose testimony I also alleged) was of this judgment, that there ought not
to be two Bishops in one City. For having decreed, that when the
Catharists, that is, Puritans or Nouatians, returned to the Catholic Church,
those who were of the clergy should retain their degree, as he that was a
Deacon or a Presbyter should so continue, and likewise a Bishop (for even the
Puritanes or Catharists themselves had their Bishops) if there were not
another already in the Catholic Church. But if there were a Bishop of the
Catholic Church already, then it is manifest (...).
before hand, that the Bishop of the Church shall have the honor of the
Bishop: but he that was called Bishop among the Catharists shall have the
honor of a Presbyter: unless it please the Bishop to communicate unto him the
honor of the name. But if that like him not, he shall find him out either a
Chorepiscopus, that is, a country Bishops, or a Presbyters place, that still he
may be retained in the clergy, (...), that there may not be two Bishop* in one
City Which words in Ruffinus Ruffin. l. 10. c. 6. can. 10. Conc. Cabilon. ca.
4.
are the tenth Canon: Ne in vna Ciuitate duo sint Episcopi. Augustine also
understood, though somewhat too late, that it was forbidden by the Council of
Nice, that there should be any more Bishops in a Church then one. For how
soever, whiles he was ignorant thereof, he was drawn to take upon him the
B^shopricke of Hippo, whiles Valerius was alive; yet when himself was old, and
desired that Eradius might be his Coa^^utor, whom also he nominated for his
successor; yet he thought it unlawful that whiles himself lived he should be
ordanied Bishop Whiles Valerius lived (says he August. epist. 110. Possidon.
in vita August. c. 8.
) I was ordained Bishop, and I sat with him, both of us being ignorant, that
it was forbidden by the Council of Nice. But what was reprehended in me, shall
not be blamed in him. Or as Possidonius speaks, Quod sibi factum esse doluit*
alijs fieri noluit.

In the next place, I bring the testimonies of Jerome In Phil. 1.1.
, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theodoret, and Oecumenius on Phil. 1. All which (I
confess) lived after the two hundred years: but they testify, that in the
Apostles times there could be no more Bishops then one. And the like has
Primasius on the same place.

To all this he answers, that he will not greatly strive about men's devices:
which no^withstanding he can never prove to be humane; and I trust the
singularity of preeminence in each of these Angels, in Timothy, in Titus, etc.
was no humane device. But though he will not strive, yet he alleges that
little which he was able, and that also more then himself does believe to be
true. For he obiecteth that Epiphanius and Eusebius also in his ecclesiastical
story, reckon both Peter and Paul for Bishops of Rome at one time. Founders
they both were of the Church of Rome, as Irenaeus Lib. 3. ca. 3.
testifies, and having founded the Church, ordained Linus Bishop: but that
either of them both, and much less that both at once were Bishops of Rome, the
Refuter himself does not believe. To what purpose then does he allege that
which himself is persuaded to be false? Would he have his Reader believe that
to be true, which himself believes to be untrue?

That which he quoteth out of Athanasius Vid Athan. cont. Mess.
that there were diverse Bishops in some one Church, though I cannot find, it
may be true in time of schism and division; as at Antioch sometimes there were
three Bishops, etc.

His allegation out of D. Sutcliffe De pontif. Romans l. 1. c. 5.
is very childish: as though when he says, that Paul ordained in every Town
or City Presbyters and Bishops; his meaning were, that in every City he
placed more Bishops then one. If I should say; there are Bishops placed in
every City or diocese throughout England, J should speak truly: and yet my
meaning would be, that in every diocese there is but one.

Where I say, 7.
that as this singularity of preeminence was ordained for the preservation of
the Church in unity, and for the avoiding of schism; so is it for the same
cause to be retained; he would seem half amazed, that I, who do not deny other
forms of government to be lawful, page 95. and no further hold the episcopal
function to be of divine institution, then as being ordained by the Apostles,
it proceeded from God, without implying any necessary perpetuity thereof, page
92. should now plainly avouch a necessity of retaining the government of
diocesan BB. for the preservation of the Church in unity, etc. But the Read^r
that favors the Refuters person and cause, has more cause to be amazed at
his dealing. For first, is not this a plain lie, and a notorious falsification
of my words, to say I plainly avouch a necessity of retaining the government of
diocesan Bishops, etc? Where do J mention or mean that necessity he speaks
of? Could those words, so is it for the same cause to be retained, no otherwise
be expounded, then as implying an absolute necessity? That is to be retained
which is meet, or fit, expedient or convenient, profitable or needful to be
retained. Secondly let the reader remember how often the refuter has charged me
for saying the Bishops calling to be holden d, iure diuino, implying a
perpetual necessity thereof, and charge the doctrine Praefat. page 3. and 5.
of my sermon to be in that respect contrary to the laws of our land, which
make the form of Church government to be alterable by the King; and yet here
acknowledges for advantage, that I hold no such matter. Thirdly let it be
observed, how under this pretense of amazement, he shifteth of the testimony of
Cyprian, which sits so near to him, and his consorts. But the reader I hope
will bear in mind the words off Cyprian Cypr. l. 4. epist. 9.
, noting the source of all schisms to be this, when the Bishop, who is but
one, and governs the Church, by the proud presumption of some is contemned
etc. And in the same epistle, you ought to know, says he, to Pupianus, that
the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the Bishop, and that whosoever
are not with the Bishop are not in the Church; and that they do flatter
themselves in vain who have not peace with the Priests of God (that is the
Bishops) etc. To this purpose Cyprian often writes. Lib. 1. epist. 3.
, Neque enim ali^^de haereses, etc. Neither have heresies or schisms any other
beginning then this, that Gods Priest (meaning the Bishop) is not obeyed.
Neither is one Bishop for the time, nor one Judge in Christ's steed
acknowledged, etc. Again, haec sunt initia haereticorum Lib. 3. epist. 9.
, these be the beginnings of heretics, these the risings and endeavors of ill
minded schismatikes, that they please themselves, and contemn their B. with
swelling pride. Sic de ecclesia receditur, thus do men depart from the Church,
etc. And in another place Sermon. 2* de zelo and liuore. Ad page 91.
: Hence do men rush into heresies and schisms, when they speak evil of
Priests, and envy their Bishops, etc. The Lord open their eyes who are faulty
in this behalf, that they may see their sin, and touch their hearts that
they may repent thereof.

. 8.
Out of Jerome, (who is the only man among the Fathers, on whose authority the
Disciplinarians in this cause do rely) I produce three most pregnant
testimonies, the first affirming, Ad page 91.
that Con^. Luciferianos.
unless this singularity of preeminence be yielded to the Bishop, there will
be as many schisms as Priests. The second, Ad Euagr.
that ever since Saint Marks time, the Presbyters having elected one, placed
him in a higher degree, and called him Bishop. The third, that In Tit. 1.
when some began to say, J am of Paul, I of Apollo, (which was in the
Apostles time) it was decreed by the whole world, that one being chosen from
among the Presbyters, should be set over the rest in every Church, unto whom
the care of the whole Church should appertain. Of these allegations, the first
gives testimony to this superiority de iure: the other two testifying de
facto, bear witness that it has been so in and ever since the Apostles
times. These testimonies are featly avoided, with a promise to answer them
afterward, when he will say never a word to the present, not almost to any
purpose.

The second part of this section,. 9.
wherein I prove against Beza, and the better sort of the Disciplinarians,
that the BB. had this singularity of preeminence, neither for a short time,
nor by course, but were elected for term of life; this Refuter rejects, as
not worth the mentioning, he has so often refuted it already. Refuted often? I
would be sorry that he should be able with soundness of reason and evidence
of truth to refute any one sentence in the Sermon. All the refutation of this
point, which hitherto we have had, was this: that I charged them with
untruths, that I threaten kindness on them, that I had need to be as eloquent
as Pericles, if I could persuade that any of them have said this, when as I
have brought forth most plain and evident allegations to this purpose. And
although I forbear to mention Beza, tendering his credit, yet what I here
confuted, is avouched by him in his twenty third chapter of his book,
concerning the degrees of Ministers, chiefly in the 141.142.143. pages.

Now because this point is of great moment,. 10.
though the Refuter have tripped over it so lightly, like a dog over a hot
hearth, as if I were afraid to touch it; I will therefore endeavor to give the
Reader some further satisfaction therein, by adding some other proofs. What
antiquity thought of the singularity of Bishops, may appear first by these two
testimonies out of Cyprian and Theodoret.

For when Nouatian was ordained a second Bishop in Rome besides Cornelius, some
of the Clergy having ben before Confessors, who also had consented to him,
moved with repentance, and returning from schism unto the Church, confessed
their error, saying Council. epist. apud Cypr. lib. 3. epist. 11.
, Nos errorem nostrum confitemur, etc. Neith^r are we ignorant that there ought
to be one God, one Christ the Lord, whom we have confessed, one holy Ghost, one
Bishop in a Catholic Church. Likewise when Constantius being entreated by the
godly Matrons in Rome, gave consent that Liberius should return, but withal
appointed that he and Felix should rule the Church in common: the faithful
people deriding that sentence of the Arrian Emperor, with one voice cried, as
Theod. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Theodoret reports, (...), one God, one Christ, one Bishop. After these
speeches of the true Christian people adorned with piety and justice, Liberius
returned, and Felix departed to another City, and shortly died. Which came to
pass by Gods good providence, says Sozomen Soz l 4. c. 15.
, that the seat of Peter, should not be diffamed as governed at once by two
rulers, (...): which is a note of dissension, and repugnant to the law
ecclesiastical.

2. And that the adding of a second Bishop was judged unlawful and esteemed as
a note of schism, Cyprian in some other places besides those which before I
cited, does testify. Writing therefore to the foresaid Confessors, who had
joined with Nouatian Lib. 3. epist. 2.
, Granat me, says he, it greiueth me etc. When I understood that you there
against ecclesiastical order, against the Euangelical law, against the unity
of Catholic institution, have thought that another Bishop was to be made,
that is to say, which is ungodly, and unlawful to be done, that another Church
should be instituted, the members of Christrent asunder, the mind and body of
the Lords flock, which is but one, to be torn with schismatic emulation.

And in another place Li. 4. Epist. 2.
, Where a Bishop is once lawfully ordained, whosoever now will be made Bishop,
it is necessary that he should be put forth of the Church, and that he have
not the Churches ordination, who does not hold the unity of the Church.
Whosoever he be, though he boast much of himself, and challenge very much to
himself; he is profane, he is an aliant, he is out of the Church. And for as
much, as after the first Bishop, there cannot be a second, whosoever after that
one, who ought to be alone, is made, he is not the second, but none at all.

Thirdly,. 11.
the singularity of preeminence in Bishops, during their life, is proved by
their singularity of succession, both in and since the Apostles times, noted
by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, and other approved authors, most plainly
proving, that there was but one Bishop at once in the ancient and Apostolical
Churches.

Fourthly, what the preeminence and superiority of Bishops was over the
Presbyters, and others of the Clergy, appears by this, that in good writers
they are said the Bishop his Presbyters, the Bishops Deacons, the Bishops
clergy. Thus Arius Epiph. haer. 69. (...).
is said to have been Alexanders presbyter, Petrus and Irenaus Athanas. Ad
sol^t. vitam agentes.
, Timothe^^ Ruff. in hist. l. 1. c. 17.
and Macarius Theodor. l. 2. c. 8.
to have been Athanasius Socr. l. 2. c. 23.
his Presbyters; the vicegerents of Siluester, in the council of Nice were his
Presbyters Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 3.
. Thus Sozom. l 8. c. 15.
Crispio is said to have been Epiphaniu^ his archdeacon, Heraclides Socr. l. 6.
c. 11.
to have been Chrysostomes deacon. In a word, all of the Clergy were said to
be the Bishops clerks, as in the council of Afric Conc. Afric. c. 21. Carth.
grac. c. 54. Socr. l. 2 c. 23.
: Let no Bishop take another clerk, without the consent of him whose clerk he
is. The which is a plain argument of the great preeminence which the Bishops of
the primitive Church had over the Presbyters, and others of the clergy. To
these we will add the testimony of Bucer De regno Christi. l. 2. c. 12
, against whom the Refuter cannot except, as being partial for Bishops. By the
perpetual observation of the Church, says he, even from the Apostles
themselves, we see it seemed good to the holy Ghost, that among the
Presbyters, to whom the charge of the Church is specially committed, one should
have the singular charge of the Churches: and in that charge and care governed
al others; for which cause the name of Bishop was attributed to these chief
Governors of Churches: Howbeit, without the counsel of the other Presbyters
they ought not to determine any thing etc.

Thus much of the Preeminence of Bishops.

CHAP. IIII. That Bishops were superior in power, The BB. superiority in power
proved by the testimony of Jerome. Aduers. Lucifer.
and first in the power of ordination.
( Sermon. sect. 5. page 36. Let us see if Bishops were not also superior in
power. Hearken to Jerome. The safety of the Church depends on the dignity of
the chief Priest or Bishop: to whom if there be not yielded exors and ab
omnibus eminens potestas, a peerless power, and eminent above all, there will
be so many Schisms in the Churches, as there be Priests.)
THis testimony is handled by him as Sir Christopher Blunts head was used,
after his apprehension; first healed, and then cut off: For first, he explanes
the testimony, and then reiects it. He restrains Ieromes speech to the
Church in his own time, viz. in the end of the fourth age, saying, That no man
can without open violence stretch it further.Which is as unlearned a shift, as
ever was heard of. As though Jerome had spoken only of that which was in his
time, and not of that which in his judgment ought to be. Was it Ieromes
judgment, that the superiority of Bishops was needful for the avoiding of
Schisms in his time only? does he not plainly teach, that the superiority of
Bishops began in the Apostles times, and that at the first they were ordained
for avoiding of Shismes? For the former, does he not say, that James was Bishop
of Jerusalem, Timothe of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet? Does he not say, that
ever since Saint Marks time, there have been Bishops placed in a superior
degree above the Presbytes? Does he not call the superiority of BB. a
tradition Apostolical? and does he not say, that it began in the whole world,
when divisions began in the Church, saying, I am of Paul, etc. which was in the
Apostles time? etc.

As touching the latter, he says, indeed that at the first the Churches (under
the Apostles, before BB. were ordained) were governed by the common Counsel of
Presbyters. But whereas afterward one was elected, who should be set over the
rest, Ad Euagr.
In Schismatis remedium factum est, It was provided as a remedy against
Schism, lest every man drawing after him, should rend in pieces the Church of
Christ. And least we should think, that afterward to be referred to the times
after the Apostles; he adds in the next words, Nam and Alexandriae, For even
at Alexandria, ever since Mark the Evangelist (who died 5. or 6. years before
Peter, and Paul, and almost 40. years before Saint John,) the Presbyters have
always chosen one, and placed him in a higher degree, and called him Bishop.
In Tit. 1.
The like he has in Titum 1. that when divisions began in the Church, it was
decreed in the whole world, that one should be set over the rest, to whom omnis
Ecclesiae cura pertineret, and Schismatum semina tollerentur, the care of the
whole Church, or all the care of the Church should appertain, and that the
seeds of Schisms might be taken away, or as he speakth afterward, vt
dissensionum plantaria euellerentur ad vnum omnem solicitudinem esse dela^^^*
that the first plants or sets of dissensions might be plucked out, the whole
care was committed to one. It is most plain therefore, that in Ieromes
judgment, the superiority of BB. was needful for the avoiding of Schism,
not only in his own time, but even in the Apostles times, when Bishops were
first ordained. And as he teaches, that BB. were instituted for avoiding of
Schism, Aduers. Lucifer.
so his judgment in the place alleged was, that for the same cause they are
necessarily to be retained: Yea, he says, Salus Ecclesia, The safety of the
Church depends on this dignity of Bishops, and that unless a peerless and
supereminent power be given unto them, there would be as many Schisms in the
Churches, as there be Priests.

. 2. The refuters answer to the testimony of Ier^^e.
But the refuter wants no reasons (J warrant you) to restrain Ieromes words to
Ieromes time: For, To stretch it to the Apostles times (says he) were to make
Jerome a wild headed (...) indeed. Thus Jerome, if he agree not with the
conceits of some giddie heads, shall be judged wild-headed. And why so I pray
you? For three reasons. First, because Jerome in diverse places disputes, and
concludes that BB. and Presbyters are equal by the word of God. Whereunto I
answer, that this is all which Jerome in this cause says, that Bishops, and
Presbyters are the (...) in the Scriptures. His meaning is, that before Bishops
were ordained, the names Episcopus and Presbyter were confounded, and the same
men were called Presbyters, and Bishops; which I do not deny. But no where is he
says, that Bishops and Presbyters were equal: for before BB. were ordained,
he could not say that Presbyters and Bishops were equal: he says they were
the same. After Bishops were ordained, which he acknowledges to have been done
in the Apostles times, and that by the Apostles, for which cause he calls
their institution, a tradition Apostolical; he plainly confesses, that one,
who was chosen from among the Presbyters, and was called the Bishop of the
Church, to have been placed in a higher degree. But hereof we shall have
occasion hereafter to entreat more fully.

His second reason: Jerome makes Heraclas and Dionysius in Alexandria the
first authors of advancing one minister above another in power. The words are,
Nam and Alexandriae a Marco Euangelista vsque ad Heraclam and Dionysium
Episcopos, Presbyteri semper vnum ex se electum in ^^ccelsiori gradu collocatum
Episcopum nominabant, quo modo si exercitus imperatorem faciat. For even at
Alexandria ever since Mark the Evangelist, until the Bishops Heraclas and
Dionysius, the Presbyters have always called one, being chosen out of
themselves, and placed him in a higher degree, Bishop; even as an army
chooses their chiefetaine. Which words as so far from giving the least
inckling of the Refuters conceit, that Heraclas and Dionysius should be the
first authors of advancing Bishops, that they plainly declare the Bishops ever
from Saint Marks time to Heraclas and Dionysius, to have been placed in a
higher degree above the Presbyters, as the general above the soldiers. Lib.
2.529.
And truly of the two, T. C. conceit, who collecteth the clean contrary to
our refuter, has the better gloss: for, he imagines, that until Heralas,
and Dionysius, they who were chosen from among the Presbyters, were called
Bishops, but then godly men misliking the appropriating of the name to one in a
Church, ceased to call him so. And he might have added with no less color out
of the words, that the Bishops till then had been placed in a higher degree
above other ministers, but then good men misliking their advancement above
their fellow ministers, brought them a peg lower. To these conjectures the
words would seem to them that understand not the right meaning thereof, (which
heretofore I have declared) to give some color of likelihood, were it not that
the practice of the Church did openly proclaim the contrary. Wherefore, of
all collectors, my Refuter shall bear away the bell: For, he that can collect
out of these words, Ever until Heraclas and Dionysius, the Bishop was placed
in a higher degree, that Heraclas and Dionysius were the first that advanced
the Bishops, needs not doubt to collect, quidlibet, ex quolibet, what himself
will, out of any thing whatsoever.

Ad Euagr.
His third reason that Jerome in the same Epistle does teach the contrary, is
most false: For Jerome plainly confesses the Bishop to be superior in the
power of ordination, and in the end concludes, that what Aaron and his sons,
and the Levites were in the temple, the same let Bishops Presbyters, and
Deacons, challenge to themselves in the Church.

3.
The Refuter having thus salued this testimony of Jerome, in the end rejects
it: For if this be true, that unless the Bishop have a peerless power, there
will be as many Schisms in the Church, as there be Priests; then by the like
reason Bellarmine may argue, if there be not a peerless power given to the
Pope, there will be as many Schisms in the Churches, as there are Bishops.

but this latter consequence is naught: so is the former.

Thus Jerome, on whose only authority among the ancient, the Disciplinarians
in this cause rely, when he speaks any thing for the BB. his credit is no
better with them, then if he had spoken for the Popes supremacy. But this is
his desperate malice against the holy calling of Bishops, whereby he seeks
every where to parallele the Christian superiority of BB. with the
Antichristian supremacy of the Pope. But all in vain: For though it be true in
Ieromes conceit, that if there were no Bishops, there would be as many Schisms
almost as Priests; yet it does not follow, that if there were no Pope, there
would be as many Schisms as Bishops. For first, experience teaches how to
judge of this matter: for until the year 607. the Pope never attained to his
supremacy; and yet the Church was more free from Schisms, before that time,
then since, whereas contrariwise, when there were no Bishops for a short
season, in the Apostles times, in most of the Churches, every one of the
Presbyters, as Jerome In Tit. 1^.
speaks, sought to draw Disciples after him: which he supposes to have been
the occasion of instituting Bishops.

Secondly, there is great odds between BB. and the greatest number of
Presbyters. One Bishop, say the Fathers of the Africane council Conc. Afr. c.
22. Carth. graec. c. 55.
, may ordain many Presbyters, but one man fit to be a Bishop is hard to be
found.

Thirdly, before there was one supreme or universal Bishop, there was unity
and communion between all the Bishops in Christendom, whose course to
preserve unity in the Churches and to avoid Schism, was to communicate the
confessions of their faith one with an other by their communicatorie,
pacificall or formed letters. And if any were in error, they sought first
severally by their letters to reclaim them; and if they prevailed not, they
assembled in Councils either to reduce them to unity, or to depose them.

Cyprian says Li 4. Epist. 9.
, that the Catholic Church is one, not rent into Schisms nor divided, but
every where knit together and coharentium sibi inuicem Sacerdotum glutino
copulata, and coupled with the glue as it were of Bishops agreeing mutually
among themselves. And in another place Lib. 3. Epist. 13.
, which before has been alleged; Therefore is the body of Bishops copious,
coupled together with the glue of mutual concord, and with the bond of unity,
that if any of our company shall be author of an Heresy, and shall endeavor
to rend the flock of Christ, and to make havoc thereof, the rest may help
etc. Whereas contrariwise, if there were one supreme and universal Bishop,
whose authority were greater then of general Councils, as the Papists teach;
when he does err, who should reclame him, when he is exorbitant, who should
reduce him into the way, when he shall draw with him innumerable troops of
souls into Hell, who may say unto him, Domine, cur ita facis? Sir, why do you
so? And as the Church is to be careful for avoiding Schism, and preservation
of itself in the unity of truth, which may be provided for, as it was wont,
yea, better then it was wont (where are Christian, and Orthodoxall magistrates)
by the BB. singularity of preeminence in every several Church, and mutual
concord of them in the truth: so must it be as careful to avoid conspiring and
consenting in untruth. But where there is one supreme and universal Bishop,
when he erreth and goes astray, he becomes as we see in the Papacy, the
head of a Catholic Apostasy from Christ. So that this pretended remedy
against Schism, causing a Catholic apostasy, is as much, or more, to be
avoided then Schism it self, the remedy being far worse then the feared
malady.

4. What the power is wherein BB. be superior to other Ministers.
( Sermon. sect. 6. page 37. This power is twofold, the power of ordination and of
jurisdiction, etc. 19. lines to, Titus in Creet.) Where I place the power
wherein Bishops are superior to Presbyters in these two things; the Reader is
to understand, that I mention the principal, and most essential: for
otherwise, ancient writers mention Damas. epist. de Chorepiscop. Hicronym. de
7. ordin. eccles. et aduers. Lucifer. Leo epist. BB.
other prerogatives of Bishops, wherein their superiority does consist; as by
imposition of hands to confirm them that are baptized, and publickely to
reconcile the penitents, to consecrate Churches etc. of some whereof Jerome
indeed says, they did belong ad honorem potius Sacerdotij, quam ad legis
necessitatem, Aduers. Lucifer.
rather to the honor of the Priesthood, then to the necessity of law. But what
says the Refuter? Now at the last yet, says he, (it seems that he has
been long delaied, or that he has greatly longed, in hope to do great matters,
to deal in this matter of ordination) let us see, how it is proved that
Bishops must have sole power of ordination. But where good sir, do I say they
must have the sole power of ordination, which you have so often objected, and now
again do repeat? make you no conscience of publishing untruths? cannot BB. be
superior to other ministers in the power of ordination, and jurisdiction, which
is the thing which I maintain, unless they have the sole power? or do I here
dispute what Bishops must have, when I only show what the ancient Bishops were
wont to have? If he shall say, that unless they had the sole power of
ordination, they had not the superiority which our Bishops have; I answer,
that our BB. have no more the sole power of ordination, then the ancient
Bishops had. And this I added in the Sermon, that although the power of
ordination was held in the primitive Church to be so peculiar to Bishops, as
that ordinarily and regularlie the ordination was not thought lawful, which
was not done by a Bishop: yet it does not follow, but that extraordinarily, and
in case of necessity, Presbyters might ordain. Howbeit, I must confess, I am
not able to allege any approved examples thereof. If the Refuter can, which I
do more then doubt of, he shall do well to produce them: it may tend to the
credit of some other Churches, it cannot be prejudicial to the cause which I
maintain

Seeing therefore the Refuter does alter the state of the question, making me
to prove that which I did not intend, because he could not answer that which
was propounded: I should neither wrong him, nor the Reader, If I vouchsafed him
no further answer in this point. But in very truth, he is so far from
refuting the superiority of Bishops in the power of ordination which J
propounded, that he is not able to disprove their sole power, which himself
has foisted into the question.

For as touching my first argument;. 5. Ad page 92. BB. superior in the power
of ordination. The 1. proof.
whereas he frames for me this consequence, It has been the received opinion
in the Church of God, ever since the Apostles times, that the right of
ordination of Presbyters, is such a peculiar prerogative of Bishops, as that
ordinarily, and regularlie, there could be no ordination, but by a Bishop:
therefore BB. have sole authority of ordination, (he should have said,
therefore they are superior to other ministers in the power of ordination:) he
passes by this consequence, though he would feign persuade his Reader, that it
is liable to (he cannot tell what) just exception: and only insisteth on the
antecedent, which is the assumption of his prolixe syllogism. But it is worth
the hearing, how he does disprove it. Forsooth It halteth down right, having
no strength but from a false supposition (and so proved to be) that there were
always Diocesan Bishops.

Here the Refuter, if he would have said any thing to satisfy his Reader,
should have produced some approved example of ordination, either in the
Apostles times, or since, performed by Presbyters without a Bishop; whereby he
might have disproued my assertion: but not being able so to do, he betaketh
himself to his ordinary trade of answearing by mere cauillations. He talks
of a supposition, whereon the assumption is grounded; when as the speech is
simple, and categoricall as they speak, and not hypotheticall; and the effect
of his answer is not the denial of a supposition, but the taking away of the
subject of the question: as if he should say; Bishops were not, therefore they
had not this power: For where he adds Diocesan, that is spoken unseasonably:
for the question now is not what their authority was extensiue: whether to a
Diocese or not, which in this point is not material; but what it was intensiue
in respect of other ministers. By that starting hole therefore he cannot
escape: especially, if it be added, that the supposition is not (as he untruly
says) false: for that error he will as I hope recant, when he shall have
read, what I have alleged for the proof of Dioceses and Diocesan Bishops. And
whereas he says, he has proved it to be false; that also is untrue: for he
never went about it. Nec ausus est: nec potuit, only he rejected it in a
glorious manner, as being so manifestly false, that he should not need to
disprove it. But suppose for a little while, that the refuters, and the rest of
the challengers conceit were true, that there were no Bishops but parishionall,
and that the Presbyters joined to them were lay elders: it would then be
known, when the pastoral charge was void, who did ordain the new Bishop or
Pastor. You will say, that is already defined. It is one of the maine
positions which the great challengers have offered to prove, that every parish
has within it self authority to elect, ordain depose, and deprive their
Minister: Not that the whole parish does ordain, but only the Presbytery.
Very good: this then is the effect of the new Disciplinarians conceit, that the
power of ordination belongs ordinarily neither to Bishops, nor to other
ministers, but to their Presbytery consisting of lay elders. But if they can
prove by any one approved example, that lay elders had ever, or at any time,
right to ordain, or to impose hands, I will yield in the whole cause.

My second proof he has perverted, My second proof.
proportioning it to his own strength: for he should have framed it thus.

If the power of ordination were not in the Presbyters of Ephesus and Creet,
neither before Timothe and Titus were sent, but in the Apostles; nor after, but
in the Bishops (that is to say, in Timothe and Titus, and their successors);
then the power of ordination is a prerogative peculiar to Bishops, wherein they
are superior to other ministers.

But both the parts of the antecedent are true: therefore the consequent.

The former part of the antecedent I prove by Paul's substituting Timothe at
Ephesus, and Titus in Creet, to that end, that they might ordain elders;
notwithstanding that there were diverse Presbyters in both those Churches
before. Whereto he answers, that it had been lawful for the Presbyters, and
people to have ordained: but at the first, they were less fit for the purpose,
then an Evangelist.

That the people sometimes have had some stroke in election of their Bishops,
I do not deny; but that they ever had any right to ordain, can never be
proved. That the Presbyters had right to have done it, he should have declared.
But what Presbyters does he speak of? ministers? they I trust, if the new
conceit be true, were confined each man to his own parish; neither might they
intermeddle in other parishes, every parish having sufficient authority
within it self: neither can it be thought, that the Presbyters of latter times
should be fit, and that they which were ordained by the Apostles themselves,
were not fit for the execution of their power? assuredly, if it were not fit
for them to ordain, but for Timothe and Titus; by the same reason, neither is
it fit for Presbyters afterward, but for Bishops, who succeeded Timothe and
Titus. Jf he say, the lay Presbyters and the people had right to ordain; he
must first prove (which he will never be able to do) that ever there were such
Presbyters; and then he must prove, that they and the people had right to
ordain ministers: which when he has performed, he may hope to prove any thing.

The latter part of the antecedent, I prove thus: Who were the successors of
Timothe and Titus for the government of Ephesus and Creet, to them after their
decease was their power of ordination derived:

The Bishops of Ephesus and Creet were the successessours of Timothe and Titus
for the government of those Churches, and not Presbyters. Therefore to the BB.
and not to the Presbyters, was the power of Ordination derived.

Hereto he answers that Timothe and Titus, were Evangelists, and not Bishops,
and therefore that which follows, of deriuing their authority, to their
successors, is merely idle. Thus no part of my syllogism is answered,
unless it be the conclusion. But to answer his reason, whereby he goes
about, (...) cl^^^ pel^ere: their being Evangelists, whiles they attended the
Apostle in his peregrinations, and were not deputed to any one place, does not
hinder, but that they might be and were Bishops, (as all antiquity with one
consent testifies) when they were assigned to certain Churches. Neither is it
greatly material, as touching the force of this argument, whether they were
Evangelists, or Bishops: seeing the power which they had of ordination and
jurisdiction, was not to dye with them; but to be transmitted to them, who
should succeed them in the government of the Church. Now that the Bishops of
Ephesus and Creet, and so of all other Churches, did succeed Timothe and Titus,
and other Apostolical men, who were the first governors of the Churches; is a
most certain truth, as the singular succession of Bishops in those Churches
from the Apostles times, does ineuitably euince. But hereof I shall have better
occasion hereafter to speak. Now that the Presbyters were not their
successors, it is evident: for they had the selfsame authority (and no
greater) under the Bishops, who were successors to Timothe and Titus, which
before they had under them. For they which had no other authority after them,
then they had under them, could not be their successors.

( Sermon Sect. 7. p. 37. They object 1. Tim. 4.14 Neglect not the gift which is
in thee, which was given thee by imposition of hands of the Presbytery etc. to
ex authoritate page 39.) MY answer to this testimony out of 1. Tim. 4. is,. 7.
Their objection out of 1. Tim. 4 14. answered. Ad page 93.
That howsoever the Presbyterians do upon this place especially build the
authority of their pretended Presbyteries, yet this text makes not for them.

That it makes not for them, I prove by this reason.

If there be but two expositions which are given of the word Presbytery,
neither whereof does favor their presbyteries; then the authority of their
Presbyteries cannot be concluded out of this place. But neither of the two
expositions do favor their Presbyteries:

Therefore their authority cannot be concluded hence.

The exceptions which he takes against this answer are very frivolous. As
first, that how many expositions soever any text in the conceit of men may
admit, the holy ghost except by way of allegory intends but one. Be it so:
but yet there may be question, which of the diverse expositions which be given,
is the sense of the holy Ghost: unless that must needs be always the meaning
of the holy Ghost, which the refuter fancieth. For my part, I did not take upon
me to determine, whether sense is the more likely: It was sufficient for me,
that whereas there be but these two expositions which are or can be given,
neither of both makes for the pretended Presbyteries. His first exception
therefore is to no purpose.

Now that the former exposition understanding by Presbyterium the Priesthood
or office of a Presbyter, makes nothing for their Presbyteries, it is more
then evident. And that this exposition, which so plainly defeateth their
Presbyteries, is very probable; I show first, because the word is in that
sense often used, though not in the new testament, yet in greek writers of the
Church. It suffiseth the Refuter, that it is not used in that sense in any
other place of Scripture: and yet himself saying that the word is no where is
else used in all the Scriptures, does as much prejudge his own exposition, as
this. How be it I do not deny, but the word is else where used in the
Scriptures; only this I say, that there is no other place, wherein it can be
drawn to signify the Christian Presbytery, meaning either the company of
Presbyters, or the office of a Presbyter. This then being the only place where
it is so used, we must not expect parallele places in the Scripture to confirm
either sense. Secondly I show that this may be the sense, because not only
diverse in former times as Jerome, Primasius, Anselmus, Haymo, Lyra, but Calvin
also do so expound it. To this his answer is worse then frivolous, that
though these writers do so expound it, yet Doctor Bilson does not say that
therefore it may be so understood. And why so I pray you? because he confesses
that Chrysostom, Theodoret and other Graecians expound it of the persons which
did ordain, not of the function whereto Timothe was ordained. Does not Doctor
Bilson say it may be so understood, when more then once he mentions it as one
of the received expositions of that place, approved by Calvin himself the
chief patron (for I must not say founder) of the Presbyterian Discipline?
neither does his relating of Chrysostomes exposition prove that he rejects
the other; no more, then his alleging of Ieromes interpretation does argue,
that he refuses that of Chrysostomes: but reciting both Page 129.252
indifferently he refers it to the Readers choice whither to embrace.

But let us hear how the Refuter confuteth this interpretation.. 8. The former
exposition, of Presbyterium, viz. that it may signify the office of a
Presbyter, defended.
The exposition of Jerome, Primasius, Anselme; Haymo is not to be rested upon;
because where Paul says the grace given by Prophecy, they say, the grace of
Prophecy, plainly mistaking the Apostle: as who should say, because they
mistook the meaning of the word Prophecy, therefore they erred in expounding
the word Presbytery, by which reason we may argue that he which mistaketh
some one thing, vnderstadeth nothing aright. What if the refuter himself does
mistake? for it is not all one to say the gift given (...) by Prophecy, and
according to former Prophecies, as he expounds it. But by Prophecy, is, by
the Revelation and Direction of the holy Ghost; whereby the Bishops, who were
ordained by the Apostles, were designed and chosen. But what if they did not
mistake? might not they mean by the gift of Prophecy, the gift which was
given by Prophecy? yea, was not the gift of Prophesying, and preaching aright,
which Paul exhorts him not to neglect (for he continues the exhortation
begun in the words going before 2. Tim. 4.13.
attend to reading, exhortation and Doctrine) the gift which was given him by
Prophecy at his ordination? Certes, Bullinger thinks the words may so be
understood. Donu^ quod tibi delegatu^ est ad prophet andum. and this is all
which Jerome says, Prophetiae gratiam habebat tum ordinatione Episcopatus. But
what if some of them did not call it the grace of Prophecy? Anselmus has no
such words, but calls it gratiam Episcopalis of^icij, which by prophecy was
given him at his ordination. But be it, that their exposition were not to be
rested in, because of their other mistaking; what is this to Lyras and Caluins
exposition, which is the same? What more? The three last, Anselmus, Haymo, and
Lyra follow Jerome hand over head: For though they expound the word of the
office, yet they read it not Presbyterij, but Presbyteri. But was not this
exception taken hand over head, and at all adventures? did not Anselmus read
Presbyterij? let his own words testify: For first, he reads Paul's words
thus: Quae gr^tia est data tibi per propheliam, cum impositione manuum
Presbyterij; and then expounds them after this manner Anselm. in 1. Tim. 4.14.
: He speaks of that imposition of hands, which was used at his ordination;
which imposition of hands was Presbyterij, of the Presbytery, or Priesthood;
and then gives two reasons of the word, either because by this imposition he
received the Presbytery, that is the office of a Bishop; for a Bishop is often
called Presbyter by the Apostles, and likewise a Presbyter is called a Bishop:
or because it was the imposition of the hands of a Presbyter, that is Paul 2.
Tim. 1.6.
, who imposed hands upon him: for so Peter and John call themselves in their
Epistles. So that he reads Presbyterij; though in one of his explanations he
expounds it, as if the Apostle by Presbyterij, did mean Presbyteri. The
ordinary gloss indeed reads Presbyteri, but so does not Lyra: For
expounding the word, he says, Est autem Presbyterium, the Presbytery is the
dignity or office of a Presbyter, and accipitur hic Presbyterium pro
Episcopatu and Presbytery or Priesthood here is taken for the office of a
Bishop. Thus you see how faithfully he has dealt with these authors. It may be
he will deal more truly with Calvin. For whereas I allege his judgment in
his Institutions, understanding Paul, not as if he spoke of the College of
Seniors, but of the ordination it self: as if he had said; Endeavor that the
grace which by imposition of hands thou did receive when I made thee
Presbyter, be not in vain: he says thus, that Calvin in his former writings,
leaued to that sense of the word, I deny not: but in his latter times, and
namely in his Commentary on that place, though he say that exposition is not
much Much is foisted in by the Refuter.

Calvin says, Non male. Ad page 49.


amiss, yet he affirms, that they which understand it of the College of
Presbyters, in his judgment think rightly of it. Which answer consists of
forged cauillations. For first he would make the Reader believe, that Caluins
judgment in his Institutions, is the opinion of his younger head, and that his
judgment in his Commentary is to be preferred, as proceeding from riper
years. It would therefore first be known, whether that edition of his
Institutions, which I alleged set forth by himself, or his Commentaries on
the Epistle to Timothy, be the latter. Is it not evident that he wrote that
Co^mentary in King Edwards time, whiles the Duke of Somerset was living?
Whereas that edition of his Institutions, was set forth by him in the time of
Queen Elizabeth. Again, where Caluins judgment seems to vary, who doubts
but that is to be esteemed his settled judgment wherein he rested, which is set
down in the Jnstitutions, whereunto himself does refer his Reader for this
purpose: being indeed a most accurate and elaborate work, often reuiewed, and
polished by him? And therefore though the first draught of his Institutions was
made in his younger days, which in process of time he did by little and
little bring to perfection; yet the last edition much differing from the first,
is as it were his last resolution, for those things which are contained
therein. Whereas therefore of the two senses, which in his Commentaries he
gives of the word Presbytery, misliking neither, he makes choice in his
Institutions of that which understands the office, and plainly rejects the
other, which thereby understands the College of Presbyters, and that to
prove, that sometimes no more then one did impose hands, which he confirms
by the Apostles own testimony, who says, that himself and no more did impose
hands on Timothy, and that the grace which was given him, was by the imposition
of Paul's hands, it cannot be denied, that Caluins judgment wherein he rested,
was, that by the Presbytery, not the College, but the office is meant.

. 9.
But leaving other men, Refuter the is pleased to appeal to my conscience, and
to appose me what governs the genuine case, (...), of the Presbytery. I
answer, first, that it may be governed of the word gift, which trai^ction of
words, the learned tongues do better bear then the English, which for the
most part disposes words according to the construction: and yet the English
will bear it well enough, if the words between (...) gift, and Presbytery, be
enclosed in a parenthesis. Neglect not the gift which was in thee (which was
given thee by prophecy, with imposition of hands) of priesthood or Presbytery.
But indeed Jerome, Anselme, and Calvin, and the rest, to whom I add Erasmus,
understand it as governed of the words next going before, without any
traiection, with imposition of hands, that is ordination of priesthood, (for
(...) and (...), is all one even in the judgment of the Refuter) that is, when
thou wast ordained Presbyter. So says Jerome, Cum ordinations episcopatus,
when thou were ordained Bishop. Anselme; This imposition was presbyterij, of
the priesthood, because by this imposition of hands (meaning ordination) he
received the Presbytery, that is the office of a Bishop. I understand, says
Calvin, the ordination it self: as if he should say; the grace which by
imposition of hands thou d^st receive, when I made thee Presbyter. Calum
therefore understands it to be governed, as if it were said, Cum ordinatione
Presbyteratus. For (...) signifies either the Senate or company of Presbyters,
which in Latin we call Presbyterium, or the office, degree, and order of a
Presbyter, which we call Presbyteratus.

Yea but the Refuter will show the absurdity of this interpretation, by laying
down the order of the words in the Greek: and yet varieth not at all from the
order which I myself set down. But this is but to please the simple. For he
might as well require the words in Greek and Latin, to be set down in the
order of construction, as to make the order of words in Greek and Latin
sentences to be answerable to the English. Howbeit, this exception is against
his own conceit, of the traiection of the words; it touches not the
exposition of Jerome, Calvin, and the rest, which is without traiection.

In his conclusion, where he bids me forbear to bleare the eyes of the Readers
with an exposition against reason, and mine own conscience; he wrongeth me
egregiously, and not me alone, but all the Authors whom I alleged. For first,
I did not deliver this as my exposition, but faithfully recited the
interpretation given by these Authors. Secondly, if I had rested in this
interpretation, as I did not, (though I see no reason why I may not) why should
it be counted against reason, and against conscience in me, which I received
from so approved Authors? But what a contumely is this to Jerome, Calvin, and
the rest, whose exposition it is, warranted by the testimony of Paul, to say,
they bleare the eyes of their Readers with an exposition against reason, and
their own conscience? I wish the Refuter, unless his judgment were better,
to forbear to condemn other men's expositions, as void of reason: and unless
his knowledge were greater, not to measure other men's conscience by his own.
For that which is against his conscience, as not being within the compass of
his science may be agreeable to the science, and consceince of them, who have
more knowledge and better judgments. But if he would needs censure Caluins
exposition as void of reason, why did he not answer Caluins reason, grounded
on the authority of Saint Paul? For if Timothy were ordained by a Presbytery*
then undoubtedly by more then one; But Paul (says Calvin C^lu. In^li^. lib. 4.
cap 3. in fine.
) in another place says, that he, and not any more imposed hands on Timothy:
2. Tim 1 6.

And so much might suffice for the former exposition, saving that by way of
advantage, something is to be added out of Erasmus E^asm. in 1. Tim. 4.14.
; who also understanding the word Presbytery, of the office, gives
notwithstanding another sense: This Paul says, Thou have not only the gift of
prophecy, but also the efficacy by imposition of hands, to give the spirit
also to others, and that by the office of thy priesthood, namely, as thou art
Bishop. And to this interpretation he was led by force of the Greek
preposition (...), which signifies with, not as an instrument, but as a
companion. And this may seem to have been Ambros. in 1. Tim. 4.
Ambrose his judgment also, that Paul gratiam dari ordinatoris significat,
signifies the grace of an ordainer to be given. Which sense if we follow, this
place makes wholly for the Bishops authority in ordaining, this being the
sense of the Apostle, that Timothy had received the gift of the ministry
together with power to impose hands on others, by virtue of his office, as he
was Bishop.

The latter exposition is of them, who understand the word Presbytery,. 10. The
second exposition makes not for the Disciplinarians.
collectiue, for a Senate or company of men. In which sense, though the word
receives from diverse learned men, a threefold interpretation; yet in none does
it either favor the Disciplinarians Presbytery, or preiudge the superiority of
Bishops in the power of ordination.

For some by Presbytery, understand the Apostle, as speaking of himself by a
synecdoche, led thereunto by the Apostles testimony in the place 2. Tim. 1.6.
before cited, where he exhorts Timothy to stir up the grace which was in
him by imposition, says he, of my hands. And this is one of Anselmus his
expositions, with whom Dionysius Carthus. agrees, ioining both his expositions
in one: Manuum Presbyterij, says he, i. manuum meaerum, that is, of my hands
who did ordain the^ Bishop. By which imposition, the Presbytery or priesthood
was conferred upon thee. So that in their judgment (wherewith Calvin also
agrees) none but Paul did impose hands in the ordination of Timothy. The
second interpretation is of the Greek Fathers, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, and Oecumenous, who expounding the word collectiue, do understand
a senate or company of Apostles and Apostolical men, who were either Bishops,
or more then Bishops. Chrysostomes words be these Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. 4.
, (...), of the Presbytery: (...): He does not speak here of Presbyters, but
of Bishops: for surely Presbyters did not ordain a Bishop. Oecumenium Oc^um.
in 1. Tim. 4.
has the like words; (...). Theophylact Theophylact. in 1. Tim. 4.
; Of the Presbytery, that is, of Bishops. Theodoret Theodor. in 1. Tim. 4.
; He calls them here the Presbytery, who had received Apostolical grace.
Neither does any Writer that I know of, before our age, understanding the word
collectiue, for a company, expound it otherwise: but conceiving Timothy to have
been ordained Bishop by the company of Apostolical men, who either were
Bishops, or more then Bishops. Now we do not deny, but that diverse Bishops
are to concur in the ordination of a Bishop. But that hinders not, but that
Presbyters and Deacons may be ordained by one. So are we taught in the two
first canons Can. Apost. 1. and 2.
called Apostolical. Let a Bishop be ordained of two or three Bishops. Let a
Presbyter be ordained by one Bishop, likewise a Deacon and the rest of the
clergy. This exposition therefore defeating their pretended Presbytery, is so
far from derogating from the superiority of BB. in ordaining, as that it
plainly proves it, because the ordination of BB. wherewith Presbyters have
nothing to do, belongs to BB.

The third exposition is of Beza, and some other new Writers, who by
Presbytery, understand the order of Presbyters. By which name, says Beza Beza
in 1. Tim. 4.
, that whole company is signified, which did labor in the word in that Church,
where this was done. Neither will I reject this exposition, though it be new,
being understood of Timothy, his ordination to be a Presbyter; so that they
will not deny that which Paul affirms, that himself was so principal a man
in this company, as that he doubts not to say, that the grace which was
given by the imposition of hands of the Presbytery 1. Tim. 1.14.
, was given by the imposition of 2. Tim. 1.6.
his hands. Which shows, that if any Presbyters did join with Paul, it was
no otherwise then as they use to do with BB. by the Canon Conc. Carth. 4. c. 3.
of the fourth Council of Carthage, and by the discipline and order In the
book of ordaining Priests it is appointed, that the B. with the Priests
present, shall lay their hands on the head of him that is ordained.
of our Church. And this answers the first thing which the Refuter infers
upon this exposition, that if Presbytery signify a company of seniors, as it
must (for J tell you his word must stand for law) then it will follow that the
power of ordination was not in one man's hand alone. For though that alone be
of his own adding, yet it is plain, that Paul and ancient BB. had this power
as much alone, as our Bishops.

Where I say, this place makes nothing either for their parish Presbyteries,
or lay Presbyteries whatsoever, he says, 11.
It skilleth not now what Presbytery this was. Belike then it skilleth not,
what becomes of the maine pillar of your Discipline, so you can make any
poor shift to maintain the point which presently is in hand. But if this be
the only place of scripture, which mentions a Christian Presbytery, on which
also the Disciplinarians do principally build the authority of their pretended
Presbyteries, it makes not a little (me thinks) for the justifying of our
cause, that it makes not at all for their Presbyteries; which (by the
confession Calu. Instit. lib. 4. cap 3. 16. Hoc posiremo habondum est, filos
pastore^ manus imposuisse Ministris.
of Calvin) have no right to impose hands. Neither can it be denied, but that
it is sacrilegious usurpation, and horrible intrusion upon the right of the
Ministry, if lay men shall take upon them to ordain by imposition of hands.
Besides, it skilleth something, that the Greek Fathers understand by
Presbytery, a company of Bishops: which, as it proves the Prerogative of BB.
in the ordaining of BB. so does it not impeach their superiority in ordaining
Ministers. And where he makes (...) say, they were no Presbyters; he
mistaketh the matter, unless he understand mere, or onely-Presbyters. For BB
and Apostolical men, yea the Apostles themselves were Presbyters, and so call
themselves; but they were not bare, or onely-Presbyters, as those be which are
not Bishops. But if they were not Presbyters, says he, then was the Apostle to
blame to call them so. If the word be understood collectiue, he calls the
company of them which imposed hands on Timothy, the Presbytery. And forasmuch
as not only inferior Ministers, but Bishops and Apostles are called
Presbyters, it being a common name to all Ministers of the word and sacraments,
it should not seem strange that a company or senate of Bishops, or
Apostolical men, should be called a Presbytery. Now that they were not mere
Presbyters, the Fathers prove: Because Presbyters might not ordain a Bishop:
neque enim fas erat, says Ambrose In 1. Tim. 3.
, nec licebat, vt inferior ordinaret maiorem. Neither was Timothy any, says
he. Bluntly and peremptorily spoken. But the Fathers that before I mentioned,
take it for granted: and it is the general consent of all the ancient Fathers,
as we shall hear; the authority of some one whereof, in a matter of fact,
ought to ouerweigh the whole nation of Disciplinarians contradicting the same.

In fine, distrusting this borough, he flies to his old starting hole, out
of which he has been so often ferretted: that the Fathers spoke only of
their own times, which is nothing to the ordaining of Ministers in the
Apostles times, almost four hundred years before them. The absurdity of which
evasion, the Reader may easily discern, if he will but call to mind what
were the Greek. Fathers words before cited, and upon what occasion they were
uttered. Chrysostom. (...).
He speaks here, says Chrysostom and Occumenius, O^cum. (...).
not of Presbyters but of Bishops. For Presbyters did not ordain Bishops.
Is it not most plain, that they speak of the Apostles time? And were it not
absurd to understand them thus, Paul by the Presbytery which ordained Timothy,
understands Bishops, and not Presbyters; because howsoever in those times
Presbyters might ordain, yet in our times they cannot?

But let me ask the Refuter this question: Seeing it is agreed upon by all,
that Paul here speaks of Timothy his ordination: to what function he
thinks he was ordained? If to be a Presbyter, or Pastor, as Calvin says, or
to be a Bishop, as all the Fathers acknowledge, then was he not only
ordained to an ordinary function in the Church, but also assigned to a
particular Church, whereof he was made Pastor, as Calvin speaks, or
Bishop, as the Fathers affirm. But that his last ordination, whereof the
Apostle speaks, was not to the degree of a Presbyter, but of a Bishop,
appears by the whole Epistle; wherein his singularity of preeminence over
Presbyters, and superiority in power both for ordination and jurisdiction, is
presupposed. If he say, that he was ordained to be an Evangelist, to omit the
singularity and the nouelty of the conceit; it would be known what Presbytery
this was, that imposed hands on Timothy. Had the Presbytery of any parish (such
as our Disciplinarians dream of, consisting for the most part of laymen) or
the Presbytery of any particular Church, though consisting wholly of Ministers,
authority by imposition of hands to ordain an extraordinary function, and that
to be exercised in other parts of the world, where themselves had nothing to
do?

( Sermon. sect. 8. page 39. Yea but the Council of Carthage (say they)
commits authority of imposing hands to Presbyters, The objection out of
Conc. Carth. 4. answered.
etc. to the end of page 44) Here the Refuter meaning to make short work,
having little to say, has made a long section, which he might better have
divided into three. For three diverse things are here performed. The first, an
answer to the objection our of the fourth Council of Carthage. The second, a
new supply of proofs for the superiority of BB. in the power of ordination.
Thirdly a prevention of popish cauils, in favor of some reformed Churches,
where the Presbyterian discipline is established.

As touching the first, the Refuter says, that canon may serve to show, Ad page
95.
that the Fathers of this Council thought it not fit, no not to leave
ordination to the Bishop alone. But because he perceives, by that which I
answered, that that Canon, though greatly urged by the Disciplinarians, makes
nothing against the superiority of BB. in ordaining, and that it agrees with
the discipline of our Church, and consequently conuicteth him of untrue
dealing: (seeing he ^udgeth, that BB. by that canon have not sole authority of
ordaining, and yet will make his Reader believe, that I defend their sole power
of ordaining: which by the discipline of our Church, is no more sole in our BB.
then it was by that canon in the BB. of Afric:) for these causes, I say, he
refuses to urge this canon: though he pretend, he will neither trouble the
Reader, nor himself about the examining of it; because, forsooth, it comes
not near the time in question. Perhaps his conscience told him, that he knew
of no testimony nor example of the Presbyters concurrence with the B. in
ordination, before that time: and that in the foresaid Council, their
assistance to the B. in ordaining, was first ordained: which if it did, as
worthily it might, then had he no reason to urge that canon to prove the
practice of the Church in the first two hundred years in a particular, which
by that canon was first appointed.

Having thus removed their two maine objections which stood in my way,. 13.
Other arguments proving the BB. right in ordaining.
I proceeded in the proof of my former assertion, that the right of ordination
was in the judgment of the ancient Church appropriated to BB. As first, that
the Councels and Fathers speak of the ordainer as of one, and consequently
presuppose the right of ordaining to be in one, which I proved by four
testimonies. This reason, because the Refuter did not well see how to answer,
he passes by it, as if he had not seen it. To make it therefore more
conspicuous, I will enlarge it; affirming, that both Scriptures, Councels, and
Fathers speak of the ordainer as of one. Timothy was ordained by the
imposition of Paul's 2. Tim. 1.6.
hands. Paul left Titus Tit. 1.5.
in Creet, that he should ordain Presbyters, and charge Timothy 1. Tim. 5.22.
that he should not lay hands hastily on any man, etc.

The Canon C. 2.
called the Apostles, appoints that a Presbyter, and so a Deacon, be ordained
of one. The Council of Antioch C. 9.
acknowledges every Bishop within his own diocese, to have authority to
ordain Presbyters and Deacons. The Council of Afric Afr. c. 22. and Carth.
graec. c. 45.
: (...), one Bishop may ordain many Presbyters. The Council of Hispalis
Hispal. 2. c. 6.
or Civil; A Bishop alone may give to Priests and Deacons their honor.

Chrysostom De Sacerd.
describes the Bishop by this property, (...), he that is to ordain us. The
people of Hippo Possidon. de vitae Aug. c. 4.
wanting a Presbyter, lay hold on Augustine, and as it was wont to be done,
bring him to Valerius the Bishop, desiring him to ordain him. To these add
the penalty inflicted upon the B. alone, when any ordination was irregular.
Sozomen Soz l. 4. c. 24.
reports, that Elpidius, Eustathius, Basilius of Ancyra, Eleusius, among
other faults objected against them, were deposed, because every of them had
ordained contrary to law. The afore^aid Council of Carthage decrees, Conc.
Carth. 4. c. 68.69. distinct. 50. ex poe^itentib.
that if a B. wittingly ordain a penitent, he shall be deprived of the power of
his Bishopric, at least from the power of ordaining. And to the like penalty
does it subject a Bishop, who shall ordain such a one, as has married her
that is divorced, etc. But you shall never read, that the Presbyters were
found fault with for unlawful ordinations, unless that any of them did
encroach upon the Bishops right in ordaining: which is a plain evidence, that
the power of ordaining was in the B. and not in the Presbyters. When Epiphanius
being at Constantinople Socr. l. 6. c. 23.14.
ordained a Deacon, he was blamed as offending against the Canons, not because
he wanted the presence of his Presbytery, but because he did it in
Chrysostomes diocese.

. 14.
Secondly, that the power of ordination was peculiar to the Bishop in the
judgment of the Fathers, J prove first by the authority of Councels: then, by
the testimonies of Epiphanius and Jerome. To the former he answers; It is to
no purpose to meddle with these allegations out of the Councels, which were
well nigh three hundred years after the Apostles times, and some of them such,
as deserve neither imitation, nor approbation.Here let the Christian Reader
judge what credit he deserves, that so contemptuously shakes off the
authority of ancient Councels, even the second among the four ancient general
Councels, which are and have been from time to time received in the Church
Gregor. mag. l. 1. epist. 24. Sicut Euangelij 4. libros sic 4. concilia
suscipere and venera^i mef^teor. Did. 15. c. sicut.
, as it were four Gospels. But let us examine the particulars, and consider
whether they deserved to be so lightly rejected. The first testimony was taken
out of an Epistle A^hana. apol. 2. in epist. ^resh. and diacon. Mareot. ad
Curios and Philagr. prefect. Aegyp^i.
written by the Presbyters and Deacons of Mareot, in the behalf of Athanasius
the Great, their Bishop, who was accused, for that by his appointment Macarius
had disturbed one Ischyras, a pretended Presbyter in the administration of the
Communion, and had broken the sacred cup. They testify these things to be
false, and among the rest they deny, that Ischyras was a Presbyter, because he
was ordained of Colluthus, the Presbyter, who was but an imaginary, or (...).
fantastical Bishop; and afterward by a general Council This seems to
have been the general Council of Sardica, which was not two hundred fifty
years after the Apostles times.
, to wit, by Osius and the BB. who were with him, commanded to remain a
Presbyter, as he had been before. For which cause, all that were ordained of
Colluthus, among whom was Ischyras, returned to their former place and order.
The like is testified by the Synod of Alexandria Epist. Synod. Alex. in Apol.
2. Athanas.
, which denies that Ischyras could be ordained Presbyter by Colluthus, seeing
Colluthus himself died a Presbyter, and all his ordinations were reuersed, and
all (...).
that were ordained by him were held as lay men. Hereunto we may add another
most pregnant testimony, expressed in the acts of the same general Council of
Sardica Vid. Balsam. in Co^c Sard^c. c. 18.19. and editionis Tilianae c. 20.
, wherein it was decreed, that for so much as Musaeus and Eutychianus were not
ordained Bishops, that therefore such Clerks as they had ordained should be held
as lay men.

My second testimony is out of the second general Council Constantinop. ^. c.
4. Graec. and 6. Let. Balsam. in Conc. Constable. 1. c 4.
, concerning Maximus, who being by birth an Alexandrian, and by profession a
Cynick Philosopher, before he was converted to Christianity, and received into
the Clergy by Gregory the Divine, against whom he ambitiously sought the
Bishopric of Constantinople, bribing the BB. of Egypt: Who being come to
Constantinople, and excluded out of the Church, went into a certain minstrels
house, and there unlawfully chose Maximus the Cynick to be Bishop of
Constantinople. The general Council therefore assembled at Constantinople,
determines thus concerning Maximus; that he neither was, nor is a Bishop,
neither Soz. l. 7 c. 9. (...).
they Clerks who had been ordained by him, in what degree so ever of the
Clergy. And to this I will adioyne another testimony out of the fourth general
Council Conc. Chalc. act. 11.
, where Bassianus who had been Bishop of Ephesus, and now sought to recover it,
alleged for himself, that if he were not Bishop, then were not they clerks
which had been ordained by him.

Neither were ordinary Presbyters alone forbidden to ordain,. 15. Chorepiscopi
forbidden to ordain.
but Chorepiscopi also, that is, country BB. sometimes were restrained, and
sometimes forbidden altogether to ordain Presbyters and Deacons. Restrained,
whiles there were such as had received episcopal ordination, that they might
not ordain without the leave of the Bishop of the City, whereunto both the
Chorepiscopus himself, and his Country is subject. Forbidden altogether, when
they ceased to have episcopal ordination, and were ordained, as other
Presbyters by the B. of the City alone.

It seeemeth to me, that Chorepiscopi, until the Council of Antioch, had
sometimes episcopal ordination, being ordained by two or three Bishops. And
therefore to the Council of Neocaesaria, and Nice, they subscribed among other
BB But forasmuch as they being but (for matters of less importance)
vicegerents in the Country to the Bishop of the diocese, whose seat was in the
City, being after the manner Conc. Neecaes. c. 13.
of the seventy disciples, Presbyters rather then BB. did incroach upon the
Bishops rights and prerogatives, not knowing their own measure; therefore
they were restrained, as in other matters of importance: so in ordinations, to
do nothing without the leave of the Bishop. Thus the ancient Which was before
the Council of Nice, and was within little more then 200. years after the
Apostles times.
Council of Ancyra determined; That it was not lawful C. 13. (...).
, that Country Bishops should ordain Presbyters, or Deacons, unless (...).
they had leave granted unto them by the Bishop, with his letters: for so
Theod. Balsam. expounds that Canon; the Fathers of this Synod determine,
that the Country Bishop may not ordain Presbyters or Deacons, without the
letters of the Bishop.

The Council of Antioch thus C. 10.
: It seems good to the holy Synod, that those which are placed in villages,
and country Towns called Countrey-Bishops (...).
, although they have received the ordination of BB. should know their own
measures, and administer the Churches subject to them, and content themselves
with the charge and care of them, and to ordain Readers, Subdeacons, and
Exorcists, and to content themselves with preferring of them. But that they
should (...).
not presume to ordain a Presbyter or a Deacon without the Bishop in the
city, whereunto both himself and his country is subject. If any shall dare
to transgress this definition, he shall be deposed from that honor which he
has; and that the country Bishop should be made of the B. in the city,
whereto he is subject. Which last clause (as I suppose) was added, to take from
them that colorable pretense, whereupon they had presumed before to ordain
Presbyters, and Deacons; viz. because they had Episcopal ordination by the
Metropolitan, and two or three other BB. To prevent this, the Council
decrees, that from that time forward, they should be ordained, not as other
BB. by the Metropolitan, and two, or three other Bishops; but as other
Presbyters, by the Bishop of the city: and so having not so much as an
Episcopal ordination, to make them (as they were before) titular Bishops, they
might acknowledge themselves to have no right of ordination of Presbyters, and
Deacons. Harmenopulus Tit. 9. de Chorepiscop.
in his abridgement of the Canons, sets this down as the sum of both
these Canons, 13. Ancyr. and 10. Antioch. Let not a Country Bishop ordain a
Presbyter or Deacon (...) without the license of the Bishop.

To the like purpose the Council of Laodicea Conc. Laod. c. 56.
determined, that Bishops may not be ordained in villages, and Country towns,
(...), so it is in ^alsam and some manuscripts.
but visiters: and that those which were before ordained, may do nothing (...).
without the consent of the Bishop in the city. By these two Councils
therefore, as Episcopal ordination for the time to come was denied to the
Country Bishops, so also power of ordaining Presbyters, and Deacons. To the
same purpose I quoted Damas. Epist* 4. De Chorepiscop.
Damasus, and Leo, who prove, that Chorepiscopi were not indeed Bishops, but
Presbyters; and therefore had no right to ordain Presbyters, and Deacons.
Chorepiscopi, says, Leo, Leo Epist. BB.
according to the Canons of Neocaesaria, and decrees of other Fathers, are the
same with Presbyters, bearing the figure of the sons of Aaron, and being
after the manner of the 70. Disciples. And although in respect of the ministry
they have a common dispensation with Bishops, notwithstanding some things are
forbidden them by the authority of the old law, some of the new, and by
Ecclesiastical Canons, as the consecration of Presbyters, and Deacons, etc.
And to his sentence the Council of Hispal. 2 c. 7.
Hispalis subscribed. Basil likewise plainly signified to the Chorepiscopi,
that if any without his appointment were received into the ministry, he
should be held for a lay man.

These testimonies plainly euince, that in the primitive Church the power of
ordination was so in Bishops; as that either themselves did ordain, or if this
power were communicated to others, it was by leave and permission from them.
And little reason had the refuter so lightly to esteem these testimonies, as
being under age. For unless he be able to show, that in the first 200. years
the Presbyters either had de iure the power to ordain, or that de facto they
did use to ordain, which he will never be able to show; the worst of these
testimonies for the Bishops, is of more worth then all that he shall be able to
say against them. Let him produce, if he can, any one testimony of Scripture,
any one sentence out of Councils, Histories or Fathers, proving that Presbyters
without a Bishop had right to ordain, and I will yield to him. But he does not
go about by sound learning and evidence of truth to refell my assertions,
which indeed he cannot do; but by unlearned shifts, and sophistiall
cauillations, to elude them, as he can; either not doubting, but such
refutations would serve his turn to retain the people in their preconceiued
alienation from Bishops, or else hoping, that J would not vouchsafe him an
answer.

But to return to my proofs:. 16. The Canon of the Council of Civil.
For one there remains yet out of the Councils; showing, that in ancient
times, they were so far from permitting Presbyters without a Bishop to ordain,
that Conc. Hispa^. 2. c. 5. Did. 23. c. 14.
when as a certain Bishop in the ordination of one Presbyter and two Deacons
used only the help of a Presbyter to read the words of consecration, and to
bless them, himself laying on his hands, but being not able for the pain of
his eyes to read; the Council of Hispalis reuersed the ordination, as
unlawful. This is the Council, which the refuter judged to deserve neither
imitation, nor approbation:by which censure of this one, though he durst not
give it of any of the forenamed Councils; yet it being indefinitely propounded,
he discrediteth the rest with the unlearned, who are not able to distinguish.
But let us hear more particularly his grave censure of this Council; What a
toy was it for the Council of Civil in Spain, to reuerse the ordination etc.
What a boy is this (might these Fathers say) that presumes thus to censure us?
was not Isidor the Archbishop of Civil, the president of this Council, and
author of these Canons, one of the most learned writers which have been in the
Church within this 1000. years See Cent. 7* 51*2.
with whom this Refuter for learning is not to be named the same day? was not
this Council held against the Heretics called Acephali, and did it not
learnedly and judiciously confute them? did these grave fathers toy, when by
grave censures they sought to preserve the discipline, and canons of the
Church, to maintain the lawful authority of BB. and to prevent the
presumptuous usurpation of Presbyters, contrary to the Canons of the Church?
had not the ancient council of Orange Conc. Arausican. c. 29.
decreed, That if any Bishop should by any infirmity or weakness, either fall
into the dullness of his senses (as this Bishop did) or loose the faculty of
speech, he should not suffer Presbyters (as this Bishop also did) under his
presence, to do those things which are not done, but by Bishops; but that he
should call for a Bishop, to whom he may commit that which is to be done in the
Church? But if we must talk of toys, what a toy was this, that (all these
things which I have alleged, being duly considered) diverse of our
disciplinarian Ministers have renounced their ordination, which they had
received from a Bishop, that they might be ordained by such as themselves?

And thus you have heard, how easily he has answered the Councils, by
vouchsafing them no answer.

Now let us weigh his answers to the testimonies of Ephiphanius and Jerome..
17. The testimonies of Epiphanius and Jerome.
His common answer to both, is such, as unlearned, yet obstinate Papists use
to give; that though they cannot tell how to answer our arguments, yet there
be learned men which can. There be Lectures of the par^^ie of Ministers one day
to be published, which will show the weakness of Epiphanius his reasons; and
there is another learned man that has answered the allegation out of Jerome.
Why, but has the Refuter no answers of his own, that he refers us thus to
other men? yes no doubt; such answers as his are never to seek. First, he
wrangleth with Ephiphanius, and then with me for alleging him. He tells
Epiphanius, that he beggeth the question. Alas good man, he wanted the Refuters
acumen in disputing. And what was the question I pray you? was it not the same
which is now between you and us, whether Bishops and other Ministers be
equal, as Aerius held? This assertion of Aerius, Ephiphanius disproueth by two
maine arguments, as I do yours; proving that BB. are superior to other
Presbyters, both in the power of ordination, and jurisdiction. His former
argument may thus be concluded. Epiph. haeres. 75.


That order, which has power by ordination to beget Fathers to the Church, is
superior to that which has not that power.

The order of Bishops has power by ordination, to beget Fathers to the Church,
which the order of Presbyters is not able to do:

Therefore the order of Bishops, is superior to the order of Presbyters.

Call you this begging of the question? Yea, but Aerius denied, that Bishops
had power more then Presbyters, to beget Fathers. How is this proved? he said
they were equal. It follows not. Aerius being a giddie-headed fellow,
because he perceived the Presbyters to do the same things, that the Bishops
did in some particulars; by an insufficient enumeration or induction,
concludes, that therefore there was no difference between them. The parts of
Aerius his induction concern the superiority and preeminence of the
Ministry in general above the people, noting those things whch be common to
Bishops, with other ministers, as their imposing hands on the penitent, their
giving of Baptism, their executing of Divine service, their sitting in the
chair or pulpit to instruct the people; but considered not the respect which
was between the Bishop and the Presbyters themselves. Epiphanius therefore
shows, that although it were true, that Bishops and Presbyters did the same
things, which argue their Preeminence in common above the Laity: yet this
hinders not, but that Bishops were superior to the Presbyters: and this
Epiphanius proves by two instances, which Aerius himself could not deny:
because the Bishops were ordainers of the Presbyters, having the power of
ordination of Presbyters and Deacons, which Presbyters had not; the second,
because the Bishops were also governors and judges over Presbyters. The
Refuter therefore should rather have suspected the shallowness of his own
judgment, then have laid such an imputation upon Epiphanius.

18. Epiphanius, his reason defended.
What then does he answer to Epiphanius his syllogism? He denies in effect,
though perhaps he intend not so much, both the proposition, and the assumption:
and first the assumption. For where Epiphanius says, that Presbyters were not
able to beget Fathers: he asks, What hinders them, but the usurpation of
Bishops? In which words, two things are implied: The first, that the power of
ordination, which the BB. have, is usurped by them: The second, that Presbyters
have as good right to ordain as they. But you will say, how are those things
proved? you must be entreated to take them upon his word: for proo^e he has
none: and yet can he by no means abide begging of the question. But such is
the boldness of our new Disciplinarians, that they doubt not to prefer their
newfangled opinions, and self-set assertions, which have no ground nor warrant
in the word of God, or true reason, before the judgment and practice of all
the ancient Fathers, of all the approved Councils, of all true Christian
Churches of former times. We prove, that the Apostles had the right of
ordaining; that this right was from them derived to their substitutes, and to
their successors; to their substitutes, as to Timothe in Ephesus, and Titus in
Creet, to Mark at Alexandria, to Polycarpus at Smyrna, to Euodius at Antioch,
to Linus at Rome, etc. to their successors, as to Simon the son of Cleophas,
the successor of Saint James at Jerusalem, etc. that from these substitutes and
first successors of the Apostles, the same was derived to their successors,
which without all doubt were the BB. of the several Churches. And hereunto we
add the general consent of the Fathers, and Councils; many of them affirming
and confirming, not one, I say not one, denying the superiority of BB. in
ordaining: the perpetual practice of all true Christian Churches, not one
approved instance to be given to the contrary: and yet he shameth not to
avouch the Bishops right in ordaining to be but usurpation. As touching
Presbyters, that they have right to ordain, we see no warrant in the word, but
rather the contrary; no testimony of Fathers, no decree of Councils for it,
but many testimonies and decrees against it; no approved example to warrant it;
how then could he say the Presbyters have as good right to ordain as BB* But
because he shall not carry the matter without proofs, this I will offer him;
that if he can bring any one pregnant testimony or example out of the
Scriptures, any approved authority or example out of the ancient Fathers,
Councils or Histories of the Church, proving that the Presbyters had by and of
themselves an ordinary power or right to ordain ministers, J mean
Presbyters, and Deacons; I will promise to subscribe to his assertion. But if
he cannot do this, as I know he cannot; then let him for shame give place unto
the truth.

Again, whereas Epiphanius in the assumption says, that BB. beget Fathers,
meaning that they have power to ordain ministers of the word, and sacraments,
or as he expounds himself, (...).
teachers; he fondly cauilleth at Epiphanius words, saying, that ministers are
no spiritual Fathers until they beget children unto God. Why, but their
calling is to be spiritual Fathers, ordained of God to this end, that they may
by the lauer of regeneration and ministry of the Gospel beget children unto
God* when Stephen said Act. 7.8.
that Jacob begat the twelve Patriarchs, meaning those whom God appointed to
be the first Fathers of the twelve Tribes; will the refuter wrangle with him,
because when they were begotten, they were not Fathers? even so BB. are said to
beget Fathers, because by ordination they beget such, as by the institution of
their calling, and ordinance of God, are to be spiritual Fathers.. 19. Ad page
96.


And thus much of the assumption. The proposition also he denies, finding
great fault with me, saying, that it is a strange and fearful thing that I
having so worth: he set out in my former Sermon the excellency of the
ministers calling in regard of his laboring in the word, do now turn all
topsey tur^^y, and prefer making of ministers before begetting souls. And to
this purpose he alleges that to beget one child unto God, is more precious
then to beget a thousand Fathers to the Church, and of more comfort at the day
of judgment, etc. But be of good comfort, this fault which he lays to my
charge, is but as he says, in his poor understanding. For there be three
things which show the poverty of his conceit. The first, that he thinks I
do therefore prefer the ordaining of Ministers before preaching, because I
say that Bishops are superior to other ministers in the power of ordination.
It seems he has not learned the distinction of those three things wherein
superiority consists, (...), that is, excellency, imperie, and power. The
magistrate is superior to the minister, in imperie, and civil authority; but
the minister notwithstanding is superior to the magistrate in excellency. But
the second thing does much more show the shallowness of his conceit: he
conceiueth of ministers, as having alone the power of preaching; and of
Bishops, as having only the power of ordination: whereas if he had but
considered that the authority of preaching is common to the Bishop with other
ministers, and the Bishop in respect of his office superior in the exercise;
because he may license, and he may upon just occasion suspend this power in
others (though perhaps in personal gifts the Presbyter may excel the Bishop:)
he could not but have discerned the superiority of Bishops, without any
disparagement to the ministry of the word; for that they being at least
equal in (respect of their function) to other ministers in the power of
preaching, are superior in the power of ordaining. The third, that he
conceiueth Epiphanius to have made a comparison between preaching, and
ordaining, which he does not, Here Is. 75.
but between baptizing, and ordaining. How is it possible, says Epiphanius,
that a Bishop and a Presbyter should be equal? (...). For the calling of
Bishops is an order generatiue of Fathers, begetting Fathers to the Church; but
the order of Presbyters being not able to beget Fathers, does by the lauer of
regeneration (that is baptism) beget children to the Church, and not Fathers,
verily, or teachers. And you are to mark how he speaks of begetting Fathers
and children to the Church. And who can deny, but that it is a matter of
greater consequence, the begetting of a Father to the Church, then of a child?
But Epiphanius his meaning was, that the Bishop having power of baptizing
common to them with Presbyters, 1. Cor. 1.
as Paul had, though he did not greatly use it, whereby they might beget
children to the Church; has also the power of ordaining, (which Presbyters
have not) whereby he begets spiritual Fathers to the Church. And so much of
Epiphanius.

Now I come to Jerome:. 20. The testimony of Jerome.
For the Refuter thinks it very strange, that I should bring him as a patron
of the Bishops sole power in ordination. It seems, that the Refuter
conceiueth nothing aright. I bring in Jerome in this place, not as a patron of
BB. but as one, who pleading for the superiority of Presbyters above Deacons,
and desiring to raise them as near as he can to BB. does notwithstanding
confess, that Bishops are superior in ordination. Ad Euagr.
What does a Bishop (says he) excepting ordination, which a Presbyter may not
do? To which, the Refuter having no answer of his own, entreats another to
answer for him; which done, he craketh, as if he had laid me on my back. The
answer is, that Jerome speaks of his own time. No doubt: for speaking in
the present tense, whereby he signifies actum continuum, he does not exclude
his own time. But does he speak therefore of his own time only? or does he
signify, that there was a time since there were first Bishops, (which he
confesses, was in the time of the Apostles) when the Bishops had not this
power? if this could be showed, then Jerome might be thought not to speak of
the Apostles times. Nay, does not Jerome speak as well de iure, as de facto,
when he says, What does a Bishop etc. that is, what has a Bishop right to do
by the power of his order, which a Presbyter has not right to do by the power
of his order, only except ordination? that I confess to be above the
Presbyters power. Well, and to what end does Jerome speak this of his own
time? That having showed before out of the Scriptures, and the practice of the
Church at Antioch, that of old a Bishop, and a Presbyter were all one; he might
see, that in his time also, there remained a proof thereof: because a Bishop
then did nothing, except ordination, which a Presbyter could not do.

The Epistle of Jerome to Eu^grius analyzed.
Out of the Scriptures Jerome proves, that in those times when the Scriptures
were written, the name Episcopus, and Presbyter were confounded; because, as
the name Episcopus, was given to Presbyters, Phil. 1. Act. 20. Tit. 1. So the
name Presbyter, to Apostles, and Bishops: as 1. Tim. 4.14. Where Jerome
understands, as before, by Presbyterium, Episcopatus; 1. Pet. 5.1. Joan.
Epist. 2. and 3. And this is Ieromes first argument that Presbyters are
superior to Deacons. But hence it does not follow, that therefore the offices
of a Bishop, and Presbyter, are confounded; especially, after the institution
of a Bishop. Does Jerome think, that every Presbyter is equal in degree with
Timothe, because the office of Timothe in Ieromes understanding is called
Presbyterium? or that they are equal with Peter, and John, because they called
themselves Presbyters? His second argument to prove the superiority of
Presbyters above Deacons, is, because Bishops were chosen out of Presbyters,
and by Presbyters; whereas contrariwise, he that is chosen from among Deacons,
by Deacons, is but an Archdeacon. The former part he first illustrateth by the
end, which was to avoid Schism; and then proves it by the Practice of the
Church of Alexandria. In his setting down the end, he lets fall one word,
which if it be not favorably expounded, will make him contradict himself,
and the truth. For upon the allegation of Saint John's second and third epistle
he says, Quod autem poste^ vnus electus, that one afterward was chosen who
should be set over the rest, it was provided as a remedy against Schism, lest
every one drawing after him should rend the Church of Christ. What say you
Jerome, were Bishops first ordained after Saint John's time? do not your self
testify that Saint James a little after the ascension of Christ was by the
Apostles made Bishop of Jerusalem, that Mark was Bishop of Alexandria? that
ever since his time (and he dyed almost 40. years before Saint John) there
has been a Bishop, in a degree superior to other Presdyters? that Timothe
was Bishop of Ephesus etc. That word afterward therefore, is not to be
referred to Saint John's time, but to those testimonies where he proved the
name Episcopus to be given to Presbyters; which custom, as he supposes,
continued, until one of the Presbyters, being chosen from among the rest, was
called Bishop: for indeed whiles Apostles or Apostolic men were made BB., BB.
were called the Apostles of the Churches: But when out of the Presbyters one
was chosen, he began for difference sake to be called, the Bishop, the Angel
of the Church. Now that BB. were chosen out of Presbyters, and by Presbyters,
he proves by the example of the Church at Alexandria: For even at Alexandria,
from Mark the Evangelist unto Heraclas and Dionysius BB. (who were not chosen
from among the Presbyters) the Presbyters have always called one, chosen from
among themselves, and placed in a higher degree, the Bishop: even as if an army
do choose their general, or Deacons choose from among themselves one, whom
they know to be industrious, and call him the Archdeacon.

His fourth argument is this. There be many things which a Bishop by the power
of his order may do, which a Deacon cannot: but there is nothing which a
Bishop may do by the power of order, excepting ordination, which a Presbyter
may not do. A Presbyter is therefore by so much superior to a Deacon, by how
much he is nearer to the Bishop: this is the very scope of this place, and to
the same are all the arguments following referred etc. the sum whereof is,
that the Presbytery is a degree between the Bishops, and Deacons.

. 21.
You see then what Jerome proves out of the Scriptures; not that the office,
but the name of Bishop, and Presbyter were for a time confounded. Now let us
see what he proves by the practice of the Church at Antioch: he would say at
Alexandria, that of old a Bishop, and a Presbyter were all one. See you not how
he proves it, when he says, that ever since Marks time the Bishop has been
placed in a higher degree above the Presbyters? Was this to prove that a
Bishop, and Presbyter are equal, or all one? or did Jerome intend any thing
else, but to prove the Presbyters superior to Deacons, and that by such
arguments as before I analyzed? We have heard what Jerome proves out of the
Scriptures, and practice of the Church at Alexandria; now at the last, let us
hear the end of his speech. That he (I know not who) might see, that in his
time also there remained a proof thereof, because a Bishop even then did
nothing except ordination which a Presbyter could not do. Toto coelo errat: it
was not Ieromes end, to prove the Presbyter equal with the Bishop, but
superior to the Deacon: For if the former had been his intent; this, and the
other from the practice of Alexandria: had been very untoward arguments to
prove his purpose. At Alexandria the Bishop ever since Marks time was
superior to Presbyters in degree, therefore they were equal. The Bishop is
superior in the power of ordination, therefore Presbyters be his equals. Has
not the Refuter now great cause, think you, to crake of this answer? was
this, among all the testimonies which I alleged, chosen as most misalledged,
by occasion whereof, he might pay me mine own, and tell me that it was
wherried in with ^are^ by him that looked an other ^ay? Blessed be God, that
so guided me in the way of truth, that among all my allegations, the refuter
has not been able to charge me with misalledging any one. As for this;
nothing could be more pregnant, and pertinent to prove, that BB were superior
to Presbyters in ordination, then as I said in the sermon, that Jerome
himself, even when, and where he seeks to advance the Presbyters, as high as
he can, above the Deacons; does confess ordinatio^ to be peculiar to Bishops.

Now, whereas Jerome says a Presbyter may do any thing which a Bishop does,
Of the power of order and jurisdiction.
excepting ordination; I did easily forsee it would be objected, that if BB.
be superior only in the power of ordination, then are they not superior in
jurisdiction. This objection I prevented in these words, Where you are not to
understand him, or other of the Fathers speaking som^time to the like purpose,
as though the B. were not superior, in any thing else; but that potestate
ord^nis, as touching power of order, ^e is superior only in ordination. For
that he is superior potestate iurisdictionis, they every where acknowledge. I
know some Bell. de Cler. l. 1. c. 15.
answer, that in Ieromes judgment BB. are iure diuin^ superior to other
Ministers, only in the power of ordination: but in the power of jurisdiction
iure apostolico; in that he acknowledges, that superiority of BB. was brought
in by the Apostles necessarily for avoiding of schisms. Which answer I
refusing, because Jerome says the like Aduers. Lucifer. in Titu^. ^ ad Euagr.
de 7. Ordin. Eccles.
of the superiority of the BB. in general, and of the power of ordination in
particular, that it was reserved to the B. ne a multis disciplina ecclesia
vendicata, concordiam sacerdotum solueret, et scandala generaret; made choice
of this other, as the more like to be true. Not that J absolutely was of this
judgment, that the right of ordination does belong to the power of Episcopal
order; as appears by that supposall which J made in the sermon page 44. l. 3.
but that I supposed it to be the judgment of Jerome, and some other fathers,
who acknowledging the Bishop to be superior in jurisdiction, and yet
affirming that he is superior only in the right of ordination or imposing
hands: must thus be understood, as judging the Bishop to be superior only
therein, quoad ordinis potestatem, as touching the power of order: they holding
other things belonging to the power of order, as the ministry of the word and
Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, to be common to BB. with other
ministers: but the power of ordination to be peculiar to the BB. and in their
judgments not communicable to Presbyters: because as Thomas 2 2^. q. 187.2. c.
says, ea quae sunt ordinis non possunt committi nisi habenti ordinem.
Hereunto the Refuter, after his malepert and saucy manner, answers: that I
understand not this distinction. For, says he, potestas ordinis, power of
order is not potestas ordinationis, power of ordination, but power to do all
that which belongs to the order of that ministry which he has received, as
Tolet Instruct. sacerd. l. 1. c. 3.
shows. But whether of us spoke without understanding, let the judicious
Reader hereby judge. For he conceiueth me, as no man would that is not of a
very shallow conceit, as if I confounded the power of order with the power of
ordination, and as though the power of order contained nothing else but the
power of ordaining, whenas I plainly made it, according to those Fathers
judgment, but one part of the power of Order: they supposing other parts of
the power of order to be common unto Presbyters, Whether BB. be superior to
Presbyters in the power of order.
but that of ordaining to be peculiar to the Bishop: and in that sense say,
the Bishop in respect of the power of order, is superior only in ordination.

. 23.
Yea but Bellarmine (for even his authority when he says any thing that may
seem to make for the Refuter, must serve the turn) says De pont. Ro^. l. 4.
c. 22.
that Potestas ordinis refertur ad sacramenta conficienda, the power of order
is referred to the ministry of the Sacraments. Me thinks the Refuter should
add, that it is also referred to the ministry of the Word. But what does
Bellarmine and all other Papists understand by Sacraments? Do they not mean
five others besides Baptism and the Lords Supper, the ministry of two
whereof, viz. of confirmation, and of orders they make peculiar to BB. and of
the other five common to them with all Priests? and does not Bellarmine
therefore prove, that the order of Bishops is superior to that of Presbyters,
and that Bishops are superior in the power of order, because De Sacram. ord.
l. 1. C. 3.
the Bishop may confer two Sacraments, which the Presbyters may not, viz. the
Sacrament of confirmation and of orders? Howbeit of the former, Jerome says
Aduers. Lucifer.
, that it was reserved as peculiar to BB. potius ad honorem sacer dotij, quam
ad legis necessitatem.

It is true, that some Popish writers make BB. and Presbyters to be but one
order; but you must withal take the reason of that Popish conceit: They hold,
that the Sacrament of the altar (as they call it) is the Sacrament of
Sacraments, whereunto the Sacrament of orders is subordinate 2.2^. q. 40.4. and
supplem. q 37.2. c.
; all their orders of Clerks being ordained to the ministry of the altar; and
that every one of their 7. orders (all which they call Sacraments) is only to
be counted a Sacrament, as it has reference to the Eucharist: to which purpose
2.2^. q. 40.4. and supplem. q 37.2. c.
Thomas Aquinas does somewhat ridiculously distinguish their 7. orders,
according to their diverse offices referred to that Sacrament. And forasmuch as
in the whole power of order this is the supreme act, by pronouncing the words
of consecration to make the very body of Christ, which is as well performed by
a Priest, as a Bishop: therefore they teach Suppl. q. 40.5.
, that Bishops, and Priests are both of one order; and that the order of
Bishops, as it is a Sacrament, is not superior to that of Presbyters, but only
as it is an office, in respect of certain sacred actions; and in this sense,
says Thomas, that the Bishop has power in sacred and Hierarchicall actions in
respect of Christ's mystical body above the priest, the office of a Bishop is
an order. For you must understand that they make al Ecclesiastical power to
have referrence to the Bellarm. de Sacram. ord. l. 1. c. 9.
body of Christ, either verum, his true body in the Sacrament of the altar,
which they call the power of order; or mysticum, mystical (that is, the the
Church and members thereof) which they call the power of jurisdiction.

This new Popish conceit therefore of confounding Bishops and Presbyters into
one order, arises from their idol of the Mass, and their doctrine of
transubstantiation, whereby every Priest is as able to make his maker, as the
Pope himself. I call it new, because all the ancient writers do confess (as
before has been showed) Bishops, Hier. de. 7. ord. eccl. acknowledges the
order of BB. to be the seventh and the highest order.
Presbyters and Deacons to be three distinct degrees, and consequently orders
of the Ministry: for what is an order but that degree, which, among things or
persons which are subordinate one to another, some being higher, some lower,
any one has obtained?

. 24. That BB. are superior in the power of order.
Wherefore laying aside these popish conceits, let us consider what is to be
determined concerning this matter according to the truth.

1. And first, that ecclesiastical power is to be distinguished into the
power of order and jurisdiction.

2. That the power of order is a spiritual power, whereby ecclesiastical
persons are qualified and enabled to do sacred actions appertayning to the
service of God and salvation of men, which they who are not of the same order
at the least, may either not at all, or not ordinarily perform.

3. That this power is that which is granted to ecclesiastical persons in their
ordination, and appertains to them as they simply are of that order, though
they have no jurisdiction or charge, and therefore cannot be taken from them
whiles they continue in that order.

4. That of Ecclesiastical order there are three degrees, in Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons: and because neither of the two superior orders may be
granted to any per saltum: therefore each superior order includes the
inferior, so that a presbyter may do that which belongs to a Deacon, and a
Bishop that which belongs to to a presbyter, but not contrariwise.

5. That the power of the order of Presbyters is besides the performance of the
divine liturgy and power to administer the sacrament of Baptism and to preach,
common to them with Deacons (who shall be thereunto authorized by the B.) a
power also to minister the holy communion, and authority to remit and retain
the sins of men: which last I do not doubt to refer to the power of order.
First, because it is given to the minister in his ordination, and belongs to
him as he is simply a Presbyter, without jurisdiction or relation to a charge.
And secondly, because it continues with him whiles he is of the order, though
his charge and jurisdiction should be taken from him. Besides, this power of
remitting and retaining sins is called the key of order, and according to the
Popish doctrine Bell. de pont. R l. 1. c. 12.
, belongs to the conferring of the sacrament of penance.

6. The power of order in B.B (besides all this power which is in the
Presbyters) is power by imposition of hands to convey grace 1. Tim. 4.14. 2.
Tim. 1.6.
, as the ordinary instrument of the holy ghost, either to parties baptized for
their confirmation; or to penitents, for their reconciliation; or to parties
designed to the ministry, for their ordination. As touching the former, the
ancient writers gather it to be peculiar to BB. because howsoever many in the
primitive Church were converted and baptized by men of inferior order, yet the
Apostles alone, and after them the BB. had authority to put their hands upon
them that they might receive the holy Ghost. Acts. 8. and 19.

And for the latter, we read, that both the Apostles themselves and such as
they ordained Bishops, did ordain ministers by imposition of hands: insomuch
that whereas at Ephesus and in Creet (where were diverse Presbyters before)
Timothy and Titus were appointed to ordain ministers.

I hold this authority to impose hands to belong to the power of order: 25. The
power of ordination belongs to the power of order.
First, because imposition of hands is a sacred action of spiritual efficacy,
indeed a sacrament, not only by the doctrine of the scholemen and Papists, but
also by the confession of Calum; Just. l. 4. c. 14. 20. Imposit^onem manuum,
qua ecclesiae ministri in suum mann^ ^uitiantur, vt non inuitus patior vocari
sacramentum, ^t^ inter ordinaria sacramenta (sci. quae in vsum totius ecclesia^
sunt instituta) non numero. etc. 19. 31. Impositionem (...) in veris
legitimisque ordinationibus sacramentum esse concedo.
though not such a sacrament as Baptism and the Lords supper, which are seals
and pledges of our union and communion with Christ; yet in a more general
sense, as a sacrament is defined a visible sign of invisible grace.

I say it is a sacred action of spiritual efficacy, consecrating a man to the
service of God in the Ministry, conueiing unto him the power of that order
whereunto he is ordained, whereby he is qualified to perform sacred actions
of spiritual and supernatural efficacy. Wherefore I do not see, why the
power of begetting spiritual Fathers to the Church by ordination, as
Epiphanius speaks, should not be thought to belong to the power of order in
BB. even as the begetting of sons to the Church by baptism, to the power of
order in all Ministers.

Secondly, because this power is conferred upon each Bishop in their
consecration, and belongs to him as being a Bishop simply, and cannot be
taken from him whiles he remains a Bishop, though his Bishopric be taken
from him, and may be exercised by him, where he has no jurisdiction. Whereof
examples might be produced of Athanasius, Eusebius* Vercellensis, and other
godly Fathers, who when they were turned out of their Bishoprics, and others
placed in their rooms, not only retained their power, but also exercised the
same, as occasion was offered in other Churches.

Thirdly, because all ecclesiastical power, being referred either to the power
of order or of jurisdiction, this must therefore be referred to the power of
order, because it cannot be referred truly to the power of jurisdiction: and
that for these two reasons: both because the Bishop cannot communicate this
power to others, as he may jurisdiction: and also because he does not lose it
with his jurisdiction, but retains it when his Bishopric is taken from him,
and may as well exercise it without his diocese, where he has no
jurisdiction, as another Minister may preach or baptize out of his own parish.

Whenas therefore I expounded Jerome and some others, who say the B. is
superior to the Presbyters only in ordination, as not meaning that he is not
superior also in the power of jurisdiction, but that in respect of the power
of order, he was superior only in the right of ordaining; because whereas
other parts of the power of order be common to him with Presbyters, that of
ordaining is his peculiar right and prerogative, I did not speak without
understanding. Contrariwise the Refuter, as in laying to my charge that I
confound the power of order with ordination, he spoke he knew not what: so in
the inference which he brings upon his former words, he pratleth without
understanding. Now if the power of ordination did belong properly to the office
of BB. then were the BB. superior to the other Ministers potestate ordinis, Ad
page 97.
(but the former I have manifestly proved, therefore the latter must be
granted) but that is the question, says he; as who should say, he were
resolved to deny the conclusion. But hear him I pray you. Notwithstanding (to
let him enjoy his own distinction) of BB. differ only in ordination from
Presbyters, quoad ordinis potestatem, then in the power of jurisdiction,
Presbyters are equal with them potestate ordinis, by the power of their order.
Wherefore where afterward he draws unto BB. the whole power of censuring
under the name of potestas iurisdictionis, he makes that to be adiuine, which
is but an humane preeminence by his own distinction. All which is mere
babbling, without sense, or understanding what he says, as the Reader who
understands what I have delivered concerning this distinction, will easily
judge.

There remains the third part of this section; wherein out of a Christian and
charitable desire to preserve the credit of such reformed Churches as have no
BB. I endeavored to prevent the objections of Papists,. 26.
who reason thus against them: The right of ordination being peculiar to BB. it
follows, that where is no B. there is no ordination; where is no ordination,
there are no Ministers; where are no Ministers, there is no Church. I answered,
that although the ordinary right of ordination belongs to BB. in the
judgment of the ancient Church, that yet it was not to be understood, as so
appropriating it to them, as that extraordinarily and in the case of necessity
it might not be lawful for Presbyters to ordain, and much less teaching
absolutely a nullity of the ordination, which is performed without a B. Which
answer I confirmed by diverse reasons. Whereunto I now add, that there seems
to be the like reason for imposition of hands, in confirmation of the baptized,
in the reconciliation of public penitents, as in the ordination of Ministers.
But although the two former were reserved as well as the third, to the B. yet
extraordinarily, in the case of necessity, and in the want or absence of the B.
the ancient Church held it lawful for Ministers to impose hands either for the
confirming of parties baptized, or for reconciliation of the penitents. The
former is testified by Ambros. in Ephesians. 4.
Ambrose and Aug. quest. ^x vet. and non. test. mixtim. 4.101.
Augustine, the latter by Cyp. l. 3. ep. 17.
Cyprian and diverse Conc. Carth. graec. c. 43. Carth. 2. c. 4. Conc. Arausic.
c. 2.
Councels. And moreover, the Popish Writers themselves Summa Angelica. ordo.. 2.
do teach, that the Pope may give license to him that is not a Bishop to
ordain: so that he to whom such license is given, have those orders himself,
which he would give to another. If therefore by the Popes license, a Presbyter
may ordain Presbyters, much better may a company of Presbyters, to whom in the
want of a Bishop the charge of the Church is deuolued, be authorized thereto by
necessity, which, as they say, has no law. To this passage, inserted by me
only in favor of the Churches where the presbyterian discipline is
established, which I would not lay open to popish cauils; the Refuter, if he
had been led with a good spirit, would rather have answered with thanks, then
have set himself to wrangle and cavil therewith, as if he cared not, so he
may have something to speak against, what becomes of those Churches, which
notwithstanding he would seem to favor more then my self. The which
ungracious course he takes again in answering the 95. page of my Sermon;
where I forced my self, as in this place, to speak as much as the truth would
permit in favor of the aforesaid Churches. But if my answers for them either
here, or there, do not please the Refuter and his consorts, I will hereafter
give them leave to answer what they please. Neither will I any more
disaduentage the truth, which I defend, in a desire to gratify them, seeing my
endeavor is so ungratefully taken. Which I speak, not as though I thought his
exceptions against my defense any thing worth. For where he obiecteth, that if
the Fathers had thought the power of ordination to have bin peculiar to BB. by
any ordinance of God, they would not have allowed any such ordination as I
speak of without a B: it follows not. For though they held the right of
Baptizing to belong to the Ministers of the Church by Gods ordinance; though
they held the right of imposing hands to be peculiar to the Apostles and their
successors: yet in a case of necessity, Apostolorum and suc^^ssorum ^orum ^st
per manus impos^tionem donum spiritus sancti tradere. Damas. epist. de
Chorepiscopis. Tertull. de B^ptismo. Conc. Eli^. c. 38. Hier. aduers. Lucifer.
they held baptism without a Minister, and confirmation without a B. to be
lawful. In like manner, though they held that the right of ordination was
peculiar to Bishops by Apostolical institution, and therefore taught that none
but Bishops could regularly and ordinarily ordain: notwithstanding in a case
of necessity, we may well think they would have allowed of such an ordination
as J spoke of, though (as I said) not as regular, according to the rules of
ordinary Church government, yet as effectual and justifiable in the want of a
B. If he still say they wou^d not, then must he confess that the practice of
the Disciplinarians is such, as the Fathers of the Primitive Church would in no
case have allowed: and that is all the inconvenience that can come to our
cause, if my defense of them be not sufficient.

As for his cavil at my supposall of the right of ordination, to belong to the
power of order in BB. I have answered before. To such objections one answer is
enough, two is too many.

And thus much of the Bishops right in ordaining.

CHAP. V. That Bishops were superior to other Ministers in the power of
jurisdiction.
( Sermon. sect. 9. page 45. Now I am to show, that the B. is superior also in
the power of jurisdiction. The Presbyters indeed, etc. to the end of the
page.)
HEre the Reader is to observe, what is by me propounded to be proved, not that
the BB. had, or have the sole power of jurisdiction, the defense whereof the
Refuter every where would feign force upon me, but that they are, and were
superior in the power of jurisdiction or government. I deny not the Presbyters
(which have charge of souls) to have jurisdiction both severally in their
parishes, and jointly in provincial synods. And I have confessed before, that
Presbyters have with, and under the Bishops exercised some jurisdiction. I
grant that godly BB. before they had the countenance and assistance of
Christian Magistrates, and direction of Christian laws, used in all matters of
moment to consult with their clergy; imitating therein, as Jerome Hier. in Tit.
1.
speaks, the example of Moses, Qu^ cum haberet in potestate solus praesse
populo; who when it was in his power to govern the people alone, he chose
seventy with whom to judge the people. This was practiced by Cyprian Lib. 3.
epist. 10. f.
, who resolved from the beginning of his Bishopric, to do nothing of
importance alone, because he would prevent dissension and scandals. Ambrose In
1. Tim. 5. ^.
, also teaches that there was a time, when nothing was done without the advice
of the Presbyters, who therefore by Ignatius (...). Ignas* ad Trall.
, are called the counselors and coassessours of the B. Which course if it
were used still, as it would ease the Bishops burden very much; so would it
nothing detract from their superiority in governing: the sway of their
authority being no less when they used the advice of their Presbyters, then
when they used it not. For the assistance of the Presbyters was to help and
advice, but never to ouerrule the Bishop. Neither will any man say, that the
authority of a Prince who uses the advice of his counsel, is the less for
it, but the mo^e advised.

But what the authority of BB. was in the primitive Church in respect of
government, The authority of BB. showed absolutely.
I will first show absolutely, and then by way of comparison with Presbyters.
What the (...), as the Council of C. Carth. grae. c. 68.
Carthage calls the authority of BB. was, may first appear by this, that
they were accounted the governors and rulers of the Churches, meaning thereby
dioceses. For though there were many ministers, who were Angels, Pastors,
Bishops: yet there was but one in every Church, who was the Angel, the Pastor,
the Bishop, the governor of the Church; bearing as Ignatius Ignat. ad. Trall.
says, the sway of authority above and over them all. But I delight to hear
Jerome, the only pretended patron of the Disiplinarians; who confesses, as
we have heard Contra Lucifer.
, that of necessity a peerless power and eminent above all, is to be
attributed to Bishops, and that the safety of the Church depends thereon.
He therefore in his Commentary upon Hier. 1. Esa. 60.
Esaias chap. 60. verse 17. reading according to the Septuag. (...).
, I will give thy Princes in peace, and thy Bishops in righteousness, says,
Herein the Majesty of the holy Scriptures is to be admired, which calls,
principes futuros ecclesiae episcopos, the Princes or Rulers which should be
of the Church, Bishops, whose visitation is all in peace, and the name of
their dignity (meaning their superintendencie) in righteousness. And on those
words Hier. in Psalm. 44.
, of the 45. Psalm, In stead of fathers children shall be borne unto thee; O
Church, says he, the Apostles were thy fathers, for they begat thee. Now
forasmuch as they are gone out of the world thou have BB. who were borne of
thee. For these also are thy fathers, because thou art governed of them. And on
the words following, whom thou shall make Princes in all the earth: for, says
he, in the name of God the gospel is spread in all ends of the world, in which
Principes ecclesiae, i. episcopi; the princes of the Church, that is to say,
the Bishops are placed. On which words Augustine Aug. in Ps. 44
also does comment to the like purpose: In stead of the Apostles, sons are
borne to thee, BB. are ordained: think not thy self forsaken, because thou
see not Peter and Paul who beg at thee; of thine own issue is sprung a
fatherhood: Agnoscant qui pr^cisi sunt, veniant ad vnitatem, etc. Let them
which are precise or cut off by schism, acknowledge it and come unto unity.
The Church has borne sons, and in steed of her fathers, has made them
princes over all the earth. Optatus L. 2. aduers. Parmen.
likewise calls the BB apices and principes omnium.

The Council of Carthage Carth. gr. c. 39. Afr. c. 35.
decreed, that when the Donatists returned to the Church, they should be
received each one in their degrees, according to the will and pleasure of the
B. (...), who governs the Church in the same place, if he shall think it
expedient for the peace of the Church* Cyprian Lib. 1. epist. 3.
, though he had approved Cornelius his courage, in that Felicissimus a wicked
schismaticke, attended with a troop of desperate fellows, was by him vigore
pleno, quo episcopum agere oportet, pulsus de ecclesia, with full vigor of
au^hority and courage, wherewith it behooves a B to deal, driven out of the
Church; yet perceiving him to be somewhat daunted with the threatenings of those
lewd companions; if this be so, says he, that the ^^daciousnes of wicked men
be feared, that what they cannot do by right and equity, they may ^ccomplish
by rash and desperate courses, actum est de episcopatus vigore, and de
ecclesiae gubernandae sublimi ac diuina potestate, then farewell the vigor of
episcopal authority, and that high and divine power of governing the Church.
But more fully is this authority described in the Councels of Antioch and
Constantinople, and also in the writings of Jerome. Every Bishop (says the
Council of Antioch) Conc. Antioch. c. 9.
has authority of his own See, both to govern it according to the fear of
God which is before his eyes, and to have a provident care of the whole
Country which is under his City, as also to ordain Presbyters and Deacons,
and to govern all things with judgment. The Council held in Trullo Constant.
in Trullo. c. 37.
decreed, that forasmuch as some Cities being occupied by the Barbarians
inuading Christian kingdoms, the Bishops of the said Cities could not enjoy
their seat, and perform such offices there as belong to the episcopal
function; that they should retain their (...) eximiam ill. (...) pontificatus
dignitatem.
eminent dignity and authority, so that they may canonically exercise
ordination of the diverse degrees of Clerks, and that they may use within their
bounds (...), the authority of their Prelacie, and that all their (...).
administration be firm and lawful. But what says Jerome? He having
entreated De 7. ordinib. Eccles.
of the other degrees of the Clergy, at the last comes to entreat de
praecipuo gradu Ecclesiae of the chief degree of the Church, qui ordo
episcopalis est, which is the order of Bishops: the power whereof he sets
down in these words: He ordains Priests and Levites, that is, Presbyters
and Deacons, etc. He Fabricae Dei praeest.
governs the Church of God: he shows what every one ought to do: he
cond^mneth, he receives, he binds, he loses that which was bound, he
has the keys of the kingdom of heaven, he opens and shuts the throne
of God, (meaning heaven) having nothing (meaning no ecclesiastical order)
above him, etc.

But the superiority of Bishops over Presbyters I showed in the sermon, 3. The
jurisdiction of Bishops compared with that of Presbyters.
by comparing the jurisdiction of BB. with that which Presbyters have, both in
regard of the greatness and largeness, and also in respect of the deriuation
thereof.

The Presbyters jurisdiction is over the flock of one parish: the jurisdiction
of the Bishop is over the whole Diocese. The Presbyters is private in the court
of conscience: the Bishops public, and in the external Court also. The
Presbyter governs the people only of one flock: the Bishop governs not
only the people of the whole Diocese, but the Presbyters also themselves. The
Presbyters receive institution unto their jurisdiction from the Bishop, and
exercise it under the Bishop of the Diocese, who hahauing (as the Council of
C. 24.
Antioch and Jerome say) the care of the whole Church or Diocese, admit the
Presbyters in partem solicitudinis, into part of their care, by giving them
institution to their several parishes. The Presbyters do answer to the sons
of Aaron, and are the successors of the 70. Disciples, as diverse of the
Fathers do teach: but the Bishops answer to Aaron, and are the successors of
the Apostles, as I prove by the testimony of Jerome, Hieron. ad Marcel.
aduers. Montan.
who says, that in the true Church Bishops do hold the place of the Apostles;
and of Irenaeus, Ir. l. 3. c. 3.
that the Apostles left the Bishops their successors, delivering unto them
their own place of government.

To all this the Refuter makes a dilatorie answer, not purposing indeed to
answer these allegations at all. Of these points I purpose not (says he) to
say any thing in this place, because the former concerning the difference of
the Bishops and Presbyters jurisdiction, must presently be disputed: the latter
is to be discussed in the last point of his five. And thus has he by a cleanly
device au^ided these allegations, which he knew not how to answer, and very
featly rid his hands of them. But if the Reader shall upon examination find,
that he speaks nothing to these allegations, and proofs in the places
whereunto he is differred, he must needs think, that their cause of
sincerity (as they call it) is not very sincerely handled.

Having thus in general noted the superiority of Bishops in the power of
jurisdiction, 4 The BB. authority in respect of the things of the Church.
let us now descend unto particulars.

The authority therefore of the Bishop respects either the things of the
Church, or the persons. Whatsoever things (says the Council C. Ant. c. 24.
of Antioch) appertain to the Church, are to be governed, husbanded, and
disposed by the judgment and authority of the Bishop, to whose trust the
whole people is committed, and the souls of the congregation. And again:
Ibid. c. 25.
(...), that the Bishop has the power or authority of those things which
belong to the Church. And this authority the Bishops had from the beginning;
for, as what was at the first given to the Church, was laid at the Apostles
feet, so afterward what was contributed, was committed (says Apol. 2.
Iustine Martyr) (...), to the Bishop. Hereof you may read more, Conc. Gangr.
c. 7. and 8. Council. Tol. 3. c. 19. and 4 c. 32. Balsam. in Council. Carth. Gr.
c. 36. alias 33.

As touching persons, In respect of persons.
they were distinguished at the first into Clericos and Laicos, unto whom
afterward, a third sort was added, viz. Monachi, monastical persons; who,
though they were sequestered from the company and society of secular men, as
they count them, yet were they not exempted from the jurisdiction of the
Bishop. The great Council of Chalcedon Conc. Chalc. c. 4.
determined, that no man should build a monastery any where, or house of
prayer, without the consent of the Bishop of the City: and that those which in
every City or Country, (...).
did lead a monastical life, should be subject to the Bishop. See more, c.
8. Conc. Afric. c. 47. Agath. c. 27. and 58. Theod. Balsam. says, Bals. in
Conc. Carth. c 83.
that Monks were more subject to the Bishop, then to the Governor of the
monastery.

As touching the Laity, I said, Sermon. sect. 10. page 46. to page 47. l. 6. I
should not need to prove the Bishops authority over the people of their
Diocese, 5.
if I demonstrate their rule over the Presbyters thereof, Their authority over
the people. Ad page 98.
etc. Not need (says the Refuter?) Ye^ you must prove the power of censuring
the people to be their only right, unless you yield that preeminence to be
given them jure humano, as indeed it must be, seeing they have it not
potestate ordinis, by the power of their order. The Refuter is to be borne
with, if he talk at randon, seeing he is (as it seems) out of his element.

The thing which I was to prove, if it had been needful, was, that whereas
Presbyters did govern each one the people of a parish, and that privately, the
Bishop governs the people of the whole diocese, and that publikelie: the
which I held needless to prove, because before it was proved, that they had
the charge of the whole Diocese, and were Pastors thereof: And secondly,
because if I prove they governed the Presbyters, who were the governors of
the several flocks, then much more their jurisdiction did extend to the
flocks themselves. Where he says, J must prove that the censuring the people
is their only right; I answer, it is sufficient to prove their superiority
in jurisdiction, which I intended, and that none in the Diocese does exercise
external jurisdiction, but from the B. and under him. A notable evidence
whereof we have in Siluanus Socr. l. 7. c. 37.
the famous Bishop of Troas, who perceiving those of his Clergy to make gain
of men's suits, appointed others whom he thought good, to be the Judges of men's
causes, whereby he got himself great renown. And as for the power of binding
and loosing in the court of conscience, it is common to Bishops with all
Presbyters, howsoever in respect of the use and exercise thereof, they are
subject to the Bishop.

Where he says, that Bishops have their jurisdiction jure humano, because
they have it not potestate ordinis, by the power of their order, he seems to
harp upon something, which he does not well understand. For although the
Schoolmen and Papists Bellarm. de Pont. R. l. 4. cap. vlt.
teach, that to the power of order belongs a character and grace which God
alone does give in their ordination; yet they grant also, that the jurisdiction
which is conferred to them by the will of man, does also mediately proceed
from God. And howsoever it be true, that Bishops with us are assisted iure
humano, Statut. anno Elizab. 1.
to exercise their public and external jurisdiction, and to judge in causes
ecclesiastical by the Kings ecclesiastical Law; yet this does not hinder, but
that they are authorized thereunto iure Apostolico, as is manifest by the
Apostles themselves, by Timothy and Titus, and all the ancient Bishops of the
Primitive Church, who by authority derived to them from the Apostles, did
exercise the ecclesiastical censures over the people and clergy, before there
were any laws of Christian Magistrates to authorize or assist them thereunto.

But he is pleased to see how I prove the BB. to have been superior to the
Presbyters in jurisdiction; 6. Their authority over the clergy.
though not pleased that I speak in general of BB. for here his Coccysme
again has place, that I should have proved the Angels of the seven Churches
to have had jurisdiction over ministers under them. Which is a miserable poor
shift indeed. Was not this the thing propounded to be proved, that the BB. of
the primitive Church were superior in jurisdiction? does not himself confess,
that the ancient Churches were all of one Constitution? And is not the proof
of the general, a proof of the particular also? If I should say, these seven
Angels had this jurisdiction; some such exception of singularity in them, would
with as great reason be taken, as against Timothy and Titus. But when I prove,
that BB. in general had this superiority, I do more then prove, that these
seven Bishops had it.

The reason which I use is an induction. The Bishop had superiority in
jurisdiction both to the Presbyters, that were parts of the Presbytery
assisting him, and to the Pastors assigned to several cures. Therefore he had
superior jurisdiction to all the Presbyters in the diocese. But the Refuter
makes me reason thus: If the Bishops had maiority of rule both over the
Presbyters that assisted them, and also over the Pastors allotted to their
several charges, then had they power of jurisdiction.

But they had maiority of rule over the Presbyters, assisting them and the
Pastors, etc.

Therefore they had power of jurisdiction.



Why? Needs this to be proved, that Bishops had power of jurisdiction, which
every parish Minister has? Or does the Refuter deny, that Bishops had power of
jurisdiction? Or if he cannot but grant the conclusion, what a folly is it to
wrangle with the premises? And yet for fear of granting the conclusion, first
he pickes a quarrel with the proposition. For though they had maiority of
rule, etc. yet w^ll it not follow they had sole power of jurisdiction. Whence
comes this sole I pray you, that has so often been foisted in? I fear greatly
from an evil conscience, resolved to oppugn and deface the truth. Cannot the
B. be superior to Presbyters in the power of jurisdiction, unless they have
(as none have) the sole power of jurisdiction?

7. 1. Over the Presbyters of the City.
Then he flatly denies the assumption. But what reason does he give of his
denial? what evidence of truth does he bring to prove the contrary? Alas, he
troubles not himself that way, all his care and endeavor is to find out
starting holes and euasions to elude the truth.

I prove first in general, that BB. had maiority of rule, or superiority of
jurisdiction over the Presbyters, even those of the City, who were the chief.
Then in particular, in the next section. The former I prove, first, by the
testimony of Jerome Aduers. Lucifer.
, who confesses, that of necessity a power eminent above all and admitting no
partner, at least no compeere, is to be granted to the B. To this besides the
poor evasion of Ieromes minority, and being under age, before answered, he
says, Jerome speaks of such BB. as he acknowledges to (...) no warrant in
the scriptures, and to have been brought into the C^^rch by occas^^^ of
schism after the Apostles times. Both which I have before proved, and shall*
again prove to be manifestly false. Does Jerome deny BB. to have warrant in
the scriptures? besides the places of the new testament often alleged, call to
mind those two Hier. in. Ps. 44. and in Esa. 60.
, on Psalm 45. and Esaias 60. Where he calls them, principes ecclesia by
warrant of those scriptures. Does Jerome say, they were not brought into the
Church until after the Apostles times? does not he confess James, Mark^,
Timothy Titus, and diverse others to have been BB. in the Apostles times, and
that ever since S. Mark there have been BB. at Alexandria?

Secondly, I allege Ignatius Ad Trall. What is a B. but he that holds all
authority over all?
, whom themselves often allege for their Presbyteries. But see what hard hap
some men have: he, whose authority is so good when he is alleged by them, is
but a counterfeit when he is produced by me. And yet those who Problem. Perk.
suspect five of his epistles, because Eusebius and Jerome mention but seven,
acknowledge this ad Trallianos to be none of the five which are suspected, but
one of the seven which are received. This ^uasion should not have bin used, if
he could tell how to answer his testimony otherwise. Yes that he can. For
though Ignatius do say that a B. is such an one as holds or manageth the
whole power and authority above all, Ad page 99.
yet that proves not the sole jurisdiction of BB. God amend that soul, that
so often foisteth in that sole besides my meaning and my words. And yet truly
Ignatius says fair for the sole power. For if the B. have the whole power and
authority above all, why may he not be said to have the sole power and
authority over all? what? says the refuter, he alone? May not a man say as
much of the Duke of Venice, or of the King of Polonia? yet are neither of these
sovereigns: no more had the B. for all these words any supreme and sole
authority. Do I any where say, that the BB. have or ought to have supreme and
sole authority, which here again he obiecteth to make the BB. according to my
judgment forsooth absolute Popelings? will these odious slanders wilfully
devised to disgrace the truth, which I taught, never be left? and yet that is
untrue which he says of the Duke of Venice, and that is more then we desire,
that the B. in his diocese, should be like the King of Polonia in his kingdom.
For though the Duke of Venice be above any other in Venice; yet he has not
the whole power and authority above al: neither do we make the B. to have
supreme power in his diocese, as the King of Poland has in his realm; though
in respect of the election of him to his kingdom, and of BB. to their sees,
there be somelikenes.

In the third place I allege another testimony of Ad Antioch.
Ignatius,. 8. Another testimony of Ignatius.
where he exhorts the Presbyters of Antioch, where himself was Bishop, to
feed the flock which was among them, using the words which Peter does 1.
Epist. 5. Until God should declare who should be their (...).
Governor, meaning the Bishop. Where the B. in plain terms is called the
governor of the Presbyters. There can be no question but (...), is a maiority
of rule. And yet he says this testimony does not prove any such maiority of
rule: and that for four worthy reasons. First, because this is one of those
places which the disciplinarians absurdly allege for the proof of
onely-gouerning elders (which never were) the duty inioined them being
pastoral. Secondly, because the Church whereof he was B. was but one
congregation at that time. And yet he expressly calls himself the Ad Roman.
Bishop of Syria: which plainly proves, that he was not only a diocesan, but
a Metropolitan B. Yea but in his epistle to Jerome he calls it (...). I will
not urge the error in the name Jerome, for Heron: perhaps it was not our
Ieremies Pref. to inform.
, but his Barucks fault. The word (...), which he absurdly translateth,
Synagogue and parish, signifies congregation, and is the same with ecclesia,
or Church. For Ignatius having signified to him that he should be his
successor in the Bishopric, he says Ignat. ad Heronem.
; (...), and the congregation of the Lord shall not be as sheep without a
pastor. But hereof I have spoken heretofore. Howbeit, both this and the former
answer here are mere euasions. For suppose that (which I have proved to be
most false) that there were onely-gouerning elders in Antioch, and that the
Church had been but one parish, can he be so absurd asto say, that none of the
Presbyters in Antioch were ministers? If any were (as indeed they were all as I
have abundantly proved before) is not the B. here plainly noted to be their
governor? and if he were their governor, was he not above them in the power
of jurisdiction or government? Or what is this to the present question, whether
the Church of Antioch contained one congregation or more, if it cannot be
denied that the B. was superior in the power of jurisdiction to the Presbyters
of that Church, how great or how little soever it was?

His third reason of all others is most impertinent. For what is this to the
purpose, if it were true, that the duty which Ignatius inioineth them of
feeding, that is, of instructing and guiding the people, was not perpetually
belonging to their office, but only in the time of the vacancie, till they had
another governor, seeing he notes that himself had been, and his successor
should be their governor? But it is untrue which he says, concerning the
perpetuity of the duty. For Ignatius his meaning was, that as they were at all
times to feed the people, so especially in the absence or want of the Bishop,
the care and attendance of the flock in the defect of a B. being deuolued to
them.

Fourthly, 9.
If M. D. do urge, says he, that Ignatius was, and so also his successor
their governor, (which was indeed the only thing for which the place was
alleged, and to which point alone he ought to have directed his speech) the
answer is easy, that he might be so, and yet the Church but a parish, and
those Presbyters governing Elders. An easy answer indeed: as who should say,
though the allegation do prove that for which you bring it, yet it does not
disprooue some other of our absurdities, for the disproofe whereof you do not
bring it: as that the Church was a parish, and the Presbyters only governing
elders. Was the disproofe of those points to be expected from this place, and
at this time? do you not say, it is one of the places which is ordinarily
brought out of Ignatius, for proof of onely-gouerning Elders? And must this be
your shift to avoid my argument, proouing out of this place the superiority of
Bishops in the power of jurisdiction, that for any thing can hence be alleged,
the Presbyters might be only governing Elders? Js not the Refuter near
driven, think you, when he would bear his Reader in hand, that his lay
Presbyters be sufficiently proved, if the place which themselves bring for
them, does not disprove them; but especially, when he is driven to allege this
as a poor shift to avoid another thing in question? Yea but if the Church were
a parish, and they only governing Elders, then was Ignatius but as a Parson of
a parish: and Parsons, though they be called, rectores ecclesiarum, governors
of the parish Churches, are far enough from the maiority of rule in question.
Whereto J answer, that if he would need^ make Ignatius but the Parson of a
parish, assisted with a Presbytery of lay Elders, he should have conceived him
to be such a one as themselves fancy, and not as ours are. For he should not
have been subordinate and subject as ours are (and as all Presbyters of The
Council of Sardica says, they are (...) subject to the B. and ought to
perform a sincere ministry unto them, c. 14.
parishes ever were) to the Bishops, but as they fancy, endued with a power
vnsubordinate and independent; and therefore had a supremacy, rather then
superiority, as being the supreme ecclesiastical officer in all that Church.
But how I beseech you is it proved, that Ignatius was but a parish Bishop?
Because, forsooth, the Church of Antioch might be a parish, and the Presbyters
thereof onely-gouerning Elders, for any thing that I have here said to the
contrary, which indeed I intended not in this place. But now I discern a
worthy stratageme of this Refuter, in choosing rather to answer the places out
of Ignatius, being brought for superiority of Bishops, then himself to urge
them for the lay elders: hoping to persuade some kind of Readers, both that
their Elders are sufficiently proved, if they be not disprooued out of the
places which themselves do bring to prove them: and also, that by such an
answer, the superiority of Bishops is sufficiently avoided. But to conclude
this point, whiles the Refuter goes about to prove, that Antioch (which was
the Metropolis of Syria, and the chief City of all the East) was but a parish
Church: and the Bishop of Antioch, who was also (as Ignatius testifies of
himself) the Bishop of Syria, Theodor. hist. l. 5. c. 23.
and as Theodoret says, (...), the chief or pr^^ate of all the Bishops in in
the East, to have been but a Parson of a parish Church; the Reader will hereby
learn, what conceit to have of his learning and judgment, and what credit to
give to his new-^angled opinions.

( Sermon. sect. 11. page 47.) Now the Presbyters were subject to their B. both
as their ruler to be guided,. 10. The BB. did rule and direct the Presbyters.
etc. to page 50. med.) Having in general showed the Bishops superiority in
jurisdiction over the Presbyters, even those of the City; in this section J
prove it more particularly by the parts of government, which are, both to rule
and direct; as also to censure and correct. I show therefore, that the
Presbyters of the City were subject to the Bishop, both as their ruler, to
be guided and d^rected by him, and also as their Judge, to be censured and
corrected of him. Where the Refuter, if he would needs be analyzing and
syllogising, should have framed this argument: To whom the Presbyters were
subject, both as to their ruler, to be guided and directed by him; and as to
their Judge, to be censured and corrected of him, he was superior to them in
the power of jurisdiction, and maiority of rule.

To the B. the Presbyters were subject, both as to their ruler, to be guided
and directed by him; and as to their Judge to be censured and corrected of him.

Therefore the B. was superior to the Presbyters in power of jurisdiction and
maiority of rule.



The proposition of this syllogism is of evident and undeniable truth. The
assumption consists of two parts: the former concerning the rule of
direction, the latter concerning the power of correction: which I do in order
prove by evident testimonies, whereunto he opposes nothing but cauilling
shifts and euasions. By way of analysis he says thus: The former proof of the
assumption touching the Bishops maiority of rule, was general, concerning
diocesan and parishionall Presbyters. Now follow the reasons for each of them
in particular: and first, for the Bishops jurisdiction over the diocesan, in
regard of direction. Where I desire him to tell us, what he means by diocesan
Presbyters, whether such as assisted the Bishop in the diocesan government? If
yea, he dreameth of that he cannot prove. To omit the commendation of his
skill in analyzing, which is not great, his resutation here is, as you
plainly see, not only a dream, but the dream of a dream. He says, I
dream of diocesan Presbyters, when himself (belike) did dream so. Where
speak I one word of diocesan Presbyters? where do I once name them? Is the
Refuters conscience no better, then still to father upon me untruths for his
own advantage? does he not thereby bewray what a cause he maintains, which
cannot be vpheld but by forgeries? Neither if J had spoken of diocesan
Presbyters, would I have used the word in that sense. For as parts of the
diocese in the country are sometimes in the Councels called dioceses; so are
Country Ministers called Conc. Agath. c. 22. Tolet. 3. c. 20.
dioecesani, qui Carth. 4. c. 36.
per dioeceses ecclesias regunt: which in the Council of Neocaesaria, are
Neocaes. c. 13.
called (...), that is, Country Ministers, and are opposed to the Presbyters of
the City, who are there called (...), and else where C. Agath. c. 22. Ad page
100.
, ciuitatenses Presbyteri. Of whom it may be truly said, that the College or
company of them was the Presbytery, which being not assigned to any one parish,
was provided to assist the Bishop in the feeding and government of the
diocese, as I have proved before, and in that sense might be called
dioecesani.

. 11.
But let us see his reason, says the Refuter. If the 40. Canon of the Apostles
says he (I said, the ancient Canon,) if the Councels of Arles and Ancyra,
Tertullian, Cyprian, and Ignatius affirm, that BB. had maiority of rule for
direction over Diocesan Presbyters, then they had such maiority. But all these
affirm so: therefore they had so.

The former part of my 10.
aforesaid Assumption, that the Presbyters of the City were subject to the B.
as their ruler to be directed by him, I prove, first in general, because they
might do nothing of importance without his direction or consent, then
particularly, in respect of those things which did belong to the power of their
order. For as touching the former; if the Presbyters might do nothing without
the B. nothing without his appointment, or consent; then were they subject to
him, as their ruler, to be guided and directed by him. But the former I prove
by these testimonies, whereto more may be added; therefore the latter cannot be
denied.

Of the Syllogism which he framed, he denies first the Consequence of the
proposition; not shaming to affirm, that although the ancient Canon called the
Apostles, though the ancient Councels of Ancyra and Arles, though Tertullian,
Cyprian and Ignatius, do all testify the maiority of rule in BB: yet it would
not follow that they had it. It will follow then, that the ancientest Councels,
and Fathers deserve no credit: which whosoever shall affirm, does much more
without comparison, deserve not only no credit, but no audience, nay no
sufferance, he is not to be endured. But what pretense has he, to discredit
their authorities? forsooth none of them, excepting Tertullian and Ignatius
lived in the first 200. years. As if all truth were confined within that
periode: or as if some of the Fathers which succeeded (as Cyprian by name)
deserved not as much credit as they. As for Cyprian, he came 40. or 50.
years after: and the Council of Ancyry some 50. or 60. years after him. No
doubt, but great alteration in discipline, and Church-gouernement, was or could
be pretended to have been in the Church, before Constatines time whiles it was
under the Cross. But let the Refuter esteem of these authorities as he
pleases; there is no modest or moderate Christian, but will prefer the
affirmation of any of these, especially, in a matter of fact, before the
negation of a thousand such as the libelling refuter.

After he has thus elevated their authority,. 12.
he cauilleth with their testimonies, denying also the assumption. And first
to the ancient Canon, Presbyters might do nothing with out the leave or
consent of the Bishop.
forbidding Presbyters and Deacons to do anything Can. Apost. 39. al 40.
(...), without the appointment and consent of the Bishop, he frames such
an answer, as every word whereof almost does argue extreme either
inconsionableness, or ignorance. He says, It does not prove they had
maiority of rule, or sole sovereignty over them* Sole soueraignity? O defiled
conscience, which ceasest not to ascribe such odious and absurd assertions to
me! But why is not the maiority of rule in the Bishop hence proved, and the
subjection of Presbyters to him as to their ruler, to be guided and directed
by him, seeing they are charged to do nothing without his direction and
warrant? what can be more plain? forsooth, the like Phrase is used Can. 35.
and Conc. Antioch. c. 9. where BB. are enjoined to do nothing without the
sentence of the Archbishop, nor he in their Parishes without the sentence or
appointment of them all. If therefore the Maiority of rule in BB. may be proved
from this Canon, then in like manner from the other two Canons, the maiority of
rule not only in Archbishops in those days over BB. but also of Bishops in
their Parishes, over the Archbishop. But the consequent is false in both the
parts of it: the former, for there were no Archbishops in those days; the
latter, because BB. had not authority over Archbishoppes: therefore the
Antecedent also is untrue. Here the refuter under some show of learning has
bewraied much ignorance. For first, as touching the proposition: his reason is
unlike, and his allegation out of the Can Apost. 34. a^ 35.
34. Canon is untrue. The Bishop of every nation m^st agnize him that is the
first or Primate among them, and esteem him as the chief, (...). It is not
said as in the Canon by me cited, (...) simply, as the refuter cites it; but
(...). Is there no difference between these two speeches, to do nothing
simply, and to do nothing more, or exceeding their own bounds? For that this is
the meaning of the Canon, the words following do plainly declare, (...), but
that they do only those things which appertain to their own See, and the
countries under it. But more plainly in the Council of Antioch Con. Antioc. c.
9.
, that the rest of the Bishops do (...), nothing more then those things only
which concern every man's own Church and Countries which be under it. And
that you should not understand them, as the Refuter does without understanding,
they add; for every Bishop has authority of his own City, both to govern
according to the fear (of God) which he has, and to have care of all the
Country, as also to ordain Presbyters and Deacons, and to administer
euerything with judgment. And yet I do not deny, but that the Metropolitanes
are superior to their Comprouinciall Bishops, in the power of Jurisdiction;
although all Bishops whatsoever, are equal in the power of order. Neither
should the Bishops by the like reason be superior to the Archbishops in their
parishes, as he ignorantly adds. For the Canon does not speak of the
several Bishops in their Dioceses, which he absurdly calls Parishes; but of
the whole Company of them assembled in a Provincial Synod, saying that he
must do nothing (...), without the consent of them all. Howsoever therefore
either the Metropolitan, or any other of the Bishops in their own several
Dioceses might do those things which concerned their own proper charge; yet
(...). Conc. Constable. 1. c. 2.
provincial businesses (which exceeded the bounds of any one man's charge) were
to be dispatched in Provincial Councels; wherein the Metropolitan was to be
acknowledged as the chief and President thereof, who called them together, and
moderated the assembly; but so, as the Bishops might do nothing without him
severally, so he might do nothing without them all jointly; and as he was
superior to them severally, so was he inferior to them all jointly, that is,
to the Synod.

The Assumption likewise in the former part of it is false, and the reason of
it also. For there were Metropolitanes in the first two hundred years, and
they were superior in the power of jurisdiction to their Bishops. But before
he will let this testimony pass, he has one point of ignorance more to show,
and that is, because Archbishoppes are mentioned, c. 35, alias 34. therefore
these Canons were none of the Apostles, nor any others above an hundred, he
will not say (whatsoever he thinks) two hundred years after them. For
Archbishops were not hatched (so reverently he speaks) a long time after,
all men being judge. The antiquity of these Canons I have touched before;
showing, that within little more then two hundred years after the Apostles
time, they were then accounted ancient Canons. But to the point. If he speak
of the name Archbishop, it is not mentioned in the Canons, called the
Apostles; if of the office of a Metropolitan, which is meant in the aforesaid
Canon; I have proved before, that it has been ever since the Apostles times.
Those learned men, which hold Archbishops to be of a latter edition, by that
name understand Patriarchs; and those of 2. sorts, being either so called
(...) as the Patriarchs of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem; or such as are more usually called Archbishops, or (...) governors
of large provinces, being in a degree between, Metropolitanes, and
Patriarchs, which seem to have been ordained in the first Council of
Constantinople, as Socrates Socr. hist. l. 5. c. 8.
witnesses. Hence it is, that Isidor Orig. lib. 7. c. de clericis.
says Ordo Episcoporum quadripartitus est, i. in Patriarchis, Archiepiscopis,
Metropolitis atque Episcopis: and the same distinction is noted in the Council
of C. Chalc. c. 9. et 17.
Chalcedon, and in the Lib. 1. tit. 4. de episcopali audientia.
Code,. 29. Sanc^mus: et Novell. 123 c. 22.
and constitutions of Justinian, and in the Ius graecorom page 88.
(...) made by Leo the Emperor etc.

To the same purpose I alleged the ancient Council of Arles Arelat. 1. c. 19
, that Presbyters may do nothing without the knowledge, and consent of their
BB. and of Ancyra the most ancient approved Council that is extant Ancyr. c.
12. alias 13. I cite the Latin text because the Greek seems to be defective.
, Non licere Presbyteris ciuitatis, sine Episcopi praecepto amplius aliquid
imperare, nec sine authoritate literarum eius in vnaquaque parochia aliquid
agere. That it is not lawful for the Presbyters of the city to do any thing
of importance without the Bishops appointment, no^ to do any thing in any
parish without the authority of his letters.

To these J add the first Council of Toledo; Toletan. 1. c. 20.
Sine conscientia Episcopi nihil p^nit^^ Presbyteri agere praesummunt, Let the
Presbyters presum^ to do nothing at all without the knowledge, and consent of
the Bishop.

And forasmuch as for a poor evasion he alleges, that these Councils by me
cited, though the ancientest that are extant, are under age; which ill
becomes him to object, who has no witnesses to the contrary before this
present age; I will therefore produce one or two more, who lived in the Apostles
times, and conuersed with them. Ignatius therefore in an Epistle which the
Refuter has before cited, says Ad Magnes.
that neither Presbyter, nor Deacon ought to do any thing without the B.
(...), neither let any thing seem reasonable unto you, which is done without
his warrant. To him I will adioyne a testimony of Clement, wishing the Reader
to credit it no further then he sees cause. He Epist. 1. ad Jacob.
therefore reports it as a doctrine of Peter, that no Presbyter ought to do
any thing in any Bishops parish or diocese, without his permission; and that
all Presbyters ought without delay to be obedient to their BB. in all things.

. 14. But as I proved that Presbyters might do nothing without the Bishops
appointment or consent, The Presbyters might not do those things which belong
to the power of order, without authority from the B. As not baptize.
so I noted especially those things which belong to their power of order; as
the actions of their ministry, to baptize, to celebrate the Communion, to
preach, to say the public Liturgy, or divine service.

As touching Baptism, I alleged Tertullian Lib. de baptism.
, testifying, that the Bishop has the right to give Baptism; then the
Presbyters and the Deacon^: but yet not without the authority of the Bishop,
for the honor of the Church, (that is, the honor due unto him in the Church)
which being safe, peace is safe. Where note in Tertullians time, within the
first two hundred years, the Bishop was so greatly honored, that the peace
of the Church was supposed to depend on the honor of the Bishop, as Jerome
also speaks, and that the ordinary right of baptizing was primarily in the
Bishop; secondarily, in the Presbyters and Deacons, but not to be exercised by
them without his authority: whereas extraordinarily, and in case of necessity,
lay men in his judgment might baptize. To this the Refuter gives five
answers, but never a good one. As first, that Tertullian speaks not of their
iuresdiction in the Apostles times, or after by authority from them. He
speaks nor de facto, but de iure; noting what right Bishops had: and he
shows the ordinary right of baptizing which the Presbyters had, was not
without the Bishops authority.

2. That the preeminence he gives them was for the honor of the Church, and
preservation of peace. What then? was this peculiar to his time? Were they not
as careful of the honor of the Church, and preservation of peace in the
Apostles times, as after?

3. Neither does he speak of the authority of the Bishop in general, but of
an honor given him in one particular.And for one particular belonging to the
power of order, did I allege it, that having proved this point in general, I
might also show it in the particulars, which cannot otherwise be done, but
sigillation, one by one. Yea but this honor no one particular, might well be
in a titular Bishop, that had no such jurisdiction. Titular Bishops in the
primitue Church were such, as had the name and title, but not the authority of
a Bishop granted to them. Such a one was Meletius, who by the censure of the
Council of Nice Epist. Synod. Nic. apud. So^r. l. 1. c. 6.
, was not to have (...), the authority, but (...), the bars name of a Bishop.
And such were Synod. Nic. c. 8.
Nouatian Bishops, returning to the Church permitted to be, if the Catholic
Bishop would gratify them with the name and title of a Bishop.

I read of Eustathius Epist. Synodi Ephesians. ad synodum Pamphyl.
, the Metropolitan B. of Pamphylia, who being desirous to lead a more quiet
and solitary life, gave up his Bishopric: whereupon Theodorus was chosen in
his room. For it was not meet (...), that the Church should continue a widow,
and that the flocks ^f our Savior should remain without a governor. But he
afterward repenting him of the abdication of his Bishopric, puts up a
petition to the Council of Ephesus, that he might at the least retain the
name and honor of a Bishop. At his request, the Council writes to the Synod
of Pamphylia, that he might have (...), the name, the honor, and communion of
a Bishop: but yet so, as that neither he do ordain, nor taking upon him the
charge of the Church, should perform sacred actions by his own authority Thus
we see who were titular Bishops in the primitive Church, such as were gratified
with the name, but wanted the office and authority of a Bishop. As for those
who had the office of a Bishop, of whom Tertullian speaks; they had also
vigorem episcopatus, the vigor of the episcopal office: whereof Cyprian so often
speaks, and the sway of authority ecclesiastical was in their hands:
insomuch that Presbyters and Deacons, who by the power of their order had right
to baptitize, might not even in Tertullians time exercise that power, but by
authority from the Bishop.

In the fourth place the Refuter obiecteth, that these Presbyters were not
ordinary Ministers of the word and Sacraments, 15. Ad page 101.
but such as he and his fellows dream of; because Tertullian in the very next
words affirms, alioquin etiamlaicis iut est, otherwise lay men also might
baptize. That the Presbyters were Ministers, I have manifestly proved before,
and I have noted already, that Tertullian signifies the ordinary right of
baptizing to be in the Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons, that yet extraordinarily
and in the case of necessity, lay men might baptize. And so Jerome Aduers.
Lucifer.
seems to exhound Tertullians meaning. Hence it is that without Chrisme
(which Conc. Carth. 4. c 36.
the Presbyters of the several parishes were to fetch from their B.) and
without the commandment of the Bishop neither Presbyter nor Deacon have right
to baptize. Which notwithstanding we know to be often times lawful for lay men
to do, si tamen necessitas cogit, but yet so, if necessity do compel. But
nothing is more evident then that the Presbyters were Ministers, by that which
has heretofore been delivered. Whereunto this helps somewhat, that
Tertullian opposes Presbyters and Deacons to laymen. This objection the
Refuter thought to prevent, by saying, that the governing Elders and Deacons
were accounted among the Clergy. Which also is an unlearned assertion. For to
omit the arguments which before were brought to prove, that the Presbyters and
Deacons were degrees of the sacred Ministry; it is plain, that the clergy of
each diocese was a company of such as were trained up in learning, it being
the seminary of the whole diocese. And as they profited in years, learning,
and piety, so they were preferred to be Readers, then Exorcists, then
Acolythi, then Subdeacons, after that Deacons, then Presbyters, out of whom
ordinarily was chosen the Bishop. And moreover, the Presbyters and Deacons,
with the rest of the Clergy, had all their maintenance according to their place
and degree in the Church. And therefore our disciplinarians, if they will have
such Presbyters and Deacons as were in the primitive Church, they must fetch
them from the University, and schools of learning, as we do, and maintain
them by the charges of the Church, as well, though not with so large allowance*
as the Bishop.

His last evasion (for none of his answers is better) is, that the lower
Tertullian speaks of, might well be, and was on a parish Bishop, the
Presbyters being subject to him, as his assistants for that one Church. But
parish Bishops, such as they speak of, and lay elders be of one edition,
never heard of before our age. For the more manifest proof whereof, I refer
you to that which before has been by me alleged. It is evident therefore by
the testimonies of Tertullian and Jerome, that such was the superiority of
Bishops, in respect of jurisdiction, that the Presbyters and Deacons, though
the right to baptize belonged to their power of order, yet they might not
exercise that power, without jurisdiction and authority granted them from the
Bishop.

. 16. Presbyters might not administer the Communion without the Bishops license.
The like I alleged concerning the Lords Supper. Ignatius Ad Smyrnens.
says, (...): Let that Eucharist be allowed as firm and warrantable, which is
celebrated under the Bishop, that is, in his presence; or by such (namely in
his absence, or in those Congregations where he is not present) as he should
permit or appoint. The words (...), prevent the Refuters cavil, who says,
that the Church was but one Congregation, wh^rein no man had authority to
minister the word or Sacraments, but with the liking of the Pastor. For that
Eucharist which was (...), was in the congregation, where the Bishop was
present, it being administered in other congregations by such as the Bishop did
authorize. But the idle conceit of one only Congregation in the greatest
Churches has been before sufficiently refuted.

Where I alleged Cyprian, reproouing the Presbyters of Carthage, for giving the
Communion to some which had fallen in time of persecution, without warrant from
him, though he were absent, therein not regarding as they ought Cypr. li. 3. ep.
14.15.16.
praepositum sibi Episcopum, the Bishop who was set over them, nec Episcopo
honorem Sacerdotij sui and Cathedrae servants, nor reserving unto the Bishop
the honor of his Priesthood and Chair: the Refuter says, the same answer
which he gave to Tertullian, will serve (as a poor shift) for Cyprians
testimony, who had just cause to complain, that the Presbyters, who in his
absence were to feed the Flock, had taken upon them to admit to the
Communion, etc. Does not the Refuter see his former shift will not serve the
turn? Is it not plain, that the Presbyters which Cyprian speaks of, who as
he says elsewhere, Li. 3. epist. 1.
were cum Episcopo sacerdotali honor coniuncti, joined to the Bishop in the
honor of Priesthood, who were to feed the people, and whose office it was to
deliver the holy Communion to the people, were Ministers of the word and
Sacraments? Again, will it serve the turn to say, either that the Presbyters
had authority only in this particular of the Sacrament, or that Cyprian was
either but a titular or a parish B. whom I have proved before to have been a
Metropolitan? In the end he rests in his first answer, that Cyprian is under
age. Alas good Cyprian, how hard was thy hap, that thou were not Bishop one
Cyprian testifies when he wrote the book, De duplici martyri^, that it was
about the year 240. and it is plain that he was B. in Fabianus the B. of Rome
his time, who ended his life in the year 249. after he had been B. 14.
years.

17. The like is said of other ministerial functions.


forty years sooner, that the Refuter and his consorts, which now have
excluded thee without the compass of their imagined Primitive Church, might
have esteemed thy testimony as good as Tertullians, or others who wrote in the
first 200. years!

The like I might have added concerning other ministerial functions. The
second Council of Carthage Conc. Carth. 2. c. 9.
decreed, that if any Presbyter without the consent of the B. should in any
place agenda celebrare, celebrare divine service, and perform such actions as
belong to the ministry, he should be deposed. The Council of Gangra
pronounces him accursed, who shall perform the actions of the church, meaning
those things which appertain to Gods public service, and the ministry of
the word and sacraments, Gangr. c. 6.
(...), there being not present a Presbyter by the appointment of the Bishop.

The ancient Canon, C. 30. alias 31.
called the Apostles, appoints, that such a Presbyter as will of his own
authority, without the appointment of the B. hold assemblies for the service
of God, and use of the sacraments, that he should be deposed, (...) as
ambitious. The same has the Council of Antioch, Conc. Antioch. c. 5.
in the fifth Canon; which Canon being recited in the Council of Chalcedon,
Act 4.
all the BB. gave it this acclamation: This is a just rule; this is the rule of
the Fathers. This case being propounded in the Council of Carthage, Carth.
graec. c. 10. and 11.
if a Presbyter being condemned by his own B. shall swell with pride against
him, and think he may apart celebrate the divine service, and offer the
Communion, etc. the Council determined, if any Presbyter swelling with pride
against his B. shall make a schism, withdrawing himself from the Communion of
his B. etc. let him be anathema.

For a conclusion, I alleged the words of Ignatius, Ad Smyrn.
(...), Let no man without the B. that is, without his leave and authority, do
any thing that belongs to the Church. To which the Refuter makes this one
only answer, of one congregation, which I have confuted more then once.

To prove the Bishops power and authority in correcting Presbyters,. 18. The
Bishops authority in correcting Presbyters.
in the first place I alleged Cyprian, who Li. 3. epist. 9.
tells Regatianu^ a B. who had been abused of his Deacon, that pro
Episcopatus v^gore and Cathedrae authoritate, for the vigor of his
Bishopric, and authority of his chair, he might himself have censured him
as he thought good; and counsels him, if the Deacon did persist, he
Fungaris circa eum potestate honoris tui, vt eum vel deponas, vel abstineas.
should exercise the power of his honor toward him, and either depose him, or
excommunicate him. Secondly, Jerome Aduers. Vigilant. ad Riparium.
maruelling that the B. where Vigilantius was Presbyter, did not virga
apostolica, with the apostolic and with an iron rod, break that
unprofitable vessel, and deliver him unto the destruction of the flesh. Both
these the refuter casts off, as vncompetent witnesses, who speak but of the
practice of their own times; as who should say, it had been otherwise before
their times. But it is plain almost by innumerable testimonies, some whereof I
will cite 20.
anon, that the ancientest Canons, Councels, and Fathers acknowledge and allow
this correctiue power in the Bishops over the Presbyters and Deacons in the
Primitive Church. As for the Apostles times, I prove the same out of the
Apocalypse, but more plainly out of the Epistles to Timothe and Titus.

The former reason, if the Refuter will give me leave to frame it, is this:
Those who either are commended for examining, and not suffering such in their
Church, as called themselves Apostles, and were not, or were reproved for
suffering false Teachers, had a correctiue power over other Ministers.

The Angel of the Church of Ephesus Apoc. 2.2.
is commended for the former: the Angel of the Church of Thyatira Apoc. 2.20.
is reproved for the latter.

Therefore these Angels, which before I have proved to be BB. had a correctiue
power over other Ministers.



His answer is frivolous, Ad. past. 102.
that neither these Angels were diocesan Bishops, which before has been
proved, nor these false Teachers diocesan Presbyters, which word himself
devised for a shift. Is it not against sense (says he) that the Presbyters
which were subject to the B. should call themselves Apostles? If they were not
subject to him, why is he either commended for exercising authority over
them, or reproved for suffering them? And if they were not Presbyters, because
they called themselves Apostles, be like they were better men. Js it not then
against sense, to deny that Presbyters were subject to the ce^sure of the
Bishop, because he imagines these, who were subject to their censure, were
better men? Whatsoever they were, whether Presbyters, or in a higher degree;
whether of the Bishops presbytery, or not; whether of his diocese originally,
or come from other places, it is plain, that they were Teachers, and that
being in their diocese, the Bishops had authority either to suffer them to
preach, or to inhibit them; to retain them in the Communion of their Church,
or to expel them.

My other reason, that BB. had correctiue power over the Presbyters, is,
because Timothe and Titus had such power over the Presbyters of Ephesus and
Creet: as I prove by most evident testimonies out of Paul's epistles Tit. 1.5.
written to them, 1. Tim. 1.3.5.19.20.21.22.6.14.
and Epiphanius Haeres. 75.
his inference on these words to Timothe: Against a Presbyter receive not thou
an accusation, but under two or three witnesses, etc. Therefore (says he)
Presbyters are Par in parem non habet imperium.
subject to the B. as to their Judge. To my inference out of S. Paul he
answers, that Timothe and Titus were not BB. and that I shall never prove
they were. I desire therefore the Reader to suspend his judgment until he
come to the proofs on both sides; and if he shall not find my proofs for
their being BB. to be better then his to the contrary, let him believe me in
nothing. In the mean time let him know, that if the general consent of the
ancient Fathers deserve any credit for a matter of fact, then must it be
granted that Timothe and Titus were Bishops.

Against Epiphanius he obiecteth, that he took for granted that which Aerius
constantly denied. But this is one of his presumptuous and malapeit conceits;
for when Epiphanius proves against Aerius, that Bishops were superior to
other Presbyters, because Timothe was, taking it for granted that Timothe was a
Bishop: what moderate or reasonable man would think otherwise, but that this
assertion, that Timothe was a Bishop, was such a received truth, as he knew
Aerius himself would not deny it?

( Sermon. sect. 12. page 50. But consider also the Presbyters as severed in
place from the Bishop, The Bishops authority over Presbyters having cures.
and affixed to their several Cures, etc. to offenders, page 52. My first
Argument to prove the jurisdiction of Bishops over Presbyters assigned to their
several cures, is, that when any place in the country was void, the Bishop
assigned a Presbyter to them out of his Presbytery, which as has been said
before, Calvin confesses; and is an evident argument, as to prove the
jurisdiction of the Bishop over the country parishes, and Presbyters thereof,
so to demonstrate that the Bishops were Diocesan. This reason because he could
not answer, he would as his manner is, persuade the Reader that it is needless.

Secondly, I allege that these Presbyters might do nothing but by authority
from the Bishop, from whom they had their jurisdiction, and therefore were
subject to him as their ruler.

Thirdly, Ad Page 103.
that they were subject to his judgment and censures. These two points with
their proofs, he passes over, as if he made have to the reason following,
which he supposes to be the weakest. For this is his manner, to pass by in
breuity, or in silence the best proofs, and if he meet with any thing which
seems to him weaker then the rest, there he rests like a^lie in a raw
place. But by his leave I will insist a little on these two points. And first,
for the former point in general, the ancient Council of Laodicea having
ordained that Country Bishops might do nothing without the consent of the B. in
the City; in like manner commands the Presbyters Con. L^od. c. 56 alias 57.
to do nothing (...), without the consent of the B. The same has Damasus,
Epist. de Chorepiscopis.
who having spoken of Country Bishops, in like manner says, this must be held
concerning Presbyters; vt sine iussu proprij Episcopi nihilagant, that they do
nothing without the commandment of their own B. To omit those actions that
belonged to the power of order, which I have already proved they could not
perform without license and authority from the Bishop: consider, how in
respect of their persons those of the Clergy were subject to the Bishop, to be
disposed by him. First, he had authority to promote the^ from one degree to
another, as he saw cause; insomuch Conc. Carth. Graet. c. 31. and Aquisgran. c.
56.
that if they refused to be promoted by him they were to loose that degree
from which they would not be removed.

Secondly, they might not remove Can. Apost. 15.

Con. Antioc. c. 3.

Constant. in Trul. c* 17. Carth. 4. c. 27.


from one Diocese to another without his consent. If they did, he had authority
to call them back. Or if any other Bishop should ordain any of his Clerks
without his consent, or letters dimissory (...).
, and in that Church prefer him to a higher degree; his own B. might reuerse
that ordination, and bring him again to his own Church. Con. Nic. c. 16. Arel.
2. c. 13. Sard. c 15. Constant. in Trullo. c. 17. Venet. c. 10 Epaun. c. 5.

Thirdly, they might not so much as travel from one City to another, without
the B. license, and his commendatory (...).
letters. This was decreed by the council of Laodicea C. Laod. c. 42. and 41.
, and diverse others, as Con. Agath. c. 38. Epaunens. c. 6. Aurelian. 3. c. 15.
Venet. c. 5. Turon. c. 11.12. Hereby the Reader will easily discern, that the
whole Clergy of every Diocese was subject to the B. as to their Ruler.

. 20. The B. judge of the Presbyters.
And that he was their judge, it is evident. Cyprian l. 1. Epist. 3. In their
controversies.
testifies, that heresies and schisms arise hence, that the Bishop is not
obeyed, nec v^us in Ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos and ad tempus index vice
Christi cogitatur, neither is one B. in the Church and one judge for the time
in the stead of Christ acknowledged. First, in their controversies: for when
Clerks Con. Carth. 4. c. 5^.
are at variance, the B* shall bring them to concord, either by reason, or by
his power. If there be a controversy between Clerks, says the Council of
Chalcedon c. Chalc. c. 9.
, they shall not forsake their own B. but first their cause shall be tried
before him. And if in their suits they thought themselves c. Carth. grae. c. 28
and 126.
wronged in their Bishops court, then were they either to se^ke to the next
BB C. Chalc. 9.
, if the matter could not be differred to the next Synod: or else they might
appeal Cod. Justin. de audien. tia episcopali c. sancimus.
to the Metropolitan, or Provincial Synod. But that the B. should be
ouerruled, controlled, or censured by his own Presbytery, it was never heard
of, unless it were by way of insurrection or rebellion.

Secondly, in causes criminal, In causes criminal.
that the Presbyters and others of the Clergy were subject to the BB. censures,
it is every where almost in the ancient Canons and Councels either expressed,
or presupposed. If any Presbyter or Deacon, says the ancient Canon Can. Apost.
32.
, be excommunicated by the B. he may not be received by another into the
Communion, then by him who did excommunicate him whiles he lives. Which Canon
is ratified in the Council of Nice Conc. Nic. c. 5.
in these words; as touching those which be excommunicate, whether they be of
the Clergy or Laity, by the BB. in every Province, let that Cano^ be observed,
that those that are excommunicated of one should not go to another, etc. The
Council of C. Antioch. c. 4.
Antioch decreed, that if any B. being deposed by a Synod, or a Presbyter or
Deacon by his own B. shall presume before they be restored by a Synod to
exercise their ministry, their degree should be unrecoverable; and that they
which communicate with them, should be cast out of the church. Again, Ibid. c.
6.
If any of the Laity, or Clergy, whether Presbyters or Deacons etc. shall be
excommunicated by his own B. he may not be received of another. And yet
again, C. 12.
If any Presbyter or Deacon being deposed by their own Bishop, etc. The
Council of Sardica Sardic. c. 13.
forbids a Bishop to receive a Presbyter or Deacon, etc. whom he knows to
have been excommunicated by his own Bishop. Again, C. 14.
If any B. through choler shall rashly excommunicate a Presbyter or Deacon, it
shall be lawful for them to appeal to the Metropolitan. Exuperantius a
Presbyter being excommunicated by Triferius his Bishop for some misdeamenour
toward him, the Council of Taurin C. 4.
left his restitution to the arbitrament of the Bishop; by whom he had been
excommunicated. The Council of Carthage Carth. graec. c. 9. Carth. 2. c. 7.
decreed, that they which received those which be excommunicated, shall be
guilty of the same fault with them, who do fly from (...), the canonical
sentence of their own B. Out of the same Council Carth. graec. c. 10. Carth.
2. c. 8.
I cited before a decree concerning Presbyters which were condemned of their
own Bishop. And in the Afric. c. 29. and Carth. gr. 63 etc. 133.134.
African Council there is another decree concerning Clergy men of what degree
soever, that have been condemned by the judgment of their Bishop. In the 4.
Council of Carthage Carth. 4 c. 55.
it was decreed that the Bishop should excommunicate the accusers of their
brethren, and that if they did repent, he should receive them unto the
communion, but not into the Clergy. The council of Ephesus Ephesians. c. 5.
, that if any for their misdeedes being condemned, either by a Synod, or their
own Bishop, should be restored by Nestorius or his accomplices either to the
communion or to their degree, that they should notwithstanding remain
excommunicated or deposed. The Council of Agatha C. 2.
appointed* that disobedient Clerks should be corrected of their Bishop. In
the Council of Chalcedon there is a Canon Chalc. c. 23.
concerning such Clerks as being excommunicated by their own Bishops, got
themselves to the City of Constantinople, etc. In the same Council Carosus
Act. 4.
uses these words; They are Bishops, they have power to excommunicate, and to
condemn. These testimonies for councels may suffice. For I will not descend to
those of latter times, the latest which I have cited being the 4. general
Council. For examples, the like plenty might be shown of them, who have been
excommunicated or deposed by the B. Thus Alexander deposed Theod. l. 1. c. 2.
Arius; Socr. l. 6. c. 4. Sozom. l. 8. c. 3.
and Chrysostom diverse of his Clergy. Euryches was canonically Euagr. l. 2.
c. 4.
deposed by his own Bishop, and diverse Presbyters excommunicated by Conc.
Chalc. act. 10.
Ibus the Bishop, etc. To conclude, Bishops, says Balsam^ Bals. in Conc. Ephesians.
c. 5.
, have authority either to excommunicate their Clergy or to depose them.

Thus have I proved by evident testimonies, that al sorts of Presbyters, and
other clergy men in every diocese were subject to the Bishop. Whereunto this I
add, that since the first institution of Bishops, which was in the Apostles
times until our age, it was never otherwise: but all clergy men, if either
they withdrew themselves from their subjection to their orthodoxall B. they
were counted schismatickes; or if they lived under no Bishop, they were wont to
be called headless Clerks. By no means, says the council of Burchard.
decret. l. 2. c. 126. ex Conc. Parisiens.
Paris, are they to be accounted Clerks, or Priests, who do not live under the
government and discipline of some Bishop: for such the custom of the ancient
Church called acephalos, that is, headless.

To these testimonies in the end I added a reason,. 21. The superiority of BB.
in jurisdiction proved by reason.
wherein the refuter, because he hoped to find some advantage, is pleased to
insist. The reason stands thus: The pastors of several parishes in the
primitive church were either subject to the authority and jurisdiction of the
Bishop; or they had associates in the parishes joined with them in the
government thereof, or ruled alone without controle^^^t, being neither
restrained by associates, nor subject to BB.

But neither had they associates in the parishes joined with them, neither did
they rule alone without controlement, being neither restrained by associates,
nor subject to the Bishop.

Therefore the pastors of several parishes in the primitive Church were
subject to the authority and jurisdiction of the bishop.



First he takes exception against the conclusion, saying that I do not
conclude that which he looked for. What he looked for, I know not, nor care
not; the thing which I propounded to prove, was, that the Bishops in the
primitive Church were superior to the Presbyters in the power of jurisdiction
or government. Which is most evidently proved by this argument a relatis: If
the Presbyters were inferior and subject to the jurisdiction and government
of the Bishops, then were the Bishops superior to them in the power of
jurisdiction and government. What can be more plain? or how could they be,
as he absurdly imagines subject to the jurisdiction and government of the B.
if he neither had power to rule and direct them, nor authority and jurisdiction
to censure and correct them? His exception therefore against the conclusion is
a very frivolous cavil, like all the rest of his answers.

To the proposition he answers, by denying the destruction as insufficient,
because a fourth thing might be added, and that is the authority of the
congregation. But though this might be added according to the fantastical
conceit of some fanaticall spirits in our time, who make the government of the
Church to be neither monarchiall, nor aristocraticall, but democraticall, or
rather ochlocraticall; yet was it not to be added, because there could be no
question thereof according to the judgment and practice of the primitive
Church, whereof I spoke. But let him add it if the please; for it may as
easily be denied in the assumptio^, as added in the proposition. The
proposition will perhaps seem somewhat the better, and the assumption will be
never the worse. Therefore, this also was a mere cavil.

As touching the assumption: that part which denies them to have ruled alone,.
22
as being neither restrained by associates, nor subject to Bishops, he says
he would have granted, but that I proved it. See the spirit of contradiction.
What then? will he deny it? No, but hereby he will take advantage to infer
his triumphing conclusion, Ad page 104.
that our Bishopsforsooth he Popes, and then say it is my conclusion. But to
this their conclusion, which they have published in print in most glorious and
vaunting manner five times that I know of, arguing nothing but their gerat
malice and small judgment, I have answered before to their shame. How often must
they be told, that we neither make our Bishops supreme governors, as they
do their parish Bishop: nor sole, as theirs would be, if they had not the
assistance of their Presbyters? And who knows not, that it is the supremacy
that makes a Pope: and supremacy they give to their parish Bishop.

The other part of the assumption, which says they had not assistants in the
parish to restrain them, he denies. But before he will examine my reason which
I brought to prove it, his gravity thought good to cauil with the phrase, which (
says he) sounds very strangely in our ears. Assistants are for his help
whom they assist, not to hinder in the execution of his office; so do the
Justices of peace assist the Judges at the assizes. Therefore he should either,
not have called them assistants, or forborne the term of restraining. Where
were so many ears, as he speaks of, there were more heads then one that
joined in this work, as I understand there did. But where so many heads were,
it is strange there was no more judgment. Are your Presbyteries assisting your
parish Bishop, to be compared to the Justices of peace at the assizes, who have
no right of suffrage or giving sentence? or not rather to the Judges assisting
the chief Judge in every Court? have not all in your Presbyteries or
consistories equal right of suffrage, and are not all things carried by
plurality of voice? Is it not plain, that the Judges in the Kings bench, or
common plees, who are assistants to the L. chief justices, are joined to
either of them, as to he^lpe him in giving right judgment, so to restrain him,
that he judge not alone, according to his own pleasure? Is it not evident when
more are joined in one commission, that they are joined as well to restrain
him that is the chief, that he shall do nothing alone, as to help him in the
execution thereof? What a shallow conceit then was this, that assitants might
not be said to restrain; seeing their office is, as to help him whom they
assist to do right, so to restrain him that he do no wrong.

Let us now hear what he can say to the reason; which is this: If the pastors
of every parish had assistants, then Presbyteries, either of lay-presbyters or
of Ministers But they had not presbyteries to assist them, neither of
lay-presbyters, nor of ministers. Therefore they had none assistants.

The Proposition is grounded upon this hypothesis, which I took for granted,
that all assistants or coassessours joined with the Bishop or pastor in the
government of the Church, that are any where is noted to have been in the
primitive Church, were Presbyters. For that which again he adds concerning
the whole congregation, is a very fond conceit.Whoeuer heard that the whole
congregation assisted the pastor in the government of it self? assuredly
they which attribute authority to the whole congregation ascribe unto it the
chief authority, as in popular states: which the refuter has before
acknowledged, saying, Page 6.
that they subject both the pastors and elders to the whole
congregation,turning the world vpside down, and making the flock to rule their
pastor. And yet how this stands with their other position, that the pastor is
the supreme ecclesiastical officer in every Church. J cannot sell, unless
they mean the highest under the Church it self. Which if it be so, then is
not the Church according to their conceit assistant to the Pastor, but the
Pastor is the Churches deputy and lieuetenant for the government of it self,
in which government of the Church the Presbyters be his assistants. But
whatsoever might be added to the proposition, according to the unstayed fancies
of certain innouators, which I respected not, the proposition is necessary
according to the practice of the primitive Church whereof only J sp^ke.

Ad. page 105.
But he denies the assumptio^ also, saying, that they had other Presbyters
which were not ministers. But I hope he will unsay that saying, when he shall
have read what before has been delivered concerning their onely-gouerning
Elders. Besides, against their parish-presbyters I alleged the practice of the
Churches in Scotland and Geneua. For in Scotland they had not a Presbytery or
consistory in every parish, but in such circuits as are answerable to our
deanries. And whereas he says, that neither I nor he (...) truly what the
practice of Geneua is, but by uncertain reports; he should have spoken for
himself. For what I report concerning Geneua, I have read, as in other
Authors, so in Beza himself, showing that they have but one Ecclesiastical
presbytery, or consistory, for all the parishes both in the city and
territory thereto belonging, consisting of eighteen seniors, whereof 6. are
Ministers constant, and 12. chosen every year out of their 3. councils of
state, viz. 6. out of the council of 200 4 out of that of 60, and 2. out of
the 25. as I have noted before. But where he says that Geneua may well be
taken for one parish, seeing it has no diocesan Bishop, it seems he does not
greatly care, what he says. Belike there is but one parish church, and all the
rest, being above 20. be chapels of ease; and who then is the pastor of the
whole Church of Geneua? and what be they that are set over the Churches, if
they be not the pastors of them? Again, it is not long since Geneua was under
a Bishop, and then was it a Diocese, and is it now come to be but a parish? or
shall we not rather say, that as the Bishop in his time was Diocesan; so the
presbytery now, is not a parishionall, but a Diocesan presbytery, and that
the whole Church of Geneua consisting of many parishes, is as well a Diocese
now, as it was before?

It remains therefore as I said in the sermon, that the ministers of several
parishes were subject to the Bishop, whose pastoral care extended it self to
al, even theremotest parishes in his Diocese etc.

CHAP. VI Titles of honor given to BB.
( Sermon. sect. 13. page 52. Thus have you heard, that the Angels or BB. of the
Primitive Church, were for the substance of their calling such as ours be. etc.
to the end of the fourth point.)
Here (I thank him) he compares me to such as be called Iuglers, Whether BB.
may be called Lords.
because as they can persuade men they see what they do not see: so I would
persuade my hearers that they heard which they did not hear. Whether of us
does use more plain evidence of truth, and whether of us tricks of
legerdemaine, I appeal to the conscience of the Reader; though it be the
refuter himself. But good sir, though it was not in me to persuade every one
that did hear, yet me thinks I might without offense say they had heard that
which they did hear, whether it were true or false. And I hope in God, that
which now I have written in defense of that which they heard, will not only
satisfy those which are not wilfully addicted to your novelties; but also
convict the conscience of the gainesayers: whom I desire in the fear of God,
to take heed how they resist a truth whereof their conscience is convicted.
Acts 9.5.
(...), it is hard to kick against the pricks.

To that which he obiecteth concerning the mentioning of provincial Bishops,
whom I did not name before, I answer: that although I did not expressly and
by name argue for provincial Bishops: yet diverse of my proofs were directly
of them, and by a consequence from the greater to the less applied to Bishops:
as also by this reason, because eeuery provincial Bishop is a diocesan Bishop,
though not contrariwise. To his other cavil of not direct concluding, I have
answered already 4. or 5. times.

Ad page. 106.
But before I ended this 4. point, I thought it needful to prevent an objection
which is usually made; that whatsoever the office of the ancient Bishops was,
yet they were not called Lords, as ours be. Whereunto I answered, that men
were not to be offended at that title, for these two causes:

1. Because it is a title in the holy scriptures given, both to natural and
spiritual Fathers, as I proved out of Genesis 3^.35.1. Kings. 18.7.13. 2.
Because the title of Angels, which the Holy Ghost in this place gives to them,
is a title of greater honor, then the other, by how much the heavenly
governors of men under God, are more excellent then the earthly. To the
former, besides some insulting speeches, Psalm. 91.11. Dan. 10.11.
which he will be ashamed of, when he shall find himself put to silence:
he answers, that the word Lord was a term common too all superiors as
(...) in Greek, and Dominus in Latin: which I confess to be true in the
vocative case, the words being used as our English, Sir. But otherwise, where
the word is to be translated Lord, it is both in Hebrew and Greek a word of
like honor with our English, Lord. And therefore it was a great oversight in
those, which translating 1. Pet. 3. where Peter says that Sara called Abraham
(...), Lord, read, that she called him Sir. For her words, whereunto Peter had
relation, were these, Vadoni zaken, and my Lord is old. It were something
foolish to say, and my Sir. Yea but says he, the word Lord with us is
appropriated to men of Nobility and special place in civil government. To
omit that it is not so appropriated to them, but that even mean gentlemen
are so called in respect of the manours which they hold, it appears by that
which has been said, that Bishops not only now have, but in the Primitive
Church had, as special and as honorable a place in the government of the
Church, as the civil magistrates he speaks of, have in the common wealth.
Their calling also being more honorable, I see no reason, why they should be
enuyed an equal title of honor.

To the latter reason he answers 2. things.. 2.
First, that the titles of honor now given to Bishops were also inferior to
the title of Angels, which the holy Ghost gives them; and yet then they had
them not, nor till Popery (he means the Papacy) was grown to his full
height. His simple Reader would think that he speaks upon certain
knowledge, and cannot but believe him, and so be deceived by his confident
speeches; but he speaks at all adventures, as his affection, not as his
knowledge lead him. The Papacy came not to the full height until the time of
Hildebra^d, which was above a thousand years after Christ: when the Pope had
gotten the temporal supremacy, and so both the swords. The beginning of that,
which our writers call the Papacy, was when the Pope first obtained the
spiritual supremacy, which was about the year six hundred and seven. If
therefore I shall prove, that Bishops had as honorable titles in the first
six hundred years, as they have now with us; I shall euince, that not only
before the height, but before the arising of the Papacy, they were called
Lords, and by other titles no less honorable then Lord. But I will not desire
so large a scope; the most of my proofs shall be contained within three or
four hundred years after the death of Christ.

Alexander therefore the Bishop of Alexandria, writing to Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople gives him this style, Theodor. l. 1. c. 4.
(...), To my most honorable brother: Not long after, Arius writes thus to
Eusebius of Nicomedia, Th. l. 1. c. 5.
, (...), to my most desired Lord. The same Eusebius Ibid. c. 6.
(...), to my Lord Paulinus Bishop of Treuers, using also the same title more
then once in the same Epistle of Eusebius of Caesaria, calling him my Lord
Eusebius. For though these two whom I last cited, were not sound in the faith;
yet their writing shows, what was the custom of the Church before the
Council of Nice. Not long after the same Council, Athanasius succeeded the
foresaid Alexander: in his behalf the Bishops which came out of Egypt write
to the Bishops assembled in Council at Tyrus, Atha. Apol. 2.
(...), to our most honorable Lords. The Synod held at Jerusalem Sozom. l. 3.
c. 22.
writing also in his behalf to the Presbyters, Deacons, and people in Egypt,
Lybia and Alexandria move the^ to be thankful unto God, who has now, say they,
restored unto you (...), your pastor and Lord. About the same time, certain BB.
direct their letters to Julius B. of Rome Soz. l. 3. c. 23.
the great Patron of Athanasius, under this style (...), to the most blessed
Lord etc. Gregory Nazianzene Greg. Naz. epist ad Greg. Nyss.
writing to Gregory Nyssen concerning a false report which had been spread,
that the BB. had put him by the bishopric, says, let no man speak untruths
of me, (...), nor of my Lords the BB. The council held at Illyricum writing
to the Churches and Bishops of Asia and Phrygia etc. has these words Theo. l.
4. c. 9.
, we have sent (...), our Lord and fellow minister Elpidius to take notice of
your doctrine, whether it be as we have heard (...), of our Lord and fellow
Minister Eustathius. George the Bishop of Laodicea Soz. l. 4. c. 13.
writes to certain BB. thus, (...) to the most honorable Lords. The fathers
of the second general Council Constantine p. 1. apud. Theodor. l. 5. c. 9.
direct their letter (...), to the most honorable Lords Damasus, Ambrose, etc.
And in the same epistle, speaking of BB. call them (...), most reverend and
most honorable brethren. The said Ambrose holding with other BB. a Synod, and
writing a synodicall epistle to Syricius then B. of Rome, among other BB. Aper
a Presbyter subscribed thereunto for his B. using these words: Ambros. Epist.
81.
Exiussudomini Episcopi Geminiani, at the commandment of my L. B. Geminianus.
And this was the usual style which Presbyters did use when they did subscribe
to Councels instead of their B. whose place they supplied. As to the Council
of Arles, Conc. Arelat. 3.
Desiderius Presbyter directus a Domino meo Ioanne Episcopo, directed from my
Lord John the B. have given my consent, and subscribed: and so three others
there mentioned; and in like manner to diverse other Turonens. 1. Epaunens.
Valent. Aurelian. 3. Toleta. 3. etc.
Councels. Whosoever will peruse the Acts of the great Council of Chalcedon,
he shall seldom read any B. mentioned without some title of great reverence
and honor; as reuerendissimus, sanctissimus. And long before that, Socrates
Socr. hist. l. 6. in prooem.
acknowledges, that it was the usual manner in his time, not to speak of BB.
without titles of great honor, calling them (...), most religious, most holy,
or such like. And Chrysostom. in Ps. 13. apud Caes. Baron. an. 58.2.
Chrysostom says plainly, that Heretics have learned of the Devil, not to
give due titles of honor to Bishops. But where he finds fault with them,
for that in stead of those titles which argue their authority, they said, your
reverence, your wisdom, and such like; what would he have said to the
terms that have been usually given to our Bishops by the Disciplinarians
among us? I say, among us: for Calvin, Beza, and others, when they have had
occasion to write to our Bishops, have not refused to give them their titles of
honor. To omit the rest, Calvin Epist. Calvin. ad Cranmer.
writing to Archbishop Cranmer, uses these titles, Illustrissime Domine,
Ornatissime and clarissime Praesul, etc. Zanchius Epist. Dedic. l. de 3.
Elohius.
to Bishop Grindall, Reuerendissime Antistes. Beza Suru. 131. September. 15. 1589.
and Sadeel to Archbishop Whitgift, Reuerendissimo viro, and in Christo Patri,
Domino Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, serenissimae Reginae Consiliario, and totius
Angliae Primati, etc.

His second answer contains two things: the former, that the title of Angels
which the holy Ghost gives to BB. (for that only J mentioned) is quite
besides the purpose, my argument being this: The holy Ghost gives BB. a more
honorable title, in calling them the Angels of the Churches, then if he had
called them Lords.

Therefore we should not think much that they are called Lords.

He answers: The Angels are glorious creatures of heaven, and have some fit
resemblance of the Ministers office: Lord, Lordship, and grace, are terms of
civil honor, not so well befitting the Ministers of Christ Jesus. I confess
they do not so well befit them, because they come short of that honor and
excellency, which in the name of Angels the holy Ghost ascribes to them. For
they are called not only Angels, that is, messengers and ambassadors of God,
as all ministers are, in respect of their ministry; but also each of them is
called the Angel of the Church, whereof he is B. in respect of his government,
and gardianship of the Church: as the holy Angels of God are said to be their
Angels, over whom they are appointed Governors, and gardians. Therefore the
name Lord given to them in respect of their government and authority, is a
title of less honor, then that which in the same respect is given them by our
Savior Christ. Neither are they therefore civil Lords, because they have that
title of Lords common to them with the Lords temporal. For who knows not the
distinction between the Lords spiritual and temporal, so often mentioned in
the Acts of Parliament? And whereas in the second place he would insinuate,
that our Savior Christ expressly forbids these titles of Lordship and grace,
Luc. 22. where though he reads thus, Luc. 22.26.
The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over
them, are called gracious Lords; but you shall not be so: yet he is not so
ignorant of the Greek tongue, as not to know, that neither gracious nor Lords
are there mentioned in the original text. That was an affectionate translation
of those, who were too partial in this cause. That very title, which our
Savior speaks of, two of the Ptolemies, Kings of Egypt, did assume unto
themselves, either of them being called Ptolomeus Euergetes, Ptolemy the
bountiful or benefactor. But indeed in the language, wherein our Savior
spoke, the word (...) Nedibim.
which is translated Benefactors, is often used for Principes or Heroes, as Psa.
118.9. It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put our trust in Princes. And
that seems to have been Lukes meaning, as not only Merceru^ In Pagnia.
thesaur.
but Beza In Luc. 22.26.
also supposes. The 70. translate the word, Prou. 19.6. (...), the King; in
Psalm. 118 9. (...), in Princes. So Psalm. 47.10.83.12.113.7. But 1. Sam. 2.8.
(...). Pro. 8.16. (...). It is also plain, that the disciples imagining that
Christ should be a worldly Monarch, expected, that themselves should be
earthly Princes, in great authority about him, every one affecting a nearer
place about him then his fellows, as appears by the two sons of Zebede,
whose ambitious suite to Christ, that they might sit one on his right hand, and
the other on his left in his kingdom, gave occasion of this speech, as Matthew
Matt. 20.20* 25.
notes. Whereas therefore they both erred in their imagination, thinking that
they should be great Princes under an earthly Monarch, and were corrupt in
their affection, each one of them ambitiously seeking superiority over the
rest, our Savior seeks to reform both, telling them that neither they
should be earthly Princes, as they imagined, in these words, But you not so;
neither ought they to affect ambitiously superiority over others, but that by
how much they should exceed others in dignity, they should labor by so much
the more to excel them in humility, imitating his example. Neither did our
Savior Christ interdict his Apostles, either superiority of authority over
others, or titles of eminent honor. The authority and dignity of being his
Apostles, is greater then any, either honor or title, that is given to our BB.
Jerome Hier. in Tit. 1.
writing on Paul's style which he assumeth to himself, Tit. 1.1. says, Where
he calls himself the Apostle of Jesus Christ, it seems some such thing as
of he had said, Pr^fectus pr^terio Augusti Caesaris, Magister exercitus
Tiberij Imperatoris. For even as the Judges of this world, that they may seem
the more noble, take names from the Kings whom they serve and from the dignity
wherewith they are puffed up, even so the Apostle challenging to himself great
authority among Christians, he signified before hand that he was the Apostle
of Christ, that by the authority of the name be might bring in awe those that
should read, showing thereby, that all which believe in Christ, must be
subject to him.

27.
Having thus answered the first objection, I did easily foresee, that three
other things would be objected: the first, if Bishops may be called Lords,
then they may behave themselves as Lords of the Churches: I answered, that
although they may not behave themselves as Lords of the Churches, yet being the
Angels of the Churches, and spiritual Fathers, to whom a paternall and
pastoral authority is committed, may worthily be honored with the title of
Lords. To this he replieth, that we call not Shepherds nor Fathers Lords, and
therefore the paternall or pastoral authority of Bishops does not make them
capable of such Lordly titles. J answer, that Magistrates, yea Princes, both in
Scriptures and profane Writers, are called Pastors, as well as Bishops, and
for the same cause are Lords. Neither do I doubt, but that the title of
Father, being given by way of honor to him that is not a natural Father, is a
word of as great honor at the least, as Lord: and that is the signification of
the name Papa, which having been given in the Primitive Church to all Bishops,
as a title of eminent honor, is for that cause by the Pope of Rome
appropriated to himself.

The second, there is too great odds between the titles of Bishops and other
Ministers, the one being called Masters, the other Lords. I answered, there is
no such great difference between Master and Lord, that inferior Minister,
which assume to themselves the title of Master, should deny the title of Lord
to Bishops. He replieth, as conceiving my speech simply, that there was no
great difference between Master and Lord. If you respect their use in
relation, as they are referred to their correlatiues, there is no difference;
if the use, without relation among us, there is great difference; but yet not
so great, as that Ministers which assume the one to themselves, should deny
the other to Bishops, there being as great difference betwixt their degrees, as
their titles. Where he says, it is not assumed, but given by custom to them,
as Masters of Arts; both parts are false: for both it is given to all
Ministers, as they are Ministers, though not Masters of Arts, though not
graduates; and also I especially meant certain Ministers, who not enduring the
title of Lord to be given to Bishops, will neither tell you their name by
speech, nor set it down in writing, without the preface of Mastership.

The third, if Bishops be called Lords, then are they Lords of the Church. I
answered, it follows no more that they are therefore Lords of the Church,
because they are called Lords, then the Ministers are Masters of the Church,
because they are called Masters: for neither of these titles is given to them
with relation, but as simple titles of honor and reverence. No? says he, let
their styles speak, Lord of Has and Wells, Lord of Rochester, etc. What?
Lord of the Cities? nothing less, but Lords of the Diocese. They are Lords of
neither, but Lord BB. both of the City and Diocese. And the relation is not in
the word Lord, but in the word Bishop, though it be not expressed always, but
many times is understood.

The Refuter having thus weakly, 28. Ad page 107.
friuolously, and fondly shifted off my arguments and testimonies, rather then
lie shifted off my arguments and testimonies, rather then answered them, there
being not one line in my Sermon hitherto, which I have not defended with
evidence of truth against his cauillations; notwithstanding, concludes with a
most insolent brag, as if he had (as his favorites give out) laid me on my
back. And therefore as some wrestlers, after they have given one the foil,
will iet with their hands under their side, challenging all others; even so he,
having in his weak conceit given me a strong overthrow, because he finds me
too weak to stand in his arms, he challenges all comers, saying, Let him
that thinks he can say more, supply his default. I do unfeignedly confess,
there be a great number in this Land (blessed be God) who are able to say much
more in this cause then I am: notwithstanding, a stronger propugner thereof
shall not need against this oppugner. And because I am assured in my
conscience of the truth and goodness of the cause, I promise the Refuter, if
this which now I have written, will not convince him, as I hope it will; whiles
he will deal as a Disputer, and not as a Libeller, I will never give him over
(God giving me life and health) until I have utterly put him to silence. In
the mean time, let the Reader look back to that which has been said on
both sides: let him call to mind, if he can, what one proof this Refuter has
brought for the paritie of Ministers; what one sound answer he has given to
any one argument, or testimony to my one proposition or assumption which I
have produced; and then let him consider whether this glorious insultation
proceeded not from an evil conscience, to a worse purpose, which is, to
retain the simple seduced people in their former terms of factiousnes.

THE FOVRTH BOOK, Maintayning the fifth point, that the Episcopal function is
of Apostolical and divine Institution.
The I. CHAPTER: Proving the Episcopal function to be of Apostolical
institution, because it was generally received in the first 300. years after
the Apostles.
Sermon. page 54. 1. That this treatise of the lawfulness of the BB. calling is
not superfluous, though from the former points the same thing may be concluded.
It remains, that I should demonstrate not only the lawfulness of the BB.
calling. etc. to page 55. li. 7.
THE Refuter finding himself unable to confute this discourse of the
lawfulness of the BB. calling, would feign persuade his Reader that it is
needless; moved, and moving thereto by as frivolous reasons as ever were heard
of. For though it be true, that this point has already been proved by one
argument, is it therefore needless to confirm the same by a second? Did ever
any man meet with such a captious trifler, as would not permit a man to prove
the same truth by two arguments, but the one must straight be rejected as
needless? but indeed his analysis was forced; as he could not but discern,
both by the distribution of the Sermon page 2. and also by the transition here
used, neither was this point handled before, but the former assertion, whereby
the text was explicated; that the Angels or Bishops of the primitive Church
were diocesan Bishops, and such for the substance of their calling, as ours be,
superior to other ministers in degree, etc. This which now we are to handle,
is the second assertion, being a doctrine gathered out of the text, so
explicated. I confess the former does prove the latter; and that does commend
the method of my Sermon, and both being disposed together may make this
Enthymeme.

The Pastors or governors of the primitive Church, here meant by the Angels,
were diocesan Bishops, and such for the substance of their calling, as ours be.

Therefore the calling of such diocesan Bishops as ours be, is lawful.

But I contented not my self with collecting the doctrine out of the text, but
as the manner of all preachers is, when they have collected a doctrine, which
is controuersall; I thought it needful to prove, and to confirm the same with
other arguments.

But other arguments, says he, needed not, if the three middle points were
sufficiently cleared: what will he assume? but the three former points were
sufficiently cleared? therefore as the first point was bootlesse, so this last
is needless. If he like not of this assumption, he cannot make this
conclusion, which notwithstanding he makes: if he will assume, that they were
not sufficiently cleared, as he has borne the reader in hand all this while,
then he must needs conclude against himself, that therefore these other
arguments were needful.

The truth is, though the former points were so sufficiently cleared, as that
the refuter had nothing, whereby to avoid the evident truth thereof conuicting
his conscience, but beggarly shifts and sophistical euasions; notwithstanding,
for so much as some of them, with whom I had to deal, are so lead with a
spirit of contradiction, as if they were in the contradiction of Chore, (the
Lord open their eyes and turn their hearts) I therefore thought it needful,
for the more full conviction of the gainesayers, to confirm by other arguments
the doctrine which I collected out of the text. But where I had been to blame
for not setting down this collection plainly (were it not a point of Art
sometimes to conceal Art) the reader is to coy the refuters head, for making
so plain a collection for his own conviction, and as they say, for gathering a
rod for his own tail. The collection being reduced into a sillogism stands
thus.

The calling of such as are here meant by the Angels is lawful and good;

Diocesan BB. such as our be, are here meant by the Angels.

Therefore the calling of Diocesan BB. such as ours are, is lawful and good.

The proposition is such as no man of understanding or conscience will make
question of, Ad page 108.
says the refuter, we ask no more, but to have this assumption confirmed,
that the Angels were such, and then you shall not need other arguments to prove
this conclusion. But the assumption say I, is that which in the Sermon, and in
this defense thereof hitherto has been proved: how sufficiently I refer to
the reader, and I appeal to the refuter.

This therefore may stand for the first argument.

I proceed to that which was expressed in the Sermon, omitting what else he
has in this section as being either refuted before, or unworthy to be
mentioned now.

Sermon. Sect. 2. page 55. 2. The question is of such BB. as were described in
the former part of the Sermon, and in the 2. and 3. books of this defense.
All the question now a days is of the lawfulnes etc. to page 56. l. 1. All the
question, says he, of the lawfulness had been ended before this time, if the
Angels of the Churches had been proved to be such BB. But say I the Angels of
the Churches were the BB. of the primitive Church, who in the former part of
the Sermon were proved to be such, and those proofs in this defense have
hitherto been confirmed in such sort as I hope the refuter will acknowledge
himself to be satisfied: Ad page 109.
if not, yet it is but folly to multiply words concerning the proofs of the
former assertion: for they must stand, until the refuter or some other of more
strength shall take upon him to assail them: And I doubt not, but they will
stand after they have been assailed.

My argument therefore stands thus: What function has divine institution and
approbation is lawful and good.

The function of BB. such as were described in the former part of the Sermon,
has divine institution, as being Angels sent of God, and approbation, as being
Stars which Christ holds in his right hand.

Therefore the function of such BB. is lawful and good.



To the assumption he has nothing to answer, besides the bare deny all
thereof, but that which already he has repeated three or four times since he
entered into this fifth point: that diocesan BB. are not meant by the Angels and
Stars, and charge me, as though I thought it enough to affirm it, and
would have my readers to take it upon my bare word: when the thing which I have
proved hitherto has been only this, that the Angels or BB. of the primitive
Church were such as in the former assertion were described. But the assumption I
prove in the residue of the sermon, first by consequence, and then directly. By
consequence, in the next section.

3. Ad page 110. That the function of such BB. is of Apostolical institution.
Sermon. Sect. 3. page 56. for what function or government is of Apostolical
institution, that is to be acknowledged a divine ordinance (in respect of the
first institution, as having God the author thereof.)

The Episcopal function, or government by BB. is of Apostolical institution.

Therefore it is a divine ordinance, etc. to page 61. l. 2.

The proposition is acknowledged not only by Beza, De grad. c. 23.
who says, if it proceeded from the Apostles, I would be bold to ascribe it
wholly, as all other Apostolical ordinances, to the institution of God, but
also by the refuter himself: as needing no proof.

The assumption I proved by three arguments: wherein I proceeded as it were by
degrees: two whereof, says the refuter, are needless; as if still he held it
superfluous to bring more arguments then one. I confess, that any one of these
cords are strong enough to bind a stronger man, then this refuter; yet I
thought it not needless to use three, knowing that, as Solomon says, a
threefold cord is not easily broken.

The first of the three I thus propounded: The 1. argument, because it was
generally used in the primitive Church.
That government which was generally and perpetually used in all Christian
Churches in the first three hundred years after Christ, and his Apostles, and
was not ordained by general Councils, was undoubtedly of Apostolical
institution.

This proposition I proved, first by two testimonies of Augustine, De Baptism.
cont. Donat. l. 4. c. 24 and Epi. 118.
whereunto might be added the like testimonies out of Tertulian, De praescript.
aduers. haeres. and con. Marc. l. 4.
Constatid ab Apostolis traditum, quod apud Ecclesias Apostolorum fuerit
sacrosanctum. T. C. Lib. 2. page 2.
says, the example of the Apostles and general practice of the Church under
their government, even without a commandment draws a necessity.

Secondly, By reason, showing, that both it is incredible, that all the godly
Fathers and Christian Churches would abolish that government which was ordained
by Christ and his Apostles: and also impossible, that a government not received
from the Apostles, nor ordained by Councils, should at once be set up in all
parts of the Christian world. But the refuter says, Ad page 111.
I did not need to prove the proposition: for though such a change might be
possible, yet it is so unlikely that it is against both Christianity and
ciuility to suspect, that there was any such: for which grant, (though he could
do no other) I think my self as much beholding to him, as if he had granted
the cause. But thereupon (says he) we may boldly infer, that if in the
Apostles times the government was in the hands of the presbitery, it continued
in the Church along time after their decease: from which proposition I may
boldly and truly assume and conclude; that after the Apostles times the
government was not in the hands of such presbiteries, as the disciplinarians
speak of; therefore neither in the Apostles times.

The assumption consists of two parts, the former that the government of the
Churches by such BB. was generally and perpetually used in all Christian
Churches in the first three hundred years after Christ and his Apostles; the
latter, and was not ordained by general Councils.

4.
The former part I prove by four arguments. The first whereof is this: 4.
Arguments proving the assumption: 1. Because all the Angels or governors of
the primitive Church in the first three hundred years after the Apostles were
diocesan BB.
If the Angels or governors of the primitive Church in the first 300. years
after Christ and his Apostles were diocesan BB. then the government of the
Church by such BB. was generally and perpetually used in that time.

But the antecedent is true, Therefore the consequent.



He makes a doubt of the proposition: because he has not learned, that
speeches in disputation indefinitly propounded are generally to be understood
for avoiding of clenches: and therefore when I say the Angels or governors, I
mean all the Angels or governors; when I say in the three hundred years, I
mean throughout that term: even from the death of Saint John, to the end of
the four hundred year after the incarnation of Christ.

The assumption has been proved at large in the former part of the Sermon and
in this defense thereof: first by this disjunction, either the Churches after
the Apostles time were governed by diocesan BB. as we say, or by presbiteries,
consisting for the most part of Lay Elders, as the disciplinarians hold.

But never by such presbiteries. Therefore ever by BB.

Secondly, I have proved that ever since the Apostles times, the Churches have
been dioceses and the BB. diocesans, superior to other ministers in degree,
having singularity of preeminence during life, and majoritie of power in
respect both of ordination and jurisdiction: his answer is, that he has
answered those points of my Sermon, where he has showed that I proved no such
matter: whereunto I reply, Ad page 112.
that all his answers were but shifts and euasions, and stand fully confuted.
But perhaps the refuter will say; if I had understood your proposition as
uttered in general terms, as now it is expounded by you; then I would have
taken the same exception against the proof of the assumption, which I did
against your proposition: for although in some part of that time some BB. were
perhaps, such as you described; yet it follows not* that generally and
perpetually in the first three hundred years after Christ and his Apostles
they were such. That they were generally such in the last of the three hundred
years, which is the fourth century after Christ, it thing most fully
testified, and most manifestly proved in the proof of the former points, and
has been confessed by the refuter: neither can be denied of any man, who has
any sound learning, joined with a good conscience. Let us then consider, when
such BB. had their beginning. Perhaps some will say, they began with
Constantine, for then was the greatest alteration in the state of the Church. I
answer, the alteration was in respect of outward peace and prosperity,
wherewith God blessed his Church, not in the discipline or doctrine of the
Church: in respect of the wealth, and better maintenance of the BB. not in the
substance of their calling. It is evident that BB. were diocesan before they
were actually Metropolitanes; and Metropolitanes, before they were Patriarchs:
for of the combination of dioceses, did follow Metropolitanes; and upon the
consociation of provinces, were Patriarchs ordained, and yet long before the
Council of Nice Con. Nic. c. 6.
the Patriarchs were in use, and the customs of subiecting diverse provinces
to them, are called (...), ancient customs. In the same canon it was also
decreed, that the privileges or prerogatives of Churches, meaning especially
the privileges of being mother Churches, should be reserved to them: which
privilege, as I have showed before, belonged to them ever since the Apostles
times. When the B. of Antioch attempted to ordain the Metropolitan of Cyprus,
the BB. of Cyprus complain to the Council of Ephesus, alleging that ever
since the Apostles, the Metropolitan B. of Constantia was ordained by the
Synod of the provincial BB. whereupon the Council Conc. Ephe. post aduentum
Episcoporum Cypri.
not only censured the attempt of the B. of Antioch as an innovation contrary
to the rules of the Apostles; but also determines, first, that no B. should
have to do with any country or province which had not, (...), ever from the
beginning belonged to his See: and secondly that every province within it self
should retain inviolable such rights as they had, (...), ever from the
beginning according to the custom received of old. If therefore Metropolitanes
and Patriarchs were in use long before Constantines time, who can doubt but
diocesan BB. were much more? Long since says Cyprian, Cyp. lib. 4. epi. 2
in all provinces and in all cities BB. are ordained, in age ancient, sound in
faith, tried in affliction, etc. in Provinces, Metropolitanes, such as himself
was; in Cities, diocesans.

5. That diocesan BB. had not their first beginning after the Apostles times.
Without doubt, if diocesan BB. had their beginning after the Apostles times,
then was it shortly after their decease. But that cannot be, first because, as
I shall prove in the next reason, they were in the Apostles times: secondly,
because, as I said in the Sermon, it is incredible that all the Churches would,
and impossible that they could agree in abolishing a government received from
the Apostles, and setting up at once in all places of the world, one other
uniform government by BB. without the gain saying of any one of the godly
Fathers, or worthy Martyrs of Christ. Besides, the succession of BB. from the
Apostles times, as I shall show, does plainly prove their original to have
been in the Apostles times. Whereunto may be added the testimony of Eusebius
concerning the age succeeding the Apostles times: for having showed that about
the twelfth year of Traian, (which was about seven years after the death of
Saint John) Primus succeeded Cerdo in the Bishopric of Alexandria, and
Alexander Euaristus in the Bishopric of Rome; he testifies, Eus. hist. l. 4.
c. 1. and 2.
that in those times both the doctrine (...).
of Christ and his Church did flourish daily more and more. Likewise in the
time of Adrian he testifies both that the c. 6 (...).
Churches shined in all places of the world like most glorious lights, and the
faith of Christ in all nations flourished. And in the same book, lib. 4. c.
19.20.21.22.
after he had noted the succession of the BB. of Rome, Alexandria, Antioch,
showing how Soter succeeded Anicetus at Rome, Agrippinus Celadion at
Alexandria, Theophilus Heroes who had succeeded Cornelius, and he Heron at
Antioch, and having mentioned some other famous BB. as Dionysius of Corinth,
and Pinytus of Candy, Philippe, Apollinaris, Melita, Musanus, Modestus, and
Irenaeus, he says, that Hegesippus flourished at the same time, An. 8. Antoni.
Christi 169.
whose testimony of the estate of the Church in his time he has recorded, to
this effect, Eus. l. 4. c. 22.
that iourneying toward Rome, in many places he had conference with the BB. all
which he found to be teachers of one and the same doctrine: and having spoken
of the Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians, he gives this testimony to the
Church of Corinth in particular, that it had continued in the right faith
until that time, when he coming to Corinth, saw Primus the B. with whom he
conuersed there a good while, rejoicing together in the true faith. But when I
came to Rome, says he, I continued with Anicetus, whose Deacon Eleutherius
was: but Soter succeeded Anicetus, and after him Eleutherius was B. Now, says
he, in every succession and in every city all things stood as the law
preaches, and as the Prophets, and as our Lord. And afterward speaking of the
heresies which did spring in his time; after that James, says he, surnamed the
Just, had suffered Martyrdom, Simon the son of Cleophas is made B. whom all
men preferred for this cause, because he was the Lords cousin: wherefore they
called the Church a Virgin; for as yet she had not been corrupted with vain
doctrines: but Thebulis because he was not made B. began to corrupt it, being
the broacher of one of the seven heresies which were in the people. So much of
the first argument.

6. The second argument from the two testimonies of Jerome.
The second is taken from the testimony of Jerome, in two places: the former in
Titus 1. where he says thus: before Hier. in. Tit.
that by the instinct of the devil, factions began in the Church, and it was
said among the people, I am of Paul, I (...) of Apollos, I am of Cephus, the
Churches were governed by the common counsel of the presbyters: The 1.
but when every one accounted those for his whom he had baptized, it was
decreed in the whole world, that one being chosen from the presbiters, should
be set over the rest in every Church, unto whom the care of that whole Church
or diocese should appertain, and that the seeds of schisms might be taken
away. For full answer to this testimony, he refers us to another place; and
when he comes thither, I doubt he will not say much to the purpose. In the
meanetime, he answers first, to the testimony itself, and then to my
inference out of it: to the testimony he answers, that Jerome makes the
beginning of this constitution of BB. not in the Apostles times, nor in the
times immediately succeeding the Apostles. Not the former because otherwhere he
says that BB. were superior to presbiters rather by the custom of the
Church, then any ordinance of God. Whereto I answer, that custom himself
calls Ad. Euagr.
an Apostolical tradition: and else where most plainly and fully testifies
in many places (some whereof are noted in the Sermon) both that BB. were in the
Apostles times, and also were ordained by the Apostles themselves. Not the
latter, because it is, as I had told him, against the modest charity of a
Christian to imagine, that all the Church would conspire at once to thrust out
the government established by the Apostles, and instead thereof to bring in
another of their own. But say I, it is most manifest, that BB. were placed in
all Churches in the next age to the Apostles: and therefore he must either
grant, that the Apostolical Churches received this government from the
Apostles, or else confess (according to his usual modesty in setting light by
the testimony of all antiquity,) that all Churches conspired to alter the
government which the Apostles had established. But of his modesty I would
know, when he thinks this government by BB. began; and whether he must not be
forced of necessity, either to lay that foul imputation upon all the ancient
Churches, on all the godly Fathers and blessed Martyrs; or to yield that they
had received this form of government from the Apostles.

My inference also he denies. When as not withstanding the allegation gives
full testimony to the generality, saying, it was decreed in the whole world:
and of the perpetuity there can be no question, if the beginning were not
latter then I intended. But it is plain, that by Ieroms meaning it began in
the Apostles times: at the first indeed he says, before BB. were ordained, the
same men were called Presbiteri and Episcopi: and until factions began, the
Churches were governed ( viz. in the absence of the Apostles) by the common
counsel of the Presbiters: which may be true of the most Churches, excepting
that of Jerusalem, by Ieromes own confession. But when factions began, as
those did in the Apostles 1 Cor. 1.
times, whereof he speaks; the Apostles ordained, and in the whole Christian
world it was observed, that for avoiding of schism one should be chosen from
among the presbiters, who should be set over the rest, and to whom the whole
care of the Church, that is, the diocese should appertain.

As for the reasons whereby he proves the consequence feeble, they are
exceeding weak. First, because Ierom speaks not of the times immediately
succeeding the Apostles. It is very true: for he speaks of that which was
done in the Apostles times, as has been said: secondly, says he, because he
says it was decreed in the whole world, which could not well be without a
general Council, unless it soaked in by little and little, till at the last
it ouer-flowed all places. The decree which he speaks of, could be no other
but of the Apostles: for as has been said, what was generally observed in the
Churches in the first three hundred years, before there was a general
Council to decree it, proceeded undoubtedly from the Apostles. Now it is more
then evident, that long before the first general council, there were not
only Diocesan BB. but Metropolitanes also, yea Patriarchs: that which he
talks of soking in by little and little, agrees not with the general
decree, whereof Jerome speaks, whereby what is instituted is ordained at
once. Neither can he assign any time after the Apostles, when BB. had either
less charges, or less authority, then in the end of the first three or four
hundred years. Their Diocesses often times as has been showed, were lessened
in process of time, but seldom or never enlarged. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that their authority among Christians was greater before there
were Christian Magistrates, then afterward. For before, they called and held
their Councels by their own authority, they heard and judged all causes among
Christians, they punished all kinds of faults Conc. Ancyr. c.
16.20.21.22.23.24.25. Et Neocaes. c. 2. and 3.
by Ecclesiastical censures.

The other testimony of Jerome, is out of his commentary on Psalm. 45. which I
have mentioned before. 7. The second testimony of Jerome in Psalm. 45.
That the Church in steed of her Fathers, which were the Apostles, had sons
which were the BB. who should be appointed governors in all parts of the world.

He says first, this testimony is an allegory upon the 45. Psalm, and not a
history of the times. Which is a frivolous evasion. For it is an exposition of
the Prophecy by the history or event, and so not only he, but Augustine also
expounds the place.

Secondly, he alleges, that Jerome does not say, that the Church had BB. as
soon as the Apostles were gone: which also is frivolous. For he signifies
that the BB. did succeed the Apostles in the government of the Church, which
else where he plainly professes, saying, that Ad. Euagr.
BB. are the successors of the Apostles. If any other had come between them
and the Apostles, those other should have been the Apostles successors, and
they the predecessors to the BB. Besides, others of the Fathers in plain
terms testify, that the Apostles committed the Church every where to the BB.
and left them their successors: which in the successions also of BB. in the
Apostolical Churches is plainly declared. Simeon the son of Cleophas
succeeding James, Evodius, Linus, Timothy, Tittu, etc. substituted by the
Apostles, Peter and Paul, and succeeding them in the government of those
Churches wherein they were placed.

Thirdly, Ad page 113.
he says, Jerome applied the Psalm to the practice of the times wherein he
lived, not expounding the meaning of the Prophecy, which if he had done he
must have acknowledged that such BB. were by the ordinance of God. Who could be
so shameless as to say, that Jerome expounds not the meaning of the Prophecy
when he commenteth thus: Pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filij. Fuerunt O
Ecclesia Apostoli patres tui, quia ipsi te genuerunt: nunc autem quia illi
recesserunt a mundo, habes pro his Episcopos filios, quia a te creati sunt:
sunt enim and hi patres tui, quia ab ipsis regeris. He therefore expounds
the meaning of the Prophecy, applying it to the state of the Church immediately
after the decease of the Apostles, and not only to Ieromes times. Why but then
Jerome must be thought to have held the function of BB. to be a divine
ordinance: that follows not; for he might hold them to be prophesied of, as
he also confesses, Es. 60. and yet esteem them but an apostolical ordinance,
being neither immediately ordained of God, nor yet provided as generally and
perpetually to be necessarily observed, as those things which are said to be
simply diuini iuris. 8. The third argument consisting of two parts: the first
affirmative, that all Councils, Histories and Fathers give testimony to BB.


My third argument consists of two branches; the former, affirmative, that
the Councels, Histories, and Fathers with one consent give testimony to the
government by BB: the other, negative, that not any one pregnant testimony of
any sound writer, or example of any one orthodoxal or apostolic Church ( viz.
in the first three hundred years after Christ and his Apostles) can be
produced to the contrary. To the former he answers, that the Councels,
Histories and Fathers, either bear witness of their own times, which is
nothing to the purpose, seeing the ancientest Note his reason: the testimonies
of the Fathers to no purpose, because the antientest Councils were in the
fourth age.
Council was in the fourth age of the Church, or else judge of the BB. in
former times, by that which they saw then in practice, taking all that had the
same name of BB. to have been pertakers of the same authority.

If the Fathers did bear witness only of their own times, it were
sufficient for the proof of my assertion, seeing there were diverse in all the
term specified of three hundred years after the Apostles, which give
testimony unto it: as in the first age after the Apostles (to omit them of the
two latter) Ignatius, Hegesippus, Irenaeus, Clemens, Tertullian, do give
plain testimony unto it; and two of them, as has been showed, to wit,
Ignatius and Irenaeus, were not only Diocesan, but also Metropolitan BB. But
the Fathers, histories and councils, do not only speak of their own times;
but also relate what was done in the Apostles times, and immediately upon their
decease. Do they not testify with one consent, as I partly show in the two
arguments following, that there were BB. in the Apostles times, appointed and
ordained by the Apostles themselves? do they not say, that the Apostles
committed the Churches to them, and left them to be their successors in the
government of the Church? is not this one of the chief things which Eusebius
propounds to himself in his history, They be the first words of Eusebius.
(...), etc.
to set down the succession of BB? chiefly, of those who next succeeded the
Apostles in the Apostolical Churches? But let the Reader judge of the Refuter,
and his cause, by that which follows.

The Fathers discerned not, or knew no difference between the calling or
authority of the BB. which were in their own time, and those which had been
before them, but thought and wrote of them as being alike, the chiefest of them
in every age from the Apostles, being BB. themselves. The refuter and his
fellows coming thirteen or fourteen, yea almost fiueteene hundred years
after some of them, will needs have a difference; and rather then it shall not
stand, all the Fathers must be condemned as Idiots, for not seeing that which
these learned men do see. I greatly marvel with what face, or rather with
what conscience the refuter could avouch these things.

The Nagatiue part of my reason, 9. The second part of the third argument
negative, that no instance can be given to the contrary.
he says, is directly false in both the parts of it, as well for testimonies
as examples. But I desire the reader to have an eye to the refuters dealing, so
shall he easily discern to what poor shifts he is driven: first consider,
what was the assumption of my first Syllogism, which by these four arguments
I do prove; to wit, that in the first three hundred years after Christ and
his Apostles the government by BB. was generally and perpetually used. This I
prove in this third reason, by the testimonies of Antiquity, both
affirmatively, that all antiquity, viz. Councils, Fathers, Histories, with one
consent give testimony to it: and also negatiuely, that no testimony or example
of antiquity, no ancient Council, Father or History, no example of any ancient
orthodoxall or Apostolical Church, can be produced to the contrary. All the
refuters instances either false or impertinent.
This any reasonable man would take to be my meaning.

Now consider his instances, wherein he spends above six leaves; and if any
one of them be both true and direct to the purpose, then say that I have no
judgment.

First for testimonies: We have pregnant testimonies, says he, of the
ancients, and of many sound writers in these latter ages, who affirm, that BB.
and ministers were all one in the Apostles times, and that one minister
exercised not authority over his fellow ministers, as BB. since have done and
still do. First, consider the persons of the witnesses, which he is about to
produce, and then the things which they are to depose* for whereas I never
meant to extend the negative part of my reason, further then the affirmative:
and therefore as I said that the Councils, Histories, and Fathers, do all give
testimony to the Episcopal government, so I meant that no pregnant testimony
either of Councils, Histories or Fathers, (which I comprised under the general
name of sound writer) could be produced to the contrary: he, for instance
alleges a company of new writers in this present age, as if they were
competent witnesses to depose in a matter of fact, or to testify what was done
or not done in the Church fourteen or fifteen hundred years ago: or as if
when I challenge them to show any one testimony of antiquity to the contrary, it
were a sufficient instance, to oppose against me a sort of new writers, who for
the most part also are parties in the cause. But yet what shall these witnesses
testify? forsooth two things: First, that in the Apostles times BB. and
ministers were all one: whereunto in the first place I answer, that this
deposition is not to the purpose. In this argument I speak of what was in the
first three hundred years after Christ and his Apostles; but he will make his
witnesses to depose what was in the Apostles times: perhaps he will say, the
conscience must build it self upon the practice of the Apostles times: (but
say I) in this reason I prove, that the Episcopal government was in use in the
Apostles times, because it was generally and perpetually used in the next three
hundred years after the Apostles times; which consequence himself has
granted against the assumption therefore he should bring his witnesses, if they
had any thing to say; and not to be so absurd, as by them to deny my conclusion
again, the Ancients that say BB. and Presbiters were all one in the Apostles
times, speak of that part of their time, when as in the most places there were
no BB. or at least not chosen from among the Presbiters: for before there were
such BB. the same persons indeed were called Episcopi and Presbyteri: but when
BB. were chosen out of the Presbiters, which they also confess was done in the
Apostles time (as namely at Alexandria) they profess, Hier. ad Euagr.
that then those which were so chosen and placed in a higher degree above the
Presbiters, began to be called BB.

The other thing, which he will have his witnesses testify is, that in the
Apostles times one Minister did not exercise authority above another as BB.
since have done: to which assertion, I am sure no sound writer will depose* for
I pray you, were not the Apostles ministers? were not Timothy and Titus
ministers? were they not also superior to other ministers? did they not
exercise authority over them? If Timothy therefore and Titus were superior
to other ministers and exercised authority over them; why may not BB. who
succeed not only them (whether they were BB. or not) but also the Apostles in
the government of the Church, be superior also to other ministers, and
exercise authority over them?

But come we to his witnesses, 10. The refuters instances out of the old
writers. Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Tertullian.
whereof he would seem to have great store: howbeit, he will content himself
with a few, and he will pass by Ignatius, Justin Martyr, and Tertullian, as
having done their service already: ^et the reader understand, that this is a
most vain flourish: for he is not able to produce any one testimony out of
any one of the Councils, Histories or Fathers, that speaks against the
government of the BB. in the first three hundred years, in respect either
facti or iuris, that is, as either denying that the Church was so governed
then, or that it ought to have been so governed. And as for Ignatius, Justin
Martyr, and Tertullian* the greatest advantage he could have by them, was to
use their names: for there is not a word in them sounding against the
government of BB. but pregnant testimonies for them: especially in Ignatius and
Tertullian, whom I have often quoted in this cause.

It is true, that the refuter did allege these Authors as witnesses to prove
that fond and unlearned conceit, that the ancient Churches were no other but
Parishes, to prove that which is more fond, that there is and ought to be no
other visible Churches endued with power of Ecclesiastical government, but
Parishes. But the vanity of his conceit, and the weakness of his
allegations, have I hope been sufficiently laid open before in the defense of
the second point. Passing therefore by them, the refuter will begin with
Cyprian, Cyp. l. 3. Epi. 19
who affirms that the menaging of the Church business, even in his days
belonged to the Counsel of himself and the rest of the Presbyters, omnium
nostrum concilium spectat, and therefore durst not take it to himself alone,
praei^dicare ego and soli mihi re^ omnem vendicare non audeo. Here let the
reader consider with me, first, the person of the witness which is produced,
and then the thing which is witnessed: was not Cyprian himself, not only a
Diocesan, but also a Metropolitan B.? did not he in judgment allow the
function of such BB.? directly he says that BB. l. 4. Epist. 9.
are the successors of the Apostles, and that they answer to the high Priest
in the law: that the Lord Jesus, when he appointed Apostles, l. 3. Epist. 9.
ordained BB. The Deacons must remember, says he, that the Lord himself chose
Apostles, that is, BB. but Deacons were chosen by the Apostles themselves after
the Ascension of the Lord, as ministers of their Episcopal function, and of
the Church. Does not he teach li. 3. Epist. 2. and 13. l. 4. Epist. 2.
that in one Church, meaning a whole Diocese, there may be but one B.? and that
to set up a second is to make a schism, and to rend in pieces the body of
Christ? does he not often plead for the superiority of BB. over the
Presbiters, showing li. 1. Epist. 3. l. 3. epi. 9. and 14. and 15.
how they ought to reverence and obey them, and that the contrary is the source
of all schism? Neither do heresies, says he, li. 4. Epist. 9.
arise or schisms from any other beginning then this, that the Priest of God
(meaning the B.) is not obeyed, neither one Priest for the time in the Church,
and one Judge for the time in stead of Christ is acknowledged: whom if the
whole brotherhood according to Gods commandment would obey, etc. How often does
he speak of the vigor li. 3. Epist. 9. and 16. li. 1. Epist. 3.
of the Episcopal power, and of the authority of his chair, whereby he
acknowledges, even those of the Clergy might be either excommunicated or
deposed. Is it not likely therefore think you, that Cyprian would testify
against the function or authority of BB.?

11. Cyprians testimony examined.
But let us examine the allegation it self. There were some in the Church of
Carthage, that had fallen by denying their faith in time of persecution; and
returning to the Church again, would in all have be reconciled and received to
the communion: whereof some by their importunity prevailed with some of the
Presbiters, whom as I noted in the Sermon, Cyprian li. 3. Epist. 14.
, being absent, reproved by letter, that they not regarding their Bishop set
over them, nor the Epi. 15. and 16.
honor due to him, nor reserving to him the honor of his Episcopal office,
and his chair, had without his appointment (though absent) reconciled them and
received them to the communion: others procured the Martyrs and Confessors to
write to Cyprian in their behalf; that when peace should be restored to the
Church, peace might upon the examination of their cause be given to them.
Cyprian li. 3. Epist. 15.
therefore writes to the Martyrs commending them, that whereas the Presbiters
should have taught them what appertained to the discipline of the Church; they
were to learn of these Martyrs, to refer their petitions and desires to the
B. and then wills them to set down in writing particularly, whom they
desired to be received: he writes also to the people, li. 4. Epist. 16.
signifying, that he had received letters from the Martyrs in the behalf of
those which had fallen, promising when God should grant peace unto them that he
might return to them, the behavior and repentance of them which had fallen
should be examined in their presence: and having signified his great dislike of
the Presbiters act, who not reserving unto him the honor of his Priesthood and
chair, had without his allowance communicated with them which had fallen. In
the end, he desires that they which had fallen would patiently hear his
counsel and expect his return, that when through Gods mercy we shall come
unto you many of my fellow BB. being assembled together, may according to the
discipline of the Lord, in the presence of the confessors, examine the letters
and desires of the blessed Martyrs: he writes in like manner to the Epi. 17.
and 18
Clergy, that is, to the Presbiters and Deacons; willing them, for as much as
still his return was delayed, that in the case of necessity they should not
expect his presence, but for such, as should be in danger of death, to lay
their hands upon them, and reconcile them; especially, such as had been
commended by the Martyrs; as for the rest, he would have them stay, till he
being restored to the Church, and they all being assembled together, might
determine what was to be done. But being importuned again by letters from the
Confessors, who had desired him, and by him the rest of the BB. to grant peace,
as themselves did to them which had fallen; he writes again to the Presbiters
and Deacons that letter, which by the refuter is cited; saying, L. 3. Epist. 19.
concerning those (which had fallen, and by the Confessors have desired to be
reconciled) until it be certainly known, what course they have taken since
their fault committed, seeing it is a matter which belongs to the Council
and judgment of us all, I dare not preiudicate, and challenge to my self a
thing which is common; and therefore appoints that course to be taken, which
I mentioned out of the last Epistle: and to the same purpose writes to diverse
BB. and by name to Calidonius L. 3. Epist. 20.
, showing him what order he had taken in this matter, and willing him to
signify the same to other BB. that the like course might be taken by them.

If these letters, all concerning the same businesses, be conferred together,
you may observe, first, that Cyprian was a Metropolitan B. having authority
to assemble and to direct his comprouinciall BB. as may appear also by the
Synodes held, and Synodicall Epistles written by him. Secondly that he speaks
not of Church business in general, but of this particular; which was of so
great importance, that he says L. 3. Epist. 18.
, it was the cause not of one Church or of one Province, but of the whole
world. Thirdly, that he would not deal alone in this business, but he would
call a Synod of his fellow BB. besides his Clergy; and in the presence of the
people have the cause of them which had fallen examined. Fourthly, that
although he would not deal alone in this business, being a cause of so great
moment, but would have it referred to the examination and censure of his fellow
BB. besides the concurrence of the people, and his own Clergy in this
judgment; notwithstanding the chief stroke in this business was in him; as
appears, both by their petitions, and his directions. And therefore the whole
carriage of this business does prove the Episcopal authority of the B. and
Cyprians superiority, not only over his own Presbiters, but also over his
fellow Bishops, so far is it from impleading the same* and further I say,
that Cyprian, because his coming to the Bishopric was much resisted by
Felicissimus and his accomplices, and the time wherein he lived troublesome and
dangerous: therefore though he might (as Jerome In Tit. 1.
speaks of all Bishops) rule alone as Moses, yet as Moses, he voluntarily
used the assistance of others, having as himself lib. 3. Epist. 10
says, from the beginning of his Bishopric determined to do nothing by his
own private sentence, without the counsel of the Clergy, and consent of the
people: whereby it appears, that his using of the Clergies counsel, and
consent of the people, was not of necessity, but voluntary: and therefore when
he saw cause, and did find himself not to need either the counsel of the
Clergy, or consent of the people, he would sometimes do matters of importance,
(as namely the ordination of Clerks) alone: as himself signifies in an
Epistle lib. Epist. 5. l^b. 3. Epist. 22. lib. 4. Epist. 5.
to the Presbiters, Deacons, and the whole people. In ordaining of Clerks I
do use before hand to consult with you, and by common counsel to weigh the
manners and deserts of all: but humane testimonies are not to be expected, when
we have divine suffrages; and therefore signifies that he had without them
ordained Aurelius and others to be Clerks. But suppose, that of necessity
Cyprian was to use the advice, or expect the presence and conscience of his
Clergy, in dispaching matters of importance; would this be an instance against
the Episcopal government in those times? did the fourth Council of Cathage
Con. Carth. 4. cap. 22. and 23.
, set forth these two Canons, the one, that a B. without the Council of his
Clergy should not ordain Clerks: requiring also that the assent or
conniuence and testimony of the people should be had? the other, that a B.
should hear no man's cause but in the presence of his Clerks, and that the
sentence of the B. should be void which was not confirmed by the presence of
his Clergy, and yet no man doubts, but that when that Council was held
(which was about four hundred years after Christ) the sway of Ecclesiastical
authority, both for ordination, and jurisdiction was in the Bishop. But I have
vouchafed too long an answer to so weak an allegation.

12. The testimony of Ambrose in 1 Timothy 5.
In the next place he mentions Ambrose his testimony, which was, as he says,
debated at large in the first point. It was debated indeed, but nothing to this
present purpose. Ambrose says, that the B. was wont to use the advice of his
Presbiters; though in his time it was grown out of use: and the matter debated
between us, was, whether those Seniors, were Ministers, as I proved, or
Lay Elders as the refuter pretended; but whether they were the one or the
other, the authority and government of the B. was no more impaired by using
their counsel, then the authority of a Prince by using the advice of his
Counselors: until such time and in such cases as by the Canons and
Canonical law their consent was required as necessary.

These two allegations, if they had been reduced into sillogismes, would have
made very loose inferences: and so would the testimonies of Ierom, The
testimonies of Jerome answered.
who every where almost, says the refuter, speaks for us. This is vauntingly
spoken, and yet the truth is, that as no where is indeed he speaks for them; so
none of the Fathers is more plentiful of pregnant testimonies, then he is, for
BB. as partly has been showed already, and more shall be declared hereafter.
Of the testimonies which the refuter cites, three Ad Ocean in Tit. 1. Ad Euagr.
are all to one purpose; that at the first in the Apostles times, BB. and
Elders were all one: that is, the same men, who were called Presbiters, were
also called BB. (but by the way, where were the Lay-presbiters then? were they
also called BB.?) and that till factions did arise, the Churches were governed
by the common counsel of Presbiters. To these allegations I have already made
answer, which I do breifely repeat; that in the Apostles times before BB.
were ordained, the Churches were governed by the common counsel of the
Presbiters, as under the Apostles: and until the BB. were elected from among
the Presbiters in the several Churches, the names of Presbiters and Episcopus,
were confounded, but when BB. were chosen out of the Presbiters, as they were
not at the first (for the first BB. were Apostles, as James; and Apostolical
men, as Mark, Timothy, and Titus, Linus, Evodiu^, etc. and were not called
Episcopi, but Apostoli) then, Hier. ad Euagr. Theodor. in 1 Timothy 3.
for distinction sake, he which was chosen from among the Presbiters and placed
in a higher degree, began to be called Episcopus, even in the Apostles times:
the name of Apostle being left to them who principally were so called. But what
will the refuter conclude from hence? There was a time whiles the Apostles
lived, when the same men were called Presbiters and BB. that is, the names were
confounded.

Therefore in the three hundred years after the Apostles the Churches were not
governed by Diocesan BB. But as the allegations were impertinent, 13. A fourth
testi.+money of Jerome misalledged aduers. Lucifer.
so the other aduers. Lucifer, is not only impertinent, but also misalledged.
The Bishops preferment, says Jerome according to the refuters allegation, was
not by necessity of law, but granted to him to honor him withal. In that
Dialogue, there is a controversy between the true Christian, and the
Luciferian: the true Christian would have those which were baptized by Arians,
to be baptized again, before they should be received again unto the
communion: because by their baptism, who believed the Father alone to be God,
the Son a creature, and the holy Ghost the servant of both, the holy Ghost
was not communicated: the Luciferian held, they might be received without
baptism, by imposition of hands, whereby the holy Ghost should be given them,
which before they had not received: and to that purpose alleges the practice
of the Apostles, who by imposition of hands gave the holy Ghost to those whom
Philippe the Deacon had baptized; and the custom generally received of the
Church, that BB. by imposition of hands do communicate the holy Ghost to them
that are baptized. The true Christian replyeth, that BB. use to impose hands
only on those who were baptized into the true faith, and that by the baptism
given by a Presbiter of Deacon, the holy Ghost also is conferred. But, says
he, if here you demand why he that is baptized in the Church receives not
the holy Ghost but by the hands of the B. whom we hold to be given in true
baptism; understand, that this observation is derived from that authority that
the holy Ghost after the ascension of the Lord descended upon the Apostles: and
the same thing we find done in many places, ad honorem potius Sacerdotij, quam
ad legis necessitatem; more for the honor of the Episcopal function, then for
the necessity of a law. For otherwise, if only at the prayer of the B. the
holy Ghost does descend, then lamentable is their case, who in Villages and
Towns, and in other remote places, being baptized of Presbiters and Deacons,
do depart out of this life, before the B. visit them: the safety of the
Church depends on the dignity of the B. etc. as has been often alleged.

That which Jerome speaks of this one prerogative of BB. the refuter
extends to his whole preferment, or pre-eminence; and says, he has it not
by any necessity of law, but is granted to him to honor him. The pre-eminence
of the B. in general, Jerome supposed to be of such necessity as that the
safety of the Church depends upon it; but for this particular of giving the
holy Ghost, he says, there was no such necessity: because in the Baptism by
a Presbiter, or Deacon before the B. imposes his hands, the holy Ghost is
bestowed.

But as I said, this testimony is also impertinent, not concluding that for
which it is brought. For it is a strange inference: their pre-eminence was
given not of necessity, but to honor them; therefore the Church was not
governed by them in the three hundred years after Christ, and his Apostles.
Neither is it impertinent only to his purpose, but also it concludes for me:
for if BB. had their pre-eminence in the primitive Church, as here it is
presupposed: then their government is proved to have been in use: but whether
it were by an honor voluntarily given them, or by necessity of law, that in
this present point is not material.

14. Ad page 114.
After Jerome, he cites Augustine in an Epistle to Jerome, granting that the
office of a B. was greater then another Minister, The testimony of Augustine
Epist. 19.
through a custom of the Church, that had gotten the upper hand, and not
otherwise. If by the custom of the Church the office of a B. was become
greater before Jerome and Augustines time, then BB. had this pre-eminence in
the three hundred years after the Apostles; so far is this testimony from
disprouing the government of BB. in those times. But neither is it truly
alleged: for he speaks not so much of the office, as the names; and that not
otherwise is added by the Refuter: and the granting he talks of, was not a
yielding upon necessity, but a modest cession from his right. Augustine
toward the end of the Epistle earnestly desires Jerome, that he would boldly
correct him, wherein he should think it needful: Quanquam enim secundum
honorum vocabula, quae iam Ecclesiae vsus obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio
mayor sit, tamen in multis rebus Augustinus Hieronymo minor est; licet etiam a
minore quolibet non sit fugienda vel dedignanda correctio. For though according
to the names of honor, Bishopship is greater then Priesthood, that is, is a
name of greater honor, or is honored with greater titles, notwithstanding in
many things Augustine is inferior to Jerome: howbeit correction is not to be
shunned or disdayned from every one that is inferior.

In that Episcopatus is a name of greater honor then Priesthood, it is to be
ascribed to the use and custom of the Church; for at the first they were
confounded. Again, might not some one of our BB. in King Edwards time, have
used the same words, writing to Calvin, as well as Augustine used them toward
Jerome? would therefore the Refuter infer, that in the times foregoing,
there had not been Diocesan BB. or that they ought not to be superior to
other Ministers? Surely, howsoever Augustine in modesty, or any other being a
B. was loath to prefer himself before Jerome, or any other man of renown,
being but a Presbiter, by reason of his great learning and renowned piety; yet
were it a saucy part for him that is but a Presbiter, to think himself
equal with a Bishop. Jerome was far from it: and therefore in his Epistles
to Augustine, gives him titles of great honor, using this inscription: Aug.
^. 2. Epist. 17. and 18.
Domino vere, sancto, and beatissimo Papae Augustino, etc. And this farewell,
the Lord preserve you, Domine vere sancte and suscipiende Papa: and the like I
have said before of Calvin Ad Cra^^er.
.

From Augustine, he makes a large step to Erasmus Erasmus in 1. Tim. 4.
, who says, Of old there was no difference between a Presbyter, a Priest,
(but that the Refuter left out, for fear of excluding his lay-elder) and a B.
And then he leapeth back again to Theodoret, Theodoret. Beda. Sedulius. etc.
Beda, Sedulius, Oecumenius, Primasius, Theophilact, etc. who affirm the same.
And do not I my self profess the same in this Sermon? do I not also prove
it in the Sermon of the dignity of the ministry, that in the Acts and
Epistles of the Apostles these two words Presbyter and Episcopus, were
confounded, and the same men were called Presbyteri and Episcopi? what will he
conclude thereof? that therefore in the three hundred years after the Apostles
the Church was not governed by BB? or that the office of a B. and a Presbyter,
were at any time confounded? nay, can he prove so much as the names after the
Apostles time were usually confounded? Ignatius, who lived in the Apostles
times, every where distinguishes them; and so do the after Writers, as
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Eusebius, etc. saving that to BB. they give
sometimes the more general name of Presbyters, or Sacerdotes.
Priests: which is not to be meruailed at, seeing the Apostles, Peter and John,
do call themselves Presbyters.

Yea, but some Protestant Writers, whom afterward he will cite, have
understood Jerome and the rest as the Refuter does: and not they only, but
Michael Medina a Popish Writer, is of opinion, that they held the same error
with Aerius. This is a strange kind of arguing, which our Refuter uses, to
bring new Writers to depose what the old have testified. Are not their
testimonies extant in print? may we not read them with our own eyes, and weigh
them in our own judgments? that we leaving the records themselves, should
seek to the d^positions of new writers to know what the old have testified?
but of the error of them, who suppose Jerome, and some other of the Fathers,
to have been of the same judgment with Aerius I have spoken before, neither
doubt I now to affirm that they joined in opinion with Aerius, no more then I
do: for they writing on Phil. 1. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 1 Pet. 5. do say, that in
these places the names Presbyter and Episcopus, were confounded, which places
my self have alleged to the same purpose.

After he had alleged what he was able out of the old Writers, 15.
Allegations out of the new Writers.
and yet never a word to the purpose; he proceeds to the new Writers, who as
he says were called out of the thickest mists of Popery, to the light of the
Gospel: heaping up a sort of testimonies without order, and without judgment,
and mingling also some testimonies out of the canon law, and some Popish
Writers among them. And because to follow him, were to run the wild-goose
race, I will reduce their testimonies to certain heads, and then give him an
answer to them all. Some therefore are brought to testify, that in the
Apostles times BB. and Presbyters were all one, (the which is true, for the
same men were called Presbyters and BB:) as Heming. and Zauch. in Phil. 1.1.
Isidor. and Did. 21. c. Cleros. ex Isidor. Duaren. de ministr. and benef. l.
1. c. 7. Gloss. ord. Hugo Card. Cassander, the councils of Constance and
Basil, Chemnitius, Lubbertus, D. Fulke. D. Willet. D. Morton. Some, that there
was no difference between B. and Presbyter till after the Apostles times: but
afterward BB. were set over Presbyters: as Danaeus. Some, that at the first
there were no such BB. as were afterward: and when they were brought in they
were not Monarchs of the Church, etc. as Chamier. Some, that iure diuino
Episcopi and Presbyteri be all one: as Iunius and Phil. Morney, and D. Whitak.
which is true concerning the use of the words in the Scriptures. Some that
Episcopatus is not a distinct order from Presbyteratus iure diuino, as D,
Holland: whose not writings, but speeches, he cites upon report. Some, that B.
and Presbyter by the word of God is the same, not in name only, but also in
office: as Sad^^l. Some, that in the Apostles times the Churches were governed
communi presbyterorum consilio, but after the Apostles they chose one to be B.
as Musculus.

Some that Christ made ministers equal, and that there was at the first no
contention, (which how true it is appears by Christ's appointing twelve
Apostles and seauentie Disciples, and by the contention among the Apostles
themselves for superiority, whiles Christ was with them,) as Bullinger. Some,
that as the Apostles were equal, so their successors: which is true; for the
BB. are equal among themselves, though superior to other ministers, as the
Apostles were to the seauentie Disciples,) as D. Whitakers. Some, that Aerius
was not an heretic for saying that according to the use of the scriptures
Episcopus and Presbiter, is all one, which is true, neither had he been an
heretic if he had said no more, and that Ambrose, Chrysostom, Jerome, and
Augustine, were of the same judgment, as B. Jewel.

Some, that in the Apostles times there were only two degrees of ministers,
Presbiters and Deacons, as D. Humfrey.

Some, that Bishops were not in the Apostles times, as Sadeel.

Some, that BB. he superior to Prebiters by man's decree, and not by scripture:
by custom of man, not by the authority of God: by man's law, and not by
Apostolical institution, as Heming, in Phil. 1.1. Bulling. Iunius, B.
Pilkington, the Canon law falsified de iure positiuo, as Cusanus: not by Gods
law, as D. Raynolds: no otherwise but by custom, as Sadeel.

Some, that Episcopus and Pastor of one flock was at the first all one. as D.
Raynolds.

Some, that there was always one principal, which by common use was called a
B. being chief, though not alone, both in government and ordination, as D.
Fulke.

Some, that BB. be in a higher degree of superiority, but not Princes; that
not they only are Pastors, that they have the right of consecration, though
not only, as D. Willet.

Some, that the sole and supreme authority in a B. is tyranny, as Bullinger.

Some, that the government of the Church by the first institution was not
Monarchical, but Aristocraticall, as Chamier.

Some, that elections were not in corners, nor by one, as Gualther.

Some, that Presbiters may ordain, as being all one with BB. in office, as
Sadeel.

Some, that Priests had voices and seats in Councils (as indeed they have with
us) as the council of Constance and Basil.

Some, that such Archbb. as are above Metropolitanes, were not ordained by
Christ, and his Apostles, as D. Bilson; who also is alleged as having been of
the Refuters mind, because he cites Jerome in Tit. 1.1. and ad Euagr.

Some, that there were two sorts of Elders, as Iunius.

Some, understanding Ieromes words of the time when factions began, not of the
Apostles times, but afterward, as Iunius.



These are all his witnesses, 16. His allegations out of new Writers answered.
besides some, with whose names only, without their testimonies, he thought
best to make a simple flourish. Now if any one of these allegations were
reduced into the form of a Syllogism, concluding the contradictorie to my
assertion, viz. that some ancient Councils, Histories, or Fathers do testify
that in the three hundred years after Christ and his Apostles, the government
by BB. was not generally and perpetually used, it would appear to every one
how ridiculously our refuter argues. As for example: Danaeus, Musculus,
Iunius, etc. do testify, that in the three hundred years after Christ and
his Apostles the government by BB. was not generally received.

Therefore some ancient Councils, Histories, or Fathers, do testify so much.



Yea, but you speak of sound Writers in general, will he say, and so I
conclude: Therefore some sound Writers do testify so much. But it is plain
say I, that I mean the ancient.

But to his argument such as it is, I answer: first, that if these Writers had
testified that which is contained in the antecedent, yet had not they been
competent witnesses in a matter of fact fourteen or fifteen hundred years
before their time, the greatest part of them being also parties in the cause.
But indeed not all, no nor any one of his witnesses does testify that in the
three hundred years after the Apostles the government of Bishops was not
generally received; but all his allegations accommodated to that conclusion,
are most ridiculous. As for example: in in the Apostles times Bishops and
Presbyters were the same. Therefore in the three hundred years after the
Apostles, the government by Bishops was not received. Bishops were ordained not
by Gods law, etc. Therefore they were not in the first three hundred years:
and so of the rest.

But some body will say, though these testimonies be impertinent to the present
purpose, and I must needs confess, that your Refuter did grossly abuse his
unlearned Readers in making such a flourish with them: notwithstanding, some of
the allegations contain assertions contrary to some points in your Sermon. Of
whom, in steed of answer, if I should ask this question, whom he conceiueth
to be adversaries to us in this cause? he would answer, those that stand for
the pretended discipline. And who be those? Calvin, Beza, Danaeus, lunius,
Sadeel, and the most of those whom the Refuter has alleged. If they be
adversaries in this cause, is it to be wondered that they have delivered
contrary assertions? and if they be parties in the cause, are their testimonies
to be admitted? Verily, he might better have alleged M. Cartwright, and M.
Trauers, then some of those whom he did cite, being more parties in the cause
then they, as not only having written in defense of their discipline, but
living where it is practiced; but that he knew the simple Reader, who cannot
be ignorant that T. C. and W. T. are parties, was ignorant that these
outlandish Writers were adversaries unto us in the cause, to whose
assertions, seeing it is folly to oppose the authorities of learned men, who
are on our side, whom the Refuter would reject as parties; I oppose the
testimonies of antiquity, and the reasons contained in this book; desiring the
Reader in the fear of God to give credit without partiality to that side on
which there is better evidence of truth.

And thus having turned over, 17. Ad page 125. Allegation of Examples.
and as I suppose ouerturned more then five leaves, which he blotted with
these testimonies; I come to his examples, of which he having not any one
between the Apostles times and ours; therefore gives instance in the Churches
of our time, and in the time of the Apostles. But mark I pray you, what was
my assertion, which he would seem to contradict. Was it not this, that no
example of any Orthodoxall or Apostolical Church can be produced, to prove
that in the three hundred years after Christ and his Apostles the government
by Bishops was not generally received? No: says he, what say you then, to
the Churches of Heluetia, France, low Countries, etc. I omit here how
shamefully he belyeth the Doctrine of the Churches of England, Wirtemberge, and
Sweueland, as opposite to the government of BB. quoting Harmon. Confess. Sect.
11. The Church of Sweueland is so far from opposing it self to the
spiritual authority of Bishops, that it does not contradict the secular power
and sovereignty of such Bishops as be Princes.
in our time? and to the Church of Corinth, Cenchrea, Ephesus and Antioch in
the Apostles times? Marry this I say; that the Refuter is a very trifler, who
pretending to give instance of some Church within three hundred years after
the Apostles times contrary to my assertion, thinks to satisfy his Reader
either with examples of some Churches in our age, or of those in the Apostles
times, whereof this present question is not.

I confess that the Churches in the Apostles times at the first had not
Bishops excepting that of Jerusalem. Notwithstanding, before the death of
Saint John, the Churches had not only Bishops but diverse of them a succession
of Bishops, and such were two of those which he names, to wit, Antioch and
Ephesus: for at Antioch there were Bishops successively in the Apostles times.
Evodius and Ignatius. And at Ephesus, before the Angel, (to whom that Epistle
is directed Apoc. 2.1) Timothy. About the year one hundred seauenty and four
Eusebius. Chron. anno 174.
Dionysius was B. of Corinth, and before him was Primus, who was of the same
time with Anicetus, Anno one hundred fifty six: before whom there was a
succession from the Apostles time, as Eusebius. hist. l. 4. c. 21. and 22.
Hegesippus records. As for Cenchrea, that never had a peculiar Bishop of her
own, but was subject as other Towns and Parishes of Acha^a to the Bishop of
Corinth. As touching the Churches after the Apostles times, the Refuter has
nothing to object, but what before he has alleged out of Justin Martyr, and
Tertullian, in whom there is not a word against Bishops. Justin Martyr, Apol. 2.
speaks but of one governor in each Church, whom he calls (...) (that is,
the B. says Beza) speaking so plainly for the singularity of pre-eminence of
one B. in each Church, that T. C. Lib. 1.14.
who would persuade that in the several Churches there were more Bishops then
one, says, that even in Iustines time there began to peep out something which
went from the simplicity of the Gospel, as that the name of (...), which was
common to the Elders, with the Ministers of the word, was it seems
appropriated unto one. And whereas this place of Iustine was alleged Lib.
2.621.
, to prove the Bishops superiority over the Presbyters (for even Beza Bez. in 1 Timothy 5. and in Phil. 1.
confesses he was the President of the Presbytery, who afterward was called
a Bishop) he answers; if it should be granted that Iustines President had
superiority over the Ministers, yet how fondly is it concluded, that it is
Lawful, because it was? And as I have answered his allegation before Lib. 1.
cap. 11. 3.
out of Tertullian Apologe^. c. 39.
for lay elders, wherein is nothing that makes against Bishops: so have I
cited pregnant places in his vvritings, giving testimony not only to the
government of BB. in his time, but proving a continued succession Praescrip.
contr. haere.
of them from the Apostles to his time. It is plain therefore that the refuter
with the help of all his collectors, is not able to produce any one example of
an orthodoxall and Apostolical Church in the first three hundred years after
the Apostles times, wherein the Episcopal government was not received: so that
my argument stands firm and sure in all the parts of it.

To my fourth reason concluding the perpetuity of the Episcopal government in
the ancient Churches, 18. Ad page 126. The fourth argument from the succession
of BB.
from the succession of BB. deduced from the Apostles times until the Council
of Nice, remaining as yet upon authentical records, Eusebius Eusebius. hist. and
Chron.
, every where carefully setting down this succession, and Irenaeus Iren. li.
3. c. 3.
and Tertullian Tertul de praescript.
proving the deriuation of the orthodoxall doctrine from the Apostles to their
time by the personal succession of BB. in the Churches teaching the same truth.

He obiecteth, Augustine Epist. 24. Christiana societas persedes Apostolorum ac
successiones Episcoporu^ certa per orbem propagatione diffunditur.
and says the objection is worth the answering, that I deceive them with the
name: he confesses there was a succession of BB. but the first were not like
the latter: for though the latter were Diocesan Bishops yet the former were
not. Belike they were first Parish BB. and then titular Diocesan BB. and then
ruling Diocesans, then Lord Diocesans, then Metropolitanes, then Patriarchs:
which being objected upon ridiculous grounds li. 3 cap. 1.. 10 and 12.
(heretofore confuted) I held scarce worth the mentioning in the Sermon. It is
apparent by this succession, that within the compass of every Diocese there
was only one B. at a time, there having bin no more in any Diocese at the end
of the first or second hundred, then were at the end of of four hundred
years: and therefore this succession does evidently prove a perpetuity of
Diocesan BB. from the Apostles times downwards. And thus the former part of my
assumption is manifest. Wherefore (as I said in the Sermon) this to a moderate
Christian might seem a sufficient commendation of the Episcopal function,
though no more could be said for it: that in the best times of the primitive
Church, it was borne of so many thousand godly and learned Bishops, received in
all true Churches, approved of all the orthodoxall and learned Fathers, allowed
and commended of all the famous Councils.

The Episcopal function not first ordained by Councils.
The latter part* that the Episcopal function was not first ordained by
general Councils, I prove by undeniable evidence: but this proof the refuter
had no mind to deal withal, because it also proue^h the former part by such
an argument as he could not tell how to answer: and that was this, that the
first general Council Conc. Nic. c. 6.
of Nice, was so far from first ordayning Bishops or Metropolitanes, that it
acknowledges Patriarchs to have been long before that time in use, and
confirms the ancient (...).
custom of subiecting diverse Provinces to them. For there were Diocesan
Bishops before there were Metropolitanes actually, and Metropolitanes were long
before Patriarchs, and Patriarchs had been long in use before the Council
of Nice, and yet that Council was held within two hundred and thirty years
after the Apostle times.

Wherefore seeing the proposition of my syllogism was so evidently true, The
conclusion.
as that the refuter could not deny it, viz. that government which was
generally and perpetually received in all Christian Churches in the first three
hundred years after Christ and his Apostles, and not ordained by general
Councils, was undoubtedly of Apostolical institution: and seeing the
assumption was proved by four or five unanswerable arguments, that the
government by such Bishops as were described in the former part of the Sermon,
was generally and perpetually used in all Christian Churches in the first three
hundred years after Christ and his Apostles, and not ordained by general
Councils; therefore the conclusion is of necessary and undeniable truth, that
the government of the Churches by such Bishops was undoubtedly of Apostolical
institution.

19.
After I had thus concluded affirmatively to prove my assertion, I propounded
another syllogism, A syllogism concluding against the pretended discipline
upon the same ground^.
concluding negatiuely against the pretended discipline: therein intending to
provoke and challenge him that should take upon him the refutation of my
Sermon, to bring some proofs for their government in the first three hundred
years after Christ. The syllogism was this: That government which no where
was in use in the first three hundred years, is not of Apostolical
institution.

The government of the Churches by a parity of ministers and assistance of
Lay Elders in every parish was no where in use in the first three hundred
years.

Therefore it is not of Apostolical institution.



The proposition is as certain as the former; the assumption I have already
proved in the former syllogism. For if the government by Diocesan BB. was
generally and perpetually received in those three hundred years after the
Apostles: then is it manifest, that this government, which they speak of, was
no wherein use. But because it is infinite to prove such a negative by
induction of particulars, which might be disproued by any one instance by them
which hold the affirmative; therefore I left the proof of the affirmative to
the refuter. Let us see then how he answeareth; forsooth by opposing the like
syllogism, saying: That government which was generally in use in the first
three hundred years, is of Apostolical institution.

The government of the Churches by a parity of ministers and assistance of
onely-gouerning Elders in every parish, was generally in use in the first three
hundred years.

Therefore it is of Apostolical institution.



And then braggeth that his proof for their discipline is as good as mine
against it. Where the refuter does not so much bewray his ignorance in the laws
of disputation, as the badnes of his cause; choosing rather to boast, that
their government was generally and perpetually used, then to give any one
instance to prove it. what needed this general assertion, unless it were to
beguile the simple who are lead with shows, when one particular instance would
have served? But that the reader may understand, that this my assumption was
undoubtedly true, I will make the refuter this fair offer; that if he can
bring any one pregnant and approved example of a Christian Church governed by a
parity of ministers, and assistance of onely-gouerning Elders, I will promise
to suscribe to their discipline. wherefore let not the reader be carried away
with vain shows, neither let him believe, that their pretended discipline was
instituted by the Apostles, until they be able to show (as they never will be)
that it was sometime and some where practiced within three hundred years say a
thousand four hundred if you will after the Apostles.

The II. CHAPTER. Proving the function of BB. to be of Apostolical
institution, because it was used in those times without their dislike.
Sermon. Sect. 4. page 61. Now I proceed to the second degree, ascending to the
Apostles times, from whence in the second place I argue thus: That government
which even in the Apostles times was used in the Apostolical Churches and was
not contradicted by them, was undoubtedly of Apostolical institution, etc. ad
page 65.
WHere I take this proposition for granted (namely of the adversaries) he
says, His answer to the proposition.
I reckon without mine host: and yet confesses it to be true according to
their opinion who hold there may be but one government in the Church, and that
instituted by the Apostles; which is the general opinion of the
Disciplinarians, confessed in effect by himself, Page 130. Yea but I say
afterward, in favor of the Disciplinarians (therein clawing a Churl,
according to the homely proverb, as appears by this refuter) that though the
government by BB. is the best; yet we doubt not but where this may not be had,
others may be admitted, neither do we deny but that silver is good, though
gold be better. If therefore, says he, there be diverse kinds of government
which may be admitted, then might there be a government in the Churches in the
Apostles times not contradicted by them, which yet was not of Apostolical
institution. whereto I answer: first, that I did not say simply, that other
governments may be admitted besides that which was ordained by the Apostles,
but where that cannot be had. But whiles the Apostles lived, that which they
ordained might be had. Again, if any in the Apostles times should of their
own heads have altered the form of government established by them, and
consequently have set up a worse, it cannot be thought, that either the
Apostles would have allowed it, or that all Churches would have retained that
government, which they had not received from the Apostles. Besides, it is
incredible, that in the Apostles times any form of government was used in the
Apostolical Churches, but that which was ordained by the Apostles: and
therefore the proposition is more then manifest.

Now follows the assumption: whereof are two parts, the one, that the
government by BB. was used even in the Apostles times, the other that it was
not contradicted by them.

The former I prove by two arguments: the one because the seven Angels were in
the Apostles times, and they were BB. for the substance of their calling such
as ours be: and therefore such BB. were in the Apostles time.

2. Ad page 128. His answer to the assumption.
Ere the refuter will answer to the matter of the assumption, he propounds
two things worthy his observation: the one, that I confine the number of the
Angels to seven, which neither the text does (says he) nor himself ever did
till now: Did not I before observe in the Sermon, that there was but one Angel
in each of the seven Churches; and does not the text say, that the seven
Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches? I have spoken of this point
before, only let the refuter call to mind this argument among the rest.

The text says the Stars were seven.

The text says that the Angels be the Stars.

Therefore the text says the Angels be seven.

The other is, that I shun the term Diocesan, in which notwithstanding the
whole question consists: for no man doubts, that the government was by BB.
in the Apostles times, seeing that both ministers and ruling Elders were called
BB.does he not speak against the light of his own conscience, when he says I
avoid the name Diocesan, seeing in express terms I said, they were for the
substance of their calling such as ours be? If I had only said Diocesan, he
might have excepted in behalf of the learneder sort of Disciplinarians; that
they doubted not but that the Angels were superintendents of the City and
country adjoining; but all the question (would they say) is, of the
superiority, whether they had a singular pre-eminence for term of life, a
superiority in degree, a maiority of power in respect of ordination and
jurisdiction: when as therefore I say, that for the substance of their calling
they were such BB. as ours are, I do say, not only that they were Diocesan,
but also that they were superior to other ministers in degree, etc.

But whence I pray you, has the refuter this confidence so boldly to affirm,
that their ruling Elders were called BB.? Calvin and M. Trauers, etc. confess
that BB. signify only preaching Elders, and are your Lay Elders now become
BB? the people may have joy of such guides that cease not to broach such
fancies.

After he has played a little with the assumption, 3. His answer to the
former part of the assumption and the proofs thereof.
he plainly denies it: what think you, says he, M. D. brings to prove
it? Nothing says the refuter, but that which has already been answered: if
that were true, yet that nothing is more then the refuter will ever be able to
disprove: and that is this, that the seven Angels were BB. all do confess:
that they were such BB. as ours be for the substance of their calling, I proved
in the first four points of the Sermon: yea but says he, I have proved that
for the substance of their calling they were but ordinary ministers: let the
reader therefore in Gods name judge secundum allegata and probata, according to
the evidence which has been brought on both sides and where he says, I
quickly have done with the scriptures, because they indeed afford but slender
show, etc. I answer first, that I had no reason to insist longer in this
proof, unless I would have repeated the former part of the Sermon again: was
it not sufficient to refer them to the former part where this point was
professedly handled? neither is he ignorant, but that in demonstration of the
latter part of the assumption* I bring other proofs out of the scripture. But
feign he would disgrace our cause with the reader as though we had no proofs
in scripture: which ill becomes him, that has not one syllable in the
scriptures, or other monuments of antiquity to prove their Presbiterian
discipline.

But it is untrue, that I bring nothing to prove the assumption, but what was
before answered. For I bring two other arguments, to prove that these seven
Angels were such BB. The former, though this great analyser either did not, or
would not see it: that two of these Angels were Polycarpus and Onesimus,
Polycarpus the B. of Smyrna, and Onesimus the B. of Ephesus, and what is said
of two, is to be understood of the rest. That Polycarpe was in these times the
B. of Smyrna, I proved by the testimony of the Church of Smyrna Eus. l. 4. ca.
15.
, testifying that he had been the B. of the Catholic Church in Smyrna. And
of Bullinger in Apoc. co^. 9.
, who notes, that Polycarpe had been B. of Smyrna thirteen years before the
revelation was given, and so continued for many years after. Whereunto may be
added those authentical testimonies which after are alleged, that he was made
B. of Smyrna by S. John. That Onesimus was B. of Ephesus at this time* I prove
by the testimony of Ignatius who lived at the same time, who in his Epistle to
the Ephesians mentions their B. Onesimus.

The latter argument proving that these seven Angels were BB. is, because from
them all a succession of BB. was continued in those seven Churches to the
Council of Nice, and afterward: for to omit, that the ancient BB. of these
Churches are sometimes occasionally mentioned Eus. l. 5. ca. 24. and lib. 4.
cap. 26. Sozo. lib. 4. c. 24.
, as Polycrates of Ephesus, Thraseas of Smyrna, Melito of Sardes, etc. it is
evident, that the Bishops of these Churches subscribed to diverse of the
ancient Councils, as to the council of Nice, Menophantes B. of Ephesus,
Eutychius of Smyrna, Artemidorus of Sardes, Thomasion of Philadelphia, Serras
of Thyatira, Nunechius of Laodicea* to the Council of Chalcedon, Stephanus of
Ephesus, Aethericus of Smyrna, Eutropius of Pergamus, Helladius of Thyatira,
Florentius of Sardes, Megalus of Philadelphia, Nunechius of Laodicea. To this
argument the Refuter answers nothing in particular.

With these two arguments the refuter joins that which I propounded Page 63.
concerning the succession of Bishops in some Churches within the Apostles
times, being indcede the second argument, whereby I proved the assumption, that
in the Apostles times were BB.

To all these he answers, 4. Ad page 129.
first jointly, and then cauilleth with some of them severally. His joint
answer to them all, I reserve until I come to that second argument. The
Epistle of Smyrna, which himself heretofore alleged as authentical, being
now alleged by me, so hard is my hap, is grown suspicious: and why I pray
you? for the Refuter travailed of a point of learning, which he desired to be
delivered of. Forsooth because it uses the word Catholic, which is not to be
found in any of the Epistles of Polycarpus, or Ignatius, nor seems to have
been in use until the end of the second age. Clemens Alexandrinus I think is
the ancientest in whom it can be found. How many Epistles of Polycarpus this
Refuter has read I know not; for my part I have seen no more but his Epistle
to the Philippians Inter Orthodoxographa.
. Indeed Suidas In Polycarpo.
, who notes him to have been the Disciple of S. John, and the successor (...).
of Bucolus, who was the first B. of Smyrna, says* he wrote an Epistle to
Dionysius the Areopagite, and to other Churches; which Epistles, if the Refuter
have, he should do well to communicate them; if not, how can he tell that the
word Catholic was not used in them? But to the point, was not the Creed of
the Apostles as ancient as this Epistle, which writes of the martyrdom of
Polycarpe, who was put to death in the seventh of Aurelius Antonius, about the
year one hundred sixty and nine? and yet that mentions the Catholic
Church. Again, was not this a high point of learning, to suspect this Epistle
to be counterfeit, because it uses a word which he confesses, is used by
Clemens Alexandrinus, who lived at the same time, though wrote not perhaps more
then twenty years after?

Where I proved, that Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians, or at least that
testimony which I cited concerning Onesimus their Bishop, not to be
counterfeit, because Eus^bius Eusebius. l. 3. c. 35.
mentions that Epistle, and those words; he says, this argument is none of
the sufficientest: but I always thought, if Ignatius his Epistles were
counterfaited, that this happened to them since Eusebius time. It suffices me,
that the testimony which I alleged, was not in Eusebius his time, who lived
within two hundred years after Ignatius, suspected as counterfeit. For if
Eusebius, and those in his time, knew no cause to suspect that Epistle; I know
no reason, besides his own suspiciousnesse, why the Refuter should suspect it.

The second argument, whereby I prove the former assumption is this, 5. The
second argument, proving the assumption.
that it is with great consent testified by Authors Iranaeus. Eusebius.
Epiphanius. Augustine. etc.
, of best credit in the Church of God, that in the Apostles times, reckoning
until the death of S. John, that is, to the year of our Lord one hundred and
one, there were not only BB. but also a succession of BB. in diverse Churches:
as at Rome, Linus, Anacletus, Clemens, Euaristus: at Jerusalem, James the just,
and Simeon the son of Cleophas: at Antioch, Evodius and Ignatius: at
Alexandria, S. Mark, Anianus, Abilius, Cerdo: hereto he says, that he has
formerly shown, that if not all, yet the most of these witnesses do affirm
that those BB. were ordinary ministers, without any such supreme power (he
ought to say if he would leave his calumniating superiority in the power) of
ordination and jurisdiction. But this is one of his usual bragges, uttered
with what conscience I know not: for what one of these has he or what one
among all the ancient Writers can he bring to make good his assertion?

Now the answer, which he makes to these arguments jointly, His joint answer
to the former reasons.
is, that the seven Angels, and these Bishops whereof there were, as I said,
successions in the Apostles times were Bishops indeed (no marvel for so were
the lay Elders) but not Diocesan: for what though long after the Apostles times
they were so, does it follow thereupon, that therefore they were so in their
times? If ever there had been within the compass of a Diocese more Bishops
then one at once since the Apostles times, or if it could be truly alleged,
that the circuit of the Bishops charge was enlarged from a Parish to a
Diocese; then were there some color for this exception, but these conceits I
have disproued heretofore, and therefore doubt not most confidently to
conclude, that if the successors of these seven Bishops, or of the others whom
I named, as having been Bishops in the Apostles times, were in the end of
three hundred years Diocesan Bishops; then were their first antecessors such.
Neither is his example of the Duke of Venice to the purpose; unless he could
prove, that the latter Bishops within the first three hundred years had
usurped or used, as they were Diocesans, a greater and larger authority then
had belonged to their Predecessors.

The latter part of the assumption remains to be proved, 6. The latter part
of the assumption, that the Episcopal function was not disallowed by the
Apostles.
where I said that the Bishops were not contradicted by the Apostles, but
approved by them. He obiecteth, that this proof is needless, seeing the
Bishops were such as he fansieth: but till he can disprove the former part of
my Sermon, and of this Treatise; he must give the Reader leave to think they
were such, as they have been manifestly proved to be: but this needless
accusation, being commonly used by the Refuter against such passages of my
Sermon as are most material; makes me conceive there is somewhat in this
point, that he could wish had been spared, or at least whereabout he means
to spare his answer. That this passage was not needless, but very material,
appears hereby. For if I had only said, that BB. had been in the Apostles
times, and therefore were of their institution, it might have been objected,
that there were abuses crept into the Churches in the Apostles time, whereof
notwithstanding the Apostles were not Authors: wherefore in this place I show
that Bishops not only were in the Apostles times, but also were approved by
them. That they were in respect of their function approved, I prove, by the
examples of the 7. Angels approved by S. John, or rather by our Savior Christ;
of Epaphroditus the Apostle or B. of the Philippians, (who therefore is not
mentioned in the inscription of that Epistle, because the Epistle was sent by
him) commended by S* Paul Phil. 2.25.29.
, as his compatner both in his function and in affliction, and the Philippians
commanded to have in honor such. James Act. 15. and 21. Gal. 1.19.
the Just, B. of Jerusalem, approved of all. Archippus Col. 4.17. Philem. 1.
the B. of Colossa approved of Paul, Antipas Ap. 2.13.
who had been B. of Pergamus commended by the holy Ghost. To none of these
has the Refuter any thing to say, Ad page 130.
but to Epaphroditus, whom he would not therefore have thought to have been a
Diocesan B. because Paul calls him his (...), fellow work^-man, nor that the
Apostle meant to equal him to himself in the Apostleship: for Epaphroditus
was none, etc. Though that word does not prove it, neither was it alleged to
that end, but as one of the titles of commendation given to Epaphroditus; yet
the word Apostle, which I alleged, does prove it; neither should the Refuter
have balked that, to lay hold upon another, unless it were to deceive the
simple. It is therefore to be noted* that as the twelve Patriarchs of Christ's
Church, which were sent into the whole world, some going one way, some another,
were called the Apostles of Christ, and not the Apostles of any Church in
particular (excepting James, who was the Apostle of the Jews) so those
Apostolical men, who were set over particular Churches as the Bishops thereof,
were for a time called the Apostles of those Churches. So Paul calls
Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians, and therefore it was malepertly
said by the Refuter, that he was not an Apostle. But of this more Chap. 3.
12.13.14.
hereafter.

Before I ended this point, I thought it needful to meet with that objection
which ordinarily is made out of Jerome, 7. That Jerome acknowledges BB. to
have bin in the Apostles time.
by them who understand him as if he had said, that Bishops were not ordained
in the Apostles times. But I show both by the place it self which they
allege, and by conference of other places in Jerome, that he plainly
confesses BB. to have been ordained in the Apostles times. Jerome In Tit. 1.
therefore confesses in the place which is usually objected, that when factions
began to arise in the Church, some saying I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am
of Cephas (which was in the Apostles times, 1 Cor. 1.) it was decreed in the
whole world, and therefore by the Apostles (for who should in the Apostles
times make such a general decree but the Apostles? yea, and Jerome himself
calls the Episcopal function a Ad Euagr.
tradition Apostolical) that one being chosen from among the Presbyters,
should be set over the rest, unto whom the care of the whole Church should
appertain. Whereunto I added his confession of the same truth in other places.
For he confesses that James Catalog. script.
the Just, shortly after the Passion of Christ was made Bishop of Jerusalem, and
continued B. there thirty years, even until his death. In the same Catalogue
it is confessed, that Simon succeeded the said James in the Bishopric, and
that Timothy was B. of Eph^sus, and Titus of Creet, and Polycarpe of Smyrna in
S. John's time; that Linus In Clemente.
, Anacletus and Clemens were BB. of Rome. He confesses also, that at
Alexandria Ad Euagr.
ever since S. Mark there had been BB. chosen successively: that S. Mark was
the Proaem. in Mat.
first B. of the Church at Alexandria, and that Anianus Catalog. in Marco.
succeeded him. After whom there were two more Abilius and Cerdo in the
Apostles times. It is most plain therefore, that Jerome acknowledges BB. to
have been in the Apostles time.

Now let us see, what trick the Refuter has to avoid such plain evidence.
Forsooth because these testimonies were as he says, (not knowing indeed, nor
greatly caring what he affirms) brought in by me out of order, and some of
them come to be handled again: he will answer generally and briefly, that the
Bishops Jerome speaks of, were not Diocesan Lords; but such as himself
describes, where he shows the custom of the Church of Alexandria, etc.
Whether they were called Lords, or not, it is not greatly material; seeing
they were called the Angels, and the Apostles of the Churches, which are titles
of greater honor; neither does it appertain to the substance of their
calling; in regard whereof I defend the ancient Bishops to have been such as
ours are. And such does Jerome describe them in the place which the Refuter Ad
Euagr.
means. For he plainly notes the Bishop to have been but one in a whole
Church or Diocese, to whom the care In Tit. 1.
of the whole Church did belong; superior also to the Presbyters in degree,
etc.

8. The refuters argument for the Presbyterian discipline.
The Refuter having answered my second argument, in such sort as you have heard,
takes his turn to reply and that thus: That government which even in the
Apostles times was used in the Apostolical Churches, and was not contradicted
by them, was of Apostollicall institution.

The government by common consent of Elders was used even in the Apostles
times, in the Apostolical Churches, and not contradicted by them.

Therefore the government by the common consent of Elders was of Apostolical
institution.



The Proposition ( says he) is sure on our side, though it was not of his. See
^ee, homo homini quantum praestat, that which is weak in my hand, is strong in
this. The truth it self belike is so partial, as that it is true only in his
mouth.

For the strengthening of the assumption (says he) besides that which before
I answered Sect. 3. (which was besides the testimony of Cyprian and Jerome
before answered, an allegation of some new Writers, who are parties in the
cause) I will add the testimonies of B. Whitgift, D. Bilson, D. Sutcliffe, and
D. Downame himself, all speaking to the truth thereof.

He should have done well to have cited these testimonies; so would it have
appeared, that we spoke according to the truth, but not according to his
meaning, which is untrue.

But I answer to his assumption, and first to the former part of it, by
distinction. If by Elders, he means the only governing Elders, as well as
Ministers (as he does, or else he says little for the pretended discipline) I
answer, that the Church was never governed by the common Counsel of such
Aldermen: neither did Cyprian and Jerome testify it, nor D. Bilson, D.
Sutcliffe, or D. Downame confess it.

If by Elders, he mean only Ministers, as Jerome did, when he said, at the
first the Churches before factions did arise, were governed by the common
counsel of Elders, two things may be questioned: first, whether this
government of theirs were vnsubordinate, according to the new discipline; and
secondly, whether the Apostles did intend, that the Churches should be so
governed still. Whereunto I answer, according to the evident light of truth,
that the Presbyters governed the Churches, as under the Apostles, and that but
for a time, until the Apostles substituted BB. or left them as their
successors, committing the government of the several Churches unto them.

To the second part of his assumption I answer, that the Apostles contradicted
that government (which he speaks of, by common counsel of Elders ruling
without a B.) not so much by words as by deeds: when ordayning BB. in several
Churches, they committed the whole care thereof as Jerome In Tit. 1.
speaks, or at least, the chief care and authority, as Ignatius Ad Trall.
testifies, to them. And so leaving the Refuter to roll the stone he speaks
of, I proceed to my third argument.

The III. CHAPTER: Proving that the Apostles themselves ordained Bishops.
Sermon. Sect. 5. page 65. But yet I proceed to a further degree, which is, to
prove that the Apostles themselves ordained BB. and committed the Churches to
them, and therefore that the Episcopal function is without question of
Apostolical institution, etc. to 38. years, page 69.
His answer to the preposition
THE refuter would feign have me seem to prove idem per idem, but that he could
not but discern that I argue from the ordination of the persons, to the
institution of the function: against which consequence, though himself say,
that without question it is good; yet I confess he might have taken more just
exception, then he has hitherto against any, which was not of his own making:
so far is it from concluding the same, by the same. For he might have said,
though they ordained the persons, yet Christ instituted the function, and that
is the judgment of many of the Fathers, who hold that our Savior Christ in
ordayning his twelve Apostles, and his seauentie two Disciples, both which
sorts he sent to preach the Gospel; he instituted the two degrees of the
ministry BB. answering to the high Priest, and Presbyters answerable to the
Priests. Again, those Fathers who affirm the BB. to be the successors of the
Apostles; do by consequence affirm, that Christ when he ordained Apostles,
ordained BB. and Cyprian li. 3. Epist. 9.
in plainetermes says so much, that our Lord himself ordained Apostles, that
is to say, Bishops. For the Popish conceit, that the Apostles were not made
Priests till Christ's last supper; nor BB. till after his resurrection, as it is
suitable with other their opinions devised to advance the Popes supremacy; so it
is repugnant to the judgment of the ancients, and contrary to the truth.
Seeing the very Disciples, who were inferior to the Apostles, were authorized
before Christ's last supper, to preach and to baptize. Neither had they, or
needed they, any new ordination, whereby they might be qualified to administer
the Sacrament. But of this matter I will not contend: for whether the function
were first ordained by Christ or instituted by the Apostles; Christ is the
author thereof, either immediately, according to the former opinion; or
mediatly, according to the latter. And those things are said to be of*
Apostolical institution, which Christ ordained by the Apostles.

The antecedent of my argument, 2. That the Apostles ordained Bishops.
viz. that the Apostles ordained BB. and committed the Churches to them: was in
the Sermon explaned, and proved, by showing the time when, the places where,
the persons whom, the Apostles ordained BB. As concerning the time; The time
when in respect of the Church at Jerusalem.
I said there was some difference between the Church of Jerusalem, and the
rest in respect of their first Bishop. For there, because shortly after Christ's
passion a great number were converted to the faith (for we read of three
thousand converted in one day) and because that was the mother Church, unto
which the Christians from all parts were afterward to have recourse; the
Apostles before their dispersion, statim post passionem Domini, straight ways
after the passion of our Lord, ordained James the just Bishop of Jerusalem, as
Catal. scrip.
Jerome testifies.

Here my refuter makes me to argue thus; culling out one part of my
argumentation from the rest; James was ordained Bishop by the Apostles,
therefore the Apostles ordained Bishops. And then denies the consequence,
because though James being an Apostle had Episcopal power in respect of
ordination and jurisdiction, yet it would not follow that the Apostles ordained
Diocesan Bishops in other Churches. But my argument is an induction, standing
thus. The Apostles ordained BB. at Jerusalem, and in other Churches, (which
afterward particularly I do enumerate) therefore they ordained BB. That they
ordained BB. at Jerusalem, I prove, because they ordained James the Just, and
Simon the son of Cleophas, BB. of Jerusalem. That they ordained James B. of
Jerusalem, I prove in this section. That they ordained Simon the son of
Cleophas B. of Jerusalem, and Bishops in other Churches, I prove afterward,
according to the order of time: Beginning here with Jerusalem because that
Church had first a Bishop.

3. That James was B. of Jerusalem.
Now that James was by the Apostles made B. of Jerusalem, I prove by these
testimonies, first, of Jerome Catalog. scrip.
; whose words are these, James who is called the brother of our Lord, and
f^^named the just, straight ways after the passion of our Lord was ordained by
the Apostles the Bishop of Jerusalem. This is that Jerome, on whose only
authority almost the Disciplinarians in this cause rely; alleging out of
him, that Bishops were not ordained till after the Apostles times.

Secondly, of Eusebius, and of the most ancient histories of the Church, whose
testimonies he cites to this purpose: first, therefore he says in general
Hist. l. 2. c. 1.
that the histories (...).
before his time did report, that to James the brother of our Lord, surnamed
the just, the throne of the Bishopric of the Church in Jerusalem was first
committed. Then particularly, he cites Clemens Ex hypotypos. 6.
Alexandrinus, testifying that James, Peter and John, after the ascension of
our Savior did choose James the just Bishop of Jerusalem. Afterward
Hegesippus Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. and Hieronym. Catalog. ex Hegesippi 5. hypomnem*
(who was nere the Apostles times as Jerome speaks, being as Eusebius says
in the very first succession of the Apostles,) to the like purpose. Eusebius
An. 33.
himself in his Chronicle translated by Jerome, has these words; James the
brother of our Lord is by the Apostles made the first Bishop of Jerusalem.
Again, in his history lib. 3. c. 7.
he not only says, that James called the brother of our Lord was the first
Bishop of Ierus^^em; but also testifies lib. 7. c. 19. and 32.
upon his knowledge, that the Episcopal throne or chair, wherein James sat
as Bishop of Jerusalem, and wherein all the BB. of that See succeeded him, was
yet in his time to be seen, being preserved as (...), as a worthy and sacred
Vid. Ruff. transl. l. 7. c. 15.
monument. And finally, both in his history Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 11. l. 4. c.
5.22. l. 5. c. 11. l. 6. c. 10 etc. l. 7. c. 32.
and Chronicle he sets down the succession of the Bishops of Jerusalem from
James unto Macarius, whom he notes to have been the thirty ninth Bishop of
Jerusalem, reckoning James the first, and Simon the second, and Iustus the
third, Zacheus the fourth, etc.

Epiphanius Epiph. haer. 66.
also testifies, that James the Lords brother was (...).
the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and sets down the same succession of the
Bishops, from James unto Hilarion, noting the years of the several Emperors
reign, unto which they continued Bishops. The same concerning James is
witnessed by Chrysostom In Act. homil. 3. and 33. in initio
, by Ambrose Ambr. in Gal. 1.19.
on the Epistle to the Galathians; Paul saw James at Jerusalem, because there
he had been ordained B. of the Apostles. By Dorotheus Dor. in synops.
, by Augustine Aug. contr. Crescon. l. 2. c. 37.
, and (to omit all other testimonies of particular men) by the general
Council of Constantinople In Trul. c. 32.
, affirming that James, who according to the flesh was brother of Christ our
Lord (...).
, was the first to whom the throne of the Church of Jerusalem was entrusted.

4. These testimonies for a matter of story (me thinks) should suffice: let us
then see, what the refuter obiecteth. First, that which he objected against the
consequence is more direct against the antecedent; The refuters exceptions.
and that is, that if the Apostles ordained James B. of Jerusalem, then they
gave him the Episcopal power; but they gave him no power which the Lord had not
before invested in his person, as an Apostle; therefore they did not ordain
him B. I answer by distinction; the power of order (if I may so term it)
James had before, as those who are Bishops, sine titulo; but the power of
jurisdiction was committed to him when he was designed Bishop of Jerusalem, and
had the Church of Iewry in particular assigned to him. For though our Savior
Christ bad the Apostles to go into all the world; yet his meaning was not,
that every one should trauerse the whole world: For if every one had been to
travel over all the world, great inconvenience, disorder, and confusion would
have followed thereof. Therefore the Apostles, who by our Savior were
indefinitely appointed to go into all the world, by the direction of the holy
Ghost, before their dispersion from Jerusalem, divided the world among
themselves; in such sort, that one being assigned to one part, and another to
another, every man walked within his own compass, and according to his own
Canon 2 Cor. 10.13.15.16. vide Chryso. in 2 Cor. 10. and gloss. ordin.
or rule, and did not usually build upon the foundation of another, nor enter
one into another labors. Now, as they were careful to provide for other
parts of the world; so would they not all forsake Iewry and Jerusalem, but
assign one of their company to take charge thereof. Who, though he were an
Apostle, yet being assigned to the peculiar Church of one nation, might not
unfitly be called, as he was indeed, the B. thereof. And hence it is, that
although the Apostles were commanded to go into all the world, yet James
stayed at Jerusalem until his death. Secondly he takes exception against the
evidence which I brought; first, because it is not testified in the Acts of the
Apostles, Ad page 132.
that they made James B of Jerusalem. As though the Apostles did nothing, but
what is recorded in the Acts; and as though we should deny credit to the
ancientest writers, and such as be of best credit, reporting with one consent
a matter of fact not registered in the Acts. But though the act of making him B.
be not set down in the Acts; yet the story so speaks of his continuance Act.
15. and 21.
at Jerusalem, of his assistance of Presbyters, of his presidency in that
Council where Peter and Paul were present; that it may appear their
testimony is true, and agreeable to the scriptures, who have reported him to be
B. there.

The next exception is, that I produce none of the Apostles Disciples to
testify it. And what one of them, whose writings are extant could I allege,
whom, you would not reject as counterfeit? Clemens Clem. Epist. 1.
the Disciple of the Apostles, not only vvriteth an Epistle to James translated
by Ruffinus, calling him the Bishop of Bishops governing the holy Church of the
Hebrews in Jerusalem, but also in his book of recognitions R^^^gn. lib. 1.
translated likewise by the same Ruffinus, and dedicated to James the brother
of our Lord, calls him usually the B. yea, the chief of Bishops: which
titles, how the Pope can digest, I know not. But suppose, that none of the
disciples of the Apostles in those few writings of theirs which be extant, had
given testimony to this matter: were not the testimony of Hegesippus, and
Clemens, who both lived in the very next age to the Apostles, sufficient? It is
not to be doubted, but that James his being B. of Jerusalem was a thing as
notorious, and as certainly known among Christians in those times; as there
is no doubt made among us now, that D. Cranmer was Archbishop of Canterbury in
King Henry the eights time.

In the third place he would seek to descredit all Historyes in general;
because the most learned B. of Ely, in a Sermon preached when he was of
Chichester, truly notes, what might be objected against historians of latter
times. But Eusebius is free, as I suppose, from that imputation, and much more
Hegesippus, and Clemens, in whom also that cavil of his has no place, that
they spoke of Bishops which had been before, according to the condition of
them in their times. For such was the estate of Jerusalem, and of the Jews in
their times; as that the condition of the Bishops there was rather impaired,
then increased. Neither were they, nor any other, whom I cited, so simple, but
that they knew as well as the refuter, that James was an Apostle; neither did
they know any reason, which the refuter would seem to know, why his being an
Apostle should hinder his being the Apostle, or Angel of that Church. For so
were the Bishops at the first called.

Fourthly and lastly, 5. His fourth objection that James could not be B. of
Jerusalem.
he gives all my witnesses the lie: saying plainly, that James was not Bishop
of Jerusalem, neither could be, so that their testimony is not only false,
but impossible. But how is this proved? forsooth because two or three late
writers (worthy men I confess, D. Whitakers, Bishop Jewel, D. Raynolds) do
deny, that he was Bishop there. If they all had denied ^t, as they did not; yet
without any disparagement to them, the affirmation of so many ancient writers
in a matter of fact, agreeable also with the scriptures, proved by the
succession of the Bishops of Jerusalem, remaining yet in diverse good authors
upon record, besides other evidence, may ouerweigh their denial. But what if
they all did not deny it? to D. Raynolds I know not what to say, the refuter
only makes a show with his name, neither alleging his words, nor quoting the
place. He cites Bishop Jewels defense of the Apology, page 300. telling Harding
out of Clemens Epist. 1. that James was no otherwise B. of Jerusalem, then over
all the other Churches; where is no such matter. Indeed in the 300. page. of
his reply unto Harding, B. Jewel does not deny James to have been B. of
Jerusalem.
in the fourth article; I find the first Epistle of Clement alleged, but
Bishop Jewel misalledged and falsified. For having maintained against Harding,
that he was not able to prove the Pope to have been called in ancient times
the universal B. he shows, that as much in effect, yea, and in express
terms had been given to others; as to the B. of Alexandria, called by some the
judge of the whole world; to the B. of Constantinople, called universal or
oecumenicall Patriarch; to James the B. of Jerusalem. Hear B. Jewels words,
Clement unto James B. of Jerusalem writes thus: Clemens Iacobo fratri Domini,
Episcopo Episcoporum, regenti Hebraeorum sanctam Ecclesiam Hierosolymis, sed
and omnes Ecclesias quae vbique Dei prouidentia fundatae sunt. Clement unto
James the brother of our Lord, the B. of BB. governing the holy Church of the
Jews at Jerusalem, and besides all the Churches that be founded every where by
Gods providence. These be all his words, saving that he says, if Harding had
so good evidence for the B. of Rome, he would not thus have passed it over in
silence. Which if you compare with the refuters allegation, you may well wonder
at his dealing. Does not B. Jewel himself in plain terms call James the B.
of Jerusalem? and that which is said of his governing other Churches, is not
his saying, but Clements, if it be truly printed in the copies Tom. 1. Council.
per Cragg. Merlinum Iouerium.
which B. Jewel did follow. Neither would it follow of those words alleged, as
they are, that he was no otherwise B. of Jerusalem then over all the other
Churches. The B. of Constantinople, though he were called universal or
oecumenicall Patriarch; yet was he the Diocesan B. of the Church of
Constantinople alone: and that was his peculiar Diocese. So if Clement had
meant that James had been the governor of all Churches, yet the Church of
Jerusalem was his Diocese, wherein Simon and the rest of the Bishops of
Jerusalem did succeed him, and thereof he had his denomination. The Pope
himself, though he claim to be universal Bishop, yet is he specially Bishop
of Rome; and his cathedral Church is the Church of Laterane, of which he is
Bishop. Howbeit, in the edition of that Epistle set forth by Sichardus, and
printed at Basil together with his recognitions anno 1526. we read thus. Sed
and ominibus Ecclesiis quae vbique sunt. By which copy, if it be true, James is
not signified to be the governor of all Churches; but Clements Epistle is
directed not only to James, but to all Churches, etc.

Yea but D. Whitakers by eight arguments does prove, 6. Whether D. Whitak. does
prove by 8. arguments that James neither was, nor could be B. of Jerusalem not
the 6. latter
that he neither was, nor might be B. of Jerusalem. I promise you, this makes
a fair show, if it be true. But this also is a manifest untruth. For the
arguments that he uses, are to prove, that Peter was not Bishop of Rome. Yea
but the same are as effectual to prove that James might not be Bishop of
Jerusalem: and therefore to these eight arguments he does refer de Pont. q.
3. s. 9. c. 3. R
me. But this also is untrue. For six of these eight, are such, as the refuter
with all his sophistry cannot with any show of truth apply to St. James. For
his third argument, taken from Peter's long absence from Rome, after he was
according to their opinion B. there cannot be, applied to James, who was
resident at Jerusalem; as the Acts, besides other witnesses, testify. Nor the
fourth, that if Peter were B. then had he two Bishoprics. For he had been by
their own doctrine as well B. of Antioch, as of Rome. But no such thing can be
objected against James. Nor the fifth that whiles Peter lived Linus was B. of
Rome: so he was indeed by the appointment of Peter and Paul, as Irenaeus
teaches. But whiles James lived none was B. of Jerusalem, but he. But after he
was dead, Simon was chosen to be his successor. Nor the sixth, that the authors
which mention Peter's going to Rome, note this to have been the end, not to be
B. there, but to oppose Simon Magus. But the cause of James his staying and
continuing at Jerusalem was to take charge of that Church, which, during his
life, had no other B. Nor the seventh, that if Peter were B. of Rome then
would he have professed himself the Apostle of the Gentiles, neither would he
have conuenanted with Paul, that he and Barnabas should take care of the
Gentiles, but himself, and James, and John, of the Circumcision. For James as
he is said to have been B. of Jerusalem; so he professes himself to have
been the Apostle of the Jews. For besides, that he writes his Epistle Erasm.
argum. in Epist. Iacobi. Iacobus quum erat Hierosolymitarum Episcopus scribit
and caeteris Iudaeis etc.
to the Jews; he, and Peter, and John, gave the right hand of fellowship to
Paul and Barnabas, that themselves would be for the Circumcision And for as
much as Peter and John traveled to other parts, James always abiding at
Jerusalem; it is more then probable, that the Church of Iewry was peculiarly
assigned to him. Neither is it for nothing that both in the 15. of the Acts, he
is noted as President, or chief in that Council, and in the 2. Chapter to the
Galathians. Paul speaking of such Apostles, as were at Jerusalem, he gives the
precedence to James before Peter and John. Nor the eight, for they that say
Peter was Bishop of Rome, say Paul was also, meaning that they were both
founders of the Church, but Linus was the B. to whom they both committed the
Church as lib. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus says. But they which say James was B. of Jerusalem, mention him
alone. Neither was he founder of that Church: but Christ himself, who was the
minister of Circumcision.

7. That the 2. first reasons do not conclude that James was not B. of
Jerusalem.
But it will be said, the two first reasons of the eight do prove that James
was not B. of Jerusalem. That comes now to be tried. The first reason is
this. Bishops have certain Churches assigned to them.

The Apostles had not certain churches assigned to them.

Therefore the Apostles were not Bishops.

The assumption is to be distinguished according to the times. For when Christ
gave them their indefinite commission Mar. 16.15.
, go into all the world, he assigned no Provinces, nor parts of the world to
any. Notwithstanding, before they were to go abroad, he wills them to stay
at Jerusalem, till they had received the holy Ghost, who should direct them
what to do; and we may be assured, that he did not direct them to go
confusedly, but distinctly, some to one part of the world, some to another.
Howbeit, when they ceased to travail in their old days, and rested in some
chief City where they had labored; they were reputed Bishops of that place,
where they rested: though some of them perhaps were not properly Bishops. And
this is true of Peter, and of the most of the Apostles. But herein James
differs from the rest: for to him at the first, before their dispersion, the
Church of Jerusalem was assigned. Neither did he travail, as the rest, from
one Country to another, being not confined to any one Province; though in the
end of their travels some of them made choice of some special place, where
they rested, exercising (no doubt) a patriarchall authority, as it were, in
that circuit, where they had travailed, and planted Churches. Thus John rested
at Ephesus, and others in other places. That assumption therefore, which is
true of the rest of the Apostles, is not true of James: and were to be denied
if the Syllogism were thus framed. BB. had certain Churches assigned to them:

James had not a certain Church assigned to him:

Therefore he was not B.

This assumption I have disproued. And therefore though that argument may seem
to conclude sufficiently against Peter's being B. of Rome; it concludes not
against James his being B. of Jerusalem. And besides, between James and the
rest this difference may be noted; that whereas they having planted Churches,
when they saw their time, committed the same to certain BB. (so Peter and
others of the Apostles committed Antioch to Evodius; Peter and Paul committed
Rome to Linus; Paul committed Ephesus to Timothy; Creet to Titus; John
committed Smyrna to Polycarpus, and diverse other Churches in Asia to other
Bishops, as Eusebius Lib. 3. c. 23.
reports; yet James abiding all his time at Jerusalem, committed that Church
to no other; though when he was dead, the Apostles committed it to Simon, whom
they ordained his successor.

The second reason applied to James.

If James were B. then by the same reason other of the Apostles were BB.

But the other Apostles were not Bishops properly; Therefore not James.

Why I should not grant this consequence, I have showed sufficient reason in
setting down the difference between James and the rest of the Apostles.
Therefore that reason also, howsoever it may take place as touching Peter, in
whom no such difference from the rest of the Apostles can be truly noted: yet
it holds not against James his being B. of Jerusalem.

If the Refuter, or any other be not as yet persuaded of this point; to
satisfy him in the maine point, that the Apostles appointed and ordained
Bishops; I will be content to suppose, that James was not B. of Jerusalem,
because it might be supposed and granted, without any great prejudice to the
cause: seeing it is manifest, that the same ancient Authors, who testify that
the Apostles appointed James B. of Jerusalem, do also witness; that after his
death, the Apostles who were then remaining, ordained Simon the son of
Cleophas to be B. there, as hereafter Cap. 4.. 20.
shall be showed.

8. By this instance of James, BB. proved to be superior to other Ministers in
degree.
After I had proved that James was B. of Jerusalem, I endeavored to confute the
opinion of the learneder sort of Disciplinarians, who do hold (as before has
been showed) that Bishops were not superior to other Ministers in degree,
neither had superiority for term of life, but for a short time. And to this
end objected the same conceits, that by this instance of James they might
plainly be refuted. Hereunto the Refuter replyeth, Ad page 133.
that I devise He museth, as he uses.
those objections to make my self work: when as indeed they be the two maine
points wherein Beza differs from us. But, says he, who ever conceived any
such thought of the Apostle James? I am sure there is not a syllable, nor a
letter of him at all in the place he quoteth out of Beza: the more wrong he
does him, etc. All this ado arises from the misprinting of one letter in the
margent, (c) being put for (p.) For in the Degrad. minist. c. 3. page 23.
23. page of that book, in the end of the third chapter, he has this saying:
though I grant that James the brother of our Lord was in order first in the
Church of Jerusalem; yet it follows not, that he was in degree superior
either to the Apostles, or else to his fellow Ministers. Which saying, as it
seems, I should not need to have confuted, if all the Disciplinarians were
of our Refuters mind, who censureth that speech as untrue and vnreuerent. But
yet, that he might let his Reader see, that he is able to defend any thing
against me; he says, if a man would speak so untruly and irreverently, he
might easily maintain it against the answer that M. D. brings. They must
remember, says he, that he was an Apostle, and his honor and degree by his
Bishopric not impaired. As if the question were not of him, as a B. not as an
Apostle. His superiority in degree proceeded from his Apostleship, and yet as a
B. he might be superior in order only. This trick of fast and loose was not
worth the showing, unless it could have been done more cleanely. To return
these tricks of fast and loose to such a shifting Sophister, as I have proved
the Refuter to be; it is plain, that Beza speaks simply of James, as the
chief in the Church of Jerusalem, as well in respect of the Apostles, as the
Presbyters there. And therefore considers him as an Apostle, as well as a B.
And if he had intended any such distinction as the Refuter imagines, he
should have conceived, that James his honor and degree by his Bishopric was
impaired, and that the Apostles in choosing him to be B. of Jerusalem, should
rather have depressed him, then done him honor. But they thought it a singular
honor to be the Apostle or Bishop of that Church which Christ himself had
founded. And therefore as Clement notes, the chief of the Apostles, Peter,
James, and John, though Christ had vouchsafed to them greater honor then the
rest, yet would not arrogate Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1.
to themselves that honor, but preferred James the just the brother of our
Lord thereunto; and when it was void again by his death, they made choice of
Simon the son of Cleophas for the same cause Eusebius. l. 3. c. 11. and l. 4 c.
22. ex Hegesippo.
, because he also was the Lords kinsman. The grave censure of the Refuter is,
that Clements speech is unsavory, and the respect carnal which Hegesippus
and Eusebius allege. Thus is he able, as it were with a breath, to blow away
these worthy Authors, Hegesippus, Clemens, and Eusebius; they are not able to
stand before him. But why unsavory? when the Apostles were to be dispersed
into diverse parts of the world, was it not a special honor for one amongst
them, without that travail and wandering, whereto the rest were subject, to be
set over the mother Church of Christendom, which Christ himself had founded,
to be the Apostle of that people which had sundry prerogatives above all other
Nations, and in respect of that place to have a precedence before the other
Apostles, Ad page 134.
as James had, Act. 15. Gal. 2? And why carnal? were not they bound in respect
of that love and reverence which they did owe to our Savior Christ, to
prefer his near kinsmen according to the flesh, being at the least equal
with others? It is certain, that James Hier. Catal. in Iacobo. in Epist. ad
Gal. c. 1. and Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. ex Hegesippo.
for his admirable piety was wonderfully honored, not only among Christians,
but also among the unbelieving Jews; as might easily be showed, in so much
that Josephus Orig. contr. Celsum l. 1. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. Hier. catal. in
Iacobo.
imputes the destruction of Jerusalem to his death, as to a principal cause.

But, says he, if it had been arrogancy in them, why not in him?That which
had been arrogancy in them to have arrogated to themselves, was no arrogancy
in him to undertake being imposed upon him. Yea, but if it were so great a
privilege, why might it not have advanced him to a higher degree above the
rest of the Apostles? because the Apostleship being the highest degree of the
Ministry, this was the greatest honor to have a priority and precedence in
that degree. Yea, but I deny him to have been B. when I say, that whereas
before the Apostles had jointly governed the Church of Jerusalem, that charge
which before they had in common, they being now to depart committed to him in
particular; but their charge was of Apostles, not of Bishops. As though the
charge of Apostles is not by the holy Ghost called Act. 1.20.
(...), that is Bishopric; and as though James, who before was an Apostle
absolutely, did not by this designement become the Apostle of the Jews.
Neither was this a clipping of his wings, as it pleases the Refuter to speak,
more then of the rest of the Apostles, when by mutual consent every man's
Province as it were, circuit and charge was assigned to him. But I spoke not
without book, delivering mine own conceits as the Refuter every where does:
but what I said, I received from their own, and almost only Author Jerome,
which he received also from Catal. script. in Iacobo.
Hegesippus. Hegesippus, says he, who was near the Apostles times in the fifth
book of his Commentaries speaking of James, says, James the brother of our
Lord surnamed the just, received the Church of Jerusalem, post Apostolos, after
the Apostles.

As touching the other point, 9. By this instance of James BB. proved to have
had their singular pre-eminence for term of life.
though the Refuter would scarsely vouchsafe to touch it as being impertinent;
notwithstanding, it not only confuteth the conceit of those who hold Bishops
were but for a short time, and not for term of life; but also proves plainly
that James was B. of Jerusalem. I therefore showed that he continued at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. and 21. Gal. 1. and 2. Hieron, Catal. Eusebius. hist. and
Chron.
as the superintendent of that Church until his death, ruling the same by the
space of thirty years, after that manner as his successor after him ruled it
eight and thirty years. Yea, but this does not prove that he was B. Neither
was it so much alleged to that end, as to show the pre-eminence which he had
was not (as Beza says of all the ancient Bishops, which he acknowledges to
be divine) for a short time, or by course; but for term of life. And yet it
proves the maine point also, that he was B. and as the Geneua translators
confess In Act. 21.18.
superintendent of that Church. For if he were not the Apostle of that Church,
that is to say the B. why did not he after the example of other Apostles
travail into other parts, but continued there ruling that Church by the space
of thirty years, until his death? Forsooth he did not stay so much to rule
that Church, for that might have been otherwise performed, as to convert the
multitudes of Jews which should resort thither. Where, he says, the Church
might otherwise have been governed, it is nothing to the purpose, unless he
can show, that it was otherwise governed. There is no doubt, but that Church
had a Pastor assigned to them by the Apostles, who would not leave that mother
Church as a flock without a shepherd. But what Pastor had it, if James who
continued there, and ruled it for thirty years were not the Pastor thereof?
There is no doubt to be made, but the cause and end of his staying there
thirty years, was the same of his successor Simons staying there thirty
eight years, and of his successors every one until their death. Wherefore
was it not great pity that the Refuter did forget himself to spend so much
time in things that were so impertinent?

10. When the Apostles ordained BB. in other Churches.
Sermon. Sect. 6. page 69. As touching other Churches, we are to observe, that
the Apostles did not at the very first planting of them appoint BB. unto them,
etc. to page 72. li. 17. The difference in respect of the time, which before I
noted betwixt Jerusalem and other Churches, I do in this section explane;
showing, that the Apostles did not at the first planting of them appoint
Bishops to them, as presently after the ascension of Christ, they appointed a
Bishop over the Church of Jerusalem: yielding these reasons, because as yet
there was neither that choice, nor yet that use of them among a people which
was to be converted, before it needed to be governed; and showing what course
they did take, before they appointed Bishops, namely, that first they ordained
Presbyters Act. 14.23. etc.
to labor the conversion of the people, to feed them being converted, and to
attend them in common, governing them after a private manner, and as it were in
foro conscientiae. And this is that, which Jerome In Tit. 1.
says, that the Churches at the first before Bishops were appointed over them,
were governed by the common counsel of the Presbyters. But the Episcopal
power which consists specially in the right of ordination, and in the sway of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction committed to one; I said the Apostles each of them
retained in their own hands, as was manifest 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 1 Cor. 5.
, whiles either they continued near them, or meant not to be long from them.
All which while, Bishops were not so needful, the Apostles providing for the
necessity of those Churches, either by their presence, or by their letters and
messengers. And this I noted to be the cause, why in the writings of the
Apostles, Bishops are so seldom (though not so seldom as some imagine)
mentioned, and the name with Presbyter confounded. But when as they were to
leave the Churches altogether, either by departure from them or by death (that
the Churches should not be left fatherless, they fulfilled that in Psalm. 45.
according to Augustines and Ieromes exposition, in steed of Fathers, that is,
the Apostles, there shall be children borne unto thee, whom thou shall make
Princes over all the earth, that is, Bishops succeeding the Apostles in the
regiment of the Church) At their departure they left substitutes, and at their
death appointed successors, to whom they committed the government of the
Churches, furnishing them by a singularity of pre-eminence, both with the
right of Ordination and with the power of Jurisdiction, as well over the
Presbyters, as the people of each City with the Country adjoining. And these
I said at the first were called, sometimes the Apoc. 1.2.3.
Angels of the Churches, sometimes (...) Heb. 13.17.
, Praepositi, Rulers, Heb. 13.17. (which text in the ancient Can. 39.
canons called the Apostles, and in the second Epistle of Ignatius Ad Trall.
, as also the name praepositi in Latin Fathers from thence is appropriated to
BB.) sometimes the Apostles of the Churches, etc.

11. The Refuter answers by snatches.
To all this the Refuter answers by snatches, as he does to the residue of the
Sermon; for which cause I think it expedient to repeat the points delivered
in the Sermon, that his dealing may the better appear.

And first he snatcheth at those words where I said, that until the Apostles
were to leave the Churches altogether, Bishops were not so needful, as after
their departure and death, Ad page 135.
which is most manifest. Belike, says he, they were needful before, but the
Apostles would put off the matter till there was no remedy, and I cannot much
blame them if it be true which D. Bilson Cap. 12. page 224.
says that they were to keep the power of imposition of hands to themselves,
unless they would loose their Apostleship. It is more marvel therefore that
they would ordain any Bishops at all, as long as they lived, then that they
would defer the doing of it so long as they could. Which words, as they
contain a mere cavil at my words, not worth the answering; so a mere
belying of that reverend B. who says, that the Apostles could not loose that (
viz. the power of imposing hands and delivering unto Satan, which the Fathers
call Episcopal power) unless they lost the Apostleship withal.

Secondly, he obiecteth want of proofs. What proof brings he that the
Apostles ordained such Bishops in other Churches? neither one text of
Scripture, nor any testimony out of the ancient Writers, only authoritate
praetoria, he tells us Pythagoras like, they did so, etc. Here, in
complaining of the want of proofs, he gives sufficient proof of a bad
conscience. In this section I did but in general (having noted the difference
of the time) declare, what course the Apostles took, first in deferring the
choice of Bishops; and afterward in appointing them. The proofs do follow in
the sections following, showing the places where, and the persons whom the
Apostles ordained Bishops. That imputation of speaking Pythagoras like, he
has often laid upon me, and yet not so often as unjustly, who have in this
Sermon and in this Treatise delivered nothing almost without plentiful proof
or sufficient authority.

Thirdly, he carpeth at the names, wherewith I said the first Bishops were
called, asking what is all this to the matter. Would he prove they were
Diocesan Bishops, because they were called by these names? what a notorious
cauiller is this? may nothing be spoken but by way of proof? may nothing be
said by declaration, or explanation, or prevention? I knew it was objected,
that Bishops are not mentioned in the scriptures, the name Episcopus Bishop,
being given to Prebyters: and therefore that is not like, they were ordained by
the Apostles, of whom no mention is in the Scriptures. For prevention of this
objection, or assoyling this doubt, I declared first, that the Bishops in the
writings of the Apostles are called, sometimes the Angels of the Churches,
sometimes their rulers, sometimes their Apostles. Yea, but in my former Sermon
I gave all these names save only the name of Apostles to all ministers. The
former Sermon is of ministers in general, including the Bishops, and diverse
things there spoken of ministers in general, do principally belong to
Bishops. All Pastors are rulers or rectors of their several flocks, but the
Bishops are rulers both of them and their flock. All ministers are called
Angel^, but the Bishop alone is the Angel of each Church or Diocese, etc.

But by what authority says he, 12. Whether Bishops are called the Apostles of
the Churches.
is the title of Apostle appropriated to BB? he would have said, communicated
to them with the twelve. For I know no man so foolish, as to appropriate it to
the Bishops. This reason I rendered, why they be called the Apostles of the
Churches; because they succeeded the Apostles in the government of the
particular Churches: whereof I gave instance Phil. 2.25. where Epaphroditus,
who was the B. or Pastor of Philippi, is therefore called their Apostle.
Therefore? says he. Who says so? Ambrose, Jerome, Theodoret, Calvin, Thomas
Aquinas, if we will believe D. D. but if we will look upon the books
themselves, not one of them says so. Calvin, Aquinas, and some other indeed,
as Lyra, interlineall gloss, Lombard, Anselme, etc. are of mind that Apostle
there signifies teacher and no more. Calvin says thus Calvin* in Phil. 2.25.
, The name of Apostle here, as in many other places, is taken generally for
proquolibet Euangelista, for any Evangelist. But by their Evangelist, he
understands their Pastor, and so calls him diverse times, using that word
upon that occasion six or seven times in that place. Paul sends to them
Epaphroditus, ne Pastore carerent qui recte compositum statum tueretur, least
they should want their Pastor who might maintain their well ordered state. On
these words, verse 26. He had a longing desire toward you all, and was
pensive, because you had heard that he was sick: Calvin notes, a sign of a
true Pastor, that when he was far distant from them, notwithstanding was
affected with the care and desire of his flock; and when he understood that
his sheep sorrowed for his sake, was pensive for their sorrow. In like manner
the godly carfulness of the Philippians for their Pastor is noted on the 27.
where Paul signifies, what grief he should have conceived, if Epaphroditus
had died; Paul says he was moved with the loss of the Church which he saw
would have been destituted optimo Pastore of a very good Pastor in so great
want of good men. On the twenty eight he says, Paul did the more carefully
send him, because he was sorry that for his occasion he had been withheld from
the flock committed to him. On the twenty nineth he observes how desirous
Paul is, that good Pastors may be much esteemed, etc. let the reader therefore
judge, whether Epaphroditus were not in Caluins judgment the Pastor of the
Philippians. By the Apostle says Ambrose Ambr. in Phil. 2.
, he was made their Apostle, that is Bishop, as Ambrose Ambr in Ephesians. 4.11. and
1. Cor. 12.28.
expounds the word in other places, Apostoli Episcopi sunt, the Apostles are
Bishops. But according to the refuters sense, he had been an Apostle, not of
Paul's making, but of their own. Jerome Hier. in Phil. 2.
writing on those words, my fellow Soldier and your Apostle, fellow Soldier
says he, by reason of his honor, because he also had received the office of
being an Apostle among them. And on those words, have in honor such, not only
him says he, qui vester est Doctor, who is your Doctor, by which word in
Ieromes time, Bishop most commonly was signified, etc.

Theodoret Theodor. in Phil. 2.
says thus, he called him Apostle, because to him the charge of them was
committed. Wherefore it is manifest, that those which in the beginning of the
Epistle were called Bishops were under him, as having the place of Presbyters.
And from this place, as afterward I noted, Theodoret Theod. in 1 Timothy 3.
gathers, that at the first, they, whom now we call Bishops were called
Apostles. Thus Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the Philippians. Thomas Aquinas
Th. Aquin. in Phil. 2.
; he calls him brother, says he, by reason of his faith; fellow worker in
the labor of preaching, fellow soldier, because they had suffered tribulation
together, your Apostle, that is Doctor. Hic fuit Episcopus Philippensium, He
was the Bishop of the Philippians. And so says Bullinger In Phil. 2.
, Philippensium Episcopus erat.

With what face therefore could the Refuter deny, that any one of these
Authors did say, that he was therefore called the Apostle of the Philippians,
because he was their Bishop and Pastor? And so are they to be understood,
who expound the word Apostle by Teacher. As Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Phil. 2.
(...), and those whom the Refuter names. For they did not, by Apostle
understand every common Teacher, or teaching Presbyter, but specialem doctorem
says Anselme In Phil. 2.
, instructorem praecipuum their chief instructor, says Dionysius
Carthusianus.

These authors, 13. The exposition, that they were called Apostles because they
were the messengers of the churches, refuted, with the reasons thereof.
and more, as they do all give testimony with my exposition; so against that
interpretation of the word Apostle, which the refuter brings: who would have
him called Apostle, not in respect of any sacred function, which he performed
toward them, but because he was their Messenger to the Apostle. And of this
judgment, he says, are Primasius, Haymo, Caietan, and two others, which be as
much parties in this cause as himself, Beza, and Piscator. And Calvin
acknowledges it to agree with the place. Primasius In Phil. 2.25.
says, that Epaphroditus had received gradum Apostolatus, the degree of
Apostleshippe among them. Calvin does indeed mention that interpretation* but
so, as he prefers the other; sed prior sensus melius (meo iudicio) conuenit:
But the former sense in my judgment agrees better. He could not think, that
both senses, being so different, agreed to the text. Yea but he has two
reasons to prove his to be the more likely sense. First, as the words following
in the same Verse and Chapt. 4.18. do show, how he ministered to him; so the
same phrase is used to the like purpose, 2 Cor. 8.23. where the brethren sent
with Titus to receive the Corinthians benevolence, are called Apostles, that
is, messengers of the Churches. I acknowledge, that Epaphroditus brought a
gratuity from the Philippians to Paul to supply his necessity, being a prisoner
in Rome. And the brethren likewise who accompanied Titus, were to receive the
benevolence of the Corinthians; but it is unlikely; that either he, or they,
were called the Apostles of the Churches in that regard. It appears by diverse
of Ignatius his Epistles, that when the churches did send one upon a Christian
Embassage, the B. commonly was entreated to take that Embassage upon him. In
like manner the Philippians, being to send as it were upon Embassage to Paul,
Epaphroditus their B. undertook that voyage He being therefore both their B.
and their Ambassador, it is more likely, that he was called their Apostle
because he was their Bishop; then for that he was their Ambassador. For it is
unlikely, that the name of that sacred function of the Apostles of Christ, who
also himself is the Apostle of our profession, should be used in the
Scriptures to signify the messengers of men. Besides, in both places, the
Apostle intends by this title highly to commend Epaphroditus, and the others;
but this had been but a small commendation, that they were messengers of the
Churches. Again, if they in 2 Cor. 8. were called the Apostles of the
Churches, because they were their messengers; then those Churches should have
sent them: but it is evident, that Paul himself sent them, for as it was
required of him, Gal. 2: so had he undertaken, to procure a supply for the
relief of the brethren in Iudaea, who were oppressed with famine. And to that
end having before dealt with the Corinthians, sends Titus and two others, to
receive their contribution.

His second reason is, 14. The second reason answered.
that it stands not so well with the properties of the word (...), which
signifies a messenger, to entitle any man (in regard of his ministerial
function) their Apostle to whom, as his from whom he is sent. And therefore
among all the titles Paul takes to himself to magnify his office, Ad page
136.
he never calls himself their or your Apostle, but an Apostle of Christ, and
an Apostle to them. We may therefore say of M. D. as Iunius does of Theodoret,
the clearest witness he alleges, he is deceived by the aequiuocation of the
word Apostolos, which sometimes in a common and general sense is given to any
one that is sent as a messenger, and sometimes more specially ascribed to those
that were employed (as the Apostles) in an extraordinary and high Embassage
from Christ.

Here the Refuter whiles he goes about to discover my ignorance (as though I
knew not the signification of the word (...) as well as he) bewrays his own.
For it is evident, that in the Scriptures the word is used with reverence as
well to the parties to whom, as to the party from whom, the Apostle is sent.
Thus Paul calls himself the Apostle of the Gentiles Romans 11.13.
(...); and says, that Peter had (...), the Apostleship of Circumcision Gal.
2.7.8.
, meaning that he was the Apostle of the Jews, because to himself was
committed the Gospel of uncircumcision, as to Peter of the circumcision. So
Angels have relation, not only to the sender who is God, but to the parties to
whom they are sent, and are called their Mat. 18.10.
Angels. And even as Angels absolutely spoken, is a title of all ministers who
are sent of God, but used with reference to the Churches whereto they are sent
(as the Angels of the seven Churches) do signify the Bishops or Pastors of
the same churches; so Apostoli, absolutely used is a title of all Ambassadors
To. 16.7.
sent from God with authority Apostolical, though (...), given to Paul Act.
14.14.
and Barnabas and the twelve Apostles; but used with reference to particular
Churches, does signify their Bishops. And in that sense Epaphroditus is called
the Apostle of the Philippians. And howsoever the word may signify any
messenger with relation to any sender; yet in the scriptures it is not used to
signify messengers sent from men, neither is to be translated otherwise then
Apostle. For though our Savior do seem to speak indefinitly John 13.16.
John 13.16. of the Apostle and him that sends him; yet it is evident, that
he means himself who sent, and the Apostles who were sent.

15. Ob. Though Epaphroditus were B. yet no Diocesan.
But admit says the refuter, that Epaphroditus were Bishop or Pastor of
Philippi where abouts I will not strive, how shall it be proved that Philippi
was a Diocesan Church? etc. This is written, as the most of the book, to
bleare the eyes of the simple. For I cannot think he which would undertake
this cause, was so void of judgment, as the refuter here would show himself
to be, if he wrote sincerely. For I pray you, what was the point which here I
had in hand? was it not to show, that the Bishops at the first in the Apostles
times were called Apostles? and do I not prove it by this instance, that
Epaphroditus being the Bishop of the Philippians, is therefore called their
Apostle? Admit it be so, says the refuter, yet how shall it be proved, that
Philippi was a Diocesan Church, and how weakly with that, does M. D. infer,
that he was a Diocesan Bishop, like to ours for the substance of his office.
All men see he deceives his reader with the like equivocation in the word
Bishop, which in the Apostles times by his own confession was common to all
Pastors, though afterward appropriated to some special persons: as if he
should have said, I grant that which here you do prove, but yet that follows
not hereon, which you intended not. That the Churches were Diocesses, and the
Bishops Diocesan, like to ours for the substance of their office, I proved
before in the former part: here, I am so far from inferring or proving it,
that I presuppose it, as sufficiently proved before. But this is the poor
shift, which the refuter usually flies unto, when he has nothing to answer.
He persuaded himself (such was his judgment) that in the question of parishes
and Diocesses he had the upper hand: and therefore, when he is foiled in any of
the points following, he flies to that as his refuge; yea but though this be
so as you say, yet the Church was not a Diocese, nor the Bishop a Diocesan. But
how little reason he has to imagine Philippi one of the Act. 16.12. Sedul. in
Phil. 1. Philippi Metropolis Macedoniae.
chief Cities of Macedonia, to have been a parish Church; may be gathered by
that, which before has been said of the like Cities. Where he says, I go
about to deceive the reader with the like equivocation of the word Bishop he
does me wrong. But he and his consorts deceive the readers, when they would
persuade them, that because in the Apostles writings and for some part of the
Apostles time, the names Episcopus and Presbyter were confounded, namely until
Bishops began to be chosen from among the Presbyters; that therefore the
offices were confounded. For here I show, that when Presbyters were called
Episcopi, those who ever since the Apostles times have been called Bishops,
were then called the Agels, and the Apostles of the Churches, to whom, as I
noted before out of in 2. Phil. 2.25.
Theodoret, those who were then called Episcopi, that is Presbyters, were
subject.

For as I said in the Sermon, 16. When and how long BB. were called the
Apostles of the Churches.
whiles the Episcopal power was in the Apostles and Apostolic men, those who
had that power were called Apostles; and therefore Ambrose by Apostles in some
places Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28.
of Scripture, understands Bishops: and to the like purpose Cyprian: l. 3.
Epist. 9.
Apostolos, id est, Episcopos and praepositos dominus elegit, the Lord chose
Apostles, that is Bishops and Governors. For as Theodoret Theodor. in 1 Timothy 3.
has well observed on 1 Timothy 3. In times past, says he, they called the same
men Presbyters and Bishops, and those who now are called Bishops they named
Apostles. But in process of time, they left the name Apostle to those who are
properly called Apostles, and the name of Bishop they gave to them who had
been called Apostles. Thus Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the Philippians,
Titus of the Cretians, and Timothy of the Asians. Which testimony, if it be
conferred with some before cited out of Jerome, the truth concerning this
matter will appear to be this. Whiles the Bishops were Apostles and
Apostolic men (for such were the first Bishops) the Angels of the Churches
were also called the Apostles of the Churches, other Ministers being then
called Presbyteri and Episcopi indifferently; but when the first Bishops being
dead, their successors were to be chosen out of the Presbyters, (which Jerome
notes to have been done at Alexandria ever since the death of S. Mark, and
was done in all other places where were no Evangelists, or Apostolical men
remaining) then they left the name Apostle, and for difference sake called him
the Bishop. Wherefore as I said in the Sermon, it was not long, that the name
Episcopus was confounded with Presbyter. For Ignatius, (who was a B. above
thirty years in the Apostles time, after that Evodius had been B. of Antioch
above twenty years before him) appropriateth the name (...) to a Bishop; and
usually distinguishes the three degrees of the Clergy, as the Church ever
since the Apostles has distinguished them, by these three names, Bishop,
Presbyter, and Deacon.

Yea, but we may gather out of Theodorets testimony, says the Refuter, that
the report which M. D. makes of Ignatius his appropriating the name of
Episcopus to a Diocesan Bishop, is without any sufficient warrant. For seeing
Ignatius lived in the Apostles times, and died within six years after S.
John, and Theodoret says, that in process of time the name of B. was imposed;
it is not likely Ignatius should be the imposer of it. No man includes the
process of time within the compass of six years any man will think. The
process of time, whereof Theodoret speaks, was as appears by conference of
him with Jerome in the Apostles time. At the first, toward the beginning of
the Apostles time, the Governors of the Churches were called Apostles; but in
process of time, when the first Bishops who had been Apostles or Apostolical
men were dead, and now were to be chosen out of the Presbyters, which was
toward the latter end of the Apostles times; then they began to be called
Episcopi, Bishops. And that this was so, appears not only by Ignatius, who
continually uses the word as the first and highest degree of the Clergy,
Presbyters as the second, and Deacons as the third: but also by other monuments
of antiquity which I mentioned in the Sermon.

I have the longer insisted on this point, because it is of great consequence.
For hereby it appears first that when the name Presbyter and Episcopus were
confounded, yet the offices of Bishops and Presbyters were not confounded.
Secondly, that Bishops being then called Apostoli, were superior to other
Ministers who were called Presbyteri and Episcopi. And lastly, that such
Bishops as were superior to other Ministers, were in the Apostles times, and
mentioned in the Apostles writings.

The IIII. CHAPTER. Showing the Places where, and the Persons whom, the
Apostles ordained BB: but chiefly, that Timothy was B. of Ephesus, and Titus
of Creet.
Sermon. Sect. 7. page 72. But we are also to show the places where, and the
persons whom, the Apostles ordained BB. and first out of the scriptures etc. to
all ordained there, page 75.
IN this section and the two next following, I prove that Timothy and Titus
were by S. Paul ordained Bishops: the one of Ephesus, the other of Creet, and
maintain the same assertion against their objections. Afterward, I show out
of other the auncientest monuments of antiquity, that other BB. of other
places, were ordained by the Apostles.

This, says the Refuter, is the last supply to maintain the former
antecedent, by showing the places where, and the persons whom the Apostles
ordained Bishops. If this fail he is undone. As who should say, that all which
hitherto has been said, has by him been very learnedly and sufficiently
refuted. When as in truth he has not been able to confute any one sentence
or line of the Sermon hitherto, with soundness of reason, or evidence of
truth. And the like assurance I have of that which follows.

Now that Timothy and Titus were by the Apostle ordained Bishops: I prove by a
twofold reason, which I joined together, and is thus to be dissolved: the
former standing thus.

If in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus it be presupposed that Paul had
ordained Timothy and Titus Bishops of Ephesus and Creet, then is it true, that
they were by him ordained BB. of those Churches.

But the antecedent is true: Therefore the consequent.

That the antecedent is true I prove by this reason; because it is presupposed
in the Epistles, that the Apostle had committed to them Episcopal authority,
both in respect of Ordination, and Jurisdiction, to be exercised in those
Churches. Against which consequence this only thing can be objected, that the
Episcopal authority might be committed to them not as ordinary Bishops or
Pastors of those Churches, but as extraordinary governors or Evangelists,
which afterward is answered.

To this argument the Refuter answers not. Ad page 137.
The second he frames thus: If the Epistles written to Timothy and Titus be
the very patterns and precedents of the Episcopal function, whereby the
Apostle enformeth them, and in them all Bishops how to exercise their function,
then Timothy and Titus were Bishops.

But the antecedent is true: Therefore the consequent.



First, he takes exception against the proposition, saying, though it make a
goodly show yet was it confuted long ago by M. Cartwright. Whose confutation
either he thinks to be insufficient, or else he does but kill a dead man in
seeking with a new onset to disprove the consequence. First, for the
consequence it self, I avouch thus much; that from that antecedent, I might
not only have inferred that particular, that therefore these two to whom the
Epistles were written were Bishops: but in general, that the function of
Bishops; whose authority and office is described, and the manner of the
execution thereof prescribed in the directions given to Timothy and Titus in
these Epistles, has warrant in the word of God: and when they can make as good
an argument for their lay elders, out of the Scriptures, I will subscribe to
their Presbyterian discipline.

Of T. C. answer to that consequence, 2. T. C. answer refuted.
I have taken special notice heretofore; and did greatly wonder, that he
could satisfy himself with such a frivolous answer. And I do no less wonder
at the Refuters either lack of judgment, who took that answer for good
payment, or want of consideration and care of T. C. credit in referring us to
so slight and frivolous an evasion. For whereas D. Whitgift Page 404.
argues thus, That Timothy was Bishop, the whole course of the Epistles
written unto him declares, wherein is contained the office and duty of a
Bishop, and diverse precepts peculiarly pertaining to that function; T. C. Lib.
2. part. 1. page 312.
answers, that by this reason he might as well prove that Timothy was a
deacon, or a widdowe, an old man or an old woman, seeing in those Epistles
the Apostle wrote of their duties. Yea, rather that he was a Deacon,
considering that there is nothing in the description of a Deacon which agrees
not to him, but in the description of a Bishop that which he requires of not
being given to wine, and not being a young Christian, could have no place in
Timothies instruction. Not to argue with T. C. but to let him rest in peace;
can the Refuter be so ignorant, or without judgment, as to think, that D.
Whitgift when he spoke of the whole course and tenure of the Epistles, did
mean only the description of a B. or Minister set down in the beginning of
the third chapter of the former Epistle? if that had been his argument, he
had argued thus: Paul directs Timothy what manner of men to ordain Bishops
or Ministers, and likewise Deacons. Therefore Timothy himself was a B. or
Minister, or likewise a Deacon. Is it not plain, that by the whole course he
understands all those directions, which are given to Timothy throughout the
Epistles for the discharge of his office, either in respect of the Ministry
common to all Ministers, or of his Episcopal function, chiefly in regard
either of Ordination or Jurisdiction, unto which heads the precepts and
directions in those Epistles are to be referred? for when he speaks of the
duties of men and women, old and young, he directs Timothy, and in like
manner Titus Tit. 2.1.15.
what to preach. When he describes the qualities of Ministers, and Deacons,
and Widows; he directs him what manner of Ministers and Deacons to ordain,
and Widows to admit. And whereas D. Whitgift having said, that in those
Epistles diverse precepts pertain peculiarly to the Episcopal function: T.C.
chalengeth him to show him any one precept in those Epistles which is proper to
a B: It is not hard to show him more then one, as, lay thy hands hastily on no
man. Against a Presbyter or Minister receive not an accusation but under two or
three witnesses, etc. These are perpetual directions, which were not common,
either to other Christians, or other Ministers: therefore peculiar to BB. And
this was T. C. confutation of the Proposition: Now let us hear what the
Refuter can say.

The Proposition says he,. 3. The refuters answer to the Proposition
confuted.
is grounded upon a false supposition, and what is that? that the Apostle by
describing in these Epistles the rules to be observed in ordination and
jurisdiction, intended to inform Timothy and Titus as BB. and in them all
other BB. how to carry themselves in those matters. Is this the Supposition,
whereon the Proposition is grounded? Alas good man, you know not Vide supr. l.
2. c. 3.
what the Hypothesis or Supposition of an Hipotheticall Proposition is: this
which you suppose to be the Supposition of the Proposition, is plainly the
Assumption of the Syllogism, which your self framed.

But because the Refuter has confounded himself with his own hypotheticall
or connexiue Proposition, I will propound my Argument in another form.

Whosoever describing unto Timothy and Titus their office and authority, as
they were Governors of the Churches of Ephesus and Creet, and prescribing
their duty in the execution thereof, and that as afterward I show to be
performed by them and their Successors till the coming of Christ, does
plainly describe the office and authority, and prescribe the duty of BB: he
does presuppose them to be BB; the one of Ephesus, the other of Creet.

But Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus describing unto them their
office and authority as they were Governors of the Churches of Ephesus and
Creet, and prescribing their duty in the execution thereof to be performed by
them and their successors until the coming of Christ, does plainly describe
the office and authority, and prescribe the duty of BB.

Therefore Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus presupposes them to be
Bishops, the one of Ephesus, the other of Creet.

This Proposition, because I know not what can be objected against it. T. C.
and the Refuter having assailed it in vain, I will once again take for
granted.

The assumption I prove by those particulars, wherein the Episcopal authority
does chiefly consist, both in respect of Ordination, Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.22. and
also of Jurisdiction, they being the censurers of other Ministers doctrine. 1 Timothy 1.3. 2 Timothy 2.16. Tit. 1.10.11. and 3.9. and judges of their persons and
conversation, 1 Timothy 5.19.20.21. Tit. 3.10. to which proofs he answers
nothing. Whereunto might be added the authority of Gregory Nazianzene In
Encomio Athanas.
, of Chrysostom Hom. 10. in 1 Timothy
, of Oecumenius In 1 Timothy 5.
, and Gregory Respons. ad August. ad (...).
, testifying that these Epistles do teach Bishops how to behave themselves in
the Church of God.

Now because the Refuters supposition is the same in ef^ect with his
assumption, I will examine first what he obiecteth against the assumption under
the name of that supposition, and so proceed to his answer which he directed
against the assumption.

The sum of that which he obiecteth against the supposition, is this, that
though Timothy and Titus were by Paul's direction to do those things, which
Bishops arrogate to themselves; yet they were to do them by an higher power,
and therefore not as Bishops. Whereto I answer, that they were to be done by a
power which was to continue in the Church until the end; and therefore not
by a higher power then Episcopal. And secondly, that the power Episcopal,
whereby Bishops do these things which Timothy and Titus had in commission, is
so much of the Apostolical power as was to continue in the Church unto the end.

4. His answer to the assumption. Ad page 138.
The assumption it self he denies, saying, these Epistles are not precedents
of the Episcopal function, etc. The reason of his denial is this. What though
Bishops have now gotten that power into their hands, yet were not those
instructions given to Timothy and Titus, as Bishops, (the Apostles dreaming of
no such sovereignty) but particularly to Timothy and Titus as Evangelists,
and in general to the Presbyters, to whom the charge of those affairs
belongs. To the Evangelists, to administer in all the Churches of those
Regions, whither the Apostles sent, or where they left them: to the Presbyters,
to administer in their several congregations or Churches. He said even now
that Timothy and Titus did those things which BB. do by a higher power, and
now he says he Apostle dreamed not of any such sovereignty, as the BB. have.
Where he says these instructions were not given to BB. but particularly to
these Evangelists to perform them in all Churches and Regions where he should
place them, and generally to Presbyters, etc. both parts are false. For these
directions Paul gave to Timothy and Titus to be observed of them as they were
particularly assigned governors of the Churches of Ephesus and Creet, and are
such as are to be observed to the end. Neither are these instructions given in
general to Presbyters, neither does the charge of these affairs belong to
them. And that these things belong to the BB. I have sufficiently proved before
Lib. 3.
.

To make the matter plain, he brings in an example, which is worth the
hearing. Suppose, says he, a Democraty, where the commonwealth is governed by
the people; it must needs be that in such a place there are laws for the
choosing and ordering of Officers. What if this government fall into the hands
of the Nobility, which continue the same laws, still in the same cases? What
if some mightier then the rest, at the last make himself sole Governor, still
observing those fundamental laws, which were at the first established: is it
to be said, that those laws are the very patterns and precedents of the
Aristocraticall, or Monarchical government, whereby the first maker of those
laws would inform, in the one, the Nobility, in the other, the Monarchy,
and in them, all other, how to exercise that function? The administration of
Church matters touching ordination and jurisdiction, was first in the several
Churches, or congregations; which by their Presbyteries had the menaging of all
Church business: in process of time, it came to be restrained to the Clergy
only, the B. and his Presbytery of Ministers only; at last, as things grew
worse and worse, the B. like a Monarch got the reins into his own hands. Now
though the laws of Ordination and Jurisdiction remain the same, and the
practice also in some sort; yet are they not patterns and presidents either of
the second or third kind of government; neither were they given to instruct
the Bishop alone, or the Bishop and his Clergy together.

5. Schismatic novelties broached by the refuter.
Which comparison I desire may be well considered, especially by the vnlearneder
sort; for hereby they shall discern, what manner of guides they have desired
to follow. For, not to contend with him about his politic proposition, not
well agreeing with the rules of policy, wherein we are taught, that the
appointment of chief Officers being reckoned inter iura maiestatis, does
always belong to them who have the sovereignty; in the whole comparison, but
especially, in the reddition, we may behold the trim Idea of discipline, which
the fancy of our Refuter and his fellow-challengers has forged. For he
conceiueth, as if he were a Brownist, or an Anabaptist, that the ancient state
of the Church was Democraticall; that the right of Ordination and Jurisdiction,
was in the whole congregation of every Parish, which by their Presbyteries
(consisting for the greatest part of the laity) had the menaging of all
Church-businesse; that the laws and Canons for Church-gouernment set down in
the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, were first provided for this popular state
of the Church. Howbeit, by the usurpation of the B. and his Clergy, the
popular state was turned into an Aristocraty, the B. and his Presbytery of
Ministers only menaging the Church affairs. Lastly, in process of time, this
Aristocraty was turned into a Monarchy, the B. like a Monarch having got the
reins into his own hands. Now the laws concerning Ordination and
jurisdiction are still in force; yet were they not patterns neither for the
Monarchical government of the B. alone, nor for the Aristocraticall government
of the Bishop and his Presbytery of ministers, but for the popular and golden
state of every Parish which within it self had authority immediately derived
from Christ sufficient for the government of it self in all causes
Ecclesiastical. This form is propounded also in the modest and Christian
offer of disputation. Have not our forwarder sort of people bin well advised
think you, to doat upon such leaders as these, who broach such a sort of
dreams and dotages, for which they have not so much as the show of any sound
proof? Our refuter has often times objected against me, though most unjustly,
that Pythagoras-like, I look to be creditted upon my bare word; but what
proofs I pray you does he bring for these schismatic novelties?

First, 6. His novelties briefly refuted.
it is here presupposed, that every Church endued with power of Ecclesiastical
government, was a Parish, and all Church officers Parishionall. Which dotage I
have before refuted. Secondly, that the form of Church-gouernment was
Democraticall, or popular, the chief authority being in the people. Which has
authority (to be exercised partly by themselves, and partly by their
Presbytery) to elect, ordain, deprive and depose their Pastor or B. for the
proof whereof the chief burden must lie upon Mat. 18. dic Ecclesiae, which
has bin before examined. Beza, making mention of one Morellius, who pleaded in
like manner for the popular government, gives him this style de grad. Ministr.
c. 23. page 155
, Democraticus quidam fanaticus, showing that these who plead that cause, are
lead with a fantastical and fanaticall spirit. For is it not a phrensy to
urge the peoples supremacy in Church-gouernment? is there any show in
scripture, or in reason, that the sheep should rule their Shepherd, or the
flock their Pastor?

But for the confutation of them, I refer them to other Disciplinarians, from
whom they had their first grounds; seeing by this fancy they seek to ouerturne,
as well those Churches where the Geneua discipline is established as ours.

The third dream is, that the laws of Church-gouernment prescribed in the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, were provided for the democraticall state of
the Church. So that when Paul says lay not thou hands on no man hastily, you
must understand the speech directed not to Timothy, to whom the Epistle was
written, but to the people, that they should not suffer their Lay Elders when
their minister is dead, to be hasty in laying hands on a new. And when he
says do not thou receive an accusation, etc. it must be understood of the
people and Presbytery. After two or three admonitions do thou avoid an
heretic or excommunicate him, that is, thou people. What of Creet? belike the
whole Island of Creet was a Parish too.

The next fancy is, that the popular state of the several Churches did first
degenerate into an Aristocraty, and after into a Monarchy. But it is as clear
as the light, that the several Churches were at the first governed by the
Apostles or Apostolical men severally, and that either perpetually, as by
James, Mark, etc. or but for a time, as by Peter, Paul, etc. and that when the
Apostles left the Churches, they committed them to other Apostolical men, such
as Timothy, Titus, Evodius, Simon the son of Cleophas, Linus, Clemens, etc.
communicating unto them the same authority both for the work of the ministry,
and for the power of ordination and jurisdiction which themselves had in those
several Churches: and what authority each of them had, their successors in
the several Churches had the same. Neither have our BB. at this day, greater
authority in menaging Church causes, then Timothy and Titus and other the
first Bishops had. Who was to ordain ministers in Creet and to govern that
Church? did not Paul commit these things to Titus, without mentioning, either
of Presbytery, or people? are not all his precepts for ordination and
Church-gouernment directed only to Titus for Creet, and to Timothy for
Ephesus? and does not this evidently show, that howsoever they might use either
the presence, and consent of the people, or the Counsel and advise of the
Presbyters in causes of greatest moment, as Princes also do in
commonwealths: yet the sway of the Ecclesiastical government was in them?

It is therefore most plain, that in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, it is
presupposed, that they had Episcopal authority: and that the rules and
directions given to them are precedents for Bishops and patterns unto them for
the exercise of their Episcopal function.

And this I prove again in my Sermon by another argument, 7. Another argument
proving that these Epistles are patterns or precedents for Bishops.
which the refuter has framed thus: Those things which were written to inform
not Timothy and Titus alone, as extraordinary persons, but them and their
successors, to the end of the world, were written to inform Diocesan Bishops:

But those Epistles were written to inform not Timothy and Titus alone as
extraordinary persons but them and their successors to the end of the world.

Therefore they were written to inform Diocesan BB.



The assumption (for with that the refuter begins) I proved by testimony,
His answer to the assumption
and by reason. And first, by the testimony of Paul 1 Timothy 6.13.14.
, straightly charging Timothy, that the commandments and directions, which he
gave him, should be kept inviolable until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and therefore by such, as should have the like authority to the end. in
1 Timothy 6.14.
Hereof Calvin, says thus, nomine mandati significat quae hactenus de officio
Timothy disseruit. Under the name of the commandment he signifies those
things whereof hitherto he had discoursed concerning the office of Timothy.
And again, omnino cerie ad ministerium Timothy refero, I do wholly refer it
to the ministry of Timothy. For Paul wrote to this end, to give direction to
Timothy, how he should behave 1 Timothy 3.15.
himself in the Church, which is the house of the living God. Which directions
he charge him Chap. 6. to observe inviolable until the coming of Christ:
which could not be performed in the person of Timothy, who was not to continue
to the end, but in a succession of them, who should have the like authority
until the end. T. C. and other Disciplinarians, having fancied that the
Apostles had given direction in that Epistle for onely-gouerning Elders:
hereupon conclude T.C. l. 1.177. l. 2. part. 2. p. 55.
, that they are to be continued until the coming of Christ, So that they can
conclude upon that charge the continuance of an office not once mentioned in
that Epistle: but they cannot, or will not see, how the continuance of that
office, which Timothy did bear, for the execution whereof all these
directions are given, is concluded upon the same ground.

The second testimony was of Ambrose Ambr. in 1. Tim. 6.14.
, writing on those words of Paul, saying, that Paul is so circumspect; not
because he doubted of Timothy his care, but in regard of his successors, that
they after the example of Timothy, might continue the well ordering of the
Church.

The proof of the assumption.
The reason whereby I proved, that Paul gives direction not to Timothy and
Titus only as to extraordinary persons, but to them and their successors
until the end of the world, was, because the authority which was committed to
them, for the execution whereof the Apostle gives his directions, is
perpetually necessary; without the which the Church neither can be governed (as
without jurisdiction) neither yet continued (as without ordination) and
therefore not peculiar to extraordinary persons; but by an ordinary deriuation
to be continued in those, who are the successors of Timothy and Titus.

His answer to the proof of the assumption.
The effect of the refuters answer is, that he could be content to grant this
assumption, were it not that he is resolved to deny the conclusion, which
follows thereupon. For first, he grants Paul's purpose to instruct those
that should succeed Timothy and Titus, in the authority which they had, but
not in their office. And that this authority was not, nor was to be, in the
hands of any one particular man, but the right of it was in the whole
congregation, the execution in the Presbytery. So that the power of ordination
and jurisdiction might be continued without Bishops, etc.

It is sufficient for the truth of the assumption, which the refuter grants;
that what Paul did write to Timothy and Titus, he wrote not to them alone as
extraordinary persons, whose authority should dye with them, but to those
also which should succeed them in the like authority until the end.

But whether the Bishops were to be their successors, or the whole
congregation, or the Presbytery, belongs not to the assumption: but rather
to the proposition. Howbeit, that which he says, either in denying the Bishops
to be the successors of Timothy and Titus, or affirming the congregation and
Presbytery to have succeeded them in the power of ordination and jurisdiction,
is spoken altogether, as against the truth, so without proof.

I will therefore return to the proposition, 8. The proposition defended. And
that the successors of Timothy and Titus were BB.
which is grounded on this Hypothesis; that Diocesan Bishops were the
successors of Timothy and Titus. For if that be true, then is the proposition
necessary, though the refuter flatly denies it. Thus therefore I reason: If
the successors of Timothy and Titus were Diocesan Bishops, then those things
which were written to inform their successors were written to inform
Diocesan Bishops:

But the successors of Timothy and Titus were Diocesan BB.

Therefore those things which were written to inform the successors of
Timothy and Titus, were written to inform Diocesan Bishops.



Here the refuter, thinking he had as good reason to deny the one part of this
syllogism, as the other, denies both. The consequence of the proposition is
feeble says he, unless it were certain, that the Bishops both de facto were,
and de iure ought to have been their successors. That the Bishops were de
facto their successors, and of all other Apostolical men in the government of
the Churches, I have already proved, and there upon have inferred, that de iure
also they were. Because what government was not only generally received in the
300. years after the Apostles, but also was in use in the Apostles times, in
the Apostolical Churches, that without doubt was of Apostolical institution.

The assumption I prove by two arguments: first, by this disjunction.

Either the Bishops were their successors, or the Presbyteries, or (which the
refuter would add) the whole congregation.

But neither the Presbyteries, nor the whole congregation, which had no
greater, nor other authority and power under Bishops, then they had before,
under Timothy and Titus.

Therefore the Bishops were their successors.

Again, those who succeeded Timothy and Titus in the government of the
Churches of Ephesus and Creet, were their successors.

But the Bishops of Ephesus and Creet did succeed Timothy and Titus in the
government of those Churches.

Therefore they were their successors.

These reasons the refuter saw not: only he takes upon him to answer the
proofs of this last assumption. BB. of Ephesus the successors of Timothy.
And first, for Timothy his successors in Ephesus, it is apparent that not
only the Angel of the Church of Ephesus. Apoc. 2.1. whether it were Onesimus,
or any other, was one of his successors, and Policrates Eusebius. l. 5. c. 25 Ad
Page 140.
the Bishop of Ephesus another: But also that from Timothy until the Council
of Chalcedon there was a continued succession of Bishops. For whereas in the
Council of Chalcedon, Stephanus the Bishop of Ephesus being deposed, some
question did arise, whether the new Bishop who was to succeed were to be chosen
and ordained by the Council, or by the Provincial Synod of Aisa; Leontius
Conc. Chalc. Act. 11.
the Bishop of Magnesia in the Province of Asia, alleged that from St.
Timothy to that time there had been twenty seven Bishops of Ephesus, all
ordained there.

To this he answers nothing, but that which before has been refuted; that
howsoever the latter Bishops of those twenty seven might be Diocesan, the
former were not. For it is certain, that both the latter and the former were
not only Diocesan, but also Metropolitan Bishops. And where I number the
Angel of Ephesus in this rank, he says, that I tediously beg the
question. But I appeal to the refuter himself, first, whether this Angel was
not the B. and governor of the Church of Ephesus, secondly whether he did not
succeed Timothy in the government of that Church, thirdly, whether he was not
one of those twenty seven Bishops mentioned by Leontius in the Council of
Chalcedon. And the like may be said of Polycrates, who had been the eight
Bishop of his own kindred, saving that concerning him there is more evidence,
that he being Bishop of Ephesus was the Metropolitan or primate of Asia. For
Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 24.
says, that he (...), he was the ruler or chief of the Bishops of Asia; who
cap. 25.
by his authority did assemble a Provincial Synod to discuss the question
concerning Easter.

As touching Creet, The BB. of Gortyna the successors of Titus.
because there is not the like evidence, the refuter takes upon him to deliver
diverse things without book; as if Titus had successors in the government of
Creet, it would be auailable for Archbishops which were not bred a great while
after, but it makes nothing for Diocesan Bishops. Whereto I answer, first,
though such Archbishops, as were also called Patriarchs, were not from the
Apostles times: yet such as are Metropolitanes, were. And again, if
Provincial Bishops may be proved to have been from the Apostles times, much
more may Diocesan. For every Metropolitan is a Diocesan, but not contrariwise.
And although I do not remember, that I have any where read of the next
successor to Titus, yet I read of Gortyna the mother City of Creet, and the
Metropolitan Bishops thereof, who were Archbishops of Creet, and successors
of Titus; though not his immediate successors. For Dionysius of Corinth, who
flourished at the same time with Hegesippus Eusebius. li. 4. c. 21. and 23. and 29
, writing an Epistle to the Church of Gortyna, together with the rest of the
Churches of Creet, he commends Philippe (...), their Bishop, for his
renowned virtue. And although he called him the Bishop of the Churches in
Creet: yet the Diocesan Churches had their Bishops too, as the Church of
Gnossus a City of Creet, had Pinytus at the same time her Bishop, which proves
the other to have been an Archbishop. Theodorus Balsamo says f, antiquius
Nomocanonum versaui, etc. I have perused the ancient Code of Councils, and by
the subscriptions I find, that in this Council held in Trullo, Basil the
Bishop of Gortyna (which is the Metropolis of Creet) was present. And where he
says, that Creet having many Churches had no one Bishop to govern them, after
Titus the Evangelist, till Diocesan Bishops had got the sway of Ecclesiastical
matters: I confess it is true, but he must remember, that even in the Apostles
times there were Diocesan Bishops. And in the very next age after them,
Philippe was Archbishop of Creet. But though there were no direct proof, that
Diocesan or Provincial Bishops were the successors of Timothy and Titus; yet
it might easily be gathered by other Churches, from whose form of government
Ephesus and Creet did not vary. It cannot be denied, but what authority
Timothy and Titus had, the one in Ephesus, the other in Creet, the same had
Mark at Alexandria, Evodius at Antioch, Linus at Rome, etc. Neither may it be
doubted, but that each of these had Bishops to their successors, even in the
Apostles times, as before has been showed: and therefore the refuter should
not make it so strange, that Bishops were the successors of Timothy and Titus.

9. Objection 1. that Timothy and Titus did not continue in Ephesus and Creet.
Sermon. Sect. 8. page 75. Against this, two things are objected, first that
Timothy and Titus may seem not to have been appointed BB. of Ephesus and
Creet, because they did not continue there, but were removed to other places,
etc. to other in Creet. page 78. The first objection is thus framed by the
Refuter.

Timothy and Titus did not continue in Ephesus and Creet, but were removed to
other places.

Therefore Timothy and Titus were not ordained Bishops of Ephesus and Creet.

I answer by distinction. For if by continuing, they understand (as the words
seem to import) a perpetual residence without removing or traveling thence
upon any occasion; then I deny the consequence, or proposition, which is
understood. For by no law, either of God, or man, are Bishops or other Pastors
so affixed to their cures, but that upon special and extraordinary occasion,
they may, either for their own necessity, or for the greater, or more
public good of the Church, travail or remove to other places. It is
sufficient that they be ordinarily resident upon their charge. If by continuing
be meant ordinary residence, then I deny the antecedent; and do contrariwise
affirm, that although upon special and extraordinary occasions they were by
the Apostle called to other places, as his or the Churches necessity required:
yet these were the places of their ordinary residence. And that I prove,
because they both lived and died there. That they continued, or had their
ordinary abode there in their life time, I prove by testimony of Scripture, and
other evidence. For if Paul required Timothy 1 Timothy 1.3.
(...) to continue or abide still in Ephesus, and appointed Titus Tit. 1.5.
(...) to continue to redress what was vvanting in Creet, then were they to
continue, or have their ordinary residence there.

But the antecedent is true in both the parts thereof: Therefore the consequent.

The Refuter denies the consequence to be of any force, Ad. page 141.
unless first it could be proved, that (...) signifies a perpetual abiding
in a place without departing from it all a man's life; which needs not,
seeing ordinary residence, which is meant by that term, and which is required
in BB. and ordinary Pastors, may be without such perpetual abiding. Secondly,
except (...) be understood also for the whole term of life. But it suffices,
that it signifies to continue in redressing, as the Geneua translation also
reads. For thereby is meant, as I said, that he was not left there for a
brunt, but that he should, as things were defective, or wanting, (...),
continue to redress them, and still keep that Church in reparation. Ad page
142.
For though the Church were new (as the Refuter obiecteth to signify that it
should not need any reparation) yet were the Bishops and Presbyters subject to
death, and the places of them which dyed were to be supplied, and the Church
subject to personal corruptions, both for doctrine, discipline and manners,
which would need reformation.

And whereas their opinion, who imagine that Timothy was required to stay at
Ephesus but for a short time, when Paul went into Macedony, Act. 20. is
contrary to that former testimony concerning Timothy: I show, that in all the
iourneyes of Paul into Macedony, mentioned in the Acts, Timothy did accompany
him. And therefore, that this voyage of Paul was after his first being at Rome,
with which the Acts of the Apostles end, not mentioning any of his travels, and
other occurrents, which afterward happened for the space of nine or ten
years. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 20.
The Acts of which time cannot otherwise be known, but by such of his Epistles
as were written in that time, and other monuments of antiquity. The which
passage, though the Refuter has passed by in silence, I thought good to put
the Reader in mind of, that he may acknowledge many things to have been done
by the Apostles, which are registered in other records of anitquity, though they
be not mentioned in the history of the Acts of the Apostles, which ends with
those things which happened above forty years before the death of S. John.
Now the Acts of the Apostles, which were performed after S. Lukes history
thereof, were in part recorded by Hegesippus, and Clemens, and other ancient
Authors, which testify that Paul ordained Timothy B. of Ephesus, and Titus of
Creet; and that he, and other Apostles appointed other Bishops in other places.
Whose testimonies whosoever do refuse to believe, do themselves deserve no
credit.

To those allegations therefore out of Paul, 10. That Timothy and Titus lived
and died the one at Ephesus, the other in Creet.
I added the credible testimony of diverse Authors, viz. Dorotheus in synopsi.
Hieron. sieve Sophron. in Catalogo in Tito. Isidorus de vita and morte
sanctorum. Number. 87. and 88. Vincent. lib. 10. c. 38. Antonius ex Policrate
part. 1. tit. 6. c. 28. Niceph. l. 10. c. 11. Who report, that Timothy and
Titus, as they lived, so also dyed, the one at Ephesus, the other in Creet. The
Refuter answers, he may well credit the report of these Authors, and yet not
grant that therefore they were Diocesan Bishops of those places. Indeed, if I
had argued thus, as the Refuter would have the Reader think, Timothy and
Titus dyed, the one at Ephesus, the other in Creet: Therefore they were BB.
there; it had been a loose consequence. But he wrangleth besides the pupose.
It was objected, that Timothy and Titus were not Bishops of those places,
because they did not continue there. I prove, that they held their ordinary
residence there, not only because S. Paul required them both, to continue
there; but other Authors also testified, that they both lived and died there.
The Refuter answers, and would have the Reader content himself with this
answer, that howsoever indeed it is true that they continued there, yet hereof
it follows not that they were Diocesan Bishops of those places.

Yea, but says he, it would be observed, that M. D. grants the consequence
to be good, namely that they were not Bishops of Ephesus and Creet, if they did
not continue there but were removed to other places. Now that they were removed
himself confesses, etc. If I had confessed, that they were removed, and also
that if they were removed, they were not Bishops. Then I should have granted
both the antecedent of the Enthymeme, (which he said before that I denied) and
also the consequence. But indeed I denied the consequence, in that sense which
the Refuter conceiueth, and yet granted, that though they were sometimes
removed; yet they kept ordinary residence, the one at Ephesus, the other in
Creet. And therefore their traveling, or removing upon extraordinary
occasions, does not hinder their being BB. Do you indeed grant, that sometimes
they were removed? marry that will I prove, says the Refuter, out of 2 Timothy
4.9. 11.12.21. etc. and thereupon infer, they were not Bishops.But neither
are all his proofs good, neither is his inference sound. He would prove that
Timothy was not at Ephesus, when the second Epistle was written to him. For
first, thither the Apostle sent Tychicus.As if he had said, whether Paul sent
Tychicus, there Timothy was not. Belike there was some such Antipathy between
them, that one place could-not hold them both. Secondly, because from the place
where he was, Paul requires him to come to him to Rome, and with him to bring
the cloak, the books and parchments which he left at Troas. As though Timothy
might not as well come from Ephesus to Rome as from some other place, and as
though his bidding him to bring the things left at Troas, did not argue, that
he was at Ephesus, which is in the same peninsula, rather then else where. But
that he was at Ephesus, may be gathered hereby: because the Apostle wills
him, to salute Aquila and Priscilla (whom he left at Ephesus, Act. 18.19.) and
the household of Onesiphorus, which also was there. 2 Timothy 4.19. with 1.16.
Sedulius understands Paul, Sedul. in 2 Timothy 4.9.
bidding Timothy 2 Timothy 4.9 to come to him quickly, as requiring him to come
from Ephesus to Rome.

Now hear his inferences, Titus was sent from Candy to Rome, and from thence
he was dispatched into Dalmatia, therefore he was not B. of Candy. Timothy was
not at Ephesus when the second Epistle was written to him, therefore he was
not B. there, etc. He stayed with Paul some time in Rome, therefore he was not
B. of Ephesus.These are goodly inferences to oppose to the evidence gathered
out of the Epistles, and to the general consent of antiquity, which testifies
that they were Bishops. Ad page 143.
Whereas therefore he asks, who dare be so bold or unreasonable as to imagine
that Paul had made them Bishops? I say, it is intolerable boldness, and
arrogancy, to avouch the contrary.And such is that presumptuous speech, that
if Timothy and Titus had been Bishops, it had been a matter neither of good
report for them, nor of good example for the ages following that they should be
called to other places. For, so long as ordinarily they were resident, their
absence at some times upon urgent and weighty occasions, was neither of ill
report, nor bad example. Besides, when the Apostle sent Tychicus to Ephesus,
and sent for Timothy from Ephesus, he sent the one to supply the absence of
the other, as Calvin also has observed.

Sermon. Sect. 9 page 78. 1^. Object. 2. That Timothy and Titus were Evangelists
and therefore not Bishops.
The other thing which they object is, that they were Evangelists: but that
does not hinder, etc. to the midst of page 81. The second objection says the
Refuter, lies thus, Timothy and Titus were Evangelists. Therefore they were
not Diocesan BB. of Ephesus and Creet.

This consequence I denied, because their being Evangelists did not hinder, but
that when they were assigned to certain Churches, and furnished with
Episcopal power, they became Bishops. Against which answer the Refuter
obiecteth two things. First, that their being Evangelists did hinder their
assigning to certain Churches, without which they could not be Bishops. And
this he proves by two reasons. For first, if the Apostle had assigned them to
certain Churches, then should he have confounded the offices which (as
himself says, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.) God had distinguished. Secondly, he
should have deprived Timothy and Titus of a higher calling, and thrust them as
it were out of the Hall into the Kitchen. These are nice points, which none of
the Fathers did ever understand: neither did they conceive, but that
Evangelists might, without any disparagement to them, be assigned to several
Churches, and so become Bishops. For if they held, that the Apostles themselves
being assigned to certain Churches, as James was to Jerusalem, were BB. much
more Evangelists.

What the Euangelisticall function was.
But for as much as the whole force of this argument depends upon the
Euangelisticall function which Timothy and Titus are supposed to have had, we
will briefly consider, what that Euangelisticall function was, and whether it
could hinder them from being Bishops. An Evangelist therefore was he, which
taught the Euangell or Gospel of Christ, whether by preaching, or also by
writing. In the latter sense, there are four only called Evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John: who though they all preached, yet for the
penning of the Gospel are peculiarly called Evangelists. In the former sense
the word is taken, either generally, We may not think that the 70. after the
death of Christ vanished away, but that they were the principal Christians
next to the Apostles. And therefore as they were Evangelists, so sometimes are
called Apostles.
to signify any one that does euangelize or preach the Gospel, or specially,
signifying the extraordinary function of those in the primitive Church, who
went up and down preaching the Gospel, being not affixed to any certain
place. And these seem to have been of two sorts: For either they were
immediately called of Christ, and by him sent to preach the Gospel, as the 72.
Disciples; or they were assumed by the Apostles, to be their companions in
their iourneyes, and assistants in the Ministry. Of the former sort was
Philippe, who after he had performed that temporary office at Jerusalem,
whereunto he and the other six were chosen Act. 6. he returned to his
Euangelisticall function, Calu. inst. l. 4. c. 4. 4. fortassis etia^ 70.
discipuli, quos secundo loco ab Apostolis Christus designabit, fuerunt
Euangelistae.
Act. 8. and is expressly called an Evangelist. Act. 21.8. Of the latter sort
were Timothy and Titus, while they accompanied the Apostle Paul in his
travails, and were not assigned to any certain place. That which the Fathers
say of the 7^. Disciples, that they had but the degree of the Presbytery, may
of this latter sort much more be verified, who were ordained Ministers of the
Gospel by imposition of hands. Ide^ in 1 Cor. 15.7 per omnes Apostolos
intelligit ^on solos 12. sed 70. discipulos etiam. Sic Chrysostom. et Theodor^t,
etc.
Neither did they differ from other Presbyters but in this, that they
accompanied the Apostles as their helpers, being not tied to any one place. For
neither had they the power of ordination, neither as Zanchy says did they
govern the Churches, Zanch. in Ephesians. 4
now one, then another, as the other Evangelists and Prophets did.

We see what the office of Evangelists was. 12. That their being Evangelists
did not hinder but that they might be BB.
Now let us see, whether it hindered men from being Bishops. For had Timothy
and Titus been such Evangelists, as the four were which preached and wrote
the Gospel, or as the 72. who were called and sent by Christ: yet might they,
when they ended their travails, and betook them to certain Churches, have
been Bishops thereof. For Mark the Evangelist, after he had preached in
Egypt and had set up his rest at Alexandria, became B. thereof: in which
Episcopal function Antanus succeeded him, and after him Abilius and Cerdo in
the Apostles times; much less does their being of the latter sort. For though
the Apostle di^ distinctly reckon the functions of the Church 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians.
4: yet in the former place he does not so much as mention the office of
Evangelists; and in the latter he speaks of those, who (...) were called
Evangelists as the four Evangelists, and perhaps also the 72; whose functions
notwithstanding were not so disioyned, but that as Apostles might be also
Evangelists, as we see in Matthew and John; so Evangelists might be Bishops, as
we see in Mark. But as for Timothy and Titus, the Greek Chrysostom. Theophyl.
Oecum. in Ephesians. 4.
Writers expounding that place, plainly say, they were not Evangelists, but
Pastors or Bishops. For they, after they were placed, the one in Ephesus, the
other in Creet, did not travail up and down as in former times, when they
accompanied the Apostle; but ordinarily remained with their flocks. The Greek
Scholiast says thus. Euangelists^ that is, those which did write the Gospel:
Pastors^ (...), he means such as had the Churches committed to them, such as
Timothy was, such as Titus. And to the same purpose, both Chrysostom, and
Theophylact, do mention them by name.

Neither was it a debasing of Timothy and Titus, when they were made Bishops,
but an advancement. Forwhereas before, they were but Presbyters (though called
Evangelists in a large sense:) they were now made the Apostles of those
Churches, and by imposition of hands ordained Bishops.

In the second place he takes exception against those words, where I say,
they were furnished with Episcopal power, and denies that when Timothy and
Titus were assigned to Ephesus and Creet, they received any new authority which
before they had not, or needed any such furnishing. But were to exercise their
Euangelesticall function in those places. For so Paul bids Timothy after
he had been at and gone from Ephesus ^. Tim. 4.5.
to do the work of an Evangelist. If they received no new authority, why did
Timothy receive a new ordination by imposition of hands, whereof the Apostle
speaks in two 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
places, and which the Fathers understand of his ordination to be Bishop? were
men admitted to the extraordinary function of Evangelists, by the ordinary
means of imposing hands? or may we think, that any but the Apostles (being
not assigned as Bishops to several Churches) had that authority wheresoever
they came, which Timothy had at Ephesus, and Titus in Creet? verily Philippe
the Evangelist though he converted Act. 8.14.17.
diverse in Samaria, and baptized them: yet had not authority to impose hands,
whereby men might be furnished with graces for the Ministry; but the Apostles
Peter and John were sent thither, to that purpose. And whereas Paul wills
Timothy to do the work of an Evangelist, what is that, but (...), to preach
the Gospel diligently, and to fulfill his Ministry, or to make it fully
known, the word Evangelist being there taken in the general sense? Now what
his Ministry was Jerome Hieronym. and Sedul. in 2 Timothy 4.
and Sedulius declare. Ministerium tuum imple, Episcopatus scilicet, Fulfill
thy Ministry, that is to say, as thou art a Bishop.

Now that their being Evangelists did not hinder them from being Bishops, when
ceasing from their travailing about, they were assigned to these particular
Churches, I proved by the testimony of Zuinglius: In Ecclesiaste.
who says, that Philip the Evangelist, who had been one of the Deacons, was
afterward Bishop of Caesarea, James the Apostle was Bishop of Jerusalem, and
diverse of the Apostles (which may much more be verified of the Evangelists)
when they ceased from their peregrinations, became Bishops of certain
Churches, as by the ancient histories is manifest. Whereto the refuter
answers two things, first, that Zuinglius speaks according to the phrase of
the histories and writers before him; therefore say I, according to the truth.
Or else we must think that none of the Fathers, or ancient historiographers
knew whom to call Bishops and whom not. But the refuter, and his fellows only,
have this knowledge. Ad page 144.
Yea but a certain learned man says, that when the Fathers call Peter or James
or any of the Apostles Bishops, they do not take the name Bishop properly. For
Peter I grant, but of James there is another reason, as I have showed before.
And although it were true, that Apostles could not properly be called Bishops:
yet what is that to Timothy, and Titus, whom I have proved notwithstanding
their supposed Euangelisticall function, to have been particularly assigned by
Paul to the Churches of Ephesus and Creet; where also they lived and dyed?

His other answer is, that howsoever Zuinglius speak of their being Bishops,
it is manifest by his writings, he neither thought they were (and so belike
spoke otherwise then he thought) nor any other might be a Diocesan B. as by a
testimony hereafter alleged, appears, where he says no such thing. I will
therefore add another testimony of Zuinglius in the same book: Ecclesiaste.
when Paul said to Timothy do the work of an Evangelist, Timothy was a
Bishop, wherefore it is certain according to Paul's opinion, the office of an
Evangelist and of a Bishop is all one.

After I had thus answered these two objections, 13. Other arguments to prove
that Timothy and Titus were Bishops.
I brought a new supply of arguments, to prove Timothy and Titus to have been
Bishops of Ephesus and Creet. And first, by occasion of his second objection I
argue thus: The function and authority which Timothy and Titus did exercise
in Ephesus and Creet, was either extraordinary, and Euangelisticall, as the
Disciplinarians teach; or else ordinary, and Episcopal, as we hold.

But it was not extraordinary and Euangelisticall; Therefore ordinary and
Episcopal.

The assumption I proved thus;

The supposed Euangelisticall function of Timothy, and Titus, was to end with
their persons, and admitted no succession, being as themselves teach, both
extraordinary and temporary;

But the function and authority, which they had, as being assigned to certain
Churches, viz. of Ephesus and Creet, (consisting especially in the power of
ordination, and jurisdiction) was not to end with their persons, but to be
continued in their successors.

Therefore the function and authority which Timothy and Titus had, as being
assigned to Ephesus and Creet, was not extraordinary and Euangelisticall.



Here the refuter would make his reder believe, that I having before denied the
consequence of the second objection, do also deny the antecedent, and in this
place reason against it. But I do not deny they were Evangelists, howsoever I
do not conceive their Euangelisticall function to have been such, and so
great, as the refuter and other Disciplinarians suppose, and therefore I call
it their supposed Evangelical function. Now, that I did not intend to deny, or
disprove that antecedent, but to bring a new supply of arguments, taking
occasion by the last objection; appears by those words, which I premised, as
it were an introduction to this argument, hereof we may conclude thus. But let
us hear what he answers. Forsooth he flatly denies the assumption, wherein
though he untruly say, that I beg the question, that Timothy and Titus were
assigned to Ephesus and Creet, as ordinary Bishop or Pastors of those
Churches; for that I do assume but conclude; yet has he nothing to disprove
it, but a mere begging of the question, and denial of the conclusion, rather
then the assumption; viz. that they had no assignment to those Churches, but
only as evangelists, which does not touch the assumption: no more then that
which follows. Neither by that (Euangelisticall) office (says he) did they
take the power of ordination and jurisdiction from the Churches, in which by
right it is seated; but with the Churches ordained ministers, and redressed
such things, as were amiss, though perhaps that right of laying on hands might
sometimes be performed by them alone, etc. What is all this to the assumption?
which if he would deny, and make this denial good, he should have said, and
proved it, that the function and authority which they exercised in Ephesus and
Creet, was to end with their persons, and admitted no succession, or was not to
be continued in their successors. But he roues, and raues, as men use to do,
which being at a nonplus, would feign seem to answer somewhat. And that
which he answers, besides that it is impertinent, is partly also untrue. For
when he says, that Timotie and Titus did not take the power of ordination and
jurisdiction from the Churches, etc. First, he would insinuate, that Bishops
do; as though herein there were some difference between Bishops and them;
when as indeed, neither Bishops, nor they, do take that authority from the
Church; but they, and all other first BB. received their authority from the
Apostles, and derived the same to their lawful successors. Secondly, he says,
that the power of ordination and jurisdiction by right is seated in the whole
Church or congregation: which is not true of any particular congregation, but
in case of necessity; wherein both the succession of their own clergy failing,
and the help of others vvanting, the right is deuolued to the whole body of the
Church. But let this go among other his Brownisticall, or rather
Anabaptistiall novelties.

I proceed to the proof of my assumption, 14. Ad page 145. That their function
was ordinary, and their authority perpetually necessary.
which he has laid forth thus: That function and authority which is
ordinary, and perpetually necessary, not only for the well being, but also
for the very being of the visible Churches, was not to end with the persons of
Timothy and Titus, but to be continued in their successors.

But the function and authority that they had, as being assigned to certain
Churches, is ordinary and perpetually necessary, not only for the well being,
but also for the very being of the visible Churches:

Therefore the function and authority which they had, as being assigned to
certain Churches, was not to end with the persons of Timothy, and Titus, but
to be continued in their successors.



The assumption is thus to be explaned; the function which Timothy, and Titus
had, as being assigned to certain Churches, was ordinary; and the authority,
which they did exercise, consisting chiefly in the power of ordination and
jurisdiction, was perpetually necessary. This assumption the refuter would
seem to deny, and yet grants, that the power of ordination and jurisdiction
is perpetually necessary; only he denies it to be necessary, that there
should be in every Church an Evangelist to exercise that authority. So that of
the two points in the assumption, the latter he grants, that the authority
which they exercised was perpetually necessary; the other, that the function
which they had being assigned to those Churches was ordinary, he touches not:
but denies that, which I did not affirm, to wit, that it was necessary there
should be an Evangelist always in every Church to exercise the power of
ordination, and jurisdiction: Did I affirm this? or rather did I not teach the
contrary, when I said that the function whereby they did exercise that power of
ordination, and jurisdiction, was not an extraordinary function, as the
Euangelisticall; but ordinary, as the Episcopal? Now that the function which
Timothy and Titus had, being assigned to Ephesus and Creet, was an ordinary
function, and the very same which the Bishops that succeeded them, and all
other BB. both in, and since the Apostles times have exercised; it is most
certain, for though in them, who chiefly are called Evangelists, there were
diverse things extraordinary, besides their limitation to no certain place, as
their immediate calling from Christ, their extraordinary gifts of the Spirit,
as of revelation, and of working miracles, as appears by Steven and Philippe:
yet in Timothy, and Titus, and others who were called Evangelists, because
they were the companions of the Apostles in their iourneyes, and assistants in
their work of the ministry, there was nothing extraordinary, but their not
limitation to any certain Churches. For their calling to the ministry was
ordinary, and their gifts, though great, yet attained and increased by ordinary
means. When as therefore they were assigned to certain Churches, as the
Pastors and governors thereof, whereunto they were ordained by imposition of
hands, and by that ordination were furnished with power of ordination and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; their function was the same ordinary function,
which their successors, and all other Bishops did exercise.

But as the refuter said, 15. Whether it be perpetually necessary that the
Ecclesiastical authority should be in one.
it was not necessary, that there should always be an Evangelist in every
Church to exercise the power of ordination, and jurisdiction; so perhaps, some
more judicious will allege, that though the power of ordination and
jurisdiction be perpetually necessary: yet it is not necessary, that this power
should always be wholly in some one in every Church, as it was in Timothy, or
Titus. Neither did I say it was, but that the power or authority which they
exercised, was perpetually necessary; and the function, whereby they did
exercise it, was ordinary, being the very same function, which other Bishops,
both then, and ever since, have administered. And therefore the refuter does
greatly wrong me, when he says, that I make this Episcopal power,
perpetually necessary, and charge me with contradicting my self in another
place, where I acknowledge, that where the Episcopal government may not be
had, there others may be admitted.

For the clearing therefore of the whole controversy, and plain manifestation
of that which I hold therein; we will make use of a distinction, which the
learned use concerning matters of government. In all governments therefore
there are these things to be considered: pot^stas, ordo, formae vel modus,
titulus, sieve applicatio potestatis ad personam, and vsus. First the power to
be exercised in government; then the order, whereby the inferiors both to be
governed and governing are subordinate to the superiors: after, the form and
the manner of government, as, whether it be a Monarchy, where the power is in
one, or an Aristocraty, where it is in few, or a Democraty, where it is in the
multitude: and how each government is ordered: the title, as whether the
governors are put in and entitled to their power and authority, by
succession, or by election or institution; and after, how they use and exercise
their authority, etc. Of these, the two first, that there should be power of
government, and order therein, and in the people governed are essential and
perpetual, as the immutable ordinances of God. The other, many ways are
accidental and variable. But yet, if question be made, what form of
government in the commonwealth is the best, and has the best vvarrant; I
would say the Monarchy, as having divine, both institution, and approbation.
But yet so, as where this cannot so well be had, the other forms of
government be lawful. Even so in the Church of every country, that there
should be a power of Ecclesiastical government to be exercised, and an order
or eutaxy, it is the perpetual and immutable ordinance of God, the Church being
by his appointment a well ordered society, and as the wise man says, Cant.
6.3.9.
tanquam acies ordinata. But whether the sway of spiritual authority should be
in one alone of every Church, or in more, it seems not to be so essential;
though I must confess, that both in the Church of the Jews by the appointment
of God it was in one, namely the high Priest, and likewise in the primitive
Churches, as has been showed. And as touching the title, that seems also to
be variable. For the governors in the Church of the Jews came to their places
by succession and lineall descent; but in the Churches of Christ, by free
election, after Gods first immediate calling.

Now if we shall enquire, 16. What form of Church-gouenrment to be preferred
before others.
what form of Church-gouernment has the best warrant; hereby we may be
resolved. For it is manifest, that our Savior Christ committed the power of
Ecclesiastical government chiefly to his Apostles, and that they being severed
into diverse parts of the world did govern the particular Churches, which they
had collected, severally. And howsoever there were diverse things extraordinary
in the Apostles, and peculiar to their persons; as their immediate calling from
Christ; their unlimited function, having authority to exercise their
Apostolical power wheresoever they came; their admirable, and extraordinary
gifts, of wisdom, of languages, of miracles; their infallible inspiration,
and direction of the holy Ghost preserving them from error: notwithstanding,
there were other things in them, which being perpetually necessary for the
being, and well being of the Church, were from them to be communicated, or
derived to others; as the power to preach the Gospel, and to administer the
Sacraments; and public prayer or liturgy: the power to ordain ministers, and
Pastors; the power of the keys for government, and exercise of Ecclesiastical
censures. Now the power of preaching the word, and administering the Sacraments,
was not from the Apostles communicated to every Christian, but to such as they
ordained ministers, and by the imposition of their hands communicated that
power to them. The power of ordination, and public jurisdiction, was not
committed by the Apostles, neither to other Christians, nor yet to all
ministers whom they ordained; but after the ordination of Presbyters in each
Church, they reserved the power of ordination, and public jurisdiction in
their own hands; which after a time they communicated to those whom they set
over the several Churches to that very purpose: viz. to ordain Presbyters,
and to exercise public jurisdiction; which manifestly appears by the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus. Thus was Timothy set over the Church of
Ephesus, Titus of Creet, Linus of Rome, Evodius of Antioch, Simon of Jerusalem,
Mark of Alexandria, etc. and what authority was from the Apostles communicated
to them, was from them derived to their successors, not only since, but even
in the Apostles times. For what authority Evodius had at Antioch, the same
after him had Ignatius; and what Linus had at Rome, the same had Anacletus,
Clemens, Euaristus; what Mark had at Alexandria, the same after him had
Anianus, Abilius and Cerdo, and all these in the Apostles times: and what
Timothy had at Ephesus, the same had Gaius, who (if Dorotheus is to be
creditted) was his next successor, In synops. in Gai^. Actio. 11
Onesimus after him, and Polycrates, and every one of those twenty seven,
mentioned in the Council of Chalcedon, which from Timothy to that time, had
been successively the Bishops of Ephesus. These, to my understanding, are
plain evidences to warrant the Episcopal function, and to show the deriuation
of their authority from the Apostles; and to persuade Christians to prefer
that form of government before others. For as I added, and will now repeat a
reason, which the refuter might more easily elude with a male pert speech,
calling it wauing and craving, then to answer with soundness of reason, and
evidence of truth.

If the Apostles, vvhiles themselves lived, thought it necessary (that is,
needful and behoofefull for the well ordering of the Churches already planted)
to substitute therein such as Timothy and Titus furnished with Episcopal
power, then much more after their decease have the Churches need of such
governors:

But the former is evident by the Apostles practice in Ephesus and Creet, and
all other Apostolical Churches.

Therefore the latter may not be denied.

All which notwithstanding, I do not deny, but that where the government by
Bishops cannot be had, another form may be used; because the modus, or form
of being in the B. alone, does not seem so to be of divine ordinance, but that
it may upon necessity be altered. But if any shall reply, that howsoever in
civil government the form is variable, yet for Church government we are to
keep us close to the word of God, and what has warrant there we are to hold
perpetual and unchangeable by men, as some of our Disciplinarians use to
argue: I wish them to look to this inference. For if they do not leave that
hold, they must needs grant, that the Episcopal function having that vvarrant
in the Scriptures which I have showed, is to be holden iure divine.

And whereas to confute me, or rather to fight with his own shadow, he says,
that other reformed Churches have continued many years, and may do more,
without Bishops: I confess they have, and I wish they may continue to the end
in the sincere profession of the truth. But where he says, that they have
continued in more quietness, then ours has done, or is like to do: for that
we may thank him, and other unquiet spirits, who have troubled the peace of
Israel, with urging and obtruding their own fancies for the ordinances of God.

To these reasons I added the testimonies of antiquity, 17. Testimonies of
antiquity that Timothy and Titus were BB. Ad page 146.
which with a general consent bears witness to this truth, that Timothy
was B. of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet. Of all which the Refuter makes very
light. All that remains to prove, that Timothy was B. of Ephesus, and Titus
of Creet, is no more but this; the subscriptions to the Epistles to Titus, and
2 to Timothy, call them Bishops, as also the general consent of the ancient
Fathers, and histories of the Church, do. No more (quoth he) but the general
consent of antiquity in a matter of fact, agreeable with the Scriptures? Why,
the testimony of some one of the Fathers affirming it, ought to be of more
weight with us, then the denial of the same by all the Disciplinarians in the
world. But let us come to the particulars. First, First, the subscription to 2 Timothy and to Tit.
I alleged the subscriptions annexed to the end of the Epistle to Titus, and
second to Timothy: wherein the one is said to have been ordained the first B.
of the Church of the Ephesians, and the other the first B. of the Church of the
Cretians. This is something plain. But he asks me, why I severed them from
the consent of the ancient Fathers? was it because I thought them to be of the
Canon? I answer, that I did not sever them, but join them in a copulative
speech; and if I had been of opinion, that they were of the Canon, I would not
have said as I did, it appears not only by the subscriptions, but also by
the general consent of the Fathers: but contrariwise, not only by the
general consent of the Fathers, but also by the subscriptions annexed by the
Apostle himself. But though it were not likely (as he has alleged out of T.
C.) that they were subscribed by the Apostle himself; yet is it certain, that
they are of great antiquity, and of better credit, then the Refuter and some
other Disciplinarians would make them. Indeed, if any other learned man, that
were not a party in this cause, had censured these subscriptions; I would have
respected their censures; but the cauillations of Disciplinarians against them
(who being parties in this cause, are so plainly confuted by them) are to be
rejected. Let us therefore hear, what the Refuter obiecteth against them. How
little credit those subscriptions deserve, it may appear by that under the
Epistle to Titus, which is quite contrary to the Epistle it self. And why so,
I pray you? the subscription says, the Epistle was written from Nicopolis, and
Paul himself wills Titus to come unto him to Nicopolis, for I have
determined to winter there. But if Paul had been now at Nicopolis, when he
wrote, he would have said, not there, but here. Therefore he was but a simple
fellow, that was the Author of that subscription. So says this great Critic.
But if you will consider with me, that Paul being, as usually he was, in
peregrination; Titus could not well tell where he was, neither had Paul
signified in the Epistle where he then was, therefore wrote being at Nicopolis,
as any discreet man would in the like case, come to me to Nicopolis, for I
mean to winter there: whereas if he had written, as the Refuter would have
had him, if he were at Nicopolis; come hither, for I mean to winter here, or
come to Nicopolis, for I mean to winter here: might not Titus have said, where
Paul; as being uncertain where Paul was, and whether himself was to go. This
therefore is too seely a censure, though received from T. B. himself, to
overthrow the authority of so ancient a subscription, in which besides the
ancient Greek copies, it is also testified in the Syriack, that this Epistle
was written from Nicopolis, Athanasius Synops. sacr. script.
speaking of that Epistle to Titus, says, (...). He wrote this Epistle from
Nicopolis, for there he wintered. Oecumenius testifies the same in his
argument on that Epistle to Titus. Sedulius In Tit. 1.
likewise, this Epistle he wrote from Nicopolis, and Theophylact. argument. in
Epist. ad Tit; the Authors of the Centuryes, cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. in Tito.

To the subscriptions I added the testimonies of these Fathers. ^8. The
testimonies of the Fathers.


First, Eusebius Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4.
reports out of the Ecclesiastical Histories which were before his time,
that Timothy had first the Bishopric of the Church at Ephesus, and Titus of
the Churches in Creet.

Secondly, the ancient Author of the book de diuinis nominibus Dionys. de
divine. nom.
dedicating the same to Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, if it be Dionysius
Areopagita himself, who lived at the same time with Timothy, does bear an
undeniable witness to this truth: or if it be another using his name, yet he
plainly signifies, that in his time it was a thing generally received, that
Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus.

Thirdly, Dorotheus In synops.
says, that Timothy was by Paul ordained the B. of the Ephesians, and he
calls Titus the B. of the Cretians.

Fourthly, Ambrose Prefat. in 1 Timothy 1.
testifies the same, Paul instructs Timothy being already created a B. how
he ought to order the Church. And again, In 1 Timothy 1.
he entreats Timothy his fellow Bishop, etc. Again, In 1 Timothy 3.
Timothy was a B. Hence it is, that Paul directs him, how he should ordain
a B. Likewise of Titus Prefat. in Epist. ad Tit.
he testifies, that the Apostle consecrated him B.

Fifthly, Jerome Hier. in 1 Timothy 1.14.
notes, that Timothy received the grace, which Paul exhorts him not to
neglect, when he was ordained B. And where Paul wills him to fulfill his
Ministry in 2 Timothy 4.
, Ierom understands it of his Bishopric. And in the Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers which is in his first Tome, it is testified Hier. in
Catalog.
, that Timothy was ordained of blessed Paul the B. of the Ephesians, and that
Titus was B. of Creet.

Sixthly Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Phil. 1.
, writing on those words Phil. 1. Bishops and Deacon^, says, what means
this? were there many Bishops of one City? in no wise; but so he called the
Presbyters. For then were the names common, and a Bishop was also called (...),
a Deacon or minister. For which cause writing to Timothy being a Bishop,
fulfill (...), thy ministry. For that he was a Bishop, he says, do not
hastily impose thy hands upon any man, and again, with the 1 Timothy 4.14.
imposition of the hands of the Presbytery] but Presbyters did not ordain a
Bishop, and in another place Prefat. in Epi. 1 ad Tim.
, he gives this reason, why Paul wrote to Timothy and Titus, and not to
Syluanus, or Silas, or Clemens, (...), because he had already committed the
Churches to them, but the others he still carried about with him. And on the
fourth to the Ephesians in Ephesians. 4.
, he gives instance in Timothy and Titus as being Pastors assigned to
certain places.

Seauenthly Epiphanius ^ares. 75.
, says, that Paul 1 Timothy 4. writes to a Bishop, and that a Presbyter cannot
be the same with a Bishop: the divine speech of the Apostle teaches who is a
Bishop and who a Presbyter, when he says to Timothy being a Bishop, receive
not hastily an accusation against a Presbyter, etc.

Eighthly Primasius Prefa^. in 1 Timothy
says, Timothy was a Bishop and Paul's Disciple. That grace in 2 Timothy 1.
was the blessing, which Timothy when he was made Bishop, received by
imposition of hands.

Ninthly Theodoret in 1 Timothy 3.
, says, that Titus was the Apostle, that is, Bishop of the Cretians, and
Timothy of the Asians. And out of him Oecumenius prefat. in Tit.
cites these words: Titus was an admirable Disciple of Paul, (...) and he was
by Paul ordained Bishop of Creet. And in another place Praesat. in 1 Timothy
, why did Paul having other Disciples, as Silas, and Luke, and others, write
only to Timothy and Titus? We answer. Because to these he had committed
Churches, but the others he had still with him.

Tenthly, Sedulius In 1 Timothy 1.
, this Timothy was B. in Ephesus, as it is said in the book of histories. And
on these words* stir up the grace which was given thee by the imposition of
hands In 2 Timothy 1.6.
, that is, iuxta ordinationem tuam in Episcopatum, by thy ordination into the
Bishopric.

11. Gregory Pastor. cur. part. 2. c. 11.
the great; hence it is, that Paul admonishes his Disciple, praelatum gregi,
being the Prelate of a flock, saying attend reading until I come.

12. Isidor says De vita and morte sanctorum. 87. and 88.
, that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus.

13. Polycrates Apud Antonin. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 28. 6. and Vincent specul. l.
10. c. 38.
says, that Timothy travailing with Paul to Ephesus, was made the first B.
there by him in the reign of Nero.

14. Theophylact Theophyl. in Ephesians. 4.
understands by Pastors, and Doctors, Ephesians. 4. those to whose care the Church
was committed, that is to say, BB. such as Timothy and Titus. And for that
cause he says Praefat. in 1 Timothy
that Paul wrote to them two. Again Prolog. in Tit.
, Titus being ordained Bishop is set over the great Island Creet.

15. Oecumenius Oecum. in 1 Timothy 1.
, on those words, I requested thee to remain in Ephesus, says, (...), here
he had ordained him B. And again, in Tim. 5. he speaks of ordinations,
(...), for he wrote to a B. And of Titus In Tit. 1.
he says, that Paul left him to ordain BB. (...), having first made him a B.
And of both, on those In Ephesians. 4.
words, Pastors and Doctors he says, Paul means such, as to whose trust the
Churches were committed, (...) BB. (...), such as Timothy and Titus.

16. Nicephorus Lib. 2. c. 34.
says, that after Paul was first dismissed from Rome, he wrote his former
Epistle to Timothy, whom he had ordained before B. of Ephesus. And another
Epistle he wrote unto Titus, whom, having before ordained B. of Creet, he had
left there.

To these I might add the testimonies of diverse new writers, but I will
mention only a few, whose judgments the Disciplinarians will not easily
reject. First therefore Calvin Calu^ in Epist. ad Tim. 1.
in diverse places on the Epistles to Timothy, does note that he was the Pastor
of the Church at Ephesus.

The authors of the Centuryes Centur. 1. l. 2. c. 10. in Joan. Euang.
say, it is evident, that Paul appointed Timothy the Pastor to the Church of
Ephesus.

D. Fulke in Tit. 1.5.
says, among the Clergy, for order and seemly government, there was always
one principal, to whom by long use of the Church the name of B. or
superintendent has been applied; which room Titus exercised in Creta,
Timothy in Ephesus, and others in other places, etc.

Finally Beza in 1 Timothy 5.19.
himself notes, that Timothy was the (...), as Iustine calls him, that is,
Antistes or President in the Presbytery at Ephesus, that is to say according to
Bezaes language, a Bishop.

19. His answer to these testimonies.
To the testimonies which I produced, the refuter answers three things, first,
in effect this, that though the Fathers call them BB. yet properly they were
not Bishops, which bare denial of his, if it be weighed with the testimonies
of the ancient, which I named, will prove as light as vanity it self.

Secondly, that the consent of the Fathers is not so general as I would make
men believe, seeing both Ambrose and Ignatius do make Timothy a Deacon. And
for proof thereof he refers us to T.C. whose words are these T.C. l. 2.
part. 1.3.14.
, all ancient writers are not of that judgment, for not to speak of Ambrose,
which calls Timothy a Deacon, where he opposes a Deacon to a Bishop:
Ignatius Ad Trall.
an ancient writer says, that he was a Deacon: and that where dividing the
ministeries of the Church into Bishops and Deacons, etc. does openly oppose a
Deacon to a Bishop. little reason had T.C. to speak of Ambrose, and therefore
might well say, not to speak of him. For these are Ambrose in Phil. 1.1.
his words: ( with the BB. and Deacons) that is, with Paul and Timothy qui
vtique Episcopi erant, who verily were Bishops, he also signified the Deacons
which ministered unto him. For he writes unto the people. For if he had written
to the Bishops and Deacons, he would have written to their persons: and it had
been fit, that he should have written to the Bishop of the place, not to two
or three, as he did to Titus, and to Timothy. Ignatius Ad Trallian.
his words be these: What be the Deacons but the imitators of the Evangelical
powers ministering unto him (that is, the Bishop, as the Angels do to God) a
pure and blameless ministry, as holy Steven to James the blessed, and
Timothy and Linus to Paul, Anacletus and Clemens to Peter. Distinguish the
times, and the answer is easy. Timothy was such an Evangelist, as first
ministered to Paul as a Deacon, afterward was ordained Presbyter, as Ambrose In
1 Timothy 3. ^ Timotheum Presbyterum ordinatum significat.
says, and lastly a Bishop; which is as the same Ambrose In Ephesians. 4.
says, primus Presbyter. But does his serving under Paul as a Deacon, prove
that afterward he was not a Bishop? nay, rather his being a Deacon, and
afterward a Presbyter does prove he was not such an Evangelist, as the Refuter
imagines. And by as good reason he might prove that neither Linus, nor
Anacletus, nor Clemens were Bishops of Rome, because they had served under
Peter and Paul, as Deacons. Here is all, that our Refuter can, either by
himself, or with T. C. help, object out of antiquity against Timothy his
being a Bishop.

His third answer is, that the Scripture calls him an Evangelist, 2 Timothy
4.5. and therefore he was no B. which is the same with the second objection,
already answered.

I hope therefore I may be bold with the Readers consent to conclude, that
Timothy and Titus were ordained BB. by the Apostle Paul; the one, of Ephesus;
the other, of Creet.

Sermon. sect. 10. page 81. 20. Examples of other BB. made by the Apostles.
To these mentioned in in the Scriptures, we add others out of other the most
ancient records of the Church, whereof some were made BB. by Peter and Paul,
some by John the Evangelist and other the Apostles, etc. to page 87. l. 1. In
this section I brought diverse most plain and pregnant evidences to prove, that
the Apostles ordained BB: noting the Places where, and the Persons whom they
ordained. The which, because the Refuter passes over, as it were in silence, I
will briefly recite; that it may appear to the Reader, that the Refuter had
cause to be silent, because the evidence of truth did put him to silence.

First, I showed out of Eusebius. Chron. ann. 4 5. hist. l. 3. c. 22.
Eusebius, that about the year forty five Euodius was made Bishop of Antioch,
by the Apostles Peter and Paul, as Ignatius Ad Antioch.
who succeeded him in the Apostles times, does witness.

Secondly, that Peter and Paul ordained Linus Bishop of Rome, about the year
56, whom Anacletus succeeded, and after him Clemens: testified by Iren. l. 3. c
3.
Irenaeus and Eusebius. l. 5. c. 6. and l. 3. c. 4. et c. 13. and 22.
Eusebius.

Thirdly, that by the appointment of Peter, Mark was the first B. of
Alexandria, whom Anianus succeeded in that Bishopric, after him Abilius, and
then Cerdo, all in the Apostles times: testified by Niceph. l. 14. c. 39. Greg.
l. 6. Epist. 37. Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 24. Hier proaem. in Matt. and in Catal. in
Marco. and ad Euagr. Dor. in synops. Eusebius. Chron. an. 65. and 86. and 99.
Nicephorus, Gregory, Eusebius, Jerome and Dorotheus.

Fourthly, that after the death of James the just, Simon the son of Cleophas
was by the Apostles which then were remaining, made Bishop of Jerusalem:
testified by Eusebius. hist. l. 4. c. 22. Chron. an. 63.
Hegesippus, and Eusebius.

Fifthly, that John the Apostle ordained Polycarpe Bishop of Smyrna: testified
by Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Eus. l. 3. c. 35. and l. 4. c. 14. Tertull. de praescript.
Hier. in Catal.
Irenaeus, Eusebius, Tertullian and Jerome.

Sixthly, that John after his return from exile, ordained BB. in diverse places:
testified by Eus. l. 3. c. 23.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius.

Finally, that the Apostles committed the Church, which is in every place, to
Bishops whom they ordained, leaving them their successors: testified by Iren.
l. 4. c. 63. l. 3. c. 3. and l. 5. Tertull. de praescrip^.
Irenaeus, and Tertullian, who says, that as Smyrna had Polycarpe from S.
John, and Rome Clement by the appointment of Peter; so the rest of the Churches
can show quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostoli^i seminis
traduces habent; what Bishops they have ordained by the Apostles, the deriuers
of the Apostolical seed.

To all this he has nothing to answer, but that which heretofore has been
fully refuted: that these Bishops were but ordinary Pastors of particular
congregations, etc. saying that he takes also exception against their
assertion, who said, that Bishops be the successors of the Apostles. But not
only Irenaeus, and Tertullian have avouched so much, but diverse others of the
Fathers, as Cyprian, Jerome and Augustine. Cyprian Cypr. l. 4. Epi. 9
says, praepositi, that is Bishops, Apostolis vicaria ordinatione succedunt,
succeed the Apostles as being ordained in their steed. And Jerome Hier. ad
Euagr.
says, omnes Episcopi Apostolorum successores sunt, all Bishops are the
successors of the Apostles. And again he says ad Marell. de error. Monta.
, Episcop^s Apostolis succedere. And Theodoret li. 4. c. 18.
, calls the government of Bishops (...). And likewise Basil Epist. 55. ad
Ambros.
, (...), the presidency of Apostles, who have delivered to Bishops, as Irenaeus
Ire. 3. c. 3.
says, their own place of government in the several Churches. And this is
that, which both Jerome August. and Hier. in Psa. 44.
, and Augustine expounding those words of the 45. Psalm pro patribus nati tibi
sunt filij, have delivered; that instead of the Apostles, Bishops were ordained
governors of the Church in all parts of the world. Which point is duly to be
considered. For hereby it is manifest, that the Bishops have received and
derived their authority from the Apostles, whose successors they are, not only
in respect of doctrine (as all other true ministers) but also in the government
of the several Churches. And when the Disciplinarians can show the like
warrant for their Presbyteryes, especially of Lay Elders; or our refuter, and
his good friends the Brownists, for the chief authority of the people, we will
harken to them. Once, it is evident, that Christ committed the authority and
government of his Church to his Apostles, who were to derive the same to
others. Wherefore who have any ordinary right, they have received the same from
the Apostles. So Timothy and Titus received their authority from Paul, Linus
from Peter and Paul, Policarpus from John, etc. And all other the first Bishops
from the Apostles, from whom by a perpetual succession it has been derived
to the Bishops which are at this day. But where is any evidence of the like
deriuation from the Apostles of authority to the people of Lay Elders, I know
not.

Thus have I made good my former proofs, that the Episcopal function is of
Apostolical institution.

The V. CHAPTER. Answering the allegations out of Jerome.
Sermon. Sect. 11. page 87. Against all this that has been said to prove that
the Episcopal function is of Apostolical institution, the authority of
Jerome is objected, etc. to page 89.
AGainst the testimonies of men, says the refuter, what is fitter to be
objected, then the authority of such a man as of set purpose disputing the
question, determines the contrary to that which was so commonly anouched.

Which speech, if it be duly examined, just exception may be taken against
every branch thereof. For first he would insinuate, that nothing has been
brought to justify the calling of Bishops besides the testimonies of men; when
besides the testimonies of men, I have brought good evidence of sound reason,
and besides that, better proof out of the scriptures to warrant the Episcopal
function, then ever was, or will be brought for the Presbyterian discipline.
Again, it were fitter, and to better purpose, against the testimonies of men
(if I had produced no other proof) to have brought either testimonies of
scripture, or sound reasons; or for want of them, the testimony of so many,
and so approved authors, to counterpoise the weight of their authorities, who
have been alleged on the contrary part. But scriptures failing, reasons
wanting, testimonies of other Fathers being to seek, Jerome alone must be
feign to bear the whole burden of this cause. For though some latter writers
may be alleged to the like purpose; yet all is but Jerome. Whose not only
judgment they follow, but reteyne his words. Neither does Jerome so often
dispute this question, or determine the contrary, as the refuter in his shallow
conceit imagines. Or if any where is he does determine the contrary, against
that which was commonly avouched both by himself and others; his determination
delivered in heat of disputation ought not to be of so great weight, as what he
has delivered, not (...), in heat of contention but (...) or (...),
dogmatically or historically. For Jerome was but a Presbyter; and there were
two things in his time, which might provoke him by way of contention to say
more in the behalf of his degree, then does exactly agree with the truth. The
one was, that the Bishops of those times did too much depresse the Presbyters.
For they might not only in their presence not preach, nor baptize, nor
administer the Communion, but also in some places they might not preach at all,
nor any where baptize, unless they fetched their Chrisme from the Bishop,
against which practices of the Bishops Jerome in some places of his works does
inueigh. Ad Nepotian. and de ^. ordin. Eccles.


But that which troubled him most was, that the Deacons in his time, especially
at Rome, because they had more wealth (as the fashion of the world is) thought
themselves better men then the Presbyters. For the confutation of whom, he
seeks to advance the Presbyters above the Deacons as much as he can; and may
seem to match them, more then truth would permit, with the Bishops. For which,
the only ground which he has is this, because the name Bishop and Presbyter
were for a while in the Apostles times confounded. Which (God knows) is a
weak ground, and easily out of his own writings ouerturned.

2. The first allegation. Hier. in Tit. 1.
But let us examine the particulars. First it is alleged out of Jerome, that
until factions did arise in the Church, some saying I am of Paul, I am of
Apollo, etc. the Churches were governed by the common counsel of the
Presbyters: but when they began to draw Disciples after them, namely such as
themselves had baptized, it was agreed in the whole world, that one being
chosen from among the Presbyters, should be set over the rest, to whom the
whole care of the Church should belong, and that the seed of schisms might be
taken away.

Whereunto I answered, first, that this speech in respect of the Church of
Jerusalem is untrue, which was first governed by the Apostles in common, and
after committed to James in particular, before we read of any Presbyters there
ordained.

Ad page 148.
The refuter replieth, that my consequence is naught, for even whiles the
Church was governed in common by the Apostles, it was not governed without the
counsel of the Presbyters of the same Church, much less did James afterward
take the whole authority into his own hands, from them. Which exception of his
is of no force, because there were no Presbyters ordained in that Church, when
it was governed by the common counsel of the Apostles; and I added, which he
should have disproued, if he would have said any thing to the purpos^, that
James was assigned Bishop to that Church, before we read of any Presbyters
ordained in, or to that Church. For if James were Bishop of that Church before
it had Presbyters, then was not that Church ruled by the common counsel of
Presbyters, before they had a Bishop. James indeed after he was Bishop,
ordained Presbyters, whose counsel and assistance he did use in the government
and instruction of that Church (as other Bishops used to do in the like case)
as we read Act. 15. and 21.

Yea but the whole multitude says he, as appears by Act. 6.2.5. had the
choice of Church Officers. What then? therefore the Church was not governed by
the common counsel of the Apostles, or was governed by the common counsel of
Presbyters? Because the Greekish Jews (which had their Liturgy and scriptures
in the Greek tongue) were discontented with the Apostles distribution of the
Churches stock, the Apostles therefore to avoid contention and scandal, and
to give every one contentment, departed from their right, and willed the whole
multitude to choose seven, whom we (say the Apostles) may appoint to this
business. Surely, if where the Presbyters are erected, the people, who do
contribute to the releife of the poor, are permitted to make choice of
overseers and collectors for the poor; it were but a simple consequence to
infer hereupon, that therefore the Churches are not governed by the common
counsel of Presbyters.

And to as little purpose, or rather less, is that which follows. If the
Apostles altogether, or James alone afterterwards, had by virtue of their
extraordinary calling the power of ordination and jurisdiction in their hands,
in that, as in all other Churches; yet the Pastors of the Churches afterward,
being no Apostles, had no such unlimited power; and so Jerome still speaks
truly of the ordinary government of the Church. And so Jerome still spoke
untruly, in respect of the Church of Jerusalem. I do confess, this was
peculiar to the Church of Jerusalem, and differing from the order of other
Churches: that the Church of Jerusalem had a Bishop before it had Presbyters of
her own. And therefore though I did not deny his speech to be untrue in
respect of other Churches; yet I proved it to be untrue, in respect of
Jerusalem, by his own testimony. But before I come to the sifting thereof,
there are two other things to be noted in this speech of the refuter. For that
which he pratleth of James his sole power exercised in the Church of Jerusalem,
by virtue of his extraordinary calling, is altogether impertinent: seeing
Jerome, of whom the question is, Catalog. in Iacobo.
confesses, that he was Bishop, and ruled that Church as the Bishop thereof
thirty years. Neither is it true, that the ordinary Pastors of that Church
had not the like power therein, which James had. For there is no question, but
what authority James had in the government of that particular Church of
Jerusalem, Simon his successor had the same, and all the Bishops of Jerusalem
after him.

3. Ieromes speech untrue in respect of Jerusalem.

Catalog. in Iaco.


Now, that Ieromes speech was untrue in respect of Jerusalem, I proved by
Ieromes own testimony; affirming, that James straight ways after the passion
of our Lord was by the Apostles ordained Bishop of Jerusalem. Here the refuter
has found out a quirke, which if it were true, would not yet serve his turn.
The quirke is, that Jerome is mistaken by false pointing and reading, for that
straight way belongs not to James his being made Bishop: but is brought to
show, that John makes mention of him, immediately after he has spoken of our
Lords passion. So that Jerome does not say, that James straight ways after the
passion of our Lord was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, but that John mentioned
him presently after he had spoken of the passion of our Lord. Let me lay down
the whole sentence, that it may appear more plainly. James says Jerome, who
is called the brother of our Lord, surnamed Iustus: the son as many think of
Joseph by another wife: as it seems to me of Mary the sister of our Lords
mother; of whom John in his book makes mention, after the passion of our Lord
straight ways, ( statim, id est, continenter and immediate vt loquuntur, John
19.25. says Iunius) who was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles. And
this manner of reading is avouched by Sophronius, that translated that book of
Jerome into Greek, who makes the distinction presently after straight ways,
seuering that word from his ordination by the Apostles. Among many other
proofs of his learning and judgment, the refuter gives this for one. For
first, this subtility he received from Iunius as he does profess, but
exceedingly dulled by coming through his fingers. For whereas Iunius referr^th
the word of whom to Mary the sister of our Lords mother, Contr. Bellarm.
controu. 5. l. 1. c. 15. 18.
of whom John makes mention straight ways after the passion of our Lord John
19.25. our learned refuter refers it to James, and that twice for failing.
But though he might be mistaken in the English of Ieromes cuius, yet me thinks
so learned a man should have known that (...), in Sophronius, should have been
referred to her and not to him. But let that pass. To justify his correction
of this place of Ierom, he says this manner of reading is auowed by
Sophronius, etc. which is neither so, nor so. For between the Greek and the
Latin there is only this difference (in that edition which I have, being as I
suppose the best) that whereas in the Latin, there is a Colon at the word
filius, which follows meminit; in the Greek, there is but a Comma; but at
the word statim in Latin, and (...) in Greek, no distinction at all. The
Latin words are these, vt mihi autem videtur, Mariae sororis matris Domini
cuius Ioannes in libro suo memunt, filius: p^st passionem Domini statim ab
Apostolis Hierosolymorum Episcopus ordinatus. The Greek, these, (...). For the
correction it self, I would be loath to contest with Iunius, neither is that
subtilty which he has found out prejudicial to my assertion, as you shall
hear; notwithstanding I must needs say, he was greatly transported with
prejudice, when he would refer the aduerbe statim to the verb meminit,
rather then to the participle ordinatus. For though both the Comma and Colon
that come between them were taken away, yet the word filius coming also
between, clean spoileth his conceit. For can any man of indifferency think,
that Jerome being an elegant writer, if he had meant that the aduerbe statim
should have waited on the verb meminit, would have disposed it thus, cuius
Ioannes meminit filius post passionem Domini statim ab Apostolis Hierosolymorum
Episcopus ordinatus? But now weigh the refuters judgment. Suppose, that this
place were read as Iunius would have it, and that James were not so presently
made Bishop of Jerusalem after Christ's passion, as Ieromes words seem to
import, but that after the Apostles he took the government of the Church of
Jerusalem, as Jerome cites out of Hegesippus; what is all this, but the same
that my self set down in the Sermon both in this place also page 68. in these
words, the Apostles first jointly ruled the Church at Jerusalem, but being to
go into all the world, and no longer to be accounted members of that
particular Church, ordained James to be Bishop. And that charge which before
they had in common, they now committed to him in particular. And this is that,
which Jerome cites out of Hegesippus, who says, James the brother of our Lord
surnamed Iustus received or undertook the Church of Jerusalem after the
Apostles. And if the refuter will needs expound after the Apostles, to signify
after their departing from Jerusalem, I must entreat him to take with him the
words both of Eusebius, Lib. 2. c. 23. Ibid. Eusebius in his Chronicle notes
James to have been made B* of Jerusalem, in the same year wherein Christ was
crucified, that is, according to his computation Anno 33.
who sometimes says, the throne of that Bishopric was committed to him,
(...), of the Apostles; therefore before their dispersion; and sometimes (...),
with the Apostles: therefore whiles they were present; and also of Jerome, who
plainly says, that he was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles: but
chiefly that he will remember, that the words straight ways after the passion
of our Lord, are to be joined with the other words, ordained by the Apostles:
then will he acknowledge himself satisfied for this point.

4. Secondly I answered in respect of other Churches; that which Jerome says,
In respect of other Churches Ieromes testimony does not prove that for which
it is alleged.
neither proves that the office of Bishops and Presbyters were confounded,
neither does it hinder, but that the distinct office of Bishops is of
Apostolical institution. Both the parts of this answer I explaned and
confirmed. The former thus: it is true, that for a time the Presbyters by
common counsel governed the Churches, but as under the Apostles, who kept in
their own hands the Episcopal authority; they, I mean the Presbyters, having
neither the right of ordination, nor the power of outward or public
jurisdiction. This therefore does not prove, that the offices of BB. and
Presbyters were confounded. The name of B. was confounded with Presbyter, but
the office and authority of the B. was as yet in the Apostles; the Presbyters
being such then under the Apostles, as they were afterward under the Bishops.
The latter thus: but when the Apostles were to discontinue, from those Churches
which they had planted, then were BB. substituted. Whereunto the factious
behavior of the Presbyters (whereof Jerome speaks) might be some inducement.
(...). Arist.
For parity indeed breeds faction and confusion; for the avoiding whereof
when the Apostles should be absent, BB. were instituted: but when, and where,
and by whom, and to what end, let Jerome himself testify. The sum is, that
although for a time the Churches were governed by the common counsel of
Presbyters; yet this does not hinder, but that the Episcopal function is of
divine institution. For after a while the Apostles ordained BB. as Jerome
himself does most plainly and fully testify, showing the places where, and
the persons whom, and the time when, and the end wherefore, they ordaynd them.

Now let us see, Ad page 149.
what the Refuter can reply against this answer. Forsooth as if he knew, or
regarded no laws of disputation, he thrusts himself into the answerers place,
and makes me the opponent, casting my answer into a Syllogism, and bids me
prove every part and parcel of it, or else all that I say is to little
purpose; himself in the mean while, who should follow the argument which I
answered, and take away my answer, goes about to prove nothing, but himself
to be a shifting Sophister. I think it was never heard in disputation, that
the opponent having received the answer, and reciting the sum thereof,
saying, sic respondes, would cast it into a Syllogism and then bid the
answerer prove the parts thereof. But such a disputer am I matched with. And
how I pray you does he reduce my answer into a Syllogism? that which I
brought to clear the former part of my answer, is made the argument to prove
both the parts in a filthy long Syllogism; and that which I added to prove
the latter part, he mentions as straggling speches brought in to no purpose.
This is his analyzing, which whether it be done of unskillfulness, or wilfulnes,
I refer it to his own conscience I cannot judge thereof, because I know not the
man.

But if my answer must needs be reduced into Syllogismes, 5.
I would entreat, The Presbyters governing the Church by common counsel, does
not prove that the office of Presbyters and BB. is confounded.
that the parts thereof may severally be concluded, as they were by me
severally explicated; and then, that the first Syllogism may be this; If
whiles the Churches were governed by the common counsel of Presbyters, the
Presbyters did govern the same as under the Apostles, the Episcopal office
and authority being not in them but in the Apostles, the Presbyters being such
then under the Apostles as they were afterward under the Bishops: then their
governing of the Church by common counsel does not prove, that the office of a
B. and a Presbyter was confounded. But the antecedent is true in all the parts
thereof: Therefore the consequent. The consequence I did illustrate by this
distinction, the name of Bishop was confounded with Presbyter, but the office
was not, for that was not in the Presbyters, but in the Apostles. The
consequence when it was worse for the addition of the second part, the Refuter
granted; yet he thought good to gather out of it this worthy observation, that
if there was a time before there were Bishops. When the Presbyters governed the
Churches as under the Apostles; then all that while there were no Diocesan
Bishops (the Refuter speaks sentences) and so no distinction between a
Bishop and a Presbyter in office. This, and so, could not well be gathered out
of the proposition, being repugnant unto it; for if there were no distinction
between the office of a Bishop and a Presbyter, then were the offices
confounded. Suppose the commonwealth of Iewry, being a Province under the
Emperor of Rome, had been governed by the Synedrion or common counsel of the
Seniors for a time, until the Emperor had placed a sovereign King over them,
as he did Herod; it might be said, that for a time that commonwealth was
governed by the common counsel of their Elders, but as under the Emperor, who
kept the regal authority in his own hands. Hereof it might not be infered,
that the office of the Senators and of a King were confounded. For the
sovereignty was in the Emperor, and the Senators might have been the same
under their King, which they had been under the Emperor, etc.

As touching the assumption, he says, it should have been proved; and I say,
if he were able, he should have disproued it. For my part, I was in this place
the answerer; and the parts of the assumption be such, as either had been
before cleared, or seemed to need no proof. For first, that the Presbyters
ruled the Churches as under the Apostles, it is manifest. That the Episcopal
authority consisting specially in the power of Ordination, and public
Jurisdiction, was not in them but in the Apostles; partly was proved before, to
wit, that Presbyters never had it; and partly needed no proof, viz. that the
Apostles had it. And surely little need had Paul to have sent Timothy to
Ephesus, and Titus to Creet, to exercise the power of Ordination and public
Jurisdiction in those Churches; if the Presbyters had the same before they
came. But still I desire some evidence, whereby the deriuation of this power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, from the Apostles to the Presbyters, or people,
may be warranted. Thirdly, that the Presbyters were the same under the Apostles
then, which they were afterward under the Bishops, I take for a certain
truth. For if they were the same under Timothy and Titus, that they were under
the Apostles; then questionless they were the same under the Bishops, who have
no other function, nor exercise any other authority, then that which Timothy
and Titus had and exercised in Ephesus and Creet. And these I hope are reasons
sufficient to approve the former part of my answer, until the refuter who is
the opponent, be able to disprove it. The second part of my answer may be
concluded thus. 6. The Presbyters ruling the Church by common counsel for a
time, does not hinder, but that the Episcopal function is of Apostolical
institution.


If after a while, namely when the Apostles were to discontinue from the
Churches which they had planted, the Apostles themselves ordained BB. then the
Presbyters ruling of the Churches by common counsel for a time, does not
hinder, but that the Episcopal function is of Apostolical institution:

But the former is true: Therefore the latter.

The consequence needs no proof: the assumption I prove by Ieromes own
testimony. For if Jerome do testify, that the Apostles ordained BB. and
withal do note the time when, the place where, and the end wherefore, then
does he give plentiful testimony to this truth: But Jerome does testify, that
the Apostles ordained BB. and withal notes the time when, the place where,
and the end wherefore. The time and place he notes: The time in general when
BB. were first ordained according to Jerome.
first generally, the time when Bishops were ordained was in the Apostles time:
the place where, in all the world: Which two if you join together, it will
appear that by Ieromes testimony the function of BB. is of Apostolical
institution. For it is utterly incredible, that BB. should be ordained in all
parts of the Christian world in the Apostles times, and yet not be of the
Apostles ordayning.

That Jerome held BB. to be ordained in the Apostles time, I prove out of the
place alleged; when factions began to spring in the Church, says Jerome, some
saying I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas; which was in the Apostles
times, 1 Cor. 1. and it were fond to imagine, that factions did not begin till
after their time.

Ad page 150.
This argument the Refuter would discredit, because Sanders uses the like, and
his own answer he would credit with the name and countenance of certain
learned men; which is one of his ordinary shifts to bleare the eyes of the
simple, who many times respect more who speaks, then what is said. But my
argument stands thus: When the factions began, whereof Jerome speaks, BB.
were ordained, as he says:

In the Apostles times the factions began, whereof Jerome speaks:

Therefore in the Apostles times Bishops were ordained, as he says.

The effect of the answer which he brings is, that Jerome speaking of
Schisms which did arise after the Apostles times, alludeth to that speech of
the Apostle; not that he thought Bishops were ordained in those times, but
that he might show, that schism was the cause of changing the order of
Church-gouernment. Which answer might have some show of probability, if Jerome
himself did not both in other places, which I cite, most plainly testify,
that Bishops were ordained in the Apostles times; and also in the place
alleged expressly speak of those factions which did arise in Corinth, and
other places in the Apostles times. The factions whereof he speaks, did arise
from hence, that vnusquisque eos quos baptizauerat suos putabat esse non
Christi, says Jerome, every one esteemed those whom he had baptized to be his
own and not Christ's. Now it is apparent, that this is the very thing which
Paul reproves in the Corinthians, that every one said they were his who 1 Cor
1.14.16.
had baptized them, and therefore thanketh God that he had baptized none of
them, but Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanas. For by this means,
as Calvin in 1 Cor. 4.14.
also observes, 1 Cor. 4.6.
the factious and ambitious teachers (whom he meant under the name of Paul and
Apollos) sought to draw Disciples after them. Yea but Jerome in his Epistle to
Evagrius, shows that in the Apostles times Bishop and Presbyter was all one;
and that afterward Bishops were first ordained as a remedy against schism. To
this I have answered before, showing that Jerome there proves that the names
at the first were confounded, and the same men were called Presbyters and
Bishops until one out of the Presbyters in every Church was chosen, and set
above the rest, and called a Bishop. Which Jerome there confesses to have bin
done ever since St. Marks time, and therefore in the time of the Apostles. For
the first Bishops were not chosen out of the Presbytery of the Churches,
whereof they were made BB. but were Apostolical men, I mean either Apostles,
or some of their companions and assistants: all which while, the Bishops were
called Apostles, as I showed out of Theodoret: the names Presbyter and
Episcopus being as yet confounded. And whereas he says, that I answered even
now, the course of government was not changed at the first when facti^^s began,
he does but threapen kindness on me: for I said no such thing. If therefore
Jerome teaches that Bishops were ordained when factions began: and also that
in the Apostles time factions did begin; then in Ieromes judgment Bishops were
ordained in the Apostles times; but Jerome teaches both the one and the other,
as is manifest by that which has been said.

7. The place in general where BB. were ordained according to Jerome. In Tit.
1.
As touching the Place; Jerome says, in toto orb decretum est, it was decreed
in the whole world, that one being chosen from among the Presbyters should be
set over the rest, to whom the whole care of every Church should appertain.
From whence I reason thus. A general decree in the whole Christian world could
not be made in the Apostles times without the authority and consent of the
Apostles:

This general decree was made in the Apostles times:

Therefore not without their authority and consent.

The assumption I prove thus: This general decree in the whole world was made
either in the Apostles times, or near their times. But not near their times,
for there could no such general decree be made without a general Council.
And there was no general council before the council of Nice, before which
council there were not only Diocesan and Metropolitan Bishops but also
Patriarchs.

Ad page 151.
The Refuter answers, that Ieromes words deceive me. For though Jerome says
it was decreed, yet he does not mean that it was decreed, but that it came
from custom, and that paulatim, by little and little. The Refuters answer
therefore makes Jerome to contradict himself; whose speeches notwithstanding
are thus reconciled. For that which he there calls custom, in another place
Ad Euagr.
he terms an Apostolical tradition, and the Apostolical tradition is that
universal decree which he speaks of. And where Jerome says, by little and
little that the roots of discension might be plucked up, the whole care was
committed to one: that is to be understood thus; that although it were agreed
upon at once, and decreed to be put in practice in the whole world; yet it
was not practiced at once in the whole world, but first in one Church, as at
Jerusalem, after in Antioch, then in Rome, after in Alexandria, in all which
Churches not only the first Bishops were ordained in the Apostles times, but
their successors also, and that by the testimony of Jerome himself as
follows in the next proof.

For having thus showed in general both the time and place out of Jerome, 8.
Jerome testifies in particular whom, where, when, and wherefore the Apostles
ordained Bishops.
when and where Bishops were ordained, that is to say, in the Apostles times,
in the whole world, and consequently that they were ordained by the Apostles:
in the next place I declare more particularly out of Jerome, that by the
Apostles Bishops were first ordained; noting also the persons whom, and the
places where, and the time when, they ordained Bishops. Does not Jerome
plainly testify that James Catal. in Iacobo.
was by the Apostles ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, before their departure
thence: that when he had governed that Church 30. years, Simon Catal. in
Simone.
his brother, or kinsman, succeeded him in the Bishopric, who living until
he was 120. years old was crucified under Traiane?

Does not he witness that Ignatius Catal. in Ign.
was the third Bishop of Antioch in the Apostles times? that Mark Proaem. in
Mat.
was the first Bishop of Alexandria, and that he dying Catal. in Marco.
at Alexandria in the eight of Nero (that is four or five years before the
death of Peter and Paul) Anianus succ^eded him?

Does he not say, that Cl^mens Catal. in Clem.
was the fourth Bishop of Rome after Peter. For, says he, Linus was the
second, Anacletus the third, all in the Apostles times?

Does he not expressly testify that Polycarpus Catal. in Polycarp.
was S. John's Disciple, and by him ordained Bishop of Smyrna? and is it not
testified in the same Catalogue that Timothy Catal. in Timoth. and Tit.
was of blessed Paul ordained B. of the Ephesians, and that Titus was B. of
Creet?

Hereunto the Refuter makes an answer like himself, that he has often told
me, that James, Mark and Timothy neither were, nor might be Bishops. And I
have often told him of his poor shifts, whereof this is one. For the question
being here, not whether these men simply were Bishops or not, but whether
Jerome says so, or no; I having alleged plain testimonies of Jerome auerring
that they were Bishops: he, in steed of maintayning his assertion, which was
that Jerome testifies Bishops not to have been ordained until after the
Apostles times, gives Jerome the lie, but answers not to the point. For if
Jerome testify, that these men were Bishops in the Apostles times, how is not
he ashamed to say, that in Ieromes opinion there were no Bishops in the
Apostles times?

And where he says that Polycarpe (and the like no doubt would say of Linus,
and Clemens, and Ignatius etc.) was the ordinary Pastor of that one
congregation at Smyrna, and no Diocesan Bishop: which evasion I have heretofore
avoided, I desire this answer may be compared with the next, which he makes
concerning the end.

9. The end of ordayning BB. according to Jerome.

Aduers. Lucifer.


The end, says Jerome, was to avoid Schism, and acknowledges that for the
same end they are to be retained; professing, that the safety of the Church
depends upon the dignity of the Bishop, to whom if a peerless power and
eminent above all be not yielded, there would be as many Schisms in the
Churches as Priests.

The Refuter answers, that some say, the remedy was almost worse then the
disease. But first, what is this to the purpose? that the Refuter had rather
there should be a Schism in every Parish, then a Bishop of the Diocese? it was
Ieromes judgment, that I opposed to their allegation out of Jerome. And if
Jerome testify, that in the Apostles times Bishops were ordained to avoid
Schism, and that this was a necessary remedy, insomuch that he doubts not
to say that the safety of the Church depends upon it; it was as much as in
this place either I intended, or could by the adversary be required. Secondly,
where Jerome says, that Bishops were ordained for avoiding of Schism, he
means such Schism as the Presbyters (whom he calls Sacerdotes, Priests)
would make, if there were not one in every Church set over them, to whom the
care of that whole Church should belong. Now apply the Refuters answer
concerning Polycarpus, which is his ordinary answer, that the first BB. were
but ordinary Pastors of one congregation, such as we call Rectors or Pastors
of several parishes. Were such ordained to avoid schism among priests? or
were not such the priests, whose schism was to be avoided by setting one B. in
every diocese over them? or could the refuter think, that the ordaining of
such ordinary pastors was a remedy worse then the disease? is it not
therefore clear, that the Bishops, whom Jerome acknowledges to have been in
the Apostles times, were not ordinary Pastors of several congregations or
parishes, equal to other Presbyters; In excelfjiori gradu ad Euagr.
but one in every diocese set in a superior degree above the rest to preserve
them in unity and to keep them from schism?

Thirdly, where to the judgment of Jerome he opposes the testimony of
others, who say the remedy was almost worse then the disease, because this
superiority of BB. did breed the Papacy: this shows, that great and sound
D^uines sometimes let fall, especially when they write (...), unsound speeches
grounded on weak proofs. For how is it prou^^ that the superiority of
Bishops did breed the supremacy of the Pope. Because as at the first one
Presbyter was before the rest, and made a Bishop, so afterward one B. was
preferred above the rest, so this custom bred the Pope and his Monarchy. By
which reason, all superiority should be condemned as the original of the
Popes supremacy. For might not a man as well say, that as one Presbyter in
every parish is superior to the rest according to their conceit; so one
Pastor which is the Bishop in every diocese is superior to the other Pastors,
etc.

But indeed the superiority of Bishops is so far from breeding the Papacy as
the cause or original, 10. That the superiority of BB. did not breed the
Papacy.
that it was not so much as any direct occasion thereof. Yea so far was it
from breeding the oecumenicall B. of the whole world, that it did not breed the
Patriarckeship in the maine parts of the world, nor yet the superiority of the
Metropolitanes in the several provinces. For the superiority of
Metropolitanes did arise as Beza supposes from the very light of nature
directing, and force of necessity urging men to that course: but as I rather
think from the institution of the Apostles, after whose times the first
original of them cannot be shown. For although actually they were not
Primates, till in the several dioceses of the province Bishops were ordained;
yet the event plainly shows it was from the beginning intended that the
Bishop of the mother city should be the chief in the province. And you have
heard before how in the Apostles times Ignatius the B. of Antioch was the
Metropolitan B. of Syria, and in the age following Philippe the Metropolitan
B of Creet, and Irenaeus the B. of Lions was the Metropolitan of the churches
in France. And although not long after the Patriarchs were acknowledged and in
the council of Nice established in a godly policy, as Calvin, Calu. Just. l.
4. c. 4. 4. Bez. Confess. c. 5. 29. Zanch. de relig. obseru. in cap. 25.
Beza and Zanchius confess, yet neither did the superiority of Bishops breed
them; nor they, the Papacy. The true original of the superiority of Bishops
Metropolitanes, and Patriarchs in their circuites was the pattern of civil
government in the Roman Empire, divided into certain precin^ts, which the
Church did follow. Whereas therefore to each city the country adjoining was
subject, the Apostles first placed Bishops in the cities, committing to their
charge not only the city but country subject to it, which we call a Diocese,
wherein from the beginning, there was never more lawfully then one B. and
whereas in every province, wherein were many Cities, there was one Metropolis
or mother city, where the ruler of that province was seated; in like manner,
so soon as Bishops were placed in the several cities, they acknowledged the
B. of their mother city their primate, and chief B. of the Province. And as
the whole Empire was divided among certain governors, who were called
praefecti praetorio, whereof one was placed in Rome having the government of
Italy, Affricke and part of Illyricum. A second in Alexandria having the rule
of Egypt, Lybia, Pentapolis etc. A third at Antioch, ruling Syria and other
countries of the East. A fourth in France governing France, Germany, Spain
and Britain; so the diverse provinces subject to the praefecti praetorio, at
least the three former, were subjected to the Bishops of the same sees, who
afterward were called Patriarchs; whose Patriarchal authority was ratified
in the Council of Nice; Con. Nic. c. 6.
to wit, that according to the ancient custom the B. of Rome should have the
care sub vrbicarum prouinciarum as Ruffinus reports that Canon, that is as I
suppose, of the provinces belonging to that pretorian prefecture, that the B.
of Alexandria should have the government of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, and
the B. of Antioch the regiment of Syria and other countries in the East. After
Constantinople, was built, and made the seat of the Empire, diverse countries
were subject to the prefecture, and consequently to the Bishopric thereof.

Neither as I said did the superiority of Patriarchs (though perhaps larger,
then was absolutely needful, because the Ecclesiastical causes of every
province might be sufficiently determined in the prouincial Synodes)
notwithstanding I say, it did not breed the Popes supremacy. Which did arise
from another occasion: which was this. The Bishop of Constantinople,
considering that the Churches of Alexandria and Antioch had that prerogative
which they had, because they were seats of praefecti praetorio; and Rome,
because it had been the seat not only of the praefectus, but of the Emperor
himself, (though at that time in respect of civil government it were subject
to the Exarch of Rauenna, for which cause the Archbishop of Rauenna contended
with the B. of Rome for the superiority) and with all remembering, that
Constantinople was the seat of the Empire; contended therefore, that as the
Emperor, who had his seat at Constantinople, was the Monarch of the world, so
himself might be acknowledged the universal B. or oecumenicall Patriarch. The
which ambition, though it were condemned by Gregory the B. of Rome as
Antichristian (for there is no universal B. or head of the whole Church but
Christ) yet his successor Boniface the third, did imitate, and exceed.
Alleging, that Rome whereof he was Bishop was the ancient seat of the
Empire, and that the Emperor though he remained at Constantinople, yet he
was the Roman Emperor. At length with much a do, and contention, obtained of
the Emperor Phocas, not only that he should be called an Oecumenicall
Patriarch, (for that title the B. of Constantinople having once usurped,
enjoyed it, as well as he, and does retain it to this day) but that his See
should be head of all Churches. And this was the true original of the Popes
supremacy.

11. Ieromes inference urged.
Sermon sect. 12. page 89. Secondly they urge Ieromes inference in that place;
Presbyters at the first ruled the Church by common counsel, therefore the BB.
and they ought to rule the Church in common still. The refuter denies this
inference to be Ieromes, or that any has urged such an inference from him.
When indeed the inference plainly is Ieromes, and is that which among all
their objections, is to best purpose objected by the Disciplinarians. Jerome
had said before, that in the writings of the Apostles Episcopus and Presbyter
is all one; and that before factions did arise by the instinct of the Devil,
some saying I am of Paul, etc. the Churches were governed by the common
counsel of Presbyters, etc. Of those speeches when he had made a brief
recital, haecpropterea, etc. he makes an inference to this effect, that for
as much as Episcopus and Presbyter were all one at the first, therefore both
Presbyters should know themselves to be subject to the B. and BB superior to
the Presbyters by the custom of the Church, etc. And for as much as at the
first the churches were governed by the common council of the Presbyters, as
under the Apostles, that therefore the B. being set over the Presbyters should
not altogether exclude them, but should in communi Ecclesia^ regere rule the
church in common; imitating Moses, who, when he had in his power to rule the
people of Israel alone, chose seauenty, with whom he might judge the people.

Which objection, being better then any the refuter has made in this book, I
will not let it pass without some answer. For it appears that neither the
Apostles or Apostolical men being Bishops, were simply bound to use the
council of the Presbyters, but that the use of them was voluntary, after the
example of Moses, as Jerome says; and the ancient Bishops of the Primitive
Church who were of the best disposition, (as Cyprian by name) did follow their
example, resolving to do nothing of moment, without their counsel and advise:
seeking therein the good and peace of the Church. And this custom was used by
all godly Bishops, until as I said, the Presbyters advise and assistance, to
themselves seeming troublesome, and to the B. by reason of the frequent Synodes
and Synodall constitutions needless, grew out of use; whereupon Canons were
made that their counsel and assistance should be required an had in greater
matters, which is not misliked but wished to be more used. And so much may
suffice to have answered an objection; which the refuter does not acknowledge.

I proceed therefore to the third, 12. Ad page 152. The chief objection that
BB. are greater then Presbyters by the custom of the church not by Divine
ordinance.
which is as it were the shoote-anchor of the Disciplinarians; which failing
their Discipline will suffer shipwreck. Presbyters and Bishops were all one;
therefore Bishops are to know that they be greater then the Presbyters, rather
by the custom of the Church, then by the truth of Divine disposition.

To this objection I returned two answers: the first, that where Jerome says
Episcopus and Presbyter is all one, it may be undertook of the names, which
he proves by many Phil. 1.1. Acts 20.17.28. Tit. 1.5.7. 1 Pet. 5.
testimonies to be confounded in the vvritings of the Apostles. And in this
sense it is true, that whereas now Episcopus is more then Presbyter, it is to
be ascribed to the custom of the Church, as before I have noted out of
Theodoret. And in the same sense Augustine Epist. 19. ad Hier.
is to be understood, when he says, according to the names of honor in
which the use of the Church has prevailed Episcopatus, Bishopship is a name of
greater honor then Presbyterium.

The refuter coming to examine this answer, says, I denied the Antecedent,
when as indeed I granting the Antecedent, in that sense which I give in the
answer, denied the consequence. That although the distinction of the names
was not by divine disposition, but by the custom of the Church: yet that
hinders not, but the function may be of Apostolical institution. Seeing they
which at the first were ordained by the Apostles to the Episcopal function,
though they were not called Bishops till they were chosen out of the
Presbyters, yet were called sometimes the Apostles, sometimes the Angels of
the churches. So that when the names were confounded, the offices were not. But
the refuter censureth this distinction as an idle conceit and shift having no
color of excuse for it. As though it needed excuse, when I brought just
defense of it, which he is not able to answer. For how shall Ieromes mind
be known in that assertion, that Episcopus and Presbyter was all one, but by
the proofs which he brings for it? but all his proofs are that the names
were confounded in the vvritings of the Apostles; and that the same men were
called Presbiteri and Episcopi, and that was all that Jerome could truly
infer out of those places. For if he would have concluded out of them that
the offices were confounded, his consequences would be very weak.

The second defense of my answer was this, that Jerome is to be understood
either of the names or of the offices: But not of the offices, therefore of the
names. If you shall understand Jerome, as affirming that the offices were
confounded, and denying that the office and superiority of Bishops was of
Divine disposition, in that sense that Apostolical ordinances may be said to
be of Divine Institution, you shall make Jerome, not only to strive against
the stream of all Antiquity; but also to be contrary to himself; but this
latter is absurd; so is the former.

To the former reason the refuter answers not, 13. The refuters reply, that
Jerome is not to be understood as speaking of the names.
but brings a reason or two, such as they be to overthrow my distinctions,
seeking as we say clauum clauo pellere. Can any man be so sotttish, says he,
as to imagine that the question betwixt Jerome and those Deacons was about
names, not offices? or would Jerome reason so simply as to prove the dignity
of the Presbyters above Deacons, because the name of Presbyter and Episcopus
was all one? it were absurd to spend more time in answering so unreasonable a
distinction. You see how brag our refuter is, when he seems to have gotten
never so little advantage. To his former question I answer, that although the
question was concerning the office of Presbyters and Deacons whether were
superior; yet Jerome might, and indeed did prove the Presbyters to be
superior, because as the Apostles did call themselves Presbyters, so
Presbyters were called Bishops. Yea but says he in the second question,
Jerome would not reason so simply. Whereto I answer, that not only learned
men, but the holy Ghost also in the Scriptures Heb. 1.
does reason to that purpose, proving their dignity to be greater who have
obtained a greater name. For as the Philosophers Plat. Arist.
say, names are the resemblances and imitations of the things.

Secondly he obiecteth the authority of diverse new, and I confess, worthy
Divines, (...).
who think that Jerome makes a Bishop and a Presbyter all one, not in name
only, but in office also. Which is a kind of arguing frequent with this
refuter, but seldom or never used by any writer of worth. Against his
authorities therefore that Jerome was of that judgment, I fear not to oppose
the reasons which I produced, and namely the second. But says he we need not
stand in fear of that glittering flourish, whereby we are charged to make
Jerome strive against the stream of all Antiquity, and to be contrary to
himself, if either he confound the functions or deny it to be an Apostolical
ordinance, that Bishops should be set over the Presbyters. What one testimony
of Antiquity within the first two hundred years, either has been, or can be
alleged to that purpose? of as little force are the allegations which M. D.
says, he has cited out of Ieromes writings. In both which answers the
refuter shows himself to be very impudent. For first, that the office or
degree of Bishop and Presbyter are distinct; have I not brought forth most
plain and plentiful proofs, out of Ignatius, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, and
other ancient writers? that Bishops were ordained by the Apostles, have I not
alleged most pregnant testimonies out of Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Hegesippus and Clemens, cited by Eusebius? and can it seem doubtful to any,
that shall read what is alleged by me and the refuter in this controversy
which way the stream of Antiquity runs? And as for Jerome, what more
plain testimonies can be desired, then those which I brought to prove, that
in his judgment Bishops were ordained by the Apostles. And that Jerome never
thought, that the office of Bishop and Presbyter was confounded, it may further
appear by these reasons. For where Paul vvriteth to the Bishops and Deacons
at Philippi, here, says Jerome Hier. in Phil. 1.
, by Bishops we understand Presbyters. For in one City there could not be
more Bishops then one. Which plainly shows, he thought that although
Presbyters had the name, yet they had not the office of Bishops, and that
although there might be many in one City which had the name, yet there could
be but one, that had the office of a Bishop. Again on 1 Timothy 3. he Hier. in 1 Timothy 3
says, it is demanded, why the Apostle made no mention there of Presbyters,
but comprehended them in the name of Bishops? because, says he, the degree of
Presbyters is the second, and almost the same with that of Bishops.

The second answer.
My second answer was, if Jerome must be understood, as speaking of the
office, that then we are to distinguish of those words, Divine disposition, as
including only those things which be either directly and immediately of Divine
institution, or are Diuini iuris, of Divine right, as being perpetual and
immutable; but not as excluding Apostolical ordinances. For Jerome, besides
that he has plentifully testified, that Bishops were ordained by the Apostles,
he does also expressly call this function Episcopal an Ad Euagr. Ad page 153.
Apostolical tradition. But this testimony the refuter thinks to elude,
because in the writings of the Fathers, the precepts and observations of their
forefathers though indeed not ordained by the Apostles are called Apostolical
traditions. Which answer may have place in such traditions, as have no
testimony or proof, that the Apostles ordained them; but for this matter in
question, we have had plentiful and pregnant proofs, and evident
testimonies, not only of other authors, but of Jerome himself, plainly
auouching, that Bishops were ordained by the Apostles, and particularly
relating the persons whom, the places where, the time when, the Apostles
ordained them.

If neither of these answers, will satisfy the refuter, then must he be
forced to confess, that Jerome was inconstant in this question, holding one
while that Bishops were of Apostolical Institution, and another while that
they were not. And if Jerome were unconstant which is the worst that can be
objected against this cause, and wherewith I would be loath to charge him,
then let it be considered, whether those testimonies which he has in more
places delivered dogmatically and historically, for the superiority of
Bishops, himself being a Presbyter; are not to ouerweigh those fewer, which
he uttered (...), in the heat of disputation, as a party in the cause,
maintaining the dignity of Presbyters, himself being a Presbyter, against
either the indignities offered them by the Bishops or the insolency of Hier.
ad Euagr. August. quaest. ex vet. and nou. test. 101.
Deacons who sought to ouerpeere them.

Thus have I proved that the Episcopal function is of Apostolical, and
consequently of Divine institution.

The VI. CHAPTER. Proving directly, that the Episcopal function is of Divine
institution.
In what sense I hold this assertion that the Episcopal function is of divine
institution.
Sermon. Sect. 13. page 92. I will in the last place directly, yet briefly prove,
that the Episcopal function is of divine institution, etc. to protection of
their persons page 94. THe refuter has more then once charged me, that I
maintain the Episcopal function to be held iure diuino, implying thereby,
that it is generally and perpetually necessary. Wherefore least he should be
taken in the manner, as a wilful deprauer of my assertion, he leaves out all
that which I have delivered to explane my meaning, and begins this section
at the middle of a sentence, where the explication ends. Such shifts may
deceive the simple for a while, Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
sed mendacia diu non fallunt, but lies will not beguile long, as Cyprian
says. If he had meant to deal truly, he should have begun this section at
the division page 91. in the end; where by a distinction of that which might
be Ieromes meaning, I take occasion to pass to the direct proofs, that the
Episcopal function is of Divine institution. But because I did foresee, that
this my assertion would be understood, as if I held the function of Diocesan
Bishops so to be diuini iuris, as that it is generally, perpetually and
immutably necessary for the being of a Church and that no other form of
government may in no case be any ways admitted; therefore both in the text,
and in the margent I explaned the assertion which I hold, showing plainly in
what sense I maintain the calling of Diocesan Bishops to be of divine
institution. All which though the refuter passed over in silence, yet I think
it needful to repeat, that both my sincerity, and his fraudulent dealing may
appear.

My words in the Sermon were these: If his (that is Ieromes) meaning should be,
that the superiority of Bishops over Presbyters, though it be an Apostolical
tradition (as himself calls it) yet notwithstanding is not directly of
Divine institution: although there be small difference betwixt these two (as I
understand Divine institution) because what the Apostles did in the execution
of their Apostolical function they did by direction of the holy Ghost: Acts
15. Acts 20.28.
so that they might truly say both of their ordinances, it seemed good to the
holy Ghost and us, and of the parties by them ordained, attend the flock over
which the holy Ghost has made you overseers; notwithstanding, for more
evidence I will in the last place directly, yet briefly prove, that the
Episcopal function is of Divine institution, or that Bishops were ordained of
God.

In the margent also (fearing least my meaning would not plainly enough
appear) to prevent the cauils of those which be adversaries to the cause
which I maintain, I noted these words. Though in respect of the first
institution, there is small difference between an Apostolical and Divine
ordinance, because what was ordained by the Apostles proceeded from GOD (in
which sense and no other, I do hold the Episcopal function to be a Divine
ordinance, I mean in respect of the first institution) yet in respect of
perpetuity, difference by some is made between those things which be Diuini,
and those which be Apostolici iuris: the former, in their understanding being
generally, perpetually and immutably necessary; the latter, not so. So that
the meaning of my defense plainly is, that the Episcopal government has this
commendation above other forms of Ecclesiastical regiment, that in respect of
the first institution, it is a Divine ordinance; but that it should be such a
Divine ordinance, as should be generally, perpetually, immutably, necessarily
observed, so as no other form of government, may in no case be admitted, I did
not take upon me to maintain. With what conscience therefore the refuter has
laid the maintenance of that assertion to my charge, and omitted the
explanation of my defense in this place, the Reader may easily judge;
especially if he remember that where he thought any advantage could be taken
out of this explanation of my defense, there he takes notice of it, as namely
page 90. of his book; where he supposing, that I avouch a necessity of
retayning the government of Diocesan Bishops, he uses these words. Who would
have thought to have heard such a speech from him that acknowledges another
government good and lawful. page 95. and makes the calling of Bishops no
further of divine institution, then as being ordained by the Apostles it
proceeded from God, without implying thereby any necessary perpetuity
thereof? Page 92. Thus sincerely their cause of sincerity, as themselves call
it, is maintained.

2. That the BB. were ordained of God. Ad page 154.
Now that Bishops were ordained of God, I prove by this argument, as the refuter
has framed it: If God ordained Timothy, Archippus, and the Angels of the
seven Churches Bishops, then were Bishops ordained by God.

But God ordained them Bishops:

Therefore Bishops were ordained by God.



As touching Timothy: I argued thus. By whom was he ordained Bishop? By Paul,
I confess, as the instrument; but yet by the holy Ghost as the author and
directer of his ordination. For he was made B. by prophecy. 1 Timothy 4. 1 Timothy
4.14.
How is that (...). What is by Prophecy? (says Chrysostom) by the holy
Chrysostom. hom. 4. Grac. 5. latin. in 1 Timothy 1.
Ghost. Paul stirring him up, puts him in mind, who elected and ordained
him; as if he had said, God has chosen thee, he has committed his Church
unto thee. (...), thou were made Bishop not by humane suffrage, but by
Prophecy; that is, by Divine revelation, says Theodoret Theodoret.
; that is, spiritu sancto iubente, by the commandment of the holy Ghost, says
Theophilact Theophil.
; (...), says Oecumenius Oecum. in 1 Tit. 4.
, (...), for by the appointment of the holy Ghost Bishops were made, and not at
random. Whereunto you may add the testimony of Calvin Calu. in 1 Timothy 4.
. Per Prophetiam] quomodo? quia scilicet spiritus sanctus oraculo Timotheum
destinauerat vt in ordinem pastorum cooptaretur. Neque enim delectus
tantuacute;m fuerat hominum iudicio vt fieri solet, sed praecesserat spiritus
nuncupatio.

To this argument the refuter answers nothing, but that, which I have
plainly and fully confuted before; that Timothy was not a Bishop, though
Calvin as you see, confesses, that Timothy by the oracle of the holy Ghost
was chosen into the order of Pastors. For if he were a Pastor, it is not to be
doubted, but he was a Bishop.

That Archippus was ordained Bishop of God, I prove thus. Because Col. 4.17.
Paul using the same exhortation to him which he gave to Timothy 2 Timothy 4.5.
the Bishop of Ephesus, namely, that he should fulfill his ministry, he
adds, which thou have received in the Lord; and therefore by Gods ordinance,
and as it were at his hands.

The refuter having framed the argument thus, He that received his Episcopal
ministry in the Lord, was ordained a B. by the Lord.

Archippus received his Episcopal ministry in the Lord:

Therefore he was ordained Bishop by the Lord:



He denies the proposition; because neither is all Episcopal ministry
proper to a Diocesan Bishop, else the Apostle would not have made a B and
Presbyter all one; neither is that office only in the Lord. Of which reasons,
the latter is merely impertinent, and frivolous. For who ever said, or
thought, that the office of a Bishop only is in the Lord? neither is the
former to any purpose, seeing he knows, that by Episcopal ministry I
understand the function of a Diocesan Bishop, and therefore should not have
denied the proposition, but have distinguished of the assumption, saying, that
he did not receive the Episcopal ministry, meaning the function of a
Diocesan Bishop. For proof whereof, it suffices to me, that Archippus was as
Ambrose in Col. 4.17.
notes, Bishop of Collosae, which was a City: seeing I have manifestly proved
before, that the Bishops of Cities were Diocesan Bishops.

sect; 3. The Bishops of the seven Churches had divine institution. Ad page
155. and 156.
As touching the Angels I argue thus; Those who are called by the holy Ghost the
Angels of the Church; and were signified by the seven stars which were in
Christ's right hand, had Divine both institution and approbation:

The Diocesan Bishops of the seven Churches are called by the holy Ghost the
Angels of the seven churches, and were signified by the seven stars which
were in Christ's right hand.

Therefore the Diocesan Bishops of the seven Churches had divine both
institution and approbation.



The proposition I proved, because they who are called Angels are authorized
and sent of God, and stars whose both pre-eminence of dignity is noted in
this life (for the stars Apoc. 12.1.
are the crown of the Church) and also prerogative of glory which they shall
have in the world to come. And finally, they who are signified by the seven
stars in the right hand of Christ, are such as Christ does both approve and
protect.

The assumption I went not about to prove now, because it was proved at large
in the former part of the Sermon. And yet all that the refuter answers to the
purpose, is, that they were not Diocesan Bishops. For that which he adds
besides, is but the uttering of his spleen, and emptying his gall against
Bishops, to whom he cannot abide (such is his malice) that the titles of Angels
and stars, which notwithstanding the holy Ghost gives to the Bishops of the
seven Churches, and which himself acknowledges to be titles common to all
ministers, should be applied to Bishops. It is true, that these titles of
Angels and stars are common to all ministers, yet (...) (to signify their
pre-eminence) they be attributed to Bishops. For as I have said before; when in
a Church, where are many Ministers, who are all termed Angels, the Bishop
only is called the Angel of the Church, this title does note his singular
pre-eminence. And the same is signified when as there being a great number of
ministers in Asia who all were stars, the seven Bishops only of those
Churches are signified by the seven stars which Christ held in his right
hand. Now if these seven Bishops were Diocesan Bishops as I have manifestly
proved them, and all the Bishops of the ancient Churches to have been; then
must the refuter be content to endure, both that Diocesan Bishops were called
the Angels of the Churches, and the stars which Christ held in his right
hand; and consequently also, that the function of Diocesan Bishops is of Divine
institution. And thus passing by his railing, as not worth the mentioning, I
proceed to the conclusion of my Sermon.

The VII. CHAPTER. Defending the conclusion of the Sermon, Ad page 157.
and showing that the chief Protestant writers did not disallow the Episcopal
government.
The third part of the Sermon. Sect. 1. page 94. Thus having proved this doctrine
arising out of the Text, that the Episcopal function is of Apostolical and
divine institution: it remains, that we should from thence gather some uses
to our selves both for the informing of our judgment, and reforming of our
lives, etc. to now let us, page 97.
THe use which serves for rectifying the judgment is contained in this
section, and it is first propounded, and afterward maintained against two
objections. The use is this, that as the Episcopal function has been
manifestly proved to be lawful and good; as being the ordinance of God, so we
would all be persuaded to acknowledge it. But the refuter is like the deaf
Adder, that stops her ear; he will not be persuaded, though he be
convicted. For though he braggeth, that this answer of his does manifest that
I have not brought any one good proof in the whole Sermon; yet this defense of
mine will make it evident, that he has not been able to disprove any one of my
proofs, which he has gone about to answer (for the most part) with sound
learning, but to elude with shifts and cauillations.

But some will say, Ob. 1. The Episcopal government so held to be of divine
institution as notwithstanding where it may not be had, another form of
government may be admitted.
this is not all that you would persuade us unto, that the function of Bishops
is lawful and good; but when you say it is of divine institution, you seem to
mean, that it is diuini iuris, and consequently that not only it is lawful,
but that it only is lawful, and that all Churches are so perpetually and
necessarily tied unto it, as that no other form of government is warrantable
in the Church of God.

My resolution of this doubt I signified before Sermon. page 92. that I did not
hold it so to be diuini iuris, as that necessarily it were to be observed
always and in all places, and so himself confesses page 90. of his book.
And therefore when he said my resolution was obscure and doubtful ( for
doubling I leave to him) he was disposed to cavil. I refer indeed the
consideration of this inference to our Disciplinarians, who having conceipted
the Presbyterian platform to be described in the scriptures; do therefore
urge the same, as perpetual and unchangeable, signifying, that if they will be
constant in their judgment, they must by the same reason acknowledge the
Episcopal government, which has warrant in the word, to be perpetual and
unchangeable. Which conceit of theirs has perhaps been the cause, why they
have given out to make my Sermon odious among their followers, that I maintain
the Episcopal function to be diuini iuris, as being commanded of God, and
perpetually imposed upon all Churches. Nevertheless, I plainly declared my
resolution to be this, that although we be well assured, that the form of
government by Bishops is the best, as having not only the warrant of scripture
for the first institution, but also the perpetual practice of the Church from
the Apostles times to our age, for the continuance of it; notwithstanding we
doubt not, where this may not be had, others may be admitted; neither do we
deny, but that silver is good, though gold be better, which objection and
answer, I inserted of purpose into the Sermon, to preserve the credit of those
reformed Churches, where the Presbyterian discipline is established, and that
they might not be exposed, or left naked to the obloquies of the Papists.

2. Contradiction falsely objected.
To which my charitable endeavor the refuter opposes himself, as being
always ad oppositum, without regard either of my charitable intent, or of the
credit of the reformed Churches, laboring tooth and nail to persuade his
reader, Ad page 158.
that I contradict my self, and that in the conclusion of my Sermon I did
overthrow what before I had builded. But as always hitherto, so now also, he
has showed his malice to be greater then his strength. For though he charge
me, as having often and peremptorily avouched the perpetual necessity of the
government of the Church by Diocesan Bishops: yet neither often, nor once,
neither peremptorily, nor at all, neither the perpetual necessity, nor any
absolute necessity at all, is urged in any one of the allegations, which he
so hotly, as it were with fire and towe, obiecteth. The first which is objected
out of page 33. has been explained before. For when I said, that as the
government by Bishops was first ordained for the preservation of the Church in
unity, and for the avoiding of schism; so it is for the same cause to be
retained: I did not mean any absolute necessity of retaining it, but that as
at the first it was ordained, as being thought fit, expedient and needful to
avoid schism; so it is fit, expedient and needful for the same cause to be
retained. Neither do I see how he can infer this perpetual necessity
which he talks of out of page 72. where I said, the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus are the very patterns and Presidents of the Episcopal function, whereby
the Apostle informs them, and in them all Bishops how to exercise their
function touching ordination and jurisdiction. For although Paul gives his
directions primarily to Timothy and Titus, and to all such as should have the
like function that is to say, Bishops: yet if this form of government be
changed, those which shall exercise the like authority, must follow those
directions, as being given, though primarily and directly to Bishops, yet
secondarily, and by consequence, to those who though they were not Bishops,
should have the like authority And to the like purpose is that alleged out of
page 74. and that we should not think as some do that these things were
spoken to them as to extraordinary persons (whose authority should dye with
them) but to them and their successors to the end of the world, he straightly
charge Timothy, that the commandments and directions which he gave him,
should be kept inviolable unto the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
therefore by such, as should have the like authority unto the end. And
presently after, for the authority which was committed to them is perpetually
necessary, without which the Church neither can be governed (as without
jurisdiction) neither yet continued (as without ordination) and therefore not
peculiar to extraordinary persons, but by an ordinary deriuation to be
continued in those, who are the successors of Timothy and Titus. Here I
appeal to the refuters conscience whether he be not persuaded of the truth of
both these sentences. Can he deny, the authority which was committed to
Timothy and Titus, to be perpetually necessary, which is the sum of the
second sentence? or if it be perpetually necessary, that some were to have it
to the end of the world, which was affirmed in the former sentence? If he had
learned the distinction betwixt potestas, and modus potestatis, whereof I spoke
before; the power or authority it self being the perpetual ordinance of God,
the manner or form of government wherein that power is exercised being
mutable; he would not so hotly have urged these allegations.

Yea but that page 79. is above all show of exception says he where he
says, the function and authority which Timothy and Titus had was not to end
with their persons but to be continued in their successors as being ordinary
and perpetually necessary not only for the well being, but also for the very
being of the visible Churches. How this spe^ch is to be understood, I
distinctly showed before, not thinking (I protest) of this objection made by
the Refuter. For when I said, their function and authority was ordinary and
perpetually necessary, I meant, that their function was ordinary as being
Pastoral and Episcopal, and that the authority which they had was perpetually
necessary, as was said in the former allegations.

If he shall perhaps urge those words which mention the successors of Timothy
and Titus to the end of the world: I answer, it is more then likely, that they
shall have successors in the same function in some Churches to the end, that is
to say, Bishops; though in some others, that form of government being altered,
the authority may be in those who do not succeed them in the said function at
least in the same form and manner of governing.

3.
This being all which he has gained by these allegations, he might have
forborne his triumphing insultations, which bewray his want of judgment. For
where he obiecteth against me this contradiction, as though I held, both that
the government by Bishops is necessary for the very being of visible Churches,
and also that there may be visible Churches without it; either he does
ignorantly mistake, or wilfully deprave my sayings. For though I said, the
authority which Timothy and Titus exercised, was perpetually necessary, both
to the being of Churches as the power of ordination, and to the well being as
the authority of jurisdiction; yet I never said, that this form of government
was necessary to the being of visible Churches. And where he goes about to
prove, that the Episcopal government is not perpetually necessary, because
there be many visible Churches at this day without it; what does he else, but
fight with his own shadow, seeing that in favor only of those Churches this
passage was by me inserted? Whether more reformed Churches are governed by the
Episcopal or by the Presbyterian discipline.
howbeit, he impudently ouer-reacheth, when he says almost all visible
Churches are without Bishops. For not to mention all other Churches which be in
the Christian world, which have always had, and still have Bishops: and to
speak only of the reformed Churches in Europe: is it not evident, that the
far greater part of them is governed by Bishops, and which is all one with
Bishops; by Superintendents? The refuter, when he desired to the uttermost
page 52. to enlarge the number of those Churches which have the Presbyterian
Discipline, he reckoned the reformed Churches of France, the Low-countreyes,
Saxony, Heluetia, Bohemia, Zuricke, Berne, Geneua, Sauoy, Palatine, Poland,
Hungary, Gernsey, Iersey, Scotland: from which number notwithstanding some
Churches are to be subtracted, as all in Scotland, and some if not all, in
Saxony, neither do I suppose that their Presbyterian discipline is established
in Zuricke, and all the Churches of Heluetia, neither is any one whole kingdom
ruled by that discipline. So that I am persuaded there are scarce so many
particular Churches or congregations, governed by the Presbyterian discipline
in all the world, as are governed by Bishops in the Kings dominions, in great
Britain and in Ireland. But besides these. I find alleged by one of great
wisdom and judgment many more which are not governed by the Presbyterian
discipline, Suru. page 362.
as the Churches of Denmark, Sueuia, all the reformed Churches of Germany
(saving in some parts of the Low-countreyes, and of late about Heidelberge,
procured in the minority of the Prince) all the Churches in the Duchy of
Saxony, the Duchy of Brunswicke and Luneburge, the Duchy of Megalopurge, the
Duchy of Wirtemberge, all the Churches within the countries of the Marquess
of Brandeburge and the Marquess of Bade, all the Churches within the
government of the Earldom of Henneberge, the Earldom of Swartzenberge, the
Earldom of Lenning, the Earldom of Hannaw, the Earldom of Oetinghe, the
Earldom of Mansfield, the Earldom of Stalbergh, the Earldom of Glich, the
Earldom of Rheinesterne, and the Earldom of Leonstine, and all the Churches
in the Barony of Limpurge, the Barony of Schenburge, and the Barony of
Wildenfield. Whereunto may be added all the Churches, in four or five and
thirty, (at the least) free cities with their territories, the most of them as
large and ample as Geneua; in none whereof the Presbyterian discipline is
erected. Which enumeration is a good evidence also to justify my answer to
the next objection: which is this.

4. Ob. 2. The first and principal Protestants did not disallowe the
Episcopal function. Ad page 159.
Some will say the Protestants which were the blessed instruments of God for the
reformation of religion in this last age, are thought to have preferred the
other discipline by Presbyteries, before this by Bishops: and therefore in thus
magnifying the Bishops; you seem to join with the Papists against them.
Whereunto I answered, that those godly and learned men allowed the Episcopal
function, and simply desired the continuance thereof, if with it they might
have enjoyed the Gospel. For proof whereof I referred the reader to the
Survey of the pretended discipline cap. 8. page 110.111. etc.

In refuting of which answer, the refuter deals very absurdly with me, and
the reverend author of the Survey. For when I referred the reader to a Chapter
of that book, containing many notable testimonies, to prove that which I said:
the refuter deals as a man resolved to deny my conclusion, what proofs so
ever I should bring against him. And though I refer him to testimonies for
number and weight sufficient, either to satisfy, or to convince him, if he
would but have turned to the place; yet he says, he cannot possibly see, how
I should have any such opinion of those godly and learned men, whose writings (
as he says) do so often and so vehemently profess the contrary. And that he
may not seem to speak without ground, he desires me to leave the Surueyour,
and hear what he can say. As if the Surueyour were not worthy to be heard
when the learned refuter is to speak. When as indeed our Refuter, for ought I
see by him, is not for wisdom, learning and judgment worthy to be named
with that reverend Author on the same day. But though he would seem not to
vouchsafe an answer to the Survey, yet the truth is, he durst not acquaint the
Reader with those testimonies: which howsoever before I did mention for breuity
sake, I may not now wholly conceal from the Reader.

And although I might by way of requital, desire him to lay aside h^s
misse-alledged allegations, as unworthy to be examined, and to give ear to
those testimonies cited by the Surueyour; yet I will vouchsafe an answer to
his authorities, after I have recited some few testimonies of the chief
Protestant writers, as I find them cited by the Surueyour, referring the
Reader, for the rest, to the Survey it self.

And first I will begin with the Augustane confession (whereunto the chief
learned men who first were called Protestants did subscribe, 5. Survey. page
110 and 111.112. etc.
Calvin soon after being one of the number) and with the Apology thereof.

We have often protested (say they Histor. confess. August. per Chytr. p. 109.
) that we do greatly approve the Ecclesiastical policy and degrees in the
Church, and as much as lies in us, do desire to conserve them. We do not
mislike the authority of Bishops so that they would not compel us to do
against Gods commandment.

We do here protest Apol. Confess. August. per Pap. page 137.
, and we would have it so recorded, that we would willingly preserve the
Ecclesiastical and Canonical policy: if the Bishops would cease to tyrannize
over our Churches. This our mind or desire shall excuse us with all posterity,
both before God and all Nations, that it may not be imputed unto us, that the
authority of Bishops is overthrown by us.

I would to God it lay to me, says Melancthon Ibid. page 305.
, to restore the government of Bishops, etc.

By what right Melanct. to Camerar. in histor. Confess. August. per Chytr. p.
389.
or law may we dissolve the Ecclesiastical policy, if the Bishops will grant
us that which in reason they ought to grant? and though it were lawful, yet
surely it were not expedient. Luther was ever of this opinion; whom many for no
other cause I see do love, but for that they think they have cast off their
Bishops by means of him, and have obtained a liberty, which will not be
profitable for our posterity.

Would to God, says George Concion. Georg. Princ. Anhalt. fol. 6.
Prince Anhall, that those which carry the names and titles of Bishops would
show themselves to be Bishops indeed. I wish they would teach nothing that is
disagreeable to the Gospel, but rule their Churches thereby; Oh how willingly
and with what joy of heart would we receive them for our Bishops; reverence
them, obey them, and yield unto them their Jurisdiction and Ordination? Which
we always, and M. Luther both in words and in his writings very often
professed.

If they would bring unto us such an Hierarchy says Calu. to Sadol.
Calvin, wherein the Bishops shall so rule, as that they refuse not to submit
themselves to Christ, that they so depend upon him as their only head, etc.
Then surely if there be any that shall not submit themselves to that Hierarchy
reverently, and with the greatest obedience that may be, I confess there is no
Anathema whereof they are not worthy.

In the articles Artic. protest. cap. de unit. Ecclesiae.
agreed upon by Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin, and other learned men, it is said,
for the avoiding of Schisms there was a profitable ordination that a B. should
be chosen out of many Priests, who should rule the Church by teaching the
Gospel, and by retayning the discipline, and who should govern the Priests
themselves. Afterward also there were degrees made of Archbishops and above
them of Patriarchs, etc. These Ordinations, if those that govern do their
duty) as preach, ouersee the doctrine and manners of their Churches, correct
errors and vice, practice Ecclesiastical censures, etc. are profitable to
preserve the unity of the Church.

And in their additions to the said Resp. protest.
articles: As concerning ordination, we especially approve the ancient custom
of the Church* etc. This difficult and necessary charge for the Church, it is
to be wished (reformation being made) that the Bishops would take upon them.
And we hear that our learned men have expressly so yielded ordination to those
Bishops, if first there may be a reformation.

In a Treatise made by Bucer De Reform. aduers. Eccles. p. 95.
with the advice of the said learned men, and offered to the Emperor, it is
thus written: we must endeavor, that that form and distribution of
Ecclesiastical government, which the Canons do prescribe to Bishops and
Metropolitanes be restored, and kept.

The same De vi and vsis ministr. p. 565.
Bucer, speaking of Bishops and Metropolitanes, and of their authority over the
Churches and Ministers within their Dioceses, and Provinces, he says, this was
agreeable to the law of Christ, etc.

And in another De Regno Christi. page 67.
place. Now by the perpetual observation of all Churches, even from the
Apostles times, we do see, it seemed good to the holy Ghost, that among
Priests to whom the procuration of Churches was chiefly committed, there should
be one, that should have the care and charge of diverse Churches, and the whole
Ministry committed to him: and by reason of that charge he was above the rest,
and therefore the name of Bishop was attributed peculiarly unto these chief
rulers of Churches.

And again, De cura curat. p. 251.
In the Apostles times one of the Priests or Pastors was chosen and ordained to
be the Captain and Prelate over the rest; who went before the rest, and had
the care of souls, and the administration of the Episcopal office especially
and in the highest degree. And this he proves by the example of James, Act. 1.
and after concludes in this sort. The like ordination has been perpetually
observed in other Churches likewise, as we may learn out of the
Ecclesiastical Histories, and the most ancient Fathers, as Tertullian,
Cyprian, Irenaeus, Eusebius and others.

It were a most profitable order for the welfare of the Church, says Jacob
Loc. comm. de Ecclesia. p. 699.
Heerbrandus a very learned man if every particular Province had her Bishops
and the Bishops their Archbishops.

These few testimonies among many do sufficiently discover, with what mind
the Refuter desired me to lay them and all the rest a^ide, and to give ear to
his allegations, as more worthy to be heard.

Let us therefore hear them* 6.
and let the Reader judge with what conscience he either rejected the former,
or alleged these. And first, though he says he will pass by an Epistle of
one Oram written under the name of Lucifer to the Pope and his Prelates, yet
because he entreats the Reader to turn to it in the book of Martyrs, as
fitting belike our Bishops, he is worthy not to pass unpunished, when he
comes to light For that letter being a mere inuectiue against the horrible
enormities of the Popish Prelates, speaking nothing at all of their office, but
that they were the successors of the Apostles, in referring the Reader unto
it, what was his intent, but that he should apply the things spoken of their
greiuous enormities to our Bishops? then which, he could not offer a greater
villainy to them. I desire the Reader that has any moderation in him to read
that Epistle, and by his intended application thereof to our Bishops, to judge
of our refuters spirit, though he professes in the last page, how greatly he
reuerenceth the Bishops persons.

In the next place, to let you think he has great store (even whiles he
quoteth either not Protestants or such as were not of our age, of whom alone
the question is) he says, he will pass by also that which is written by
defensor pacis part. 2. c. 15. and well might he pass by him; for though he
hold, that the Priestly Character is the same in Priests and Bishops, yea in
the Pope himself, and that they have the same essential authority which is
the power of order, and likewise in imitation of Jerome holds, that Episcopus
and Presbyter at the first were one, etc. Notwithstanding, he no more
disalloweth the superiority of Bishops; then either some other Papists, who
have contended, that for as much as order, in that it is a Sacrament, has
reference to the Sacrament of the Altar which the Priest does offer, and make
his maker, as well as the Pope himself, that therefore Bishops and Presbyters
be of one order; or then Jerome, who though he says Episcopus and Presbyter
were at the first all one* yet professes, that the safety of the Church
depends upon the dignity of the Bishop, etc.

John Wickliffe.
Having passed by these two, he professes to begin with Wickliffe, whom he
would feign have the Reader believe, to have been a Marprelate, or an oppugner
of the superiority of Bishops. But howsoever, either Papists through malice, or
Protestants for want of information, have in some points As in that which the
Refuter calls the twelfth article, and Pighius his question.
so conceived of him (of both which sorts the refuter quoteth some) yet those
who have perused his writings Thom. James his Apology for Wickliffe, proving
his conformity with the now Church of England. Epist. dedic. and cap. 8. s. 21.
protest, that not only for doctrine, but also for discipline, he was wholly
conformable to the present Church of England, approving the government of
Archbishops, Bishops, and Archdeacons, etc. And whereas the Rhemists object
against Wickliffe, that he had renewed the heresy of Aerius; D. Fulke In Phil.
1.1.
answers thus. It appears by many places of Wickliffe his works, and namely
in his Homily on Phil. 1. that he acknowledged the distinction of Bishops and
Priests for order and government, although for doctrine and administration of
the Sacraments, they are all one. Indeed in the book of Martyrs, where be
eighteen articles objected against Wickliffe (though neither the twelfth
article which the Refuter mentions, nor that which Pighius obiecteth against
him is contained in that number) the which articles he explaneth. Among which
the fifteenth is this, that every Priest rightly and duly ordered according to
the law of grace, has power according to his vocation, whereby he may minister
the Sacraments, and consequently absolve any man confessing his fault, being
contrite and penitent for the same. Which article, when he came to expound, he
gave this reason; because that the order of Priesthood in his own nature and
substance receives no such degrees either of more or less. Ordo sacerdotalis
non suscipit magis and m^nus.
And yet notwithstanding the power of inferior Priests in these days be upon
due consideration restrained, and sometimes again in time of extreme
necessity, released. And thus according to the Doctors, a Prelate has a
double power, to wit, the power of order, and the power of Jurisdiction or
regiment. And according to the second power, the Prelates are in an higher
majesty and regiment.

Thus have I recited word for word what is set down in the book of Martyrs;
the words whereof the Refuter depraueth, making Wickliffe to say, Ad page 160.
the order of Priesthood receives no degrees of more or less, howsoever the
Doctors say, that the Prelate has a double power, etc. Whereby he would make
the Reader believe, that he differed from those Doctors, with whom he does
agree: affirming (as many others have done, who notwithstanding allowed of the
superiority of Bishops) that in the power of order all Priests are equal,
though Bishops have also the power of Jurisdiction, wherein they are superior
to other Priests. To the same purpose is alleged his assertion of two orders
Priests and Deacons, which the Papists themselves hold, dividing Priests unto
Maiores which be Bishops, and Minores which be Presbyters.

Bal. Centur. 6.1.
Why he quoteth Bales centuries I know not, unless it were to show his more
exquisite reading then other men's, having belike read there something
concerning this cause, which no man else is able to read or to find.

But I had almost forgotten his first allegation, which the Refuter pretending
such plenty, might well have omitted as impertinent. For though he envied
against the excessive lordlinesse and tirannicall domination of the Popish
Bishops: Yet does it not prove, that he was an enemy to the superiority of
Bishops, or the substance of their calling.

And whereas with Wickliffe he joins the Waldenses, whose opinion he does
not cite but by the report of Pighius; it is evident by the book of Martyrs in
their story, that they acknowledged these three degrees, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, Artic. 7. And therefore is untruly laid to their charge by Aeneas
Syluius, that they held no difference of degrees among Priests, unless perhaps
by Priests, be meant Bishops.

7 John Hus.
The next is John Hus, says the Refuter, who was charged by the Pope and his
officers to err. First, in that he held not, nor allowed, that by the Church
was meant the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops and Clergy underneath them, but
affirmed that signification The words are, and dicit illam significationem
extortam a scholaribus.
to be drawn out of the Schoolmen. Secondly, that he avouched all Priests to
be of like power, and therefore the reservation of the Bishops casualties order
of Bishops, and consecration of Clerks The refuter puts in Priests.
was invented only for covetousness. Thirdly, that he held, that every man
has authority to inuest men into the cure of souls.

Whereto I answer, first, that these articles were indeed exhibited against
him to the Pope by Michael de Causis, but I do not read, that either he
acknowledged them to be true, or that he was condemned for them. Secondly, in
the book of Martyrs, and also in his Story prefixed before his works, it is
said, that of the articles which were objected against him, there were but a
few which he acknowledged to be true. This therefore is the refuters argument,
John Hus was accused by his malicious adversaries, who made no conscience of
accusing him falsely, that he held all these articles; therefore all these were
his opinions. But if it be sufficient to accuse, as the Emperor said, who can
be innocent? the godlyest Martyrs never wanted accusers; whom if the refuter
should therefore pronounce guilty of those matters whereof they were accused, he
should show himself a wise man. But so he deals with John Hus: he was
accused of these opinions, therefore he held them. Wherefore he must either
prove, that Hus did acknowledge them to be true, or else what does he but
subscribe to the accusations of his malicious accusers against him. But suppose
the first of these three were his, what will the refuter infer thereof? he
did not hold nor allow that by the Church was meant the Pope, Cardinals,
Archbishops and Clergy underneath them; therefore he did not allow the
calling of Orthodoxall Bishops. Michael de Causis his accuser, for this article
quoteth his book de Ecclesia, where I find this assertion (by the allegation
whereof, you may guess how he was used in the rest) that the Pope of Rome Hus.
de Eccl. c. 7.
with his Cardinals is not the whole body of the universal Church but a part,
and that the Pope is not the head thereof, but Christ.

The which assertion he opposes against the sayings of some Doctors, who
held, first, that the Roman Church is the Church universal: that of the
Church of Rome the Pope is the head, and the college of Cardinals the body.
Which assertion, if you shall compare with his adversaries allegation, and
apply to the refuters purpose, you shall perceive the malice of the one, and
folly of the other.

For the second article, his accuser does not quote any of his books, but
says thus, aliqualiter patet iste articulus ex praedictis, this article after
a sort may be gathered out of the precedent articles, wherein there is no such
matter contained.

The third he proves by Husses fact, because in the kingdom of Boheme many by
him and his favorers and abetters have been thrust into Parish Churches,
which they a good while ruled without the institution of the Sea Apostolic,
and also of the ordinary of the City of Prage. Whether Hus did this or no, it
is questionable; but if there had been Orthodoxall Bishops, by whose authority
faithful Ministers might have been instituted; without question, he would
never have attempted any such enterprise. But he held the Popish Clergy to be
Antichristian, and therefore did as he did. Otherwise for the function it self
of Bishops, he says plainly more then De Eccles. c. 10 and 15.
once, that the rest of the Apostles had equal honor and power with Peter,
and that when they deceased the Bishops did succeed in their place. And that
all Bishops of Christ's Church following Christ in manners, are the true Vicars
of the Apostles. And out of Jerome, that all Bishops are the Apostles
successors. And approves that saying of Bid Ex Bed. in Luc. 10.
, as no man doubts but the twelve Apostles did premonstrate the form of
Bishops: So the seauenty two did bear the figure of the Presbyters and second
order of Priests.

Jerome of Prage
And thus much of John Hus; to whom the refuter joins Jerome of Prage, who
justifies the doctrine of Wickliffe and Hus against the pomp and state of the
Clergy. Which if he had done, he had spoken never a word in disallowance of
the Episcopal function. But that word state is foisted in by the refuter, who
alleges almost nothing truly. His words were these Act. and Mon. in the
history of Jerome of Prage.
, whatsoever things M. John Hus and Wickliffe had holden or written specially
against the abuse and pomp of the Clergy, he would affirm even unto the
death. And again, that all such articles as John Wickliffe and John Hus had
written and put forth against the enormities, pomp and disorder of the
Prelates, he would firmly hold and defend. And persisting still in the praise
of John Hus, he added moreover, that he never maintained any doctrine against
the state of the Church, but only spoke against the abuses of the Clergy,
against the pride, pomp and excess of the Prelates. For it was a grief to
that good man, says he, to see the Patrimonies of Churches misspent and cast
away upon harlots, great feastings and keeping of horses and dogs, upon
gorgeous apparel, and such other things unbeseeming Christian religion. And
again, I take God to my witness, that I do believe and hold all the articles
of the faith, as the holy Catholic Church does hold and believe the same, but
for this cause shall I now be condemned, for that I will not consent with you
unto the condemnation of those most holy and blessed men aforesaid, whom you
have most wickedly condemned for certain articles, detesting and abhorring
your wicked and abominable life. Whereby it is apparent, that both he, and
they did not speak against the function or calling of Bishops, but against the
personal abuses and enormities of the Popish Bishops, which none but a
viperous brood would apply to the persons of our Bishops, and much less
against their sacred function.

After them arises Martin Luther says the refuter, 9. M. Luther.
whose sayings he quoteth in his book against Popish Bishops, of private
Mass, and against the Papacy, etc. But for the first of these, Luther
himself has given us this caveat. Let no man think that what is spoken
against these tyrants, is spoken against the Ecclesiastical state and true
Bishops or good Pastors. Let no man think that what is said or done against
these sluggish beasts and slow bellies, is said or done against the heads of
the Christian Church. And howsoever in the heat of his zeal against these
Antichristian Bishops he uttered some things which seem prejudicial to the
calling: yet you have heard it testified before Supr.. 5.
by sufficient vvitnesses, Ad page 161.
that in his judgment he allowed the government of Bishops. Whereunto add
the testimony of Camerarius Camerar. in vita Phil. Melancth.
, that Melancthon non modo ad stipulatore sed etiam authore ipso Luthero, not
only by the consent, but advise of Luther persuaded, that if Bishops would
grant free use of the true doctrine, the ordinary power and administration over
their several Dioceses should be restored unto them.

Zuinglius.
The like may be said of Zuinglius. For he that professes as Zuinglius does in
the book before Ecclesiast.
cited, that James was B. of Jerusalem, Philippe of Caesarea, Timothy of
Ephesus* cannot lightly speak against the Episcopal function it self. If he
speak against the Popish Clergy for arrogating the name Church to themselves;
what is that to the purpose? or if he affirm, that every several congregation
according to the phrase of the Scriptures, is a Church who denies it? or if
he inueigh against the sole and supreme power of Bishops, whom does this
touch, but the Pope?

Oecolampadius.
Oecolampadius might be of opinion that the Church was governed by only
gouerning-Elders, and persuade the Senate of Basil who had no Bishop, that
such may be chosen to assist their Pastor; and yet notwithstanding not
disallowe the government of Bishops. Calvin, Zanchius and other learned men
have said and done as much, who notwithstanding approved the Episcopal
function.

Ph. Melancthon Ad page 162.
And as Melancthon was of Ieromes judgment, that Bishop and Presbyter at the
first was all one, so with Jerome he does allow the superiority of Bishops:
and where the Episcopal government was overthrown* he sought to restore it,
as you have heard before, and did restore it as may appear by these
testimonies. You Hist. August. Confess. page 306.
will not believe says he writing to Luther, how greatly they of Noricum and
some others do hate me propter restitutam Episcopis iurisdictionem, for
restoring the jurisdiction to Bishops. Again Ibid. page 304.
, some are wonderfully angry with me, because I seem to restore the dominion
of Bishops. Camerarius In vita Philippi Melancth.
also reports* how inhumanely some accused Philip for maintaining of Bishops,
etc.

Tindall.
Where he alleges Master Tindall, affirming that in the Apostles times an
Elder and a Bishop were all one, etc: he does but play with names, which no man
denies to have been confounded, and so he says Page 251.
all that were called Elders or Priests if they so well were called BB. also,
though they have divided the names now. Yea but in his book Page 133. and 135.
of the obedience of a Christian man, he says that a B. is the ouerseer but of
a parish, and is to preach the word of God unto a parish, and for the same to
challenge an honest living of the parish.

This allegation the refuter has notably wrenched. For Tindals words be these:
by the authority of the Gospel they that preach the word of God in every
parish, and perform other necessary ministeries, have right to challenge an
honest living. For Tindall speaks of such a B. as was but a Presbyter; and
says, that he which preached the word in every Parish, should have an honest
living, the refuter cites him as saying, that a B. is but an ouerseer of a
Parish, etc.

In the next place he cites Viret, as pleading for a popular state in every
church; wherein, if the allegation be true, he is singular, having neither the
judgment of any other sound Divine, nor practice of any reformed Church that I
know of, No not of Geneua it self, to second him. For though the common wealth
of Geneua be reduced to a popular state, yet the government of the church by
their consistory, is Aristocraticall.

And though he passes by (as well he might) Calvin and Beza, Bucer, Peter
Martyr, Bullinger, Brentius, Musculus, whom he thought good to mention only as
favorers of the pretended discipline; yet neither any of these, nor any other
moderate and judicious Divine does condemn (as our Presbyterians do) either
the ancient government by Bishops in the primitive Church, or the retayning
thereof in reformed churches now, as has been showed before.

But he is pleased to conclude with some of our own writers and Martyrs. 10.
And first with Francis Lambard, who is alleged as saying, that a B. and
preacher, a church and a parish is all one, that every parish should have right
to choose their Pastor, and (which is a very unadvised speech if it be truly
alleged) to depose him if he prove unworthy, but not as disallowing the
government of the church by orthodoxal BB. either now, or in the Primitive
church, which was the point to be proved. And the like is to be said of John
Lambart, etc.

As for Bradford whom he cites as holding that the Scripture knows no
difference betwixt a B. and a minister, meaning that the names were confounded
and that nothing is to be gotten by the succession of Popish BB. as minister
not, but Lord it: yet nothing can be alleged out of him to prove that he
disalloweth the government of orthodoxal Bishops.

But it is strange, that he should allege B. Hooper, and B. Bale, as
disallowing in their judgment, the superiority of BB. which they allowed in
their practice. But all that is said out of B. Hooper, is either that BB. were
not till Siluesters or Constantines time, In precept. 8.
such as they are now: (which is true in respect of their outward estate, which
by the peace and prosperity of the Church was much increased, but is not to be
understood in respect of the substance of their calling) or that
excommunication should not be used by the B. alone; which is little, or nothing
to the present purpose, as if he must needs disallow the Episcopal function,
who would not have the Bishop to excommunicate alone.

Ad page 164.
B. Bale understands by the names of blasphemy written on the heads of the
beast. Apoc. 13. the titles of Popish offices, which he says are usurped, and
not appointed by the holy Ghost; among which when he reckons Metropolitanes,
Diocesans, Parsons, Vicars, and Doctors, he cannot be understood as speaking of
these offices in the true church, but as they are members of Antichrist. For
what is the office of a Parson, but of a Pastor, etc. And that this was his
meaning, appears by the other allegation In Apoc. 17.3.
, wherein besides the titles and offices of the Popish hierarchy (among whom he
reckons BB. Doctors and Priests) he adds temporal governors also, as
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Justices, Deputies, Judges,
Lawyers, Mayors, Baylifes, Constables, etc. leaving their own duty offices
(as to minister rightly) to serve their abomination.

After these, for want of better proofs, he alleges the testimony of the
English men which were at Geneua in Queen Mary's time, and were the first
authors of this contention for the pretended discipline among us; to whose
testimony in their own cause, that they present to us the form of a Church
limited within the compass of Gods word, what should I answer, but that they
have often said, but never will be able to prove, that their discipline is
prescribed in Gods word?

Lastly, he alleges M. Fox, whose testimony though in vain I sought in
three several editions; yet his judgment is apparent, by that which may
easily be found. He therefore says, according to the refuters allegation,
that in the Primitive Church there was not then any one mother Church (such as
the church of Rome now pretends her self to be) above other Churches, but
the whole universal Church was the mother Church, under which universal
Church in general were comprehended all other particular Churches in special
(he means the Churches of several countries, and Provinces) as sister
Churches together, not one greater then another but all in like aequalitie.
What will he hence conclude, that therefore there were no BB. nor Archbishops?
Not so. But that therefore as the Diocesan churches were equal, so were the
BB. and as the Metropolitan churches were equal, so the Archbb. Hear Mr. Fox
Act. and Mon. page 20. edit. 1570.
himself where he debateth this question.

If they say there must needs be distinction of degrees in the church, and in
this distinction of degrees superiority must necessarily be granted for the
outward discipline of the church for directing matters, for quieting of
schisms, for setting orders, for co^mencing of Conuocations and Councils as
need shall require, etc. Against this superiority we stand not; and therefore
we yield to our superior powers, Kings and Princes our due obedience, and to
our lawful governors under God of both regiments, Ecclesiastical and
Temporal. Also in the Ecclesiastical state we take not away the distinction
of ordinary degrees, such as by the scripture be appointed, or by the
Primitive Church allowed. As Patriarchs or Archbb. BB. Ministers and Deacons,
for of these four we especially read, as chief. In which four degrees, as
we grant diversity of office, so we admit in the same also diversity of
dignity: neither denying that which is due to each degree, neither yet
maintaining the ambition of any singular person. For as we give to the Minister
place above the Deacon, to the B above the Minister, to the Archbishop above
the B. so we see no cause of inequality, why one Minister, should be above
another minister: one Bishop in his degree above another B. to deal in his
Diocese, or one Archbb. above another Archbishop. And this is to keep an order
duly and truly in the church, etc. Here then is the question between us and
the Papists, whether the Metropolitan church of Rome with the Archbb. of the
same ought to be preferred before other Metropolitan churches and Archbb
through universal Christendom or not?

11.
And thus I have examined his testimonies, which if you shall compare with those
whereunto in the Sermon I referred the reader* you will acknowledge, that he had
little cause, either to accuse my speech of untruth, or to iustle out the
Surueyours testimonies with his own, as though they had not been worthy to
have been heard in comparison of his. Whereas indeed if there had been no more
testimonies alleged, then of the authors of the Augustane con^ession and the
subscribers thereunto (whom I especialy meant being the men who first were called
Protestants) my assertion had been sufficiently confirmed, though the refuter
could have alleged the judgments of more particular men, then he has done to
the contrary.

But I added in the Sermon, that howsoever the first reformers of religion
(whom they call Protestants) did not disallowe the Episcopal government, but
simply desired the continuance thereof, (as I have now proved by their own
testimonies) notwithstanding, when together with the Gospel, etc. ad page 97.
li. a fine 4. In which words, I do partly excuse the ancient Protestants, who
first yielded to the deposing of Bishops, and partly accuse the innouatours
among our selves.

Histor. August. confess per Chytr. Non agitur vt dominatio eripiatur Episcopis,
s^d hoc vnumpetitur, vt patiantur Euangelium pure ^oceri.
The former I excuse, because they desiring chiefly, and above all, the
instauration of religion and propagation of the gospel, which could not be
obtained while the Popish BB. retained their authority, were forced with the
loss of the Episcopal government to redeem the free profession of the gospel.

The refuter as if he were desirous to leave them without excuse, says, that
is a bad excuse, because it was easier to choose one fit man among them to be
their B. then to find diverse Pastors and Elders meet for the Presbyteries. See
the confession of the church of Sueueland. Harm. confess. s. 11. Ad page 165.
Conc. Afric. c. 22. and Carth. Grac. ^55.
I deny not, but that among them there were some fit to have been BB. yet the
speech of the refuter is untrue. It being an easier matter as the Fathers of
the Affricane council professed, to find many fit men to be Presbyters
(especially if the laity also afford fit men for that purpose) then to find
one fit to be a B. But the refuter does not consider, first who should have
ordained them, secondly, how they should have been maintained, thirdly, and
chiefly, whether the assistance of the civil Magistrates could have been had
for deposing the BB. unless they had yielded both to the dissolution of the
Bishoprics, and to the alteration of the form of government, etc.

Now that the Protestants which subscribed to the Augustane confession did
simply desire the continuance of the Episcopal government; 12.
I prove, because so soon as they could, they procured the restitution thereof
though under other names, because the names of BB. and Archbb. by reason of the
corruptions of the Popish prelates, were odious. And because the refuter shall
no longer doubt, whether those Superintendents, and general superintendents
placed in Protestant churches, be for the substance of their calling, De relig.
obseru. in cap. 25. 10. and 11.
the same with BB. and Archbb. he shall hear the judgment of Zanchius in this
behalf Who after he had signified his approbation of the ancient form of
government by BB. and Archbb. and had confirmed the same by the testimony of M.
Bucer, he adds for further confirmation the practice of reformed churches,
some wheerof both in deed and name have retained BB. and Archbb. and besides
says he, in the churches of Protestants there are re ipsa in very deed BB. and
Archbb. whom having changed the good Greek names into bad latin words, they
call Superintendents and general Superintendents.

Hear the history of the Augustane confession. Hist. August. Confess. per Chytr.
Ministers may bereduced into 3. orders Deacons, Pastors and superintendents.
Deacons we call young Ministers who are joined to Pastors etc. We call them
Pastors, to whom though alone some church is safely committed, not doubting but
that they may rule the same without a colleague. Loc. com. page 699. Suru. 118.
Superintendents we call these Pastors, who are set over other Pastors and
Deacons. With us says Heerbrand there are Deacons, Pastors, special
superintendents, and over them general superintendents.

But why in other churches the learned men have not restored BB. I gave this
reason: for that they could not, either because the Popish BB. were still
countenanced by the civil Magistrate, as in France: or because the form of
civil government being after the expulsion of the B. changed into a popular
state, could no more endure the government of a B. then Rome after the
expulsion of Tarquinius, the regiment of a King. The refuter says they could,
thereby insinuating that they would not. But does he think that the Popish BB.
in France countenanced by the state, would endure Antibishops to be set up
against them in their Diocese? And for Geneua, is it not a plain case, that,
that state was so far from admitting again the government of BB. that Calvin
being out of hope to get a Presbytery established of Ministers alone, was feign
to accept of a Presbytery wherein twelve Citizens are joined to six Ministers?
neither is that to be omitted which Zanchius in the place before cited, does
add in the next words. But even in those Churches also where neither the good
Greek names, nor the bad Latin names are used, notwithstanding there use to
be some chief men, in whose hands all the authority almost is. Where
therefore these be vpheld and Bishops repelled it may seem to be but a
controversy concerning the names, but when we agree of the things, why should
we strive about the names? At Geneua, while Calvin lived, he was the perpetual
president of their Ecclesiastical Senate, differing rather in name, then
authority from a B. And Beza likewise for the space of ten years had the like
authority, till Danaeus coming thither that course was altered. Since which
time* Beza finding some inconveniences, which he knew not how to redress, has
sometimes signified his desire to some (whom I know) wishing with all his
heart, that with the reformation of religion the Episcopal government in that
church had been retained. And I have been very credibly informed, that the
most learned and judicious Divines both in France, and Geneua, could well be
contented, that the ancient government by BB. were renewed among them. which
need not seem strange to us, seeing in the Church of Scotland, where the
Geneua Discipline had for a long time been practiced, notwithstanding, when
the matter was referred to voices, of that great number which were assembled to
that purpose, there were not above five which stood for the Presbyterian
discipline, as I have been informed by some that were there.

But there are two things more in the refuters answer to be touched; the one
that against sense he charge me twice in this place as holding the government
by BB. to be so necessary as that there cannot be a visible Church without it.
I say, against sense, because in the former part of this section I acknowledged
that where this government could not be had, others might be admitted: and in
this place, I do not only excuse those Divines which wanting the Episcopal
government brought in the Presbyteries, but also commend their fact as wisely
performed.

The other is, that out of a desire of contradicting me, he denies the state
of Geneua to be popular. But let Bodin who could discern between the diverse
forms of policy, be judge between us. De repub. l 2. c. 6. Anno. 1523.
The self same year says he, that Andreas Doria did establish the
Aristocracie at Geneua, did they of Geneua having expelled their B. change the
Monarchy into a popular state. And after liberty was restored to the
commonweal, although they ordained a Senate or Council of two hundred men,
yet the people reserved to themselves the right and authority of making laws,
of creating the chief Magistrates, of making war and concluding peace, which
are the principal prerogatives of Sovereignty, called iura Maiestatis.

In the latter part of this Section I did accuse the innouatours among us,
affirming that as in those places where orthodoxall Bishops could not be had,
Presbyteries were wisely brought in: so are they very inconsiderately obtruded
on those churches, where Bishops most soundly professing the Gospel of Christ
are established; especially, considering that the government by Bishops is not
only simply good, and lawful, but also in comparison to be preferred before
the Presbyterian Discipline, as having better warrant. Here the refuter, who
was so ready to take away the excuses which I brought for other churches, has
nothing to pretend as an excuse for himself and his consorts.

12.
Sermon. Sect. 2. page 97. Let us now consider what practical uses etc. to the
end. The practical uses concern, either those who live under the authority
of the BB. or the reverend Fathers themselves. The former, that for as much as
the government of Bishops is the ordinaance of God, we would reverence their
persons, and obey their authority.

The latter, that they would from this Text receive, both comfort and
encouragement in good things; and also admonition, that as they are called
stars and Angels, so they would endeavor to be answerable to their names.

Ad page 166.
The latter use the refuter touches not, neither does he gainesay the former,
but professes that what they are here exhorted unto, they are and have been
careful to perform, appealing to all men whether they have not always
reverenced the persons and obeyed the authority of Bishops. Whereunto, though
I could say some thing; yet I will say no more but this; that as I wish it were
true in respect of the time past, so I pray to God it may be verified of them
for the time to come. Amen.

(...).

FINIS.
Errata, In the first Book.
Page 11. line 15. read (...). P. 18. l. 8. pure, P. 39. l. 15. entyre Church,
P. 48. l. a sin. 3 Council or decree, p. 61. l. 20. dele or should, p. 66. l.
9. rather. page 67. l. a f. 5. M, D. meaning, p. 70. l, 1. call them, p. 87. l.
3. many new, p. 88. l. 6. as a l. 18. grandeuis, p. 89. l. 20. but whether, 91.
l. a f. 10. as well he, p. 97, Marg l: 3. pro 26. page 104. l. 24. and note P.
135. l. a f: 9. jointly, p. 152. l. vlt. dele all the Lent, 153. marg. l. 3.
Insubres, 156. l. 24. proposition, 157.20. matrix, 159. l. 8. Palestines, l.
penult. sublimisas Ep scopalis, p. 161. l. 19. not unwilling, 163. l. 4. ius
Sacerd. substernit, 164. l. 9 Lay Elders* 165. l. a f. 6. Plane tree, 166. l.
13. seely Sophister, l. 18. makes against me, 169. l. a f. 8. that T.C. th.
170. l. 2. (...) 171 l. 19. commended, l. 26. Numidicus, l. vlt. at the 176.
marg. l. a f. 5. graecorom 177. l. 3. have suits, 178. l. a f. 4. coetum 179.
l. 9. has been, 180. l. 20. desidi^. l. 25. exposition, l. vlt. the better
181. l. a f. 11. all these p. 189. l. 4. Decani i. Arch. p 196, marg. l. 4. sc.
and praes. p. 198. l. 25. all one, 203. l. 12. let them examine 204. l. a f. 3.
(...) 208. l. 16. sanedrin. l. 18. Gabinius, 209. l. 5. if yeo, l. 11* argue
et, 212. l. 18. Apostaticall, 218. l. 10. referred, 222. l. 12. signifying,
231. l. penult. (...) 232. l. 22. Syria, 236. l. a f. 11. a Canone marg. l. 3.
Duaren. 238. l. 18. or of.

In the second Book.
Page 2. l. a f. 6. City etc. p. 12. marg. l. 26. Tilius, l. a f. 8. Gangra. p.
14. l. vlt Cerdo. p. 18. l. 1. Melitena, l. Penult they l. vlt. their. p. 36.
l. a f. 5. Matrix p. 40. l. 1. Coela p. 43. l. a f. 3. as the hyp. p. 46. l. 5.
of Christians, p. 47. l. 18. possible that dele but, p. 56. l. a f. 4. and
always, p. 61. l. 16. Nicetas, p. 64. l. 2. and 20. Presbyteries, p. 76. l.
16. see Luke l. 21. if nay, p. 80. l. 5. raw, p. 98. l. 13. greater, 104. l.
17. and 19. or 56. p. 122. l. 6. and 7. acknowledge, 125. l. a f. 6. I mean
128. l. 3. pernicious l. 21. Ministerial, 134. l. 23. Sasima, p. 135. l. a f.
3. villani, 139. marg. 31.32.33. (...).

In the third Book.
Page 12. l. 7. opposition, p. 15. l. 5. was intended, p. 18. l. penult.
Sabellius, p. 22. l. 4. of the p. 31. l. 4. and Councils, p. 33. l. 24. degrees
not so seldom as 9. p. 34. l. 25. ascent. p. 44. l. a f. 8. Tilius, p. 59. l.
a f. 7. did forbear. p. 60. marg. l. 1. Cornel ep. p. 61. l. 21. are called,
p. 65. l. 11. dele him, l. 12. are so, p. 127. l. vlt. to other, p. 146. l. 21.
to his.

The fourth Book.
Page 6. l. 6. assume and p. 20. l. 16. business, p. 21. l. 27. did not, p.
23.14. as these, p. 26. l. vlt. depositions p. 30. l. 7. of fact p. 69. l. a f.
9. reference, p. 84. l. 2. Apostle, p. 91 l. 8. Antoninus p. 98. l. a f, 4. I
do not assume, p. 99. l. 8. his denial 113. l. 3. saving 117 l. 9.
Presbiteries, p. 133. l. penult. understood, p. 134. l. a f. 9. would. p. 144.
l. a f. 3. has no^ 151. l. a f. 14. in me 156. l. 15, inueyed.


