royal blazon or coat of arms

TO THE MAJESTY OF KING JAMES.

A gratulatorie Poem by Michaell Drayton.

AT LONDON Printed by James Roberts, for T. M. and H. L. 1603.

royal blazon or coat of arms
TO THE MAJESTY of King JAMES.
THE hopeful reign of a most happy King,
Lo thus excites our early Muse to sing,
Of her own strength which boldly thus presumes,
That Is yet vnimpt with any borrowed plumes,
A Counsels wisdom, and their grave foresight,
Lends me this luster, and resplendent light:
Whose well-prepared policy, and care,
For their indoubted Sovereign so prepare,
Other vain titles strongly to withstand,
Placed in the bosom of a peaceful Land:
That black destruction which now many a day,
Had fixed her stern eye for a violent pray,
Frustrate by their great providence and power,
Her very nerves is ready to devour,
And even for grief down sincking in a swound
Beats her snak'd head against the verdant ground.
But whilst the air thus thunders with the noise,
Perhaps unheard, why should I strain my voice?
When stirs, and tumults have been hot'st and proudest,
The noble Muse has song the stern'st and lowdest;
And know great Prince, that Muse thy glory sings,
(What ere detraction snarle) was made for Kings.
The neighing courser in this time of mirth,
That with his armed hoof beats th'reecchoing earth,
The trumpets clangor, and the peoples cry,
Not like the Muse can strike the burnished sky,
which should heaven quench the eternal quicking springs
The stars put out, could light the^ with her wings.
What though perhaps my self I not intrude
Amongst th'vnstedy wondering multitude,
The tedious tumults, and the boystrous throng,
That press to view thee as thou come along,
The praise I give thee shall thy welcome keep,
When all these rude crowds in the dust shall sleep,
And when applause and shouts are hushed and still,
The^ shall my smooth verse chant thee clear and shril.
With thy beginning, does the Spring begin,
And as thy Usher gently brings thee in,
Which in consent does happily accord
With the year kept to the incarnate Word,
And in that Month (cohering by a fate)
By the old world to wisdom dedicate,
Thy Prophet thus does seriously apply,
As by a strong vnfailing Augury,
That as the fruitful, and ful-bosom'd Spring,
So shall thy reign be rich and flourishing:
The month thy conquests, and atchieuements great
By those shall sit on thy Imperial seat,
And by the year I seriously divine.
The Crown for even settled in thy line.
From Cornwall now past Calidons proud strength,
Thy Empire bears eight hundred miles in length:
Half which in breadth her bosom forth does lay
The Irish Sea.
From the fair German to 'th Verginian sea:
Thy Realm of Ireland, a most fertile Land,
Brought in subjection to thy glorious hand,
And all the Isles their chalkie tops advance
To the sun seiting from the coast of France.
Saturn to thee his sovereignty resignes,
Opening the locked way to the wealthy mines,
And till thy reign Fame all this while did houer,
The North-west passage that thou might dise of
Unto the Indies, where that treasure lies
Whose plenty might ten other worlds suffice.
Neptune and Jove together do conspire,
This gives his trydent, that his three forkt fire,
And to thy hand do give the keys to keep,
Of the profound immeasurable deep.
But soft my Muse, check thy abundant strain
To the conceiving of th'vnskilfull brain,
That whilst thy true descent I do rehearse,
Th'vnlearned'st soul may sweetly taste my verse*
Which now in order let me first dispose,
And tell the union of the blessed Rose*
That to thy Grandsire Henry I may bring thee,
(From whom I after to thy birth may sing thee)
Katherine wife to Henry the fist.
That Tudors blood did worthily prefer,
From the great Queen that beauteous Dowager,
Edmond Tudor Earl of Richmond, son of Owen Tudor by the Queen. The
daughter of John Duke of Sommerset, son of John Earl of Sommerset, the son
of John of Gaunt.
Whose son brave Richmond from the Brittons fet,
Graft in the stock of Princely Sommerset,
The third fair Sien, the sweet Roseat plant,
Sprung from the Root of the Lancastrian Gant,
Which had seventh Henry, that of royal blood
By his dear Mother, is the Red-rose bud,
As their great Merlin propheci'd before
Should the old Brittons regalty restore,
Which Henry reigning by th'vsurpers death,
Married the Princess fair Elizabeth
Fourth Edwards daughter, whose predest'nate bed
Did thus conioyne the White-rose, and the Red:
These Roseall branches as I thus entwyne,
In curious trayles embelishing thy line,
To thy blessed Cradell let me bring thee on,
Rightly derived from thy great Grandsires throne.
Who holding Scotlands amity in worth,
Strongly to linck him with King James the fourth,
His eldest daughter did to him unite,
Th'vnparaleld bright lovely Margarite,
Which to that husband prosperously did bring,
The fifth of that Name, Scotlands lawful King,
Father to Mary (long in England seen)
The Daulphins dowager, Married whilst he was Daulphin.
the late Scottish Queen.
But now to Margarite back again to come,
From whose so fruitful, and most blessed womb
We bring our fullioy, James her husband dead,
Archibald Dowglasso, Earl of Anguish.
Took gallant Anguish to a second bed,
To whom ere long she bare a princely gerle,
Married to Lenox, that braue-issued Earl,
This beauteous Dowglasse, The Countesle of Lenox.
as the powers imply,
Brought that Prince Henry, Duke of Albany,
who in the prime of strength, Henry Lord Daily.
in youths sum'd pride
Married the Scotch Queen on the other side,
Whose happy bed to that sweet Lord did bring,
This Britain hope, James our undoubted King,
In true succession, as the first of other
Of Henry's line by Father, and by Mother.
Thus from the old stock showing thee sprung to be,
Grafting the pure White, with the Red-rose tree,
By mixture made vermillion as they meet,
For in that color is the Rose most sweet:
So in thy Crown the precious flower that grows
Be it the Damask, or Vermillion Rose,
Amongst those Relics, that victorious King,
Edward called Longshanks, did from Scotland bring,
And as a Trophie royally prefer
To the rich Shrine in famous Westminster,
That stone reserved in England many a day,
Recorded to be that stone whereon Jacob slept.
On which great Jacob his grave head did lay,
And saw descending Angels whilst he slept:
Which since that time by sundry Nations kept,
(From age to age I could recite you how,
Could I my pen that liberty allow.)
An ancient Prophet long ago foretold,
(Though fools their sawes for vanities do hold)
A King of Scotland, A prophecy belonging to that stone.
ages coming on,
Where it was found, be crowned upon that stone.
Two famous Kingdoms separate thus long,
Within one Island, and that speak one tongue,
Since Brute first reigned, (if men of Brute allow)
Never before united until now,
what power, nor war could do, nor time expected,
Thy blessed birth has happily effected.
O now revive that noble Britains name,
From which at first our ancient honors came,
Which with both Nations fitly does agree
That Scotch and English without difference be,
And in that place where feuds were wont to spring
Let us light Iigs, and joyful Paeans sing.
Whilst such as rightly propheci'd thy reign,
Deride those Idiots held their words for vain.
Had not my soul been proof against enuies spite
I had not breathed thy memory to write:
Nor had my zealous, and religious lays
Told thy rare virtues, and thy glorious days.
Renowned Prince, when all these tumults cease,
Even in the calm, and Music of thy peace,
If in thy grace thou deigne to favor us,
And to the Muses be propitious,
Caesar himself, Rooms glorious wits among,
Was not so highly, nor divinely sung.
The very earth l'est and degenerat'st spirit,
That is most void of virtue, and of merit,
With the austeer'st, and impudentest face,
Will thrust himself the foremost to thy grace;
Those silken, laced, and perfumed hinds,
That have rich bodies, but poor wretched minds,
But from thy Court (O Worthy) banish quite
The fool, the Pandar, and the Parasite,
And call thy self most happy (then be bold)
When worthy places, worthi'st men do hold,
The servile clown for shame shall hide his head,
His ignorance, and baseness frustrated,
Set lovely virtue ever in thy view,
And love them most, that most do her pursue,
So shall thou ad renown unto thy state,
A King most great, most wise, most fortunate.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
FOr the truth of these branches of the descent, in the table or Page here
unto anexed, the perfect and sundry Genealogies extant, do sufficiently
warrant in this behalf: If by reason it is but a part, and that also pattern'd
out of the large Genealogy as a lim of the same, and runs only and directly
with the Imperial line, being but so much (as we may fitly say) is aly'd to
the Poem: It seem not to bear such uniformity and proportion, as workmanship
would praise, that let judgment bear with and the Artificer reform, being
placed here rather for explanation, then any mere or extreme necessity.


