Jack Drums Entertainment: OR THE COMEDY Of Pasquill and Katherine. As it
has been sundry times plaide by the Children of Powles.

AT LONDON Printed for Richard Olive, dwelling in Long Lane. 1601.

JOHN DRVMS Entertainment, or the Comedy of Pasquill and Katherine.
The Introduction.
Enter the Tyer-man. IN good faith Gentlemen, I think we shall be forced to
give you right John Drums entertainment, for he that composde the Book, we
should present, has done us very vehement wrong, he has snatched it from us,
upon the very instance of entrance, and with violence keeps the boys from
coming on the Stage. So God help me, if we wrong your delights, it is infinitely
against our endeavors, unless we should make a tumult in the Tyring-house.


Exit Tyer-man. Enter one of the Children. You much mistake his Action Tyer-man,
His violence proceeds not from a mind
That grudgeth pleasure to this generous presence,
But does protest all due respect and love
Unto this choice selected influence.
He vows, if he could draw the music from the Spheres
To entertain this presence with delight,
Or could distill the quintessence of heaven
In rare composed Scenes, and sprinkle them
Among your ears, his industry should sweat
To sweeten your delights: but he was loath,
Wanting a Prologue, and our selves not perfect,
To rush upon your eyes without respect:
Yet if you will pardon his defects and ours,
Heel give us passage, and you pleasing scenes,
And vows not to torment your listening ears
With moldy fopperies of stale Poetry,
Impossible dry mustie Fictions:
And for our parts to gratify your favor,
We Will study till our cheeks look wan with care,
That you our pleasures, we your loves may share.

Exit. ACTVS PRIMVS.
Enter Jack Drum, and Timothy Twedle, with a Taber and a Pipe. Drum. Come
Timothy Twedle, tickle thy Pipe on the green, as I have tipled the Pot in the
Seller, and the hoy for the honor of High-gate, you old Trojan.


Twedle. And a heigh for the honor of Hygate, Hem, by my holydam, tho I say it,
that should not say it, I think I am as perfect in my Pipe, as Officers in
poling, Courtiers in flattery, or wenches in falling: Why look you Jack Drum,
it is even as natural to me, as brawdry to a Somner, knavery to a Promoter, or
damnation to an Usurer. But is Holloway Morice prancing up the hill?


Drum. I, I; and Sir Edward, and the yeallow toothd, sunck-eyde, gowtie shankt
Usurer Maman, my young Mistresses and all are coming to the green, lay
Cushions, lay the Cushions, ha the wenches!


Twed. The wenches, ha, when I was a young man and could tickle the Minikin, and
made them cry thanks sweet Timothy, I had the best stroke, the sweetest
touch, but now (I may sigh to say it) I am fallen from the Fidle and betook me
to thee.


He plays on his Pipe. Enter Sir Edward Fortune, M. Mamon, Camelia, Katherine,
and Winifride, Camelias maid. Sir Ed. Sit M. Mamon, ha heeres a goodly day
nigh.


Mam. I thank you Sir, and faith what news at court?


Sir Ed. What news at court? ha, ha, now Jesus God,
Fetch me some Burdeux wine, what news at court?
Reprobate fashion, when each ragged clowt,
Each Cobblers spawne, and yeastie bowzing bench,
Reekes in the face of sacred majesty
His stinking breath of censure, Out-vpont,
He drinks. Why by this Burdeux juice, it is now become
The shewing-horne of Bezelers discourse,
The common food of prate: what news at court?
But in these stiff nekt times when every Jade
Huffes his vpreared crest, the zealous bent
Of Counselors solid cares is trampled on
By every hacknies heels: Oh I could burst
At the conjectures fears, preuentions
And restles tumbling of our tossed brains:
Ye shall have me an empty caske that's furd
With naught but barmy froath, that nere traueld
Beyond the confines of his Mistress lips,
Discourse as confident of peace with Spain*
As if the Genius of quick Machiauel
Vsherd his speech.

Mam. Oh forbear, you are too sharp with me.


S. Ed. Nay M* Mamon, misinterpret not,
I only burn the bauen heath of youth,
That cannot court the presence of fair time
With ought but with, what news at Court sweet sir?
I had rather that Kemps Morice were their chat,
For of foolish actions, may be they will talk wisely, but of
Wise intendments, most part talk like fools.
The sum is this, bear only this good thought,
The Counsell-chamber is the Phaenix nest,
Who wastes it self, to give us peace and rest.

The Taber and Pipe strike up a Morris. A shoute within. A Lord, a Lord, a
Lord, who! Ed. Oh a Morice is come, observe our country sport,
It Is Whitson-tyde, and we must frolic it.

Enter the Morris. The Song.
Skip it, and trip it, nimbly, nimbly, tickle it, tickle it, lustily,
Strike up the Taber, for the wenches favor, tickle it, tickle it, lustily:
Let us be seen, on Hygate Green, to dance for the honor of Holloway.
Since we are come hither, lets spare for no leather,
To dance for the honor of Holloway.
Ed. Well said my boys, I must have my Lords liuory, what is it, a May Pole?
troth twere a good body for a courtiers imprezza, if it had but this life,
Frustra florescit. Hold Cousen hold.


He gives the Fool money. Fool. Thanks Cousen, when the Lord my Fathers
Audit comes, weel repay you again. Your benevolence too sir.


Mam. What a Lords son become a beggar?


Fool. Why not, when beggars are become Lords sons, come it is but a small
trifle.


Mam. Oh sir, many a small make a great.


Fool. No sir, a few great make a many small, come my Lords, poor and need
has no law.


S. Ed. Nor necessity no right, Drum down with them into the Celler, rest
content, rest content, one bout more and then away.


Fool. Speak like a true heart, I kiss thy foot sweet knight.


The Morice sing and dance, and Exeunt. Ma. Sir Edward Fortune you keep too
great a house,
I am your friend, in hope your son in law,
And from my love I speak, you keep too great a house,
Go too you do, yon same dry throated husks
Will suck you up, and you are ignorant
What frostie fortunes may benumme your age,
Poverty, the Princes frown, a civil war, or.

S. Ed. Or what? tush, tush, your life has lost his taste,
Oh madness still to sweat in hot pursuit
Of cold abhorred sluttish nigardise,
To exile ones fortunes from their native use,
To entertain a present poverty,
A willing want, for Infidel mistrust
Of gracious providence: Oh Lunacie,
I have two thousand pound a year, and but two Girls,
I owe nothing, live in all men's love,
Why should I now go make my self a slave
Unto the god of fools; put worst: then here is my rest.
I had rather live rich to die poor, then live poor to die rich.

Mam. Oh but so great a mass of coin might mount from wholesome thrift, that
after your decease your issue might swell out your name with pomp.


S. Ed. Ha, I was not borne to be my Cradles drudge,
To choke and stifle up my pleasures breath,
To poison with the venomd cares of thrift
My private sweet of life: only to scrape
A heap of muck, to fatten and manure
The barren virtues of my progeny,
And make them sprowt, spite of their want of worth:
No, I do love my Girls should wish me live,
Which few do wish that have a greedy Sire:
But still expect and gape with hungry lip,
When heel give up his gowtie stewardship.

Mam. You touch the quick of sense, but the^ I wonder
You not aspire unto the eminence
And height of pleasing life: to Court, to Court,
There burnish, there spread, there stick in pomp
Like a bright Diamond in a Ladies browe,
There plant your fortunes in the flowring spring,
And get the sun before you of respect:
There trench your self within the peoples love,
And glitter in the eye of glorious grace,
What Is wealth without respect and mounted place?

S. Ed. Worse and worse, I am not yet distraught,
I long not to be squeasd with mine own weight:
Nor hoyse up all my sails to catch the wind
Of the drunk reeling Commons: I labor not
To have an awful presence, nor be feared
(Since who is feared, still fears to be so feared)
I care not to be like the Horeb Calfe,
One day adored, and next pasht all in pieces:
Nor do I envy Poliphemia^ puffes,
Swizars slopt greatness: I adore the Sun,
Yet love to live within a temperate zone,
Let who will climb ambitious glibbery rowndes,
And lean upon the vulgars rotten love,
I Will not coriuall him: The Sun will give
As great a shadow to my trunck as his:
And after death like Chesmen having stood
In play for Bishops, some for Knights, and Pawnes,
We all together shall be tumbled up, into one bag,
Let hushed calm quiet, rock my life a sleep:
And being dead, my own ground press my bones,
Whilst some old Beldame hobling ore my grave,
May mumble thus: Here lies a knight whose money
Was his slave. Now Jack what news?

Enter Jack Drum. Drum. And please your Worcester. the Morice have taken their liquor.


Sir Ed. Has not the liquor taken them?


Drum. Tript up their heels or so? one of them has undertaken to dance the
Morice from Hygate to Holloway on his heels, with his hands upwards.


S. Ed. That's nothing hard.


Drum. Yes sir, it is easier for him to dance on his head than his heels, for
indeed his heels are turnde rank rebels, they will not obey, but they are
tumbling down the hill a pace.


Ma. And I must after then, farwell my souls delight,
Sweet Katherine adieu. Camelia goodnight.

S. Ed. Nay not to London Sir to night, In Faith at least stay supper.


Drum. Hark you sir, there is but two Lambs, a dozen Capons, half a score
couple of Rabbots, three Tartes, and four Tansies, for supper, and therefore I
beseech you give him Jack Drums entertainment: Let the Iebusite depart in
peace.


Sir Ed. Why Jack, is not that sufficient?


Drum. I for any Christian, but for a yawning usurer it is but a bit, a morsel,
if you table him, heel devour your whole Lordship, he is a quicksand, a
Goodwin, a Gulf, as hungry as the Jaws of a Iayle, he will waste more
substance then Ireland soldiers: A Die, a Drabbe, and a paunch-swolne Usurer,
devour whole Monarchies: Let him pass sweet knight, let him pass.


Sir Ed. Peace knave peace.
Daughter, lay your express commandment upon the stay of master Mamon, what
it is women's year,
Dian does rule, and you must domineere.

Mam. No she will not wish my stay, oh I am cursed
With her inexorable swiftnes, by her love
Which dotes me more then new coynd glowing gold,
The utmost bent of my affection
Shootes all my fortunes to obtain her love,
And yet I cannot praise, but still am loathde.
My presence hated, therefore Mamon down,
Farewell sir Edward, farewell beauties Crown.

Sir Ed. Faith as it please you for going, and her for wooing,
I will enforce neither.

Kath. With your pardon sir, I shall sooner hate my self,
Then love him.

Sir Ed. Nay be free my daughters in election,
Oh, how my soul abhorres enforced yokes,
Chiefly in love, where the affections bent:
Should wholly sway the Fathers kind consent.
Foregod when I was batcheler, had a friend,
Nay had my Father wished me to a wife,
That might have liked me, yet their very wish
Made me mistrust my Love had not true course,
But had some sway from duty which might hold
For some slight space: but o when time shall search
The strength of love, then virtue, and your eye,
Must knit his sinews: I chusde my self a wife
Poor, but of good dissent, and we did live
Till death diuorc'd us, as a man would wish:
I made a woman, now wenches make a man:
Choose one either of valor, wit, honesty, or wealth,
So he begentle, and you have my heart,
I faith you have: What, I have land for you both,
You have love for your selves. Heeres M. Mamon now.

Drum. A club-fisted Usurer.


Sir. Ed. A wealthy, careful, thriuing Citizen.


Mam. Careful, I, I, let nothing without good black and white, I warrant you.


Drum. Yes sir.


Mam. No sir.


Drum. A little back wind, saving your worcester. sir.


Mam. I am scoft at, where is my man there ho?


Came. Sir you need not take the pepper in the nose,
Your nose is fiery enough.

Mam. What Flawne, what Christopher, Heart where is the knave become? Hold sirrah
carry my cloak.


Enter Flawne. Kathe. It seems he can scarce carry himself.


Drum. He Is over the shoes, yet heel hold out water, for I have liquor'd him
soundly.


Mam. Why cannot you come where headie liquore is, but you must needs bouze?
What a man may lead a horse to the water, but heel choose to drink.

Flawn. True, but I am no horse, for I cannot choose but drink.


Mam. A pale weak stripling, yet contend with Ale.


Flawne. Why the weakest go to the Pot still.


Mam. That Jest shall save him. Sir Edward now good day.


Exit. Sir Ed. Nay sir, we will bring you a little of the way.


Drum. Rely on me Christopher, I will be thy staff,
And thy Masters nose shall be thy lanthorn and candlelight

Exeunt all. Manent Camelia and Winifride. Wini. Mistress Camelia, me thinks
your eye
Sparkles not spirit as it was wont to do.

Came. My mind is dull, and yet my thoughts are fixed
Upon a pleasing object, Brabants love.

Wini. Indeed young Brabant is a propper man,
And yet his legs are somewhat of the least:
And faith a chitty well complexioned face,
And yet it wants a beard: A good sweet youth,
And yet some say he has a valiant breath,
Of a good hair, but oh, his eyes, his eyes.

Came. Last day thy praise extold him to the skies.


Wi. Indeed he wares good clothes, and throws his cloak
With good discretion under his left arm,
He curles his boot with judgment, and takes a whiffe
With graceful fashion, swears a valorous oath,
But o the devil, has a hateful fault, he is a younger brother.

Came. A younger brother? o intolerable.


Wini. No Mistress, no: but there is M. John,
M. John Ellis, there is a Lad In Faith,
Ha for a virtuous honest good youth!

Came. Tut he is good, because he knows not how to be bad,
Nor wherefore he is good.

Wini. I know not, me thinks not to be bad, is good enough in these days.


Came. Nay he is a fool, a perfect Idiot.


Win. Why all the better. And I Will tell you this,
The greatest Lady in the Land affects him,
Nay doates upon him, I, and lies with him.

Ca. What Lady, good sweet Winifride, what Lady say* Faith there be some good
parts about the fool, which I perceive not, yet an other may: what Lady, good
sweet Winifride? say quick good wench.


Winif. The Lady Fortune.


Camel. Why my name's Fortune too.


Winif. Then you must needs favor him*
For Fortune favors fools.

Camel. Oh but to hug a fool is odious.


Winif. Foul water quenches fire well enough,
And with more lively pallar, you shall taste
The Juice of pleasures fount at private times:
Pish, by my maidenhead, were I to match,
I would elect a wealthy fool foreall,
Then may one hurry in her Chariot,
Shine in rich purpled Tissue, have hundred loves,
Rule all, pay all, take all, without check or snib.
When being married to a wise man (O the Lord)
You are made a fool, a Ward, curbd and controlld, and (O) out upon it.

Came. Believe me wench, thy words have fired me,
I Will lay me down upon a bank of Pinkes,
And dream vppont; Sweet fool, I it is most clear,
A foolish bed-mate, why he has no peer.

Exit Camelia. Winif. Ha, ha, her love is as uncertain as an Almanacke, as
unconstant as the fashion, Just like a whiffe of Tobacco, no sooner in at the
mouth, but out at the nose: I think in my heart I could make her enamoured on
Timothy Twedle: well he that fees me best, speeds best. For as it pleased my
bribed lips to blow, So turns her feathry fancy too and fro.


Exit. Enter Brabant junior at one door, Ned Planet at the other. Bra. Good
speed thee my good sweet Planet,
How do thou Chuck?

Pla. How now Brabant, where have you liu'de these three or four days?


Bra. Ho at the glittering Court my Pytheas.


Pla. Plague on ye Pytheas, what have you done there?


Bra. Why lane in my Ladies lap, eat, drink, and sleep.


Pla. So has thy Ladies Dog done, what art in love
With you Hygate Mammer still?

Bra. Still, I still, and still, I in eternity.


Plan. It shall be Cronicled next after the death of Banks his Horse, I
wonder why thou love her?


Bra. Love has no reason.


Pla. Then is love a beast.


Bra. O my Camelia is love it self.


Pla. The devil she is: Harther lips look like a dride Neats-tongue: her face
as richly yeallow, as the skin of a cold Custard, and her mind as settled as the
feet of bald pated time.


Bra. Plague on your hateful humor, out vppont,
Why should your stomach be so queasie now,
As to bespawle the pleasures of the world?
Why should you run an Idle counter-course
Thwart to the path of fashion? Come your reason?
O you are buried in Philosophy,
And there intombd in supernaturalls,
You are dead to native pleasures life.

Pla. Let me busse thy cheek sweet Pugge, Now I am perfect hate, I loved but
three things in the world, Philosophy, Thrift, and my self. Thou have made me
hate Philosophy. A Usurers greasy Codpeece made me loath Thrift: but if all
the Brewers Iades in the town can drug me from love of my self, they shall do
more then e're the seven wise men of Greece could: Come, come, now I Will be as
sociable as Timon of Athens.


Bra. Along with me then, you droming Sagbut,
I Will bring thee to a Crewe.

Pla. Of Fools wilt not?


Bra. Faith if you have any weight of judgment, you may easily sound what
depth of wits they draw, there is first my elder brother.


Pla. Oh the Prince of Fools, vnequald Idiot,
He that makes costly suppers to try wits:
And will not stick to spend some 20. pound
To grope a gull: that same perpetual grin
That leads his Corkie Jests to make them sink
Into the ears of his Deryders with his own applause.

Bra. Indeed his Jests are like Indian beef, they will not last, and yet he
powders them soundly with his own laughter.

Then there is the Gotish Frenchman, Mounsieur John fo de King, knowste thou him?


Pla. Oh, I to a hair, for I knew him when he had never a hair on his head.


Bra. He is a faithful pure Rogue.


Pla. I, I, as pure as the gold that has been seven times tried in the fire.


Bra. Then there is John Ellis, and profound toungd Master Puff, he that has a
perpetuity of complement, he whose phrases are as neatly decked as my Lord
Majors Hensmen, he whose throat squeakes like a treble Organ, and speaks as
small and shrill, as the Irish-men cry Pip, fine Pip.

And when his period comes not roundly off, takes tole of the tenth hair of
his Bourbon lock: as thus. Sweet Sir, repute me as a (Puff) selected spirit
borne to be the admirer, of your never enough admired (Puff).


Pla. Oh we shall be ouerwhelmd with an inundation of laughter. Come, where are
they?


Bra. Here at this Tavern.


Pla. In, in, in, in, I long to burst my sides and tyer my spleen with
laughter.


Exeunt. Enter two Pages, the one laughing, the other crying. Page. 1. Why
do thou cry?


2. Why do thou laugh?


1. I laugh to see thee cry.


2. And I cry to see thee laugh.
Peace be to us. Here Is our Masters.

Enter Brabant Signior, Planet, Brabant Junior, John Ellis, M. Puff, and
Mounsieur John fo de King. Bra. Sig. You shall see his humor, I pray you be
familiar with this Gentleman master Puff, he is a man of a well grown
spirit, richly worth your. I assure you, ha, ha, ha.


Puff. Sir I enrowle you in the Legend of my (Puff) intimates, I shall be
infinitely proud if you will daigne to value me worthy the embracement of your
(Puff) better affection.


Pla. Speak you from your thought sir?


Puff. I, or would my silk stock should loose his gloss else, I shall
triumph as much in the purchase of your (Puff) love, as if I had obtained the
great Elixar: Let us incorporate our affections I pray you: let me be forward
in your favor.


Pla. Sir, I pray you let me beg you for a Fool.


Puff. I affect no rudenes gentlemen, the heavens stand
Propitious to your fair designs:
As Soon as next the sun shall gin to shine,
I will salute the eyes of Katherine.

Bra. Sig. Of Katherine, M. Planet observe the next,
M. John, what makes you so melancholy?

Ellis. I do not use to answer questions.


Bra. Iu. What are you thinking on now?


El. I do not use to think.


Bra. Sig. He looks as demurely as if he were asking his Father blessing.


El. I do not use to ask my Father blessing.


Bra. Iu. Heart, how chance he is out of his similies?


Pla. I have followed Ordinaries this twelve month, only to find a Fool that
had lands, or a fellow that would talk treason, that I might beg him. John,
be my Ward John, faith I Will give thee two coats a year and be my Fool.


Bra. Sig. He shall be your Fool, and you shall be his
Coxe-come. Ha, ha, I have a simple wit, ha, ha.

Pla. I shall crow over him then.


Enter Winifride. Wini. Is there not one M. John Ellis here?


Page. There sits the thing so calde.


Winifride and Ellis talk. Br. Sig. Now to the last course: Monsieur John fo
de King,
I will help you to a wench Mounsieur.

Moun. No point, a burn child feere de fire.


Ellis. As a hungry dog waits for a mutton bone, or as a tatterd foote-boy
for a cast suit, even so will I attend on my Mistress.


Enter Winifride. Moun. O my Vinifride, piee you awe, by gor, me ang de for her.


Bra. Sig. Nay stay, stay, I will help you to a dilicate plump-lipt wench.


Moun. Toh, phi, phi, your proffer ware stink: stay Vinifride; or by gor die,
me die, me die by gor, me ang so desirous adieu goot Sir.


Bra. Sig. Oh stay Mounsieur, how do you pronounce Demurra? Ha, ha, I Will plague
him.


Moun. Grand Sot, my vench is gone, and me brule, and me brule, like one mad
bule, me go into de vaterto cool my reine, ang my back made de vater hize
again, dus so brule, me burst vor a vench, and yet grand poc on you all, pree
you adieu.


Ellis. As the Iigge is called for when the Play is done, even so let Mounsieur
go.


Moun. He, me teach you much French vor dis, I go to Hygate, adieu grand Sors.


Exit Mounsieur. Ellis As sore eyes cannot endure the Sun, nor scabd hands
abide salt water, so must I leave all, and see my mistress, and as fair
Ladies do use soul foyles, even so do I bid you farewell.


Exit Ellis. Bra. Sig. Why this is sport imperial, by my Gentry, I would spend
forty Crowns, for such an other feast of fools. Ha, ha.


Bra. Iu. I wonder who would be the fool then?


Bra. Sig. Why it is the recreation of my Intellect, I think I speak as
significant, ha, ha, these are my zanyes, I fill their paunches, they seed my
pleasures, I use them as my fools faith, ha, ha.


Pla. It Is a generous honor.


Bra. Sig. Troath I think you have a good wit, ha? pray you sup with me, I
love good wits, because mine own is not unfortunate: pray you sup with me.


Pla. I Will give God thanks sir, that has sent a fool to feed me.


Bra. Sig. Come along then, ye shall have a Capon, a Tansey, and some
kick-showes of my wits, ha, ha, some toys of my spirit.


Exit Bra. Sig. and Bra. Junior. Pla. I will eat his meat, and spend's money,
that's all the spite I can do him: but if I can get a Pattent for concealed
Sots, that Dawe shall troop among my Idiots.


Exit. ACTVS SECVNDVS.
Enter M. Puff with his Page. Puff. Boy what is a Clock?


Page. Past three, and a fair morning.


Puff. Burns not that light within the sacred shrine?
I mean the chamber of bright Katherine.

Page. I, should appear by these presence, that it does.


Puff. I wonder that the light is up so soon.


Page. O Mistress Snuff was weary with sleeping in the Socket, and therefore
has newly put on her stamell petticoat, and taken her pewter state to give
light to things are in darkness.


Puff. And I know that women of gravity and sweetness are soon up.


Page. I see that women of leuitie and lightness, are soon down.


Puff. Boy clear thy throat, and mount thy sweetest notes
Upon the bosom of this sleeke cheekt air:
That it may gently breathe them in the ear
Of my adored Mistress: Come begin.

The Song.
Delicious beauty that does lie
Wrapped in a skin of Iuorie,
Lie still, lie still upon thy back,
And Fancy let no sweet dreams lack
To tickle her, to tickle her with pleasing thoughts.
But if thy eyes are open full,
Then daine to view an honest gull,
That stands, that stands, expecting still
When that thy Casement open will
And bless his eyes, and bless his eyes, with one kind glance.
The Casement opens, and Katherine appears. Puf. All happiness and
vnconceiu'd delight,
Wait on the love of sweet fac'de Katherine.

Kathe. Good youth Amen: I do return your wish
With ample interest of beatitude.

Puf. I do protest, with ceremonious (puff) lips
The purest blood of my affection,
Is even fatally predestinate
To consecrate it self unto your (puff) love.

Ka. Unto my love? Oh sir you bind me to you:
Fair Gentleman I have a thankful heart,
Tho not a glorious speech to sweet my thanks.

Puf. Reward my love then with your kinder love.


Ka. With my love sir, I relish not your speech.


Puf. I with your love, in pleasing marriage.


Ka. Alas sir, cannot be my Loves a man,
Who hardly can requite the dear protests
Of kind affection, which you seem to vow
Unto his fortunes: kind youth, you did wish
All happiness to wayt upon my love:
Well he shall know it when we next do meet,
And thank you kindly: now good morrow sweet.

Puf. You take my, my, my meaning (puff.)


Page. Nay if he be puffing once, the fire of his wit is out.


Puf. Why she is gone. Heart did I rise for this?


Pa. She cannot endure puffing. O you puffed her away


Puf. Lets slink along unseen, it is yet scarce day.


Exeunt. Enter Mamon with Flawne, bearing a light before Mamon. Flawn. Now me
thinks I hold the candle to the devil.


Mam. Put out the light, the day begins to break.


Flawn. Would the day and thy neck were broke together.


Mam. Oh how the gout and love do tire me.


Flawne. Why sir, love is nothing but the very gout.


Mam. As how Flawne? as how?


Flawne Thus sir: Gout and love, both come with Idleness, both incurable, both
humorous, only this difference: the Gout causes a great tumor in a man's
legs, and love a great swelling in a woman's belly.


Mam. Why then o Love, o Gout, o goutie Love, how thou torments old Mamon:
good morrow to the sweet lipt Katherine, eternal spring unto thy beauties love.


Ka. Alas good aged Sir, what make you up?
In faith I pity you, good soul to bed,
Troth soon you will cry, Oh God my head, my head.

Mam. No Katherine, the wrinckling print of time
Erred, when it sealed my forehead up with age:
I have as warm an arm to entertain
And hug thy presence in a nuptial bed*
As those that have a cheek more lively red:
And tho my voice be rude, yet Flawne can sing
Peans of beauty, and of Katherine.
List to the Music that corrupts the Gods,
Subuerts even Desteny, and thus it shogges.

The Song.
Chunck, chunck, chunck, chunck, his bags do ring
A merry note with chuncks to sing*
Those that are far more young and witty,
Are wide from singing such a Dittie
As Chunck, chunck, chunck,
There Is Chunck that makes the Lawier prate,
There Is Chunck that make a fool of Fate:
There Is Chunck, that if you will be his,
Shall make you live in all hearts blis*
With Chunck, chunck, chunck.
Ka. It Is well sung good old man, hence with your gold,
Leave the green fields it is deawy; you will take cold.

Mam. The Casements shut, well here I Will lu^ke and stay,
To see who bears the glory of the day.
Hence, hence, to London, Flawne let me alone.

Enter Flawne I can hardly leave him alone, for the Devil and double Ducats,
still associate him, but I am gone.


Exit. Enter Pasquill. Pasquil. The glooming morn with shining Arms has
chaste
The silver Ensign of the grim cheekt night,
And forced the sacred troops of sparkling stars
Into their private Tents, yet calm hushed sleep
Strikes dumb the snoring world: yet frolic youth
That's lately matched unto a well shapte Less,
Clippes his sweet Mistress, with a pleasing arm,
Whilst the great power of Imperious Love
Sommons my duty to salute the shine
Of my Loves beauties. Vnequald Katherine
I bring no Music to prepare thy thoughts
To entertain an amorous discourse:
More Musick's in thy name, and sweet dispose,
Then in Apollos Lyre, or Orpheus close.
I Will chaunt thy name, and so inchaunt each ear,
That Katherinas happy name shall hear.
My Katherine, my life, my Katherine.

Kathe. My Ned, my Pasquil, sweet I come, I come,
Even with like swiftnes, tho not with like heart:
As the fierce Fawcon stoupes to rising foul
I hurrey to thee: do not go away,
The place is private, and it is yet scarce day.

Pas. Oh these kind words imparadize my thoughts.


Ma. Ha, ha, young Pasquil have I found you out*
Is It you must bore my nose, I Will bore your heart:
Why this same boy's as bare as naked Truth.
A low ebd gallant, yet she will match with him:
I Will match him, if his skin be poniard proof*
He may escape the force of gold and murder, if not*
As you return sir, I will pepper you.
Exit. Enter Katherine to Pasquill. And art thou come dear heart, first fee be
this,
This kind embrace, and next this modest kis.

Pas. This is no kiss, but an Ambrosian bowl,
The Nectar deaw of thy delicious soul:
Let me suck one kiss more, and with a nimble lip,
Nibble upon those Rosy banks, more soft and clear
Then is the Ieweld tip of Venus ear.
Oh how a kiss inflames a Lovers thought,
With such a fuel let me burn and die,
And like to Hercules so mount the sky.

Ka. Come you grow wanton. Oh you bite my lip.


Pas. In faith you Jest, I did but softly sip
The Roseall Juice of your reviving breath:
Let clumsie judgments, chilblaind gowtie wits
Bung up their chief content within the whoopes
Of a stuffed dry Fatt: and repose their hopes
Of happiness, and hearts tranquillity,
Upon increase of dirt: but let me live
Clipped in the cincture of a faithful arm,
Luld in contented joy, being made divine,
With the most precious love of Katherine.

Ka. Let the unsanctified spirit of ambition
Entice the choice of muddy minded Dames
To yoke themselves to swine, and for vain hope
Of gay rich trappings, be still spurd and pricked
With pining discontent for nuptial sweetes.
But let me live loved in my husbands eyes,
Whose thoughts with mine, may sweetly simpathize.

Pas. The heavens shall melt, the sun shall cease to shine,
Before I leave the love of Katherine.

Kathe. Nay when heavens melted, and the sun struck dead,
Even then my love shall not be vanquished.

Pas. When I turn fickle, virtue shall be vice.


Ka. When I prove false, Hell shall be Paradise.


Pas. My life shall be maintaind by thy kind breath.


Ka. Thy love shall be my life, thy hate my death.


Pas. Oh when I die let me embrace thy waste.


Ka. In death let me be counted thine and chaste.


Pas. Heavens grant, being dead my soul may live nie thee


Ka. One kiss shall give thee mine eternally.


Pas. In fair exchange vouchsafe my heart to take.


Ka. With all my mind, wear this Ned for my sake,
But now no more, bright day malings our love,
Farewell, yet stay, but it is no matter too,
My Father knows I think, what must ensue.
Adieu, yet hark, nay faith, adieu, adieu.

Pas. Peace to thy passions, till next enterview.


Exeunt. Enter Mamon, and Mounsier John fo de King. Mam. Now Mounsieur be but
confident, and hold
There is the price of blood, this way he comes,
Strike home bold arm, and thou shall want no crowns.

Moun. Fear you noting, when he is die, me bring you word. Exit Mamon.
He, by gor brave crown, brave monney,
Me have here a patent to take up, one, two, treescore
Vench: fine Crown, fine vench, unreasonably fine,
Dis monney is my baude. Me send a French crown
To fetch a fine vench, de French crown fetch de
Fine vench, de fine vench take de French crown,
And give me de French poc. He excellent, you see
Me kill a man, you see me hang like de Burgullian,
He no poine: He by Gor, me have much vitt,
Ang me much bald, and me ang much bald wit.
Here come de Gentleman meter Pasquill.

Enter Pasquill. Pasquill. Is It possible that sisters should so thwart
In native humors? one's as kind and fair,
As constant, virtuous, and as debonayre,
As is the heart of goodness: the other, proud,
Inconstant, fantastic, and as vain in loves,
As travelers in lies: blessed Katherine,
Camelia's not thy sister, if she be,
She Is basterd to the sweetes that shine in thee.

Moun. Boniour Meter Pasquill, sance Jest, me am hired to kill you, Mounsieur
Mamon, Messier: Iounck, Iounck, give me money to stab you, but me know there is
a God that hate blood, derfore, me no kill, me know dear is a vench, that love
Crown, derefore me keep de money.


Pas. Unhallowed villain, that with gold and blood, Thinks that almighty love
can be withstood.

Hold Mounsieur, there are more Crowns, only do this, return to Mamon, tell
him the deed is done, and bring him hither, that he may vainly triumph in my
blood, I have some painting which I found by chance in loose Camelias chamber,
with that I Will stain my breast, go and return with speed.


Moun. He, by gor I smell a rat, me fly, me fly, by gor.


Exit Mounsieur. Pas. Leaud miscreant, that through the throat of hell,
Would mount to heaven, and enjoy love,
Invaluably precious: no rank churl,
Thou wast not made to slauer her fair lips
With thy dead rewmy chops, nor clip her waste,
With thy shrunk bloudlesse arm, I hear him come.
Now Pasquill faigne, o thou eternal light,
Mourn that thy creatures should in blood delight.

He lies down, and faines himself dead. Enter Mamon and Mounsieur. Mam. Now
smug faced boy, now nibble on her lips,
Now sippe the deawe of her delitious breath.
Stink, rot, damn, bake in thy cluttered blood,
Snakes, Toads, and Earwigs, make thy skull their neast,
Ingendring deaw-wormes, cling orethwart thy breast.

Moun. Hush, hush, leave praying for dead, it is no good
Caluianisme, puritanisme. Dissemble, here are company.

Exit Moun. Enter Bra. Sig. and Planet. Bra. Sig. Good morrow Sir, who lies
there murdered?


Mam. Oh Gentlemen, the kindest virtuous youth
That e're adorned London. Damned thieves
To spoil such hopes: the last words that he spoke,
Sticks still within the hollow of mine ear.
Katherine quoth he, hold M. Mamon dear,
I know not what he meant, but so he said.
If that you pass to Hygate, tell the Knight,
P^squill is sunk into eternal night.

Pla. Faith it was a good youth, come Brabant, come aaway.


Exeunt Brabant and Planet. Mam. Dead Kate, dead Kate, dead is the boy,
That kept rich Mamon from his joy.

Mamon sings. Lantara, etc. Pasquill rises, and strikes him. Mam. Oh the
devil, the ghost of Pasquill, I am dead, if you have any courtesy in you,
believe it. I believed you when you faign'd, believe me now, for I am almost
dead, numbd up with fear, give faith sweet gentle youth.


Pas. Old wretch, amend thy thoughts, purge, purge, repent,
I Will hide thy ulcer, be but penitent.

Exit. Mam. Ha, I think it was but his ghost that swept along.

Enter Mounsier singing. Grand sot Mamo^, Pho, phy, phy, phy, a foutra pour vos
chu^ck, chunck. John fo de King, teach you a ding, John fo de King graund Sot,
Sot, Sot.


Exit Mounsieur. Ma. Death, plague, and hell, how is cursed Mamo^ vexed?
Scourgde with the whip of sharp derision:
I Will home, and starve, this cross, this peevish hap,
Strikes dead my spirits like a thunderclap.

Exit Mamon. Enter Brabant Junior, and Planet. Bra. Gods precious, I forgot to
bring my Page,
To breathe some Dittie in my Mistress ear.

Pla. Would have a Ballet to salute her with?


Bra. No, but a Song. How would thou court thy Mistress?


Pla. Why with the world, the flesh and the devil.


Bra. Right dog, well thoult swear, that I am blessed
Beyond infinity of happiness,
When thou beholdest admired Camelia.

Pla. And God would bless me with 3. such mistresses,
I would give two of them to the devil, that he would take the third.

Bra. Oh when she clips, and clings about my neck,
And suckes my soul forth with a melting kiss.

Pla. Does she use thee so kindly then, ha?


Bra. O I, and calls me dear, dear Brabant, and (o Jesus God)
I cannot express her sweets of entertain,
She Will so insinuate with chaste amorous speech,
And play the wanton with such pretty grace,
And vows love to me: Oh I Will make thee mad
To see how gracious Brabant's in her eye.
Here is her window, mark but when I call,
How swift she comes, and with what kind salutes
She welcomes me. What ho Camelia?
Faith you will be taken up, what in bed so late?

Winifride looks from above. Pla. And you take her up Brabant, she will take you
down.


Bra. Heart they hear not: My Camelia wake?


Wini. What harsh uncivil tongue keeps such a coile?


Bra. Winifride it is I. Tell my sweet Duck I am here,
Now mark Ned Planet, now observe her well.

Wini. She wonders at your rudeness that intrudes
Upon the quiet of her mornings rest,
And she is amaz'de, that with such impudence
You dare presume to intimate some love to her,
As if she knew you more then for a youth,
A younger brother, and a stipendary.

Enter John Ellis. Pla. Now mark Ned Planet, now observe her kindness.
Good morrow M. John.

Ellis. As the Country maid cries to her Cow to milk her, or as the
Trauailer knocks with his Hosts for a reckning, even so do I call to thee o
Mistress.


Camelia from her window. Came. Sweet John my Love, here is thy Camelia:
Hold wear this favor, with this kiss vppont.

Bra. Flesh and blood cannot bear such disgrace.


Brabant beats Ellis. El. Help, help, help, help, he boxes me that he
does. Help, help.


Enter Sir Edward, Katherine, Drum, and Twedle. Sir Ed. What outrage have we
here so early up?
Sir you do wrong the quiet of my house. Enter Camelia.
I faith you do, and it is but rudely done,
Go too it is not. Is this a place to brawle?

Pla. And please thee knight, I Will tell thee faith and troth.


Came. What did he strike thee sweet?


El. I in good deed law, and a my conscience, I think he has made my nose
bleed.


Came. And would not you draw your weapon out, and to it lustily, as long as
you could stand?


El. I do not use to draw.


Ca. Did he give thee a box on the ear, and would thou take it?


El. And he be such a fool to give it me, why should not I be so wise as to
take it.


Ca. Pure honesty, kind Ducke, kiss me sweet John.


Bra. Iu. Heart Sir Edward, will you suffer this?
Now on my life she is enamord on the fools babble.

Sir Ed. Go too sir boy forbear, you wrong my Love,
And you forget your self to use such Jests,
Such nastie rybauldry upon my daughter:
I tell you M. Brabant, does she love
Any that meriteth the name of man?

Bra. Iu. Why he is no man, but a very --


S. Ed. Well, well, no more; my house, my self, my love,
Opens their hearts with liberal embrace
To entertain your presence: I or any man's
So they will be civil, modest, not profane,
Not like to those that make it their chief grace,
To be quite graceles.

Pla. Well said honest knight,
We have had blood enough to day already:
Ned Pasquil's slain by bloody murdering Rogues.

Sir Ed. Speak softly, God forbid, my daughter hears,
Tell me the circumstance, I pray you Sir.

Ka. Eternal death unto my happiness,
My Pasquil slain? Oh God, oh God, oh God.

Exit Katherin, tearing her hair. Pla. I, and I think the Usurer made a Tent
Even of his nose it was so red and near:

Sir Ed. God for his mercy, what mischance is here?
A good youth, a virtuous modest youth,
I faith he was. And I can tell your sir,
My daughter Katherine, where is she now?
Whithers she gone? Drum call her hither strait.

Drum. Your Drum will sound a call sir presently.


Exit Drum. Sir Ed. And as I told you sir, my daughter Katherine
Affected him right dearly: by my peace of soul,
If he had lived, I could have heartily wished
He had been my son in law, I faith I could:
But see the will of God. How now Drum,
Where Is my daughter?

Drum. Sir, she is either invisible, or deaf, for I can neither see her, nor
she hear me.


Sir Ed. Boddie of me, my heart misgiues me now,
Look, call, search, run all about.
My daughter gone? Go all and search her out.
Here Is Pasquil ha? Is this the man that's dead?

Enter Pasquil. Pas. Let me entreat this favor, do not search
Or be inquisitiue why I fain'de:
Repute me worthy your better censure: and thus think
My cause was urgent, the rest lie buried.

Sir Ed. Well, I would you had not fainde.


Pas. Why would you have had me dead indeed?


Sir Ed. Oh no, but I have lost my child I fear,
By your strange faining, she no sooner heard
The tidings of your death, but gone she was,
And God knows whither. Ha what news now?

Enter Drum. Drum. It Is easier to find wit in ballating, honesty in Brokers,
Virginity in Shordich, then to hear of my Mistress.


Sir Ed. Broach me a fresh Butt of Canary Sack,
Lets sing, drink, sleep, for that's the best relief:
To drown all care, and ouerwhelme all grief.
Power Wine, sound Music, let our bloods not freeze,
Drink Duch like gallants, lets drink vpsey freeze.

Exeunt Sir Edward, Planet, Brabant, Drum and Twedle. Came. Servant you will go in
too, and stay dinner?


El. I in truth, for as the Itch is augmented
By scratching, so is my love by seeing my mistress.

Exeunt Camelia and Ellis. Pas. How Is this, how is this, My Katherin gone hence?
Senses awake, and thou amazed soul
Unwind thy self from out the Labyrinth
Of gaping wonder, and astonishment.
My Katherine departed? how? which way?
Fool, fool, stand not debating, but pursue
Haste to her comfort, for from thee does spring
(Wretch that thou art) her cause of sorrowing.

Exit. ACTVS TERTIVS.
Enter a Page solus. Page. Ha, ha, ha, tipsie, tipsie, tipsie, all turned
whirlegig, John fo de king, Drum, and Timothy Twedle, are rare fine, ha for the
heavens, In Faith: Drums Lion drunk, and he dings the pottes about, crackes the
glasses, swaggers with his own shadow. Honest Timothy is Mawdelin drunk, and
he weeps for kindness, and kisses the hilts of Jack Drums Dagger. Mounsieurs
Goat drunk, and he shrugges, and skrubbes, and he is it for a wench. Here they
come reeling, I must pack, or we shall swagger, for they having a crack in
their heads, and I afault in my hands, we shall nere agree.


Exit. Enter Drum, Mounsieur, and Twedle. Drum. A Seruingman quoth you? Heart,
and if I serve any that's flesh and blood, would I might never taste my liquore
more: stand bare whilst he makes water, out vppont, I Will to Ireland, and there
I Will Tan, ran, ty, ry, dan, Sa, sa, sa, sa: Nay it is the only life.


Twe. Nay good Thewte heart, good kind Jack, stay, if you would love me, as I
love you, we would live and die together: and please God, would I were dead,
and you are gone. And heeres M. John so de king, a very honest man too.


Drum. I, I, he is a very good honest man: for there is not a hair betwixt him
and heaven.


Twe. Heel live with us now and teach us French.


Moun. I by my trot, ang you help me to a Vench now, me teach you French. 5.
towsand, towsand year, o your Secke is hot, and make me brule, and brule, and
burn, for a ( he) by gor your Seck is hot.


Enter Winifride. Drum. Welcome Basilisco, thou will carry level, and knock
ones brains out with thy pricking wit. Kiss me sweet wench, kiss me.


Moun. He my Vinifride, by gor you are come, in te very nick to pleasure me,
pree you kiss me, clip me, love me, or by gor me ang die certain.


Drum. Out you French Dog, touch my Love, and I Will --


Moun. Touch her, by gor me touch her, and touch her, and touch her.


Drum. I Will touch you, I Will slash you, I Will vench ye.


Wini. Put up, put up, for the passion of God put up, or if you will needs too it,
sheath both your weapons in me first.


Drum. Heart touch my love, touch my Winifride?


Wini. Hark you Jack, come to my chamber an hour hence, and you shall have
what you will ask, and I can grant.


Drum. Why then my chollers down. John fo de King. Fontra for you.


Exit Drum. Moun. Fontra for me, futtra, futtra, futtra, five towsand futtra's
for you.


Twe. Stay friend Jack, I Will reele along with you, if you will not swagger.


Exit Twedle. Wini. Sweet, sweet Mounsieur, hang you slaves, I love you
infinitely.


Moun. By gor me teach you French four towsand year dan.


Wini. Well Mounsieur, I Will give you pleasure.


Moun. But will you presently? quickly, for by gor me am a hot shot.


Wini. I so they say, I heard you were under the Torred zone last day.


Moun. Pish it is no matter, me am like a Tobacco Pipe, de more me am burn, de
cleaner me am.


Wini. Well then, two hours hence come to my chamber, and Timothy Twedle shall
give you me in a sack.


Moun. In a sack? Ha very well.


Wini. And you shall carry me to my Masters house at Holloway, for in the
house we cannot be private without suspect. Till then, farewell.


Exit Winifride. Moun. By my trot vnreasonablie good, I carry de vench on my
back, and devench carry me on her (he) fine back, fine vench, fine
Mounsieur, fine, fine, fine Knight, all fine, vnreasonablie fine, me sing vor
joy; by gor me sing la, liro, liro la, lilo.


Exit. Enter Brabant Signior, Brabant Junior, and Planet. Bra Sig. Gentlemen,
as e're you loved wench, observe M. Puff and me.


Bra. Iu. What shall we observe you for?


Bra. Sig. Oh for our complement.


Pla. Complement, what is that?


Bra. Sig. Complement, is as much as (what call you it) it is derived of the
Greek word, a pox ont.


Pla. Complement, is as much as what call you it, it is derived of the Greek
word, a pox ont.


Enter Puff. Bra. Sig. You shall see M. Puff and me toss it, In Faith mark
with what grace I encounter him.


Pla. Heart thy brother's like the Instrument the Merchants sent over to the
great Turk: you need not play upon him, heel make music of himself, and
he be once set going.


Bra. Sig. M. Puff, I long to do fair service to your love.


Puff. Most accomplished wit, exquisitly accoutred, ( Puff) Judgment, I could
wish my ability worthy your service, and my service worthy your ability.


Pla. By the Lord fustian, now I understand it: complement is as much as
fustian.


Bra. Sig. I protest your abilities are infinite, your perfections matchless,
your matchless perfection infinite in ability, and your infinite ability,
matchless in perfection.


Pla. Good again, rejoice Brabant, thy brother will not live long, he talks
Idly already.


Puff. Delicious spirit, disparage not your courtesy, stand not bare to him
that was borne to honor you.


Bra. Sig. Let us press our hairs then, with an uniform consent.


Puff. The pressure of my hairs, or the puncture of my heart, stands at the
service of your ^ollide perfections: my life is bound to your love, your love
being my life, tho my life be not worthy your love, your perfection is the
center to which all the paralels of my affection are drawn: your love my life,
your perfection, my affection, being --


Pla. Your Ass, my Fool.


Puff. Being chainde by the mighty coplet of inevitable destenie, who sees
the sun, but he must adore it: who sees beauty, but he must honor it: who
vieweth gold, but he must covet it: then, (o then) who can behold your sun-like
beauteous golden beauties, but he must more then adore, much more then honor,
and most infinitely love to be out, out, out.


Bra. Iu. Out he is indeed.


Pla. He Is at a stand, like a restie Jade, or a Fiddler, when he has cracked
his Minikin.


Puff. Outragiously addicted to the worthy pursuit of such matchless worth.


Bra. Sig. Sir, I can rest but truly thankful, for your more then good conceit
of my no less then little worth. And now fir for the consequent hours of the
day; how stands your intencion for employment?


Puff: I ha taken my leave of Sir Edward, bid adieu to love, my Mistress is
gone, my humor is spent, my joys are at an end, and therefore Gentlemen, I
leave love, and fall to the ( puff) Law, I will interre my self in Ploydens
Coffin, and take an eternal Conge of the world. And so sweet gallants
farewell.


Exit. Bra. Sig. Nay I Will follow you to your grave. Gentlemen you will not
accompany the coarse?


Exit. Pla. No, no, look Ned Brabant, yons a pleasing object for thy eyes.


Enter Camelia, Ellis, and Winifride. Bra. Iu. My Mistress is turnde
Bucephalus, no body must ride her but Alexander: no body kiss her but John
Ellis. Now stand and list good Planet.


Ca. Come sweetest Love, lets give time pleasing wing,
What shall we make some purposes or sing?

El. I will sing, so you will bear my burden.


Ca. Come lay thy head then in my virgin lap,
And with a soft sleeke hand I Will clappe thy cheek,
And wring thy fingers with an ardent gripe:
I Will breathe amors, and even intraunce thy spirit,
And sweetly in the shade lie dallying.

The Song.
Now dally sport and play, This merry month of May,
This is the merry, merry month, Sweet time for dallying:
The Birds sit chirping, chirping, The Doves sit billing, billing,
Phillip is treading, is treading, is treading, is treading, is treading,
All are to pleasures willing.
You that are fair and witty, Observe this easy Dittie,
And leave not Natures Natures bliss; Do not refuse to kiss.
The Birds sit chirping, chirping, The Doves sit billing, billing,
Phillip is treading, is treading, etc.
Bra. Iu. Death I can holder: Life of love
Amazing beauty, let not me seem rude,
Tho thus I seem to square with modesty.

El. Pray you let me go, for heel begin to square, And even as some do wear
Muffes for warmth, some for wantonness, some for pride, some for neither, but
to hide gowtie fingers, so will I get your Fathers consent, and marry you. Fare
you well.


Exit. Came. Sir it were good you got a benefice,
Some Evenuch'd Vicaridge, or some Fellowship,
To prop up your weak younger brothership.
Match with your equals, dare not to aspier
My seat of love, I wis Sir, I look higher.

Bra. Iu. Astonishment of Nature, be not proud
Of Forunes bounties: Brabant is a man,
Tho not so clogd with dirt as others are:
I do confess my younger brothership;
Yet therein lay no such disparagement
As your high scorn imputes unto my worth.
Coach Iades and Dogs, are coupled still together,
Only for outward likeness, growth and strength,
But the bright models of eternity,
Are ioind together for affection,
Which in the soul is form'de. Oh let this move,
Love should make marriage, and not marriage Love.

Pla. Woo her no more Brabant, thou wilt make her proud,
You Duch Ancient why should you look higher?
His births as good as yours, and so's his face:
Put off your Iengle, Iangles, and be not as fair,
He shall renounce it, fore this Audience,
Put off your clothes, and you are like a Banbery cheese,
Nothing but paring: why should you be proud,
And look on none but Weathercocks forsooth?
O you shall have a thousand pound a year!
Bar Lady that's a bumming sound. But hark,
Wilt therefore be a slave, unto a slave,
One that's a bound Rogue unto Ignorance?
Well thou wilt serve to make him gellide broaths,
And scratch his head, and may be now and then
Heel slauer thee a kiss. Plague on such marriages.

Came. Rudevnciuile Clown.


Pla. Tut rail not at me, turn your eye upon the leprosy of your own
judgment, loath it, hate it, scorn it, and love this young Gentleman, who is a
Fool in nothing but in loving thee: mad in nothing but affecting thee: and
cursed in eternity if he marry thee.


Ca. Sir you ha spoke exceeding pleasingly,
For which I love you, as I love a dull dead eye.
Brabant I do conjure thee Court not me,
Do not presume to love or fancy me.

Bra. Iu. How not presume to love or fancy you?
Heart, I will love you, by this light I will
Whether you will or no, I Will love you still.
Spite of your teeth I will your love pursue,
I will by heaven, and so sweet soul adieu.

Exit Bra. Junior. Ca. Farewell, and never view my face again.


Exit Camelia. Pla. Hark you fair Winifride, sweet gentle maid,
I have but fained with you all this while,
I doat upon the sweet Camelia,
And if your favor will but second me,
I vow when I shall wed Camelia,
To indowe you with a hundred pound a year,
And what I have shall stand at your command.

Win. Sir I will undertake to forward your fair love,
So you will remember what you here do vow.

Pla. If I forget it, heaven forget me:
Do you but praise me, let not her once know
I love, or do affect her for the world.

Wini. Well fear no rubbes, farewell fair bounteous Sir.


Exit Winifride. Pla. It works, it works, magnificent delight,
Laughter, triumph, for ere the Sum godowne,
Thy forehead shall be wreathed, with pleasures crown.

Exit Planet. Enter Pasquil at one door, and his Page at the other. Pas. Now
my kind Page, can thou nor hear, nor see,
Which way my Katherine has bent her steps?

Page. Sir I can.


Pas. What can thou my sweet Page?
What can thou Boy?
Oh how my soul does burn in longing hope,
And hangs upon thy lips for pleasing news.

Page. Sir I can tell ye.


Pas. What* o how my heart does quake and throb with fear.


Page. Sir I can tell you nothing of her in good faith.


Pas. Oh thou have tortur'de me with lingering hope,
Go haste away, fly from the pestilence
Of my contagious grief, it will infect thee boy,
Murder thy youth, and poison thy life's joy.
Run search out Katherine, in her eyes dwell
Heavens of joy; but in Pasquil hell.
Oh thou omnipotent, infinity,
Crack not the sinews of my patience
With racking torment: Insist not thus to scourge
My tender youth with sharp affliction,
If I do love that glory of thy hand,
That rich Idea of perfection,
With any lustful or profane intent,
Crossed be my love, murdered be all my hopes:
But if with chaste and virtuous arm I clip
The rarest model of thy workmanship,
Be then propitious: o eternal light,
And bless my fortunes, maugre hellish spite.

Enter Katherine in a petticoate. Ka. Black sorrow, nurse of plaints, of
tears, and groans,
Evaporate my spirit with a sigh,
That it may hurrey after his sweet breath,
Who made thee doat on life, now hunt for death.

Pas. What soul is that, that with her teare-full eyes
Seems to lament with me in miseries?

Ka. Here seems to be the pressure of his truncke,
Dear earth confirm my doubt, was this the place
Which the fair body of my Pasquil pressed,
When he lay murdered? See the drooping grass
Hangs down his mourning head, and seems to say
This was the fatal place, where Pasquil lay.
Oh thou sweet print, stamped by the fairest limbs,
The richest Coffin of the purest soul
That ever pressed the bosom of the earth,
First drink my tears, and next suck up my blood.
Now thou immortal spirit of my Love,
Thou precious soul of Pasquil view this knife
Which once thou gave me, and prepare thy arm
To clip the spirit of thy constant Love.
Dear Ned I come, by death I will be thine,
Since life denies it to poor Katherine.

She offers to stabbe her self. Pas. Hold, hold, thou miracle of constancy,
First let heaven perish, and the crazde world run
Into first Chaos of confusion,
Before such cruel violence be done
To her fair breast, whose fame by virtue won,
Shall honor women whilste there shines a sun.

Kathe. Thrice sacred spirit, why do thou forsake
Elizeum pleasures, to withhold the arm
Of wretched Katherine? Oh let me die,
Retire sweet Ghoast, do not pollute thy hand
With touch of mortals.

Pas. Amazement of thy Sex, Pasquill does live,
And lives to love thee in eternity.
Be not aghast, recover spirit, (Sweet)
It Is Pasquill speaks, it is Pasquill clips thy waste,
It Is Pasquill prints a kiss on thy fair hand.

Ka. What do I dream? or have I drawn the sluice
Of life up? and through streams of blood
Unfelt, have set my prisoned soul at large?
Am I in heaven? or in Pasquills Arms?
I am in heaven, for my Neds embrace
Is Katherines long wished celestial place.

Pas. Divinity of sweetness, I protest,
If these inferior Orbs were rolled up,
And the imperial heaven barred to my view,
Twere not so gracious, nor so much desired,
As my dear Katherine is to Pasquills sight.

Ka. Heaven of Content, Paphos of my delight.


Pas. Mirror of Constancy, life-bloud of love.


Ka. Center to whom all my affections move.


Pas. Renown of Virgins, whose fame shall never fleet.


Ka. Oh I am mazed with joy, I pree thee sweet,
Unfold to me, what sad mischaunce it was,
Forced thy deaths rumor, and such woes disperc'd?
Sad sorrow past, delights to be rehearsed.

Pas. It will be tedious, but in brief think thus,
Old Mamons malice was the venombd foame,
That poisoned all the sweets of our content.

Kathe. Alas dear heart, that love should be so crossed.
Now good Ned fetch my gown, it is at yon house,
I would be loath to turn to Hygate thus.

Pas. I am oblig'de with infinite respect, to do you service.
Oh power divine, was ever such a love as Katherine?

Ent. Ma. Look Mamon, search Mamon, this way she went,
Put on thy spectacles, this way she went:
Blessed, blessed, blessed, be thy nativity,
Yonder she sits, I Will either have her now,
Or none shall e're enjoy her with content.

Ka. How loves impatient, when will Ned return?


Ma. Tut, it is no matter when, look where thy Mamo^ is.


Ka. Good devil, for Gods sake do not vex my sight:
Did not thou plot the death of my dear Love?

Ma. Yes, yes, and would complot ten thousand deaths,
Even damn my soul, for beauteous Katherine.
My ship shall kemb the Oceans curled back
To furnish thee with brave Abiliaments,
Rucks of rich Pearl, and sparkling Diamonds
Shall fringe thy garments with Imbroadry:
Thy head shall blaze as bright with Orient stone,
As did the world being burnt by Phaeton.

Ka. You make me death, for pitties sake forbear:
Oh when will Pasquil come? Good Sir depart.
When wilt return? I pray you Sir go hence,
And troth, I will not hate you: nay I Will speak
Against my heart, and say I loath you not.
You vex my patience, gentle sir forbear,
I beg it on my knee, and with a tear.

Mam. Tut will you love me, and detest yon boy?


Ka. Heaven detest me first, and loathe my soul.


Mam. Is it your final resolution?


Ka. God knows it is. So good Sir rest content.


Mam. I, I will rest, and thou shall rest thus blur'd,
Thus poysond; venomde with this oil of Toades:
If Mamon cannot get thee, none shall joy
Which he could not enjoy. I fear no law,
Gold in the firmest conscience makes a flawe.
Rot like to Helen: Spittle hence, adieu,
Let Pasquil boast in your next interview.

Ka. Be pitiful and kill me gentle Sir.
Heaven my heart is cracked with misery:
Where shall I hide me? which way shall I cleanse
The eating poison of this venomde oil?
Poor wretch (alas) see where thy Pasquil comes.

Pas. Here Love put on your gown. How now? good God,
Heaven give me patience: who has used thee thus?

Ka. The devil in the shape of Mamon. Sweet
Touch me not. Pasquil I conjure thee now
By all the power of affection,
By that strickt bond of love that lincks our hearts,
Leave and abandon me eternally.
I merit now no love, yet prithee sweet,
Vouchsafe to give me leave to love thee still.
But I do bind thee by thy sacred vow
Of our once happy, and thrice blessed love,
Follow not Katherine: good Ned, do not grieve,
In time just heaven may our woes relieve.

Exit Katherine. Pas. fureus. O dira fata, saeua, miseranda, horida
Quis hic Locus? quae Regio? quae Mundi plaga?
Vbi sum? Katherina, Katherina, Eheu Katherina.

Enter Mamon. Mam. My Spectacles will betraie me, look
Mamon, search Mamon, here abouts they fell.

Pas. Welcome Erra Pater, you that make Prognostications for ever. Where Is you
Almanacke?


Pulles his Indentures out of Mamons bosom. Ma. Lord bless my Obligations,
Lord bless my bonds, Lord bless my Obligations. Alas, alas, alas.


Pas. Let me see sir now, when will true valor be at the full? Oh there is an
opposition it is eclipsed, Venus, I Venus is mounted. Where Is the Goat now? Kembd,
fine kemd. Oh here are Dog days, out vpont Dog days, Dog days, Dog days,
out vpont.


He tears the Papers. Mam. Alas my Obligations, my Bonds, my Obligations, my
Bonds. Alas, alas, alas.


Pas. Katherina, Katherina, Ehew Katherina.


Exit Pasquil. Mam. Obligations, Obligations: Alas my Obligations, I am undone,
undone, undone.


Enter Flawne. Flawne. Sir, Sir, Sir.


Mam. What sir you for, you Dog, you Hounde, you
Crust, what is best news with you now? Out-alas my
Obligations, my Bonds, I am undone, undone.

Flawne. Sir, the best news is, your ship (the Hopewell) has hapt ill,
returning from Barbary. It Is but sunk, or so, not a scrap of goods sau'de.


Mam. Villains, Rogues, Jews, Turks, Infidels, my nose will rot off with
grief. O the Gowt, the Gowt, the Gowt, I shall run mad, run mad, run mad.


Flawne. Amen, amen, amen. But there is other news to comfort you withal sir.


Mam. Lets hear them good Flawne. My ship, my bonds, my bonds, my ship, I
shall run mad unless thy good news reclaim me. Lets hear thy news.


Flawne. Your house with all the furniture is burnt, not a ragge left, the
people stand warming their hands at the fire, and laugh at your misery.


Mam. I defy heaven, earth and hell, renounce my nose, plague, pestilence,
confusion, famine, sword and fire, devour all, devour me, devour Flawne,
devour all: bonds, house, and ship, ship, house, and bonds, Despair,
Damnation, Hell, I come, I come, so room for Mamon, room for Usury, room for
thirty in the hundred. I come, I come, I come.


Exit Mamon. Flawne. Why me thinks this is right now, I Will even lay him up in
Bedlame, commit him to the mercy of the whip, the entertainment of bread and
water, and the the sting of a Usurers Conscience for ever.


Exit Flawne. ACTVS QVARTVS.
Enter Drum and Winifride. Drum. Truly Mistress Winifride, as I would be
willing to be thankful, and thankful to find you willing to prostrate your
fair parts to my pleasure, so I hope you will remember your promise, and
promise what you now remember, if you have forgot, I would be glad to put you
in mind of it.


Wini. Truly friend John, as I would be loath to break my promise, so I would
be unwilling to keep my word to the dishonesting of my virginity. Marry for a
nights lodging or so, I will not be strait laced to my friend. Therefore thus it
must be. To night I must lie at the Farm at Holloway, thither shall you be
conveyed in this Sack, and laid in my chamber, from whence you shall have free
access to the pleasures of my private bed.


Drum. Well then be constant Winifride, and you shall find me faithful Jack
Drum: and so taking leave of your lips, I betake me to the tuition of the
Sack.


Enter Twedle. Exit Drum. Twe. Winifride my Mistress Camelia stays for you to
attend her to the Green, I must go and clap my Tabers cheeks there, for the
heavens In Faith.


Wini. Stay a little here, and if John fo de king come, give him that Sack. Oh
I could crack my Whalebones, break my Buske, to think what laughter may arise
from this.


Exit Winifride. Enter Mounsieur. Moun. By my trot, dis love is a most cleanly
Ientleman, he is very full of shifte, de fine Vench, can invent ten towsand,
towsand trick to kiss a men ( he) see by gor she ha keep her word, she is in
de seck already, he, brave by gor, my blood das sparkle in my vein for joy.
Meter Timotty you must give me dat seck dear.


Timo. Owy da Mounsieur, that is well pronounced is it not?


Moun. Ritt, ritt, ritt, excellan: excellan: adieu Timothy, me am almost burst
for joy.


Exit Mounsieur. Twe. Well, I know what the Wenches on the green are saying
now, as well as if I were in their bellies, when will Timothy come, when will
honest Timothy approach, when will good Timothy draw near? Well Wenches now
rejoice, for Timothy Twedle does come.


Exit Twedle. Enter Pla. Bra. Sig. and Bra. Junior. Bra. Iu. Brother how like
you of our modern wits?
How like you the new Poet Mellidus?

Bra. Sig. A slight bubling spirit, a Cork, a Husk.


Pla. How like you Musus fashion in his carriage?


Bra. Sig. O filthily, he is as blunt as Pawles.


Bra. Iu. What think you of the Lines of Decius?
Writes he not a good cordial sappie style?

Bra. Sig. A surreinde Iaded wit, but a rubbes on.


Pla. Brabant thou art like a pair of Balance,
Thou wayest all saving thy self.

Br. Sig. Good faith, troth is, they are all Apes and gulls,
Vile imitating spirits, dry heathy Turffes.

Bra. Iu. Nay brother, now I think your judgment erres.


Pla. Err, he cannot err man, for children and fools speak truth always.


Enter Mounsieur with a Sack, and Jack Drum in it. Bra. Sig. See who comes
yonder sweating with a pack.


Pla. Mounsieur, what do you bear there ha?


Moun. Pree you away, you break my glasses der, Ieshu, now me know not what
to do, Zot dat I was to come dis way widd them.


Pla. Glasses you salt rheum, come what ha you there?


Moun. Trike no more for Ieshu sake, by gor me have brittle vare, if you knock
it, it will break presant, pre you adieu.


Br. Iu. We must know what is in the bag In Faith.


Moun. By my trot, me tell you true, will you no trike meden?


Bra. Iu. No faith, but see you tell us true, or else.


Moun. Or else, or else by gor, do wat you please wid me: Sweet Vinifride, my
very art dus vurst, he by gor, me did not dink to vrong you dus: come out
sweet Vinifrid, me much discredit you.

He Jack Drum. Jesus vat made you dear?


Drum. Gentlemen my M. desires you to come supp with him, I was sent to inuit
you, and this itching goat, would needs ease my legs and carry me: I hope
you will come, and so I take my leave. I, I am guld, but if I quit her not, well.


Exit Drum. Bra. Sig. Come, there is some knot of knavery in this trick.


Pla. His culler is not current, well, let pass.


Bra. Sig. Come Mounsieur, come, I Will help you to a
Go down the hill before, I Will follow you. Wench,

Moun. Me dank you: Mor deu, he mo^ a me, me ame trooke dead wit grief, de
cock of my humore is down, and me may hang my self vor a Vench.


Exit Moun. Bra. Sig. Gentlemen will you laugh heartily now?


Pla. I, and if thou will play the fool kindly now.


Bra. Sig. I will strait frame the strongest eternal Jest
That e're was builded by Invention:
My wife lies very private in the Town,
I Will bring the French man to her presently,
As to a loose lascivious Curtezan:
Nor he, nor you, nor she, shall know the rest,
But it shall be immortal for a Jest.

Exit Bra. Sig. Bra. Iu. Farwell brother, we shall meet at Hygate soon.


Pla. The wicked Jest be turnde on his own head,
Pray God he may be kindly Cuckoled.

Exeunt both. Enter Camelia and Winifride. Came. Carry this favor to my Ellis
straight,
I long to see him, preethe bid him come.

Wini. I would be loath to nourish your defame,
And therefore Mistress pray you pardon me.

Came. What is thy judgment of my Ellis chandge?


Wini. No that is firm: but your estate is changde.
You know your sister's straungely vanished,
And now the hope and revenue of all,
Calls you his sole, and fair apparent heir:
Now therefore would I have you change your love.
Indeed I yield it is modern policy,
To kiss even dirt that plasters up our wants.
I Will not deny, it is worthy wits applause,
For women on whom lowering Fortune squints,
And casts but half an eye of due respect,
To pin some amorous Idiot to their eyes,
And use him as they use their Looking-glass,
See how to adorn their beauties by his wealth,
And then case up the fool and lay him by.
But for such Ladies as your self is now,
Whose fortunes are sustaind by all the proppes
That gracious Fortune can advance you with,
For such a one to yoke her free sweet youth
Unto a Lowne, a Dane-like barbarous Sot,
A guilden Trunchion, fie, it is slavish vile.
Oh what is richer then content in love?
And will you now having so huge a Ruck
Of heaped up fortunes, go and chain your self
To a dull post, whose very eyes will blaze
His base bred spirit, where so e're he comes,
And shame you with the very name of wife.
No Mistress, no, I have found out a man
That merits you, if man can merit you.

Came. Lord what a tide of hate comes creeping on
Upon my former judgment? Come, the man?

Wini. The man? (oh God) the man is such a man,
That he is matchless: oh, I shall profane
His name, with unrespected utterance.

Ca. Oh thou tormentst me, dear Winifride the man?


Wi. By the sweet pleasures of an amorous bed,
I think you will be deified by him.
O God the most accomplished man that breathes,
And Planet is the man.

Came. Out on the devil, th^res a man indeed.


Wini. Nay look you now, you will straight oreshoot yourselfe,
You Will say he is sour and unsociable:
Tush you know him not, that humor's forced:
But in his native spirit he is as kind
As is the life of love. And then the clearest skin,
The whitest hand, the cleanest well shaped leg:
The quickest eye: Fie, fie, I shall but blurre
And sulley his bright worth with my rude speech.

Came. Well, if he court me, I Will not be much coy.


Wi. Court you? nay you must court him for ought I know:
You must not think forsoothe, that I am feed
To urge you thus. I solemnly protest,
I motion this out of my pure vowed love,
Which wishes all advancement and content
To attend the glory of your beauteous youth.

Ca. O I am Planet stricken Winifride,
How shall I intimate my love to him?

Wi. I saw him coming up the hill even now,
Send him a favor, and I Will bear it to him,
And tell him you desire to speak with him.

Exit Winifride. Ca. Do, do, dear Winifride, sweet wench make haste.


Enter Sir Edward Fortune, and John Ellis, with a Paper in his hand. Ellis.
Sir, I have her good will, and please you now to give me your consent, and
look you Sir, here I have Item'd forth what I am worth.


Sir Ed. Tush show me no Items, and she love you, a God^ name: I Will not be
cursed by my daughter for forcing her to clip a loathed, abhorred match: and see
how fortunate we are; Look where she stands.


Came. Sweet Planet, thou only gouernst me.


Sir Ed. Daughter give me your hand, with your consent, I give you to this
Gentleman.


Ca. Marry phoh, will you match me to a fool?


Sir Ed. God pardon me, not I: why M. Ellis ha?
Had you her consent, speak freely man?

El. Indeed law now; I thought so: by my troth
You sed you lou'de me, that you did indeed.

Ca. I as my fool, my I diot to make sport.


Sir Ed. Fie daughter, you are too plain with him.
Alas my son Similie is out of countenance.

El. Truly as a Mill-horse, is not a horse Mill, and as a Cart Jade, is not a
Jade Cart, even so will I go hang my self.


Sir Ed. Mary godforbid, what frolic, frolic man, we will have a Cup of Sack
and Sugar soon, shall quite expel these mustie humors of stale melancholy.


Enter Pasquil and a Country Wench, with a Basket of Eggs. Pas. Is this the
Egg where Castor and Pollux bred?
I Will crack the Bastard in the very shell.

Coun. Maid. Alas my markets, my markets are clean spoilde.


Exit Wench. Pas. Vbi Hellena, vbi Troia, is it not true my Ganimede,
When shall old Saturn mount his Throane again?
See, see, alas how bleake Religion stands.
Katherina, Katherina, you damned Titanoies,
Why prick you heavens ribs with blasphemy?
Python yet breathes, old gray hayr'd piety.

Sir Ed. Alas kind youth, how came he thus di^^^aught?


Page. I left him in pursuit of Katherine,
And found him in this strange distemperature.

Pas. O Sir, is it you that stamp on litrature?
You are inspired you with Prophecy.

El. Not I, as I shall be saved, I am M. John Ellis I.


Sir Ed. Come, come, lets entice him by some good means,
I Will labor to reclaim him to his wits.
O now my daughter Katherine remembers me,
Where art thou girl? heaven give me patience.

Pas. Poor, poor Astrea, who blurs thy orient shine?
Come yons the Capitol of Jupiter,
Letts whip the Senate, else they will not leave
To have their Justice blasted with abuse
Of flattering Sycophants. Come lets mount the Stars,
Reverend antiquity go you in first --
Dotage will follow. Then comes pale fac'de Lust --
Next Sodom, then Gomorha, next poor I,
By heaven my heart is burst with misery.

Exit Pas. Enter Brabant Signior, Mounsieur and the Page. Moun. I ha tell you
de very trote of the lagg Jest, by gor your England Damosells are so feere, so
vittie, so kitt, by my trote she toss me wish vey she please der: but pre
you were is de Vench? Is dis de house? Ha is dis de house, pre you tell me ha?


Bra. Sig. It is, it is, and she is in the Inner Chamber:
Boy call her forth.

Exit Page. Moun. Sings. By gor den me must needs now sing,
Ding, ding, a ding, Ding a, ding a, ding,
For me am now at pleasures spring.
Ding a, ding, ding, ding a, ding a, ding a, ding,
And a he da vench, da vench, da vench,
Which must my br^ling humor quench. Coma, coma, com.

Enter Mistress Brabant. Mist. Bra. Now sweet, you kept your promise well last
night.


Moun. By gorshe give him much kind word already.


Bra. Sig. Well to make thee amends, boy fetch us a quart of Canary Sack. Pry
thee Mall entertain this French Gentleman.


Mist. Bra. Sir you are very welcome to my Lodging.


Moun. Me danck you, and first me kiss your fingre, next me busse your lip,
and last me clip your vaste, and now foutra for de Vinifride.


Page. Sir Edwards Caterer passed by sir, you wild me to remember Lemmons.


Bra. Sig. Gods precious it is true: Boy go with me to Billings-gate. Mall I Will
return straight.


Exit Bra. Sig. and his Page. Moun. Will you no Vin sir, he, he is gone
purposely, by my trote most kind Gentleman. Fair Madame pree you pity me,
by Gor me languish for your love, me am a pouera French Ientleman, pree you
show me your bed-Chambre.


Mist. Bra. What mean you sir, by this strange passion?


Moun. Nay noting, by Gor damsel, you be so faer, so admirably feer, flesh
and blood cannot endure your countenance, me brule, ang me brule, ang you ha
no compassion, by gor me ang quite languish. Last night me go to bed, ang me
put de candle behind me, and by my trote me see clean torough me. Me ang so
dry, me put a cold plattre at my back, and my back melt de plattre quite, do
so burn. Pree you show me your bed Chamber, me will be secret constant: I
love you unreasonably vell* unreasonably vell by gor.


Mist. Bra. In faith you make me blush, what should I say?


Moun. Say no, ang take it: Or arc you one ting, Say neder yea nor no, but
take it, ang say noting.


Mist. Bra. You will be close and secret?


Moun. Secred, by gor as secred as your soul, me will tell noting, possible.


Mist. Bra. Well Sir, if it please you to see my Chamber, it is at your service.


Exit Mist. Brabant. Moun. He now me ang brave Mounsieur, by gor ang me had
know dis, me wood have eat some Potatos, or Ringoe: but vell: he. Me will
tanck Meter Brabant vor dis, by gor me am caught in heaven bliss.


Exit Mounsieur. Enter Camelia and Winifride, hanging on Planets arms. Ca. Oh
too unkind, why do thou scorn my love?
She that with all the vehemence of speech
Has been pursued, and kneeled too for love,
Prostrates her self, and all her choycest hopes,
As low as to thy feet, disdain me not,
To scorn a Virgin, is man's odious blot*

Pla. To scorn a man, is Virgins odious blot.
Were thou as rich as is the Oceans womb,
As beauteous as the glorious frame of heaven,
Yet would I loath thee worse then varnisht skulles,
Whose ryuels are dawbd up with plaistering painte.

Came. O Rockie spirit.


Pla. Breathe not in vain, I hate thy flatterings,
Detest thy purest elegance of speech,
Worse then I do the Croaking of a Toade.

Wini. Sweet Gentleman.


Pla. Peace you Rebato pinner, Poting-sticke,
Y^^ bribde corrupters of affection:
I hate you both, by heaven I hate her more
Then I do love my self. Hence pack, away,
I Will sooner doat upon a bleare-eide Witch,
A saplesse Beldame, then I Will flatter thee.

Came. Be not too cruel sweet Planet, dear relent,
Compassionate my amorous languishment.

Pla. Ha, ha, I pree thee kneel, beg, blubber, Cry,
Whilste I behold thee with a loathing eye:
And laugh to see thee weep.

Came. Look, on my knees I creep,
Be not impenetrable beauteous youth,
But smile upon me, and I Will make the air
Court thy choice ear with soft delicious sounds.
Bring forth the Violls, each one play his part,
Musick's the quiver of young Cupids dart.

The Song with the Violls. Pla. Out Siren, peace scritch-owle, hence chattering
Pie,
The blackt beakt night Crow, or the howling Dog,
Shall be more gracious then thy squeaking voice:
Go sing to M. John. I shall be blunt
If thou depart not, hence, go mourn and die,
I am the scourge of light inconstancy. Exit Camelia and Winifride.
Thus my dear Brabant, am I thy revenge,
And whip her for the peevish scorn she bare
To thy weak younger bi^th: o that the souls of men
Were temperate like mine, then Natures painte
Should not triumph over our infirmities.
I do adore with infinite respect,
Weomen whose merit issues from their worth
Of inward graces, but these rotten poasts
That are but guilt with outward garnishment,
O how my soul abhorres them. Yons my friend, Enter Brabant Junior.
I will conceal what I for him have wrought,
Nice Jealousy mistakes a friendly part:
Now Brabant where is thy elder brother ha?
What has he built the Jest with Mounsieur yet?

Bra. Iu. Faith I know not, but I heard he left the
Frenchman with his wife.

Pla. Knew she thy brothers meaning?


Bra. Iu. Not a whit, she is a mere stranger to this merriment.


Pla. Hit and be luckie, o that twere lawful now
To pray to God that he were Cuckoled.
Dear Brabant I do hate these bumbaste wits,
That are puffed up with arrogant conceit
Of their own worth, as if Omnipotence
Had hoysed them to such vnequald height,
That they suruaide our spirits with an eye
Only create to censure from above,
When good souls they do nothing but reprove.
See where a Shallop comes. How now, what news?

Enter Winifride, and whispers with Planet. Bra. Iu. What might this mean,
that Winifrid salutes
The blunt tongu'de Planet, with such private speech?
See with what vehemence she seems to urge
Some private matter. Planet is my friend,
And yet the strongest link of friendship's strainde,
When female love puts to her mighty strength.
Mark, Mark, she offers him Camelias scarf:
Now on my life it is so: Planet supplants my Love.

Pla. Friend I must leave thee, preethee pardon me,
We Will meet at supper soon with the good knight.

Exeunt Pla. and Winifride. Bra. Iu. I, I, content: o hell to my delight,
My friend will murder me, thin Cobweb Lawne
Burst with each little breath of tempting sweets. Winifride speaks from within.
She entreats you M. Planet, to meet
Her at the Cross style.

Bra. Iu. Ha, at the cross style, well I Will meet him there.
He that's persidious to me in my love,
Confusion take him, and his blood be spilt
Without confusion to the murderer.

Exit Brabant. ACTVS QVINTVS.
Enter Bra. Iu. and his Page, charging a Pistol. Bra. Iu. So load it soundly,
murders great with me,
Go Boy, discharge it, even in Planets breast,
Shoot him quite through, and through, thou can not sin
To murder him, that murdered his dear friend
With damned breach of friendship, when he is slain
Bring me his Cloak and Hat, here I will stay
To be imbrac'de in steed of Planet: go, away. Exit Boy.
I had rather die with blood upon my head,
Shame and reproach clogging my heavy hour,
Then to have my friend still wounding of my soul
With reprobate Apostacisme in love.
O this Sophisticate friendship, that dissolues
With every heat of Fancy, let it melt
Even in Hells Forge* Hark, the Pistol is discharg'de,
The Act of gory murder is performd'e.
Have mercy heaven: o my soul is rent
Enter the Page. With Planets wound. Come Boy the Hat and Cloak,
Go post to Scotland, there are crowns for thee,
Leave Brabant unto death, and obloquie. Exit Page.
Why now the vlcerous swelling of my hate
Is broken forth: Oh that these women's beauties,
This Natures witchcraft, should inchaunt our souls
So infinitely unrecoverable,
That Hell, death, shame, eternal infamy,
Cannot reclaim our desperate resolves,
But we will on spite of damnation. Enter Camelia and Winifride.
Come ye poor garments of my murdered friend,
Mourn that you are compeld to hide his limbs
That slew you Master. See Camelia comes,
I Will stand thus muffled and deceive her sight,
When love makes head, friendship is put to flight.

Came. Persist not still, o thou relentlesse youth
To scorn my love: what tho I scorned thy friend,
Do not upbraid me still with hating him,
Do not still view me with a loathing eye.
For Brabants sake, do you but love me sweet,
And I Will not scorn him. Why should be so nice
In keeping laws of friendship? did thou e're hear
Of any soul that held a friend more dear,
Then a fair woman?

Bra. Iu. O the sting of death, how has Brabant erred?
Hence thou vile womb of my damnation,
Oh thou wronged spirit of my murdered friend,
Thou guiltless, spotless, pure Immaculate,
Behold this arm thrusting swift vengeance
Into the Trunck of a cursed damnde wretch.

He draws his Rapier. Wini. Heel spoil himself, lets run and call for help.


Exit Camel. and Wini. Bra. Iu. Now have I room for murder, this vaste place,
Hushed silence, and dumb sollitude, are fit
To be obseruers of my Tragedy.
Planet accept the smoke of reeking blood
To expiate thy murder. Friend I come,
We Will troop together to Elysium.

Enter Sir Edward, Camelia, Winifride, Ellis, Brabant Sig. Twedle, Drum, and
others. Sir Ed. Hold hairbrainde youth, what mischief maddes thy thoughts?


Bra. Iu. Forbear good knight, you never sinned so deep,
As in detaining this just vengeance
To light upon me, but know I will die,
I have infring'de the laws of God and Man,
In sheading of my Planets guiltles blood,
Who I supposde corryuald me in love
Of that Camelia, but injuriously:
And therefore gentle knight, let mine own hand
Be mine own hangman.

Bra. Sig. Brother I Will get you pardon, fear it not.


Bra. Iu. You Will get my pardon, brother pardon me,
You shall not, for I Will die in spite of thee.

Sir Ed. I am turnde wild in wonder of this act.


Enter Planet and the Page. Pla. Come Brabant come, give me my Cloak and Hat,
The euenings raw and danke, I shall take cold.
How now? turned mad, why star'st thou on me thus?
Give me my Cloak. Heart is the youth distraught?

Bra. Iu. Ha, do thou breathe, lets see where is thy wound?


Pla. Do breathe, my wound, what do thou mean by this?


Page. Gentlemen I can direct you forth
This Laborinth of intricate misdoubts,
My M. willed me kill that Gentleman,
Now I thought he was mad in putting me
To such an enterprise, and therefore soothed him up,
With I sir, yes sir, and so sir, at each word,
Whilste he would show me how to hold the Dagge,
To draw the Cock, to charge, and set the flint,
Mean time I had the wit to think him mad,
And therefore went, and as he willed me shot,
Which he God knows, thought pearc'd his deer friends heart,
Then went and borrowed that same Hat and cloak
Of M. Planet, brought them to my Master,
And so.

Pla. No more, no more, knight I will make thee smile
When I discourse how much my friend has erred.

Sir Ed. I will dissolve and melt my soul to night,
In influent laughter. Come' my Iocund spirit
Presageth some vnhopte for happiness:
We Will crown this evening with triumphant joy,
I Will sup upon this Green, here is room enough
To draw a liberal breath, and laugh aloud:
Drum fetch the Table: Twedle scour your Pipe,
For my old bones will have a Rownd to night.
Now by my troth and I had thought ont too,
I would have had a play: I faith I would.
I saw the Children of Powles last night,
And troth they pleased me pretty, pretty well,
The Apes in time will do it hansomely.

Pla. I faith I like the Audience that frequenteth there
With much applause: A man shall not be choakte
With the stench of Garlic, nor be pasted
To the barmy Iacket of a Beer*brewer.

Bra. Iu. It Is a good gentle Audience, and I hope the Boys
Will come one day into the Court of requests.

Bra. Sig. I and they had good Plays, but they produce
Such mustie fopperies of antiquity,
And do not suit the humorous ages backs
With clothes in fashion.

Pla. Well Brabant well, you will be censuring still,
There lies a Jest in steep will whip you fort't.

Sir Ed. Gallants I have no judgment in these things,
But will it please you sit? Camelia
Call these same Gentlemen unto thee wench:
O there with thee my Katherine was wont
To sit with graceful presence, well let't pass:
Fetch me a Cup of Sack. Come Gallants sit,
M. Brabant, M. Planet, I pray you sit.
Young M. Brabant, and Gods precious M. John,
Sit all, and consecrate this night to mirth.
Here is old Neds place: Come, sound Music there,
What Gallants have you never a Page can entertain
This pleasing time with some French brawle or Song?
What shall we have a Galliard? troth it is well.
A Galliard. Good Boy I faith, I would thou had more room.

Enter Katherine. Ka. Once more the gracious heavens have renewd
My wasted hopes, once more a blessed chance
Has fetched again my spirit from the sownd
And languishing despair of happiness.
A skillful Beldame with the Juice of herbs
Has curde my face, and killed the venoms power,
And now if Pasquil live and love me still,
Heaven is bounteous to poor Katherine.
Yon suppes my Father, but my Ned's not there
I fear, and yet I know not what I fear.

Sir Ed. Gallants I drink this to Ned Pasquils health.


Pla. I faith I Will pledge him, would he had his wits.


Sir Ed. And I my daughter. Fill me one Cup more:
No grief so potent, but neat sparkling wine
Can conquer him: Oh this is Juice divine.

Ka. Would he had his wits. Oh what a numming fear
Strikes a cold palsy through my trembling blood.

Enter Pasquil mad. Pas. Virtue shall burst open the Iron gates of Hell,
I Will not be cooped up, room for Phaeton*
Lame policy how can thou go upright?
O Lust, stain not sweet Love. Fie be not lost
Upon the surge of vulgar humors. You Idiot
Riuet my Armor, and Caparison,
A mighty Centaure, for I Will run at Tilt,
And tumble down y on Giantin the dust.
Sit gentle Judges of great Radamant,
Let not Proserpine rule thee. Oh she is dead*
Now thou art right Eacus, I appeal to thee,
Have pity on a wretches misery.

Sir Ed. I am quite sunck with grief, what shall we do
To get recovery of his wits again?

Bra. Iu. Let Music sound, for I have often heard
It has such sweet agreement with our souls,
That it corrects vain humors, and recalls
His straggling fancies to fair union.

Pla. Why the soul of man is naught but simphonies,
A sound of disagreeing parts, yet fair unite
By heavens hand, divine by reasons light.

Sir Ed. Sound Music, then pray God it take effect.


The Musickes soundes, and Pasquils Eye is fixed upon Catherine. Bra. Iu. Mark
with what passion he sucks up the sweets
Of this fame delicate harmonious breath.

Pla. Observe him well, me thinks his eye is fixed
Upon some object that seems to attract
His very soul forth with astonishment
Mark with what vehemence his thoughts do speak
Even in his eyes, some creature stands far off,
That has intranc'te him with a pleasing sight.

Pas. Amazement, wonder, stiff astonishment,
Stare and stand gazing on this miracle,
Perfection, of what e're a humane thought
Can reach with his discoursiue faculties,
Thou whose sweet presence purifies my sense,
And do create a second soul in me,
Dear Katherine, the life of Pasquils hopes.

Ka. Dear Pasquil, the life of Katherines hopes.


Pas. Once more let me embrace the constant's one
That e're was tearmde her Sex perfection.

Kathe. Once more let me be valued worth his love,
In decking of whose soul, the graces strove.

Pas. Spite has outspent it self, and thus at last,

Both speak. We clip with joyful arm each others wast.

Sir Ed. O pardon me thou dread omnipotence,
I thought thou could not thus have blessed me.
O thou have deaw'd my gray hairs with thy love,
And made my old heart sprout with fertile joy.

Kathe. Forget dear father, that my act has wronged
The quiet of your age.

Sir Ed. No more, no more, I know what thou wold'st say
Daughter, there is nothing but salvation,
Could come unto my heart more gracious
Then is the sight of my dear Katherine.
Son Pasquill now, for thou shall be my son,
What frolic gentle youth.

Pas. Is Mamon here?


Drum. Oh Sir, M. Mamon is in a City of Iurye, called Bethlem, Alias plain
Bedlame: the price of whips is mightily risen since his brain was pitifully
ouertumbled, they are so fast spent upon his shoulders.


Pas. Oh sacred heavens, howiust is thy revenge?


Sir Ed. Why? did he cast you in the laborinth
Of these strange crosses?

Pas. Yes honored knight, which in more private place
And fitter time, I will disclose at large.

Came. Faith Sister, as I am your elder borne,
So will I match before or with you sure,
Young M. Brabant?

Bra. By this light not I.


Came. Honest M. Ellis?


Ellis. No indeed law, not I, I do not use to marry*
For even as black patches are worn,
Some for pride, some to stay the Rhewme, and
Some to hide the scab, even so John Ellis
Scorn her, that has scorned him.

Came. Virtuous Master Planet.


Pla. Errant wandering star we shall nere agree.


Ca. M. Brabant, M. Planet, M. Ellis, faith I Will have any.


Sir Ed. But no body will have thee, this is the plague of light inconstancy.
Go Twedle, bid the Butler broach fresh wine,
Set up wax lights, and furnish new the boords,
Knock down a score of Beefes,
Inuit my neighbors straight,
And make my Dressers groan with weight of meat.
M. Ellis, pray you let us hear your high Dutch Song,
You are admired for it: Good lets hear it.

El. I do not use to sing, and yet even as when the sky falls we shall have
Larkes, even so when my voice rises, you shall have a Song.


He sings, holding a Bowl of drink in his hand. The Song.
Give us once a drink, for an the black Bowl,
Sing gentle Butler balley moy,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler balley moy.
Give us once some drink, for an the pint Pot,
Sing gentle Butler balley moy, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler balley moy.
Give us once a drink, for an the quart Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the quart, the pint Pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink, for an the pottle Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once a drink, for an the gallan Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint
pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once a drink for an the Firkin,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart,
the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once a drink for an the Kilderkin,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the
pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For and the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink for an the Barrel,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Barrel, the Kilderkin, the
Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink for an the Hoggeshead,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Hoggeshead, the Barrel, the
Kilkerkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For
an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once a drink for an the But,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the But, the Hoggeshead, the Barrel, the
Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For
an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink for an the Pipe,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Pipe, the But, the Hogeshead, the Barrel,
the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink for an the Tun,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Tun, the Pipe, the But, the the
Hoggeshead, the Barrel, the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the
quart, the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Sir. Ed. Well done, I faith it was chaunted merrily:
What my Gallants, nere a tickeling Jest
To make us sown with mirth ere we go in?

Bra. Sig. Faith Gent. I ha brewed such a strong headed Jest
Will make you drunk, and reele with laughter:
You know Mounsieur John fo de king?

Sir. Ed. Very well, he read French to my daughters.


Bra. Sig. I to gull the Fool, have brought him to my wife, as to a loose
lascivious Curtezan, she being a mere stranger to the Jest, and there some
three hours ago left him: but I am sure she has so cudgeld him with quick
sharp Jests, and so batterd him with a volley of her wit, as indeed she is
exceeding witty, and admirable chaste, that in my conscience heel never dare
to court women more. Would to God he were returned.


Enter Mounsieur. Sir. Ed. See even on your wish he is come.


Moun. Jesus preserve you sweet Meter Brabant, by gor de most delicat plumpe
vench dat ever me tuche: me am your slave, your peasaunt; by gor a votre
service whil'ste I live vor dis.


Bra. Sig. He would persuade you now that he touched her, with an immodest hand.
Ha, ha, ha.


Moun. Tuch her, by Gor me tuch her, and tuch her, and me tuch her, me nere
tuch such a venche, de finea foot, de cleanest leg, de sleekest skin: and
me tell e sure token, she has de finest little varte you know veare: he by
Gor me nere tuch such a vench.


Sir Ed. Pray God he have not brewed a headie Jest indeed.


Bra. Sig. Why faith Gentlemen I am Cuckolde, by this light I am.


Moun. By gor me no know, you tell a me it was a Curtezan, prey you pardon
me, by my trote, me teache you French to t'end of de vorlde.


Pla. Come here is thy Cap of Maintenance, the Coronet
Of Cuckolds. Nay you shall wear it, or wear
My Rapier in your gutts by heaven.
Why do thou not well deserve to be thus used?
Why should thou take felicity to gull
Good honest souls, and in thy arrogance
And glorious ostentation of thy wit,
Think God infused all perfection
Into thy soul alone, and made the rest
For thee to laugh at? Now you Censurer
Be the ridiculous subject of our mirth.
Why Fool, the power of Creation
Is still Omnipotent, and there is no man that breathes
So valiant, learned, witty, or so wise,
But it can equal him out of the same mould.
Wherein the first was formed. Then leave proud scorn,
And honest self made Cuckold, wear the horn.

Bra. Sig. Wear the horn? I, spite of all your teethe
I Will wear this Crown, and triumph in this horn.

Sir Ed. Why faith it is valorously spoke fair Sir,
Weel solemnise your Coronation
With royal pomp. Now Gentlemen prepare
A liberal spirit to entertain a Jest,
Where free light Iocund mirth shall be enthroand
With sumptuous state. Now Music beat the air,
Intrance our thoughts with your harmonious sounds,
Our Fortune laughes, and all content abounds.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
The names of all the men and Women, that Act this Play.
The Men.
1. Sir Edward Fortune. 2. Brabant Signior, and his Page. 3. Brabant Junior,
and his Page. 4. Planet. 5. Puff, and his Page. 6. John Ellis. 7. Mamon the
Usurer, with a great nose. 8. Flawne his Page. 9. Timothy Twedle. 10. Jack
Drum. 11. Pasquil. 12. Mounsieur.
The Women.
1. Katherine. 2. Camelia. 3. Winifride. 4. Market Woman.

