THE MOST excellent, profitable, and pleasant book of the famous doctor and
expert Astrologien Arcandam or Aleandrin, to find the fatal desteny,
constellation, complexion, and natural inclination of every man and child by
his birth: with an addition of Phisiognomie very delectable to read. Now newly
turned out of French into our vulgar tongue, by William Ward.

I R



Printed at London by James Rowbothum and are to be sold at his shop in
Chepesyde, under Bow church.

To the right honorable and virtuous lord the Earl of Shrowesbury, knight of
the most noble order of the Garter. etc. James Rowbothum wysheth long life,
with the increase of godly honor.
I Doubt not (right honorable) but the mind of man is free, and has the rule
and power of him self through the virtue of his liberty, and that the wise
man by his reason, and reasonable sapience, has dominion over the stars and
their impressions, namely over all natural inclinations, and celestial
destnies, without any forced necessity to do this or that, which comes by
the grace and gift of God, the governor of the universal world. Even so
Stilpo (by reason rulyng him) avoided whoredom, although he were naturallye
enclyned thereunto. Yet not withstanding it is most certain, that men have
some inclinations and complexions by nature which some men know either by
Astrology, or by conjecture of their nature, called Phisyognomie, and they
that conjecture are called in Greek Physiognomones which tell by conjectures,
notes, signs and tokens, the inclinations of men's affections. The Philosophers
indeed have invented and found out phisiognomy to the great commodity of men,
for to know to what virtue or what vice young children were inclined to the end
they might amend their vicious and faulty nature with good education, and not
to give the bridle to their affections, but to move them to scienences,
studyes, and other qualities, whereunto nature most calls them and makes
them most inclined. So Apelles and Zeusis followed and learned naturally the
art of painting. So Polyeletus and Praxiteles followed the art of making
pictures and images. So Demosthenes and Cicero chose the art of Oratorie and
eloquence, in pleadyng matters in the law: So Homere and Virgil followed
poetry: So Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle handled Philosophy. And now all is
altered and changed and almost clean ouerturned, and goes (as I might say)
ouerthwartly like the Crabbe. For he that should be naturally a plowman, is
forced to the study of pleading, and to be an Orator or Philosopher, or else
of some higher learning, snoring on his books, turning and returning himself
this way and that way, as though he sat upon coals or hoate embers.
Contrariwise, they that are well borne, and called by the benefit of nature to
all honesty often times are constrained to seruyle doyngs. The knowledge then
of Phisiognomy is requisite and profitable to men, so that men abuse it not, as
some fond people do (commonly called Egiptians) which are as it were ravening
Harpies, hunting after the gain of money, which have brought to pass by their
lies, that this part of philosophy is now in no estimation, which is to be
lamented, seeing that even Hunters know by co^iectures, notes, signs,
draughtes, lineamentes, and sight of the body, the nature and property of
dogs: And by the like means Horsecorsers do know the nature of Horses, as the
Poet Vergill describes in the third book of his Georgykes saying.

The good Colt by and by marches high upon the ground, and orderly extolleth
himself, or else sets down often times his soft thighs the one after the
other: And first he dare go in durtye ways, or into great rivers, and venture
upon a bridge which he knows not: neither fears he any vain noise or cry.
The good horse has a high neck, a little head, a short belly, fat behind, and
fair before, having a full mane. The red is fair, fair also is the
speckled, fair is the brown baye: and evil is a white color in a horse. And
worse is the color between white and red.

A good horse can not stand still at the sound of a trumpet that he hears a
far of. The ear we see waggeth up and down, every member moves, foming at the
mouth, he breaths out and gathers in under his nostrels fire and hot
breath. A thick mane hangyng on the side alonge down all his neck: and a
double chyne ending broad upon his back. He treads deep in the ground, and
in treadinge he astonieth it. His hard hoof of horn sowneth, with other
qualities belo^gyng to a good horse.

But now a days no man cares to conjecture, or to know by conjectures, or to
refer man's natural inclinations to such a profit. And though there were no
other profit risynge by it but only to make a troubled mind merry (whereunto
we oftentimes see music applied which is one of the sciences commonly called
liberal:) this art of phisiognomy ought not be contemned. And therefore
wayinge with my self the pleasauntnes of this part of philosophy and having
occasion to publishe in our vulgar tongue this little book of Arcandam or
Aleandrin doctor and most expert Astrologian, treating of the predictions of
the birth and fatal disposition of young children. I was so bold as to dedicate
ye fruit of this labor unto your lordship, and to honor it with the
honorable title of your honors name, most humbly besechinge your lordshyp
favorably to accept it as offered of one who wishes unto you and yours all
health, wealth, long life, and much increase of virtue and honor, nothing
doutinge but that after your lordshippes weyghty and serious affairs, you shall
not be grieved to recreat your self with the reading of some pleasant part
hereof, which may ease such tedious exercises as your lorship may upon
occosions take in hand.

Your honors most humble, James Rowbothum.

A brief declaration most certain and profitable, for to find out (as much
as the art of Astronomy can certify) man's fate and constellation indicative,
touching the natural inclination of man: Made by Arcandam the learned and
expert Astrologian.
THe manner to find out the destnie and constellation is this. First, if you
will know the constellation of any man, take his natural name which is
co^monlye called his proper name and the proper name of his mother, in such
sort as neither of ye said two names in any wise be changed or depraved from
the vulgar or proper calling (as often times it chances by the common
apellation of men's names) but that they be perfect and not diminished. And for
two causes the name of the mother is taken and not of the father. First,
because the mothers side is more apparent then the fathers. Secondlye, although
the father be the original of the conception and generation of the child yet
the child touching the body has more of the mothers matter and substance
then of the fathers. Yea and as oftentimes it happens, some part of the
fathers seed does not enter nor serve touching the material composion. For
man is verily a thing active, and by no means passive, and touching him self
can have no action. Whereby it consequently appears that the child concerning
the body has more of the mothers substance then of the fathers. Whereunto a
third cause may be added, that for as much as the child is nourished of the
mothers substance and not of the fathers, that then the constellation enforsyng
his effect and sign in the chyldes body, does rather convert the same with
the mother and the body of the mother, then with the father and the body of
the father. And therefore truly and determinatlye to know and learn the
chyldes fate and constellation, his proper name must be taken togethers with
the natural and proper name of the mother. Then diligently consider every
letter of the said two names, and among the same gather ye numeral letters,
such as signify a number, which according to the ancient account are seven
as.I. signifies one.V. five.X. ten.L. fifty.C. a hundredth.D. five hundredth,
M. signifies a thousand.

Taking all and singular letters of the said two names, as well the number as
such as signify a number. Then gather the whole sum, which sum so
collected, divide if it be possible by.xxix. because of the.xxix.
constellations of the stars, or because of the particular signs celestial
which after the ancient manner is the first division of the signs. And
hereby it appears that the principal parts of the particular stars and
signs celestial in number are.xxix. as here after shall appear. So that the
number signified by the numerall letters of the two proper names aforesaid
ought to be divided by reason of the said signs. And sometimes the said
number does amount just to the sum of.xxix. and sometime it excedeth the
same, wherein is to be noted that either the number does excede or else is
equal.

If it excede, then the number ought to be applied and divided by their unities
to the said signs adding to every of the signs their unities beginning at
the first sign which is the head of Aries and so of the rest successiuelye.
And where so ever the last unity shall fail or shall be placed, there and in
that sign and in the part of that sign, the Infant (whose constellation you
seek to know) undoubtedly is borne, and thereby you shall give judgment and
truly pronounce that in that sign the fate and constellation of the Infant
consists. Not withstandyng that peradventure, according to the manner and
course of the stars, times and months, some other sign should seem to
have dominion over that nativity. And because that the sign wherein
certaynely the Infant is borne does not alone bear rule in the time of the
birth, but all and singular effectuallye do concur according to the more
or less in every nauitie. So that eftsoon it chances that some sign
distinct from that sign appropriat to the month does more effectuallye rule
and more excellentlye express his effects. Therefore to the intent you may
perfectly behold the fate and constellation of the party that is borne, you
must not only look upon the sign allotted and appropriate to that month
wherein determinatlye any is borne: but chiefly you must have respect to that
sign which specially has dominion above others in the time of the birth,
not withstanding that sign appropriate to the month has the principal
effect.

And whether one sign is more excellent or effectual then another you may
most certainlye and truly know by this art.

Let us return then unto our former proposition, and say that either the
sum of the number signified by the numeral letters of the names aforesaid
does not amounte to.xxix. or else that it does principally atteyne to that
sum, or is equal, or else excedeth the same. But now after the agreement
and concord of the number, take also the convocation and assemble of the
signs celestial, which are touching their particular parts.xxix. as is
aforesaid, or xxx. as shall be said hereafter, beginning at the first
particular sign, which is the head of the sign Aries. And where so ever the
last unity of this number shall rest or remain, that is the special sign
and is of most force in the time of the nauitie. But if this number does not
surpass the number of.xxix. but thereunto is equal, then the last sign
which is the tail of Pisces is the chiefest sign at the nativity.
Semblablye if this number does excede the number of.xxix. then this number is
to be divided so many times by.xxix. till the number of.xxix. be found out.
And then for every unity one sign must be accounted yeldyng to every sign
his unity: and then the last unity, which is xxix. is attributed to.xxix.
and to the last sign which is the tail of Pisces, as was said a little
before, and that sign chiefly has dominion in the nativity of the infants.
But if that number lastly remainynge be within the number of xxix. then every
unity of this number ought to be distributed to every particular sign
beginning first at the head of Aries, and wheresoever the last unity of this
nu^bre does remain the same is the principal sign, and chiefly has
government at the birth of the infant.

Here also ought diligently to be noted that the celestial signs may be
taken two ways, that is to say totally or touching the whole effects of the
same and are in number but twelve. That is to wete: Aries (and is the first
sign, at which you must begin, and then follow successively till you come
to the sign of Pisces which is the twelfeth) Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces. Now each of
these signs in his whole effect does especially bear rule in that month
which is appropriate to the same. And every sign intierly has dominion over
every month such as thereunto is appointed. As for example: Aries has
dominion in March which is the first month according to the computation of
Astronomers. Likewise Taurus in April, and so the rest consequently succedyng.
And although the foresaid signs singulerlye and appropriatlye have their
months specially assigned as is aforesaid. Yet all these twelve signs in
every month at all times, every day and hour, every moment and minute of an
hour, do concur in the nauitie of every birth, although not equallye yet
according to the moore or less. And that sign which chiefly has dominion
in the nativity, the same is the constellation of the Infant. Moreover the
sign wherein the Infant is borne, although it be not that sign which is
appropriat to the month but some other, yet it is easy to be known from the
sign perticularly appointed to the said month. Likewise the said signs
may be taken two ways not intierly but specially touching their parts and
by acceptyng the same in such particular wise (chiefly after the reconing of
ancient Astronomers) they be nine and twentye, for five of them that is to
say: Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius are every of them diuyded
into three pryncipall parts. As into the Head, the Beallye, and Tail, and is
as much to say, into the beginning, the myddle, and the end.

Whereby it follows that these five figures so divided do include fyftene
particular signs which are there.xv. principal parts for three times v. make
fyftene. And the other seven signs. That is to say Aries, Cancer, Virgo,
Libra, Sagittarius, Capricornus and Pisies, emongs whom three parts are
contained in Virgo for his tail is diuyded into twain as shall be said
hereafter, although here it has but.ii. parts. All which seven are divided
but into two principal parts, to weete into the head and tail and so
include.xiiii. particular signs for twice seven is xiiii. Whereby it
manifestlye appears by the premysses that the signs particulerlye accepted
are in number.xxix. because.xv. and.xiiii. make.xxix. Further it is to be noted
that in all and every the aforesaid signs being wholly accounted according to
the manner before remembered al these.xii. are concurrents either more or less
in the nativity of every infant. For each man has in the foresaid signs a
part and propriety as for example. The infant that is borne in Aries, Aries.
disposes his life in that sign and in that part of Aries which is most
pliant to his nativity. And specially the part which according to the
quantity has chiefest dominion in that sign, and is the first house of his
nativity which is a signifier of life. etc. And also places in the said
sign his speech, wisdom, augmentation of al his works, his beginning, his
name, and the original of his life and years.

In Taurus is contained the substance of the infant, Taurus.
his gain or loss his living, Debtes, Gifts, Servants, Helpers, such as be
obedient to his commandments, his witnesses and treasure. And this sign
because it is the second house signifies the end of his youth.

Gemini are brethren. Gemini.
This sign because it is the third house is a token of brethren, systers,
friends neyghbors brethren of husbands and such as proceed of the mothers
side, and signifies the mother her self. Likewise it is a token of faith,
religion, commandments, ambassadors, news, mutations, small journeys, and a
space of life before death approach.

In Cancer the Infant disposes his father, Cancer.
graundfather, and all his parents on his fathers side, to wete, all his
auncetours ascendynge from the right line males, and his sisters and other
inheritours, except such as are inheritours by the succession of the dead.

Also it signifies houses lands, rightes, treasures, and what so ever is hid
under ground, prisons, and prisoners, and all such as happens to the dead
being buried, after the buryall, or without burial, as eft soones it chances
to such as be hanged, beheaded, or otherwise slain. And because it is the
fourth house it signifies death before he grow to man's state and the end of
things.

Leo.
Leo betokens Infantes, love, messangers, novelties, gifts, rewards, fair
promyses, or myrthe, goods by the father and such as shall happen after death
whether it be praise or infamy.

In the.vi. sign which is Virgo are contained infirmities, Virgo.
and things contrary to health, servants, maids, lyinge, accusation,
unrighteousness, places prisons, mutation from place to place, Catayll of small
stature. And because this sign is the syxth house it does insinuate end of
life and all such things as shall happen before old age.

In Libra which is the seventh sign marriages are contained, Libra.
mischief and peril in marriage, contencions, open enemies, wars, emmities,
thieves, partakynge, and opposition and every thing opposite, participation of
marchaundise, expedite and small voyages, and because it is the seventh house
it notes the moitie and end of life toward old age.

In Scorpio is contained death, fear, Scorpio.
sadness, labor, dispeyre, seperatio^, aid of adversaries, policies, wit,
letall, poison, substance or hereditamentes as well of strangers as of
affinite such as the heyers ought to possess after death and signifies
because it is ye eight house end of life after the approchement of old age.

Sagitarius.
In Sagittarius being the.ix. house are expressed long Journeys, or far
peregrinations and all things thereunto incident. Also it signifies faith,
religion, wisdom, Philosophy, writtinges, Books, Epistles, News,
interpretations of dreams and things to come great wonders, much honor and
joy. And for as much as this sign is lord of the nynth house it sygnifyeth
a beginnynge and enteraunce into half of the life.

Capricornus.
The.x. house is Capricornus which prefygurateth kingdom, government,
auctoryty dignities offices and all arts that may be exercised and whereby a
man may be a Master, it sygnifyeth also ecclesiastical iurisdiccion, things
stolen or carries away, praise and fame it pronosticateth also mothers,
graundemothers, and ancestors of feminine kind, mothers in law, and half the
term of life.

In the eleventh sign which is Aquarius the birth appoints his proper and
prosperous constellation, Aquarius.
and it betokens praise honor, great fortune, faythefull friends aid of
kings and princes, treasour, and society and sygnifieth half the years of
man's life.

Pisces being the twelfeth house does demonstrate significations of werines,
Pisces.
sadness, poverty, priuye hatred, deceit fear, sorrow, lamentacion,
blasphemye ambushmentes, houses, prisons, captive hands, rebuke, and beasts
meet to ride upon.

In manner above expressed is entreated only of the infant borne in Aries
although the same must be divided and spoken of every sign ascending in the
nativity of every birth and of all other signs following the sign of the
nativity til by recours the number of.12. be attained whether any be borne in
Taurus or in Gemini which is in order, is written the third sign or in any
of the twelve signs. And therefore you shall diligently note that every of
the aforesaid houses is in him self the first, and has his second, third,
fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eight, nynth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfeth
house. And this I remember because the like whereof we have said of the
signs, the same I would should be understood of the houses. And every
house according to their qualities has eleven other houses beside him self
of whom their significations be derived.

All which (well beloved reader) may through the dexterity of thy wit be
easily understood, whether the infant be borne in Taurus, in Gemini or in
Libra, as before. And so every man may learn to know by this art
determinatly his own fate, his proper and passive constellation, not forced of
necessity, but by the natural inclination. because as Ptolemeus says, a
wise man shall rule the stars. As much to say. A wise man may let and
prohibit the very future effects, The heavenly inclinatie no be no
inforcementes to the wise.
which proceed of the stars and the influences thereof. And so if he will he
may rule the said stars and heavenly mocions. And therefore for a monition
unto thee, the said stars do not enforse and constrain thee to any thing,
except it he such as are proclyue and ready to be drawn by them, and such
as will follow nature rather then reason after the manner of brute beasts.
Wherefore for a more evident doctrine and instruction of the premesses, the
Scheme or figure ensuwyng is placed.

The first celestial principal and entier sign called Aries.


ram

The Figure.
(The East.) The house cadent. The house succedyng. (Noonetyde.) The house
cadent. The house succedyng. (The West.) The house cadent. The house succedyng.
(Mydnyght.) The house cadent. The house succedyng.
Aries, the first house. Taurus, the ii. house. Gemini, the iii. house. Cancer,
the iiii. house. Leo, the v. house. Virgo, the vi. house. Libra, the vii.
house. Scorpio, the viii. house. Sagitarius, the ix. house. Capricornus, the x.
house. Aquarius, the xi. house. Pisces, the xii. house.


The figure of the Infant in whose nativity Aries has dominion. But if
Taurus bear rule, then Taurus must be figured in the first house, in the
second house Gemini, and in the third Cancer. And if Gemini bear rule, then
Gemini must be placed in the first house, and Cancer in the second. And so of
the other Signs.

Place this figure next before the sign of Aries.



IN the first treatise the said sign of Aries is discribed with the
efficacy and power thereof. Which Aries is divided into two principal parts.
Aries divided into two principal panes containing five chapters.
That is to say, into the head and tail. And this treatise conteyneth.v.
Chapters.

In the first the head of Aries is described with the efficatie and fortune
thereof. In the second the tail and force thereof. In the third the special
judgment of Aries according to the male. In the fourth, the judgment
especial after the female. In the fyfte and last the general and total
fortune of Aries.

The first Chapter which is the head of Aries, the first particular sign.
being the first particular sign celestial is called Aluathay, and after some
men's opinions Salhay, having four stars disposed in this manner. Where is to
be not understood that who so ever is borne in this sign touching the
disposition of the body, color and making of the body.
according to the effect of ye sign shall be somewhat ruddy or yellowe color,
and shall have a small bealy, nymble and strait, thynne and lean of body, and
shall also have upon his left foot a sign or mark, Mark or sign.
and the like upon the left elbowe. And if fortune favor he shall have a
mutable enheritaunce. inheritance
That is to say being once obtained shall suddenly be lost, and yet in short
time shall recover it again. And this part of fortune is by a certain nature
indifferent. Likewise touching the good fortune, Good fortune.
the same shall have many friends, and shall hate the evil and follow the
good, employing good tournes upon ingrate and unthankful men. Significations
of the mind.
Touching the disposition of the mind he shall be subtle, politic, and
craftye. And concerning infirmities, and sickness, Infirmities
the same shall be more prone to pains in the head then to any other disease,
wherewith he shall be vehementlye vexed, besides which disease the health shall
be good and prosperous. And for a more apt advertisement of the fortune of
this sign, I refer to the universal chapter of this sign Aries where is
entreated the entier effect and general fortune thereof, and is the fifte
Chapter of this treatise.

The second Chapter mencioneth the tail of Aries, the.ii. particular sign
or the latter part thereof, according to the sign particular is called
Allothayn and of some Alhuthou.

This sign has four stars, one in the tail and three in the loins or
bellye figured in this manner. Where is to be noted that who soever is borne in
the tail of Aries or in the second particular sign celestial.

First touching the disposition of the body shall be very hearye, the body.
and shall have a great bearde, colored eyes, white teethe, a fair Nose,
great eye Brows, and shall be of color Read mixte with the Croceall or
Safferon color.

And touching the disposition of the mind, the mind and qualities thereof.
shall be eloquent, solitary in life, prodigal in necessity, deceiptfull, and
many times shall follow after ambushments, and prone to hurt others. If the
same be borne in the second hour of the night, there shall be a white or pearl
in the eye, and in the end shall be stark blind, and touching the minds
inclination shall be a searcher of words, factes, and other secrets. Likewise
shall be irefull, envious, and yet shall be rather envied of others, then greatly
given to that vice. Whereof it will come to pass that he shall have many
enemies which will seek after his destruction. the term of life.
And touching the life and manner thereof, he shall live forty years and then
shall wax sick, but if he shall chance to recover that sickness he shall live
four score years, and then dye in his bed. Ill fortune
Moreover touching ill fortune, he shall have a strype in the face either with
a sword or stone, and shall be afflicted with many miseries. So that he shall
receive no commodity without loss and some hynderaunce. Good fortune.


And concerning prosperous fortune, he shall be happy in tillage.

The third Chapter wherein the judgment of Aries is remembered touching the
male, and both parts of this sign because both do concur in all the
effects determinatly, especially concerning the said male. What so ever male
therefore, that is borne in this sign and in every part thereof, the body.
after the disposition of his body shall have a certain mark in his shulders,
and in his left foot as is said before. Secondarely touching his mind, he
shall be of good stomach, the mind
studious, proud, inconstant and lively. And in his first degree of youth he
shall be very contencious, irefull, and shamefast. He shall be very covetous, and
shall attain to great authority in bying and sellyng, by reason he shall deny
that he has any substance, affirmyng himself to be very poor and worth
nothing. He shall be glotonous, and in all meats shall find lack, that is to
say, not satisfied, whereby his ravenous and greedy stomach shall
continuallye murmour and grudge. Inwardelye he shall freate with anger, and can
not keep it secreate, but utter and disclose the same. Likewise he shall be a
liar and false in words, faynyng fair speech, amiable countenance and
obedient gesture, and thereby hyde his dissimulation and falsehode, he shall
speak one thing and do another, promising golden hills, but perform
nothing. Thyrdly, touching his life and manner thereof, Chances in the life
time.
he shall pass part of his life in great authority. And shall suffer pain
in the stomach, and for a woman's sake shall sustain much sorrow. Also he
shall receive wounds of four footed beasts as of horses, and such like,
whereby he shall be in danger of death. Also about the three and twentye,
and five and thyrty years of his age he shall be in peril of poison. Moreover,
if he escape certain diseases, he shall live till the age of four skore and
seven years, Diseases.
and three months. And the Mondaye shall be his contrary day. Contrary d^^^
And therefore let him not wash his head nor put on any new apparel, or
begin any notable thing upon that day, because all such things having
respect to misfortune and manner of living are unfortunate.

Fourthlye, touching the good fortune, Good fortune.
he shall have good luck to other men's goods. He shall be made rich by his
wife, and shall atteyne to great substance. He shall enjoy great store of
cattaile, and shall daily increase to further wealth. He shall wander into far
countries, for saking both his own country and parents. When he comes to
xxiii. years of age he shall attein to better things and shall have to do with a
mass of money. And being.xl. years old he shall be of great wealth and amou^t to
great dignity: such things as he goth about to take in hand shall be brought to
great perfection. His promocions or offices he shall exercise with much favor.
He shall not marrye his first wife which shall be allotted unto him, Marriage.
but another of whom he shall have noble and worthy Children. He shall love
and be daily conversant with the Catholic Church. And to speak universally
such as are borne in the time of the day, shall be fortunate and in great
favor with Princes and noble men, but if in the night they be unfortunate.

The fourth Chapter discourses the judgment of Aries, description of the
body.
concerning both parts and the efficatie of the same, especially touching
the female. Therefore the maid that is borne in this sign shall have in the
myddest of her body before or behind, or upon her feet, certain natural
marks, and a hear dependynge down to her feet.

Likewise touching the disposition of her mind, she shall be diligent and
paynefull. the mind.
She shall be fair, curste and curious of things new. She shall have a
certain honorable shamefastness, that is to say, endued with chastity and
bashefulnes, and therefore called honorable. She shall be merye, and her
myrthe shall daily increase. Likewise that thing which is done by her advise
shall have good perfection. And after the vmacitie and lyuelynesse of her
spryte, she shall be curste and tauntynge in words. And touching her life and
manner of her life, Sickness,
she shall be full of syckennesse from the age of four years to seuentene
years, and then let her beware of marriage. Marriage.


Likewise she shall suffer a certain infirmity called the lunatyke passion,
which is a great disease, and if she escape the same, she shall live till she
be three score and nine years of age. Length of life.


Touching her good fortune, she shall enjoy the goods of her parents and
shall travail in places unknown, Good fortune.
and after.xxxiii. years of age, she shall ariue in places of better adventure.
She shall have many Children by her husband and shall be called a mother of
other men's children, but her first begotten shall dye. And touching her
evil fortune, Ill fortune
she shall be hurt of a four footed beast and subject to many perils.

The syxte Chapter of this treatise, mencioneth the general fortune of
Ariries. Where it is to be known that the sign of Aries touching both
parts, signifies fortune in war fare, and the service of others. Forreyn
euentes.
Likewise fortune in all kinds of marchaundise especially in read things,
bloudye things, and in fire and blood, in the shambles, and in every fact
done by fire, it signifies fortune in hospitality. Infantes borne in this
sign, Infirmities
males or females, shall be void of head ache, but greatly troubled with the
strangullion, gravel and stone. Days.
The fortunate days be Mondaye and Twesdaye, wherein they may attempt any
new enterprise. What part of the world is best.
Likewise the Infant borne in this sign about the East part is more
fortunate then about any other part. Therefore if the same will prosper in
any affairs he ought to direct his doings thereunto, yea if it be about
marriage. Let him also have the door of his house open toward the East and
his bed standing toward the same part also. Garments.
Let his garments be black and read. His nature is both whote and dry,
Nature.
and therefore Choler is most abundaunt in him.

Taurus the second and principal sign celestial.


depiction of bull

THe second principal traictise of this book entreats of the principal
sign called Taurus, which sign is divided into three chief parts that is
to say into the Head, Taurus divided into three parts containing vi. chapters
Bealy and Tail. This treatise is divided into.vi. Chapters. The first
conteyneth the head of the said sign. The second the bealy. The third the
tail. The fourth the judgment of the same touching the male. The fyfte
touching the female. The syxte and last entreats of the general fortune of
the said Taurus.

Concerning the first Chapter of this treatise, wherein the head of Taurus is
spoken of which is the third particular sign called Adoldaya, the third
particular.
has.vii. stars disposed in this sort. And is to be noted yt whosoever is
borne in this sign first touching the disposition of the body and vinacitie
of this sign shall be of color pure, of body fat, the body.
fair and without spotte, his lips thick and hanging down his stature
short. He shall have a beautiful face, his hear long, but very fair, and
shall have many marks in his body. But the special mark shall be in his
neck because he shall be very hearye. He shall have great eyes of color like
a Catte or black. Touching the disposition of the mind, of the body.
he shall be much aided and succored, and of his aiders shall receive no
hurt, he shall be aduenturous and of good corrage. And touching his life and the
manner thereof, Infirmities
he shall be greatly troubled with pain of his heart. The first term of his
life shabe at.xxiiii. The second at lxx. in either of these terms he shall be
wonderful sick, term of Sickness.
but in the second term he shall suffer an infirmity of the Apostume
Cynanches commonly called the Squinsie, which breadeth in the throat, which
if he escape, he shall live to four skore, but in the end he shall die of the
said apostume. Touching the influence of this sign, Hurtes.
he shall be bitten with a Dog, and shall have a notablye strype with a
Stone, or Iron. Likewise you shall understand, that if it chance the Infant
be borne earlye in the morning, he shall be thycke and gross. And touching
the disposition of his mind, Qualities.
he shall be pleasant, apt, and bold, and chiefelye in his youth, but he
shall be of an vpryghte conscience, and a good Companion. If he be borne in
the first part of the night, he shall have a great Noase, and a small head.
He shall have many friends and shall have a dilectation in sundry kinds of
pleasures.

In the second Chapter of this treatise the Beallye is descrybed, which is
the second part of Taurus, and the fourth particular sign. the.4.
particular sign
Therefore it is to wette, that this sign has seuentene stars, of this
form and fashion following, and is called Co^ebram. And who so ever is borne
in this sign. First touching the disposition and quantity of the body, the
body.
he shall be narowe between the shulders, and in the Arm hooles very hearye,
his face indifferent round, and his eyes very fair. he shall have a mark in
his body, either upon his yard, loins, or the privy parts, or else between
his Armehooles. One of his arms shall be hurt, and shall receive a wound upon
his head. The quality of the mind.
And touching the disposition of his mind, he shall be smiling, merye,
artificial, and shall take good aduisement in his doings. He shall be liberal
and willing and shall give his enheritaunce to one of his own family. His
mind shall be fired upon the goods of Fortune, and upon their happy or
unhappy adventures.

He shall love contencion and embrace women, and especially he shall love two
above others in his life time, to the which he shall use carnallye, he shall
be very ritous, but not so much as he that is borne in the first part of
the sign. Touching his life and manner thereof he shall have two special
diseases which is the cough and pain of the galle. Diseases.
In the fourth year of his age, he shall be affected with a great disease, but
if he shall recover the same, then shall he be free till twentye, at which
time he shall be sick again. But if he escape that sickness, he shall
continewe to four skore years or foureskore and ten. He shall dye in a
strange country alone, Death.
naked and without absequies at his burial. He shall not be buried. Burial.
No man shall mourn for him. And there shall be no man that will say, he was
my neighbor. Concerning his good fortune, Good fortune.
he shall among strangers atteyne either unto good or evil success. He
shall be entangled and subject to diverse troubles, and as is aforesaid shall dye
in a strange country, and at the time of his death shall depart without
company. If he be borne in the first part of the night he shall be inconstant
and mouable, having small regard to his own family. If he be borne in the
day time, he shall be wounded upon some part of his body. And touching his
mind, he shall be a good man and of a good disposition doing his affairs after
a simple and plain sort without any regard of diuinations or knowledge of
things to come.

And the third Chapter entreats of the tail of Taurus which is the fifte
sign celestial and has two stars shaped in this form, The 5 particular
sign
and is called Aliuiseri. Whereby you may know that who soever is borne in
this sign first touching the disposition of his body and quantity thereof, of
the body.
he shall be of an indifferent form and stature, he shall neither be white nor
black but of a color like honny or nutbroune but his head, face and hear,
shall be beutifull. In his face he shall have a natural sign or mark, or in
his left eye, or else in his bealy, or right thigh, and shall be balde. the
mind.
Touching his mind he shall be solitary in his busynes doing the same without
company of others, in so much as if it be possible he will have no man to know
of it, because he trusts no man. He shall be ware in his doings for that he
mistrusteth all men.

He shall be covetous daily musing how he may get other men's goods. He
shall be strong and prone to anger, but it shall not continue, he shall also be
very inconstant. All which notwithstanding in the end he shall endeavor him
self to walk uprightly. And touching his life and manner of his life, he
shall live in trouble, Sickness,
and contiue to five and twenty years before he be sick and if he escape that
sickness then, he shall atteyne to forty. He shall be luckie in tillage, and
happy to the female kind as well fowls as beasts, and among others
fortunate to women. But notwithstanding that felicity, he shall not keep any
number of servants.

Marriage.
He shall marrye a wife, and for a certain space shall be without Children. He
shall sustain envy and malice, he shall be bitten of a Dog, and stricken upon
one of his sides, and hurt with a stone. One of his bones shall be broken. And
if it chance that be he borne in the night, then he shall have a natural
sign upon his arm. He shall be swifte to journey or travel. He shall be wise
ryotous, and notablye beloved of women, although in other things he is of
cold nature, which chances by reason of the total effect of this sign.

The fourth Chapter describes the judgment of Taurus, The judgment of the
male.
touching all and every the parts thereof concerning the male. And what so
ever male child is borne in this sign Taurus in what part so ever he be
borne after the disposition of the body, he shall be wounded or marked in the
stones or yard. He shall be riotous and strong, dealing with things of
great force.

And after his mind he shall be wise, and sigulerlye presume in his own wit
and force, whereby he shall greatly prolonge the term of his life. He shall
give no heed to the counsel of his neighbors. Nor be careful and vigilant
about his own affairs. He shall be beautiful, liberal, and wylfull, a
liberal geuer, and for that cause beloved of all men. Concerning his life and
manner thereof: Infirmtiie.
He shall have seven diseases, or seven principal terms. In the three and
twenty year of his age, he shall be affected with a notable malady, and if he
escape al his infirmities, and atteyne to old years, then he shall acquire
great substance and much money, Wandering in forteen countries,
and by his diligence shall have great fortune to goods.

He shall be a great trauailer, and shall pass to unknown places, he shall
not abide in his own country, but wander from place to place, and from city
to city. And by reason of such alteration obtain great riches. When he is
three and thyrtie years of age, he shall see his money and substance increase.
At three and twenty he ought to marry, Marriage.
but if he marry a maid, she shall die.

And she being dead he ought to marrye another maid by whom he shall be made
more rich and welthie. He shall be very fortunate and happy in vanquishing
his enemies. Ill fortune
Touching his evil fortune, in the fifte year of his age he shall have a
wound on his head, arm, or bealy, and bitten with a Dog he shall have a
mark with a sword or else with fire, and sometimes in danger of drowning.
Contrary day.
Monday is his contrary day, and therefore upon that day let him attempt no
new enterprise.

The fifte Chapter mencioneth the judgment of Taurus touching the woman. The
judgment of the female.
Whatsoever female or woman that is borne in this sign after her bodies
disposition shall be marked in the face leg or thigh. She shall be of a good
understanding, doubtful, careful, murmuring. She shall be be painful and
obsequious, Husbands
and married to many husbands by whom she shall have many Children. She shall
have a natural pain in her eyes and feet. And ouercommyng al her diseases
which are thertene in number, Diseases.
she shall atteyne to four skore years: and according to her good fortune she
shall obteyn a certain promocion. Substance.
She shall increase in riches by occasion of husband men and strangers.
Infamy.
She shall sustain a notable infamy or slander, because in her youth she
shall abuse her body. Other men's goods she shall make her own, whereby she
shall use theft. She shall continuallye be reproved of like offense, and in
the end delivered from the same, and then change her dwelling place.

The sixte Chapter makes mention of the general fortune of Taurus. The
general fortune of Taurus.


Wherefore it is to be known that this sign has a singular and notable
fortune in all inequitable beasts that can not be ridden, be they fair or not
fair, especially such as are of color white. Moreover this sign has
fortune in all things that may be given. Good fortune.
It has also fortune in things that belong to women's apparel or fortune and
other delectations. It has also fortune in all feminine kind. It has
fortune in white garments. The borne in this sign has a special luck
toward the Southe, and therefore let him direct his chamber door and bed
toward that part. Likewise let him dispose all his busynes that ways.
Concerning the evil fortune, Ill fortune
the borne in this sign from the mids of September till the mids of March
is most fortunate above other times of the year. Friends.
He is also unhappy among friends, because he is naturally cold and dry,
and thereby melancolyke, and so consequently sad and of sad conversation,
whereby like as he procures friends in have, even so he loses and forgoeth
them again. He shall be fortunate in hard enterprises, Sickness.
and shall vanquishe his enemies, if he pass four and thirty years, he shall
be very long lived. He ought to beware of poisons, Collickes, Squinsies,
Diseases.
Apostumes, Vlcerations which grow in the Throat, wherewith among others he
shall be vexed.

Gemini the third celestial and principal sign.


depiction of twins

THE third treatise of this book, has a discourse of the third principal
and entier sign celestial called Gemini, Gemini is divided in to 3 parts
containing 6 chapters.
and is divided into sire Chapters like unto the other which immediately before
precedeth. Whereof the first entreats of the head of Gemini, the second of
the bealye, and the third of the tail. The fourth of the judgment of Gemini
touching the male: The fifte concerning the female, and the sixte treats of
the general fortune of Gemini.

The first Chapter entreats of the head of Gemini, the 6 particular sign
being the six sign particular, and includes five stars disposed in this
form. Whosoever is borne in this sign touching the inclination of his body,
the body.
and first according to the quallitie and quantity thereof, he shall be fair,
mean of stature, beautiful in the face, and has his eye brows comely and
all his members well proporcioned and his sight clear and sharp. But touching
the quality his hear is black his voice thryll and pleasannt. He has a
sign or strype in his body. That is to say upon his head, in his eyes, hands
or knees and his mouth hurt. He is of great strength and force, hearye, and
naturallye slow. And after the disposition of his mind: the mind.
He is given much to prayer, fearful and not prone to anger. He is naturally
riotous, Infirmities
although with women he shall not be very fortunate:

Length of life.
Concerning his living and manner thereof he shall be troubled with the pain
of the back and shall be vexed with an evil spirit. He shall lose certain
of his teeth, and shall live till he be.vii. or twelve years old.xl.
or.lxxxiiii. and shall dye in his bed. And after his good fortune he shall
have much goods, and shall be greatly praised of men. His honor shall with
better success happen in age then in youth. And touching his evil fortune he
shall have.ij. wives, but that directly has not respect to the evil fortune
but indifferent. He shall apply with diligence his own affairs, if he be borne
in ye latter part of the night, he shall be a seller of flesh and a merchant of
Catail which are apt to be eaten and saleable in the shambles. And so
consequently shall be a sheder of blood.

The ij. Chapter entreats of the belly of Gemini, The 7 particular sign
which is the vij. particular sign, and has four stars disposed in this
form, and is called Alcaya. of the body.
Where is to be noted that whosoever is borne in this sign, first touching
the disposition of the body, he is naturallye black, hearye, of short
stature and strange. He has fair eyebrowes, and a black spotte upon his
Elbowe or pryuye members. And after the disposition of his mind, the mind
he shall be most happily given to prayer. He shall be timorous and fearful.

His words sweet and pleasant, notwithstanding he shall be riotous and
vnthryftye.

Length of life.
He shall live till he be ten year old, and if he escape his sickness then, he
shall live till he be thyrtye, and if his life be prolonged any further, then
he shall live til he be.xliiii. and if he revive his sticknes, Diseases.
then he shall live.lxxii.

He shall be troubled with the pain of the back and vered with an evil
sprite. He shall have much substance and rule over his own affairs. If he be
borne in the second hour of the natural day, then after his bodies
disposition, he shall be hearie and have a spotte in his eyes, and shall lease
many of his teeth. Likewise if he be borne in the third hour of the day, he
shall be happy and of nature whote and moist. But if he be borne in the night,
then he shall be a seller of flesh, or a sheder of blood, and shall live of
such substance as happens to him by marriage.

The third Chapter of this treatise, describes the latter part of Gemini,
The 8 particular sign
and is the.viij. particular sign celestial, having.ij. stars disposed in
this form, and is called Aldaman, where is to be noted that who so ever is
borne in the said sign touching the disposition of the body, the body.
is naturallye colic and dry, his Galle ascending into the head by his
fumositie. His eyes semynge to threaten or disdain, and his face changing
colors, sometime white and pale and sometime reuerteth to his own natural
color, that is to say, like to honny, and yet not withstanding handsome and
well made in his members and body saving that his eyes are somewhat little. His
voice great, and upon his forebead or face, has a mark or strype, or else
the (...) upon one of his hands, his breast, privy parts, or yard. the mind
And after the minds inclination has a good and honest heart, a beneuolant
will, a fine and pregnant wirte, by reason whereof he shall learn many things
in so much that through the viuacitie of the same, he shall perceive and
thoroughly understand the things that be hears, applying the same as though
before they touched him self. He is mer^e and plea saunt not wythstandynge of
choleric nature. And as he is soon angrye even so he is soon reconciled. He
is bold of spech and words, before the presence of his prince by reason whereof
he will not spare to touch any man. Likewise he is very prone and apt to
swearynge, doing or speaking nothing without an oath. He is light of
suspicion, and thereby will utter words unseemly. He is a great
dissemulatour, and spread: abroad of fancies and tryfles or tones. He is a
great drunkarde, and very riotous, and by reason of much bibbyng and
swillinge of wine greatly given to leacherye. His first sickness shall be
at.vij. years of age, Sickness,
which if he escape then the second shall be at.xxiiii.lxxx. or lxxx, and shall
dye of a disease in the throat. According to his good fortune he shall find
money and treasure hidden in the earth. Good fortune.
He shall have two Children at one hyrthe. And after his evil fortune, Ill
fortune
he shall live unquietly with his wife, who shall live but a short space. His
parents shall not be rich, whom he shall burye, and shall have no brother
like unto him self but one.

The fourth Chapter determines the judgment of Gemini touching the male. The
judgment of the male.
And whosoever is borne in Gemini, in whether part of the same soever he be
borne, first touching the disposition of his body, he shall have an
indifferente and comelye stature, the body.
beautiful, and fair of face, strong and of great force. He shall have
great authority and things of much value to be sold. His body shall be
naturally marked. And after the disposition of the mind, he shall be an
ingenious and cunning Artificer, the mind
and much given unto excellent Arts.

He shall be naturallye wise, and shall trust much therein, and by reason of
the same, what so ever he entendeth to go about and accomplish, he shall
bring it the sooner unto good effect.

Likewise he is pleasant and merciful, easy to be spoken unto, and by virtue
of this constellation shall be acceptable in all men. He shall not be, much
curious over his own affairs, he shall, be sobre and moderate in meat and
drink, and yet not withstanding luxurious and given to women. He shall be
contencious and unquiet with his neighbors by reason of his prone disposition
to anger and cholor. And for his said promptitude to choler he shall sustain
much peril and blame, and yet not withstandyng a profitable man and beloved
of all men. Touching his life and manner of his life, he shall be entangled with
many troubles by reason of his wife. And concerning his evil fortune, Ill
fortune
he shall suffer much pain in his back or guts within, and about the stomach.
But if it happen that he eskape his first diseases, Diseases.
he shall live till he be an hundredth and ten and three months. Likewise
touching his good fortune, Good fortune.
he shall be with catel greatly enriched. He shall find money that has been hyd
in the ground, and shall triumph over his enemies. His chiefest fortune shall be
toward the East, and therefore toward the same let him dispose all his
affairs. In the fifty year of his age toward the said East part he shall
find money. And touching his evil fortune, he shall travel much upon the
sea, and when he is.xxxii. years old, he shall be in danger of the fire and
sword, but yet delivered from that peril and shall receive hurt of some
fourefooted beast. The Twesdaye is his vnfortune day, Evil days.
and therefore upon that day let him attempt no enterprise, nor wash his head
or feet, or put on any new apparel, or such like.

The fifte Chapter entreats of the judgment of Gemini touching the female.
The judgment of the female.
Whereit is to be noted that what soever maid child that is borne in this
sign, first touching her body, she shall be very fair, and have a wound up on
her body. And touching her mind she shall of nature be very wise and
ingenious. She shall be merry and courtelyke, diligent and ready to obey. She
shall be very wylfull and whote of mind and by reason of the said heat of
will, complexion, or nature, somewhat angry, which will not long continue. And
because she is free of speech, she shall be much boastynge of her self, and a
great liar speaking one thing and daynge the contrary. Length of life.
If this maid or woman do escape the force of her diseases, she shall live
till.lxxxiij. years of age. She shall sustain many notable infirmities and
diseases of her body within the time of her age of.xxxiij. and chiefelye
about fiftene years the Frenzy or Lunatike passion by the space of fourtye
days, Lunatik of Moneage.
which disease is commonly called the Moneage, or infirmity of the Moon,
whereby the Pacient is called Lunaticus. Semblably, till she be.xxxviij. she
shall pass over many sorrows, Good fortune.
but by reason of Physic which shall be ministered unto her she shall recover.
Likewise touching her good fortune, because of many troubles which she shall
suffer, at length she shall obtain to great honor and much service, and
obedience shall be done unto her, and through her husbands fortune she shall
very much rejoice, and through him atteyne to great promicion. And at three
and fourtye she shall begin to wax rich. She shall see reuengement over her
enemies, and after.xlv. shall be called a mother of Children. And her first
begotten shall be no male but a female, Children.
according to the force of her natural constellation. And touching her evil
fortune, Ill fortune.
she shall be labourious and painful, and till.xxxv. years of age, she shall be
enrapped with much pain and sorrow. She shall be hurt with whore water, and
shall have a fall from an hic place. She shall be bitten with a Dog. Twesdaye is
her contrary and unfortunate day, Evil days.
therefore let her not wash her head upon that day, or do any new fact or
enterprise.

The.vj. chap. mencioneth the common fortune of gemini, The general fortune of
Gemini
where is to be noted ye

THe fourth sign called Cancer being the fourth treatise, Cancer is divided in
to 5 parts containing 5 chapters.
is divided into.v. parts or.v. Chapters. The first entreats of the head of
Cancer.

The.ij. of the tail having no mo parts but those twain. The.iij. of the
judgment of Cancer touching the male.

The.iiij. touching the female. And the v. of the universal fortune thereof.

The first entreats of the head of Cancer, the.x. particular sign
and is the.ix. particular sign called Albacra, and has.x. stars shaped in
this form: where is to be noted, that who so ever is borne in this sign, in
ye day time, of the body.
touching the bodies disposition shall be lean of body only, and of hear
comely. His eyebrowes narow. His nostrylls ample, wide, broad, or large. He
shall have natural signs in his breast or side, in his arm or right Elbowe,
in his Leg, and sometimes upon the face. Touching the disposition of the
mind this party shall be very irefull, the mind
and thereby a great liar, a Chyder, and fighter even against his own friends.
He shall be black of color, much resemblyng the color of Honnye. He shall be
eloquent, expert and witty, a Carier of tails, and reporter of words. He
shall be glorious, reuengynge and a great drynker. But yet in all the premises
will he glad to receive aduertisment of his friends, for the admendement of
those vices. Good fortune.
Touching the good fortune, he shall be of a good inclination, Thereby
recoueryng a number of friends. He shall live thyrty years, and then shall
sustain a great sickness, Sickness.
which if he eskape, he shall live to the age of forty and eight years, and
then shall be sick, which if he recover, he shall live.lxxxx. He shall be
payned in the raines of the back, in his knees and eyes, he shall be bitteen
with a Dog. And touching his indifferent fortune he shall marry.iij. wives,
but the third wife of these.iij. shall bury him, and before he die he shall be
bitten with a dog, as is aforesaid. If he be borne in the night, then after his
minds disposition he shall be very angry, wicked and mad, ready to stryke.
And concerning his diseases, he shall be payned with the headache, in the heart,
or back, or else in all. Touching his good fortune, his end shall be better
then his beginning. And touching his evil fortune, he shall be in ye thraldom of
a great man. Likewise he shall possess the goods of his kynred.

The second Chapter of this present treatise describes the the tail of
Cancer, which is the tenth particular sign caled Alearf, and has two
Stars in this form. Where is to be known, that who so ever is borne in this
sign (except there be any special or urgent cause ye contrary.) Touching the
bodies disposition, he has a small body and short, but not so extreme small,
but yt it shall be of an indifferent bigness: the same shall have two marks, that
is to wette, upon his leg and privy parts nere the guts, and shall have a
strype upon his lyppes. His eyebrowes shall be very heary, and his face swollen
and puffed up. He shall have a mark upon his right hand, in his forehead, breast,
bealye or guts. He shall receive suck of two nourses.

His color is very black, but his body shall be somewhat white (chiefly his
face) and hearie, and yet after the course of this part of the sign, he
shall be read.

After the disposition of the mind, he shall be wise and discrete. He shall not
be a sercher of many matters, but rather dulle and stack. He shall be ireful,
wrathful molestious or grievous, and wicked or ungracious in strykyng. And
although he be wrathful, yet his anger shall be priuye and hidden from any man,
in so much that when he is angry, no man shall know any cause why but
himself only, and therefore desperate in striking. He shall be prone to adultrie,
by reason of the heat which has dominion in him in whom the fire bears
the chief rule. He shall be a great offender, and shall commit much mischief,
and shall be soon angry. Likewise touching his life and manner thereof, he
shall live forty years, and shall dye in a strange land. He shall suffer
great pain in his back and head. And touching his good fortune, for his
diligent and pleasant conversation, he shall be beloved of all men with whom
he is familier, and shall have many Children. He shall gain much by his lands
and Vinyardes, and his end shall vain, He shall not tarry long in his way and
journey, but having accomplyshed his purpose shall soon return. Concerning
his evil fortune, that although he have many Children, and in the same shall
be fortunate, yet his own brethren shall not live long, but shall remain
brotherlesse. He shall be hurt by fire, and depryued of some bone, and shall
have a strype upon his head.

The third chapter of this treatise discourses the judgment of Cancer
touching the male. Where note that whosoever male child is borne in this sign
first touching the disposition of the body, he shall be naturallye mighty and
strong, whose body shall be gross, and touching the disposition of the
mind, he shall be wise, witty, somewhat gentle, a great and manifest Scorner
and Mocker, and shall speak playnelye. He shall be naturallye Choleric, and
a great Threatner, but his anger will be soon appeased, and shall be well
beloved of all men. And touching his life and manner of his life. This man
within the space of two and twenty year especially about the end of that
time, he shall sustain sickness. Likewise in three years following, that is to
say, about.xxvj. years old, he shall be in great danger of life. Semblably he
shall have vij. diseses or notable infirmities, which if he escape, he shall
live according to the efficacy of this sign.lxxx.viij. years and iij.
months, and shall die of the disease of the belly. Co^cerninge his good
fortune, imediatlye after he be.xxiiij. years old: He shall see his riches
begin to increase, and such things as he is borne unto he shall possess
about the middle of his age, that is to say, when he is.xliiij. year old. He
shall have the government of some Castle or Hold, and shall have authority in
the common wealth. His fortune is to have.iij. masters, and by fortune of one
man he shall atteyne unto great promocion. He shall travel far and shall have
to do with many affairs, and receive much sorrow by means of a stranger. He
shall purchase manners and farms and shall find money that is hid, he shall be
enriched by his wife. And touching his evil fortune he shall undoubtedly
sustain diverse and sundry troubles and dangers. He shall be hurt with a
sword, in danger of drownynge, he shall fall from an high place, and shall be
in peril of fire. He shall receive hynderaunce by his own children, and
shall be poor till he be twentye years old, his service and good iournes shall
be counted ingrate, displeasaunt, and a^^^xed to unthankfulness. He shall have
victory over his enemies. A great man shall rule over him and of him,
according to the force of this sign, he shall be externated and banished for
some notable fact.

Wednesday is his contrary, and most unfortunate, and therefore upon that day
let him not wash his head, nor put on any new apparel or do any notable
thing.

The.iiij. Chapter discloseth the judgment of Cancer touching the female and
is to be noted that the maid borne in the said sign after the disposition of
her body, shall be lusty and of strong complexion. She shall be well
proporcioned, neat, somewhat fat, nimble, and well made. She shall be very
witty, wise provident and subtle, irefull, diligent, shamefast, double
minded, painful, bold whote of mind, and spiteful, but her anger will be
soon appeased, and through the vehemency of her anger will spare for no
talk, but utter her stomach. And she is unmerciful and will have no compassion
upon one that wepeth. She shall have al great flux before she be.xxxij. year
old, and at.xxxij. she shall be in danger of death. Likewise at.lxxx. years she
shall be in like danger of death, because through the force of her constellation
she shall be subject to great peril.

And at.lxxx.vj. year she shall dye.

Touching her good fortune when she is.xxx. years old she shall have a son,
and after.xxxviij. she shall atteyne unto great promocion. She shall have
Children by.iij. husbands, and by all three shall be in great honor. She shall
continually be enryched, and shall possess much Cattail. And touching her
evil fortune she shall be greatly envied and shall be hurt with a sword. She
shall be troubled with water, and suffer displeasur in her body by fire, and
shall be very much vexed with the colic. In the 38 year of her age she shall
suffer much peril through her nieghbors, she shall lose her first husband, and
her husband shall love another man's wife. In the.viij. month of her xxx. year,
she shall by her parents negligence suffer some danger by a whot burning iron,
whereby she shall be in danger of death.

The.v. chap. entreats of the indifferent fortune of Ca^cer, where is to be
noted yt the borne in this sign is fortunate in his affairs, and chiefly
merchandise, and in cattle not apt to be ridden, especially such as be of
color of white, his fortune shall be better upon land then water and in such
things as may be carried or tra^sported by water chiefly ye color being whit.
He is likewise very fortunat in tillage and in embassage, when ye Moan is
growing, or before the full, for when it decreaseth then he is infortunat. The
borne in this sign shall suffer much coughing, consumption in the lungs,
plurisie, breaking out, the skapes, and such like, if it be a maid ye is borne
in this sign beside these inward diseases she shall be in danger of drowning.
His weke days which are good be Mo^day, Thursday and friday. His evil day is
Twesday. As for Wednesdaye and Saterdaye be indifferent.

His better fortune is toward the Southe, and therefore let him direct all
his affairs that way, and that way also place his chamber door, and bed.
He that is borne in this sign, is naturallye sanguine, much disposed to
Cholor mixte with Phleame. And therefore let him wear his apparel of color
Read and White. Read because of Fire and blood, and White by reason of
Phleame.

Leo the fyfte celestial and principal sign.


lion

THe.d. treatise discloseth the effect of Leo being the fifte total sign and
is divided into three parts. That is to say, into the head, belly, and tail,
and has six Chapters. The first entreats of the head of Leo. The second of
the belly. The third of the tail. The fourth of the judgment of Leo touching
the male. The fifte of the female. And the sixte of ye equal fortune of both.

The first entreats of the head of Leo, which is the eleventh particular
sign, and is called Algebachac having iiij. stars disposed in this form.
And note that who soever is borne in this sign, first touching the
disposition of the body has a comely face, plain and corpulent, a fierce look
and terrible. A little nose and broad, but yet comely, and a body proper. His
mouth shall be hurt, having thereupon a strype, but yet notwithstanding his teeth
fair and great ears. His shulders great and broad, but his back well made. He
shall have certain natural marks, and the first in his face, the rest upon
his thigh, breast, leg, and privy parts. Touching his color, his body shall be
white, his face neither black nor white but indifferent. Touching the
disposition of the mind, he is naturally given to be notably proud and of
such stomach that in his heart, he would wish himself comparable to Kings,
yea and them to excel, if it were possible. And he is of such and so great
pride, that by reason of his haultie cocourage, as well in value as dignity,
or other sufficiency, he will suppose no man in the world (be he never so
great) to be his equal or match, or at least wise greater then he, and also
in his heart judges him self to surpass or is able to excel in human
felicities all and singular other persons. He is also covetous and very ireful,
and yet that notwithstanding, of much mirth and pastime in so much ye
continually he would be merry and plai: he will be a wise man and proper, and the
Magik science will do him great stead. Likewise touching his life and manner
thereof, he shall be much vexed with the headache, in such forte as he shall be
straughte of his wits by reason of the fumes, which ascend from the Galle.
He shall be pained in his thighs chiefly in the upper parts thereof. He shall
have three principal diseases, the first when he is.xiij. years old. The
second when he is.xl. years old, if he eskape the first. If he also eskape
the second, then the.iij. he shall feel about.xlviij. which also if he
recover, then shall he atteyne to the sum of a hundredth years. And either he
shall die upon ye swords point, or else by some grievous infirmity of the
body. And according to his prosperous fortune, he shall pass from one
promocion to another, in so much as among kings and princes he shall be familier
and well beloved. He shall get much treasure, and bring it heaped together. He
shall lose them again, and at length shall fall in danger and displeasure of
some pier or noble man.

The.ij. chapter entreats of the bellye of Leo, and is the.xij. particular
sign, the 12. particular sign
being called. Alcomencon, and has.iiij. stars formed in this manner. Where
note that who so ever is borne in this Sign, has a marvelous evil and
unfortunate constellation. First touching his body and manner thereof, whether
he borne in the night or day, has a broad breast, a long face, small
stones, and slender legs, and has a natural mark in the raines of his back.
Touching his mind, he is of heart proud or irefull. For eftsoons he is
angry, and is of speech very rusticall. He is very doubtful and suspicious
in his doings. Touching his good fortune, he shall have no good fate, but by
virtue of this sign shall be most unfortunate as is aforesaid. For he that is
borne in this sign is subject to many troubles, if he be borne in the day he
shall be very fearful and timorous when he trauaileth, if he be borne in the
night what hour so ever it be, saving the second, then he shall be of a merry
countenance, and shall have a round nose, a stripe upon his head, and a
natural mark upon his feet. He shall be witty, fearful and careless. He
shall have three diseases. The first shall chance when he is.xj. year old.
The second when he is.xxiiij. And the third when he is.lviij. And shall dye
upon the sword, or else of some other great infirmity of the body. He shall
have two wives which shall faithfully love him, but them he shall not love,
but rather shall hate to the vttermoste. He shall have a strype in his Head, or
Hyppe, which shall happen by fire, or shall have some other sign. He shall be
deprived of his speech after the disposition of the Sign, and influence
thereof, unless the same by some particular cause be wythstanded or else
interrupted by the divine clemency, or else by the liberty and will of the
Lady of this Science whose liberty this Sign, not withstanding may be
applied to good, and to virtue, and to works godly, who also may appease and
mitigate the influence and malice of the said Sign. Semblably if he be borne
in the second hour of the night, over and besides the premises. Touching
his evil fortune, he shall lose his Infantes and Children, and few shall
remain on live. Likewise he shall be curious in searchynge of Parables and
Mysteries. His first Child shall be a female, and the second a male. During
his life he shall sustain much trouble and perils.

The third Chapter mencioneth the tail of Leo, or the latter part thereof,
which is the tenth particular Sign. And has one only Star in this form.
And who so ever is borne in this Sign, touching the bodies disposition, is
sufficiently bygge of stature, whose voice is vehement and bygge.

He shall have three natural marks in his breast, and shall be marked in the
throat, leg, or middle of the hand. And shall have a strype upon his bellye,
his color shall be white, mixte with a roseall color. His hears shall be of
color somewhat read, but his eyebrowes somewhat black, and shall have much
hear. Also concerning the mind, he shall be lowly, gentle, not ambicious, but
pacient. He shall suffer infirmity, but the same he shall tolerate with much
patience. In eating he shall be very moderat after the quality of this sign.
Likewise angry he shall be and lecherous, in so much that although he marry a
wife of his own afinitie, yet he shall be disposed to lecherye. He shall have
two manner of sickennesses. The first at.xxiij. years old, at what time he
shall be sick of the small Pox or of an ague. The second, shall be at.xliiij.
years old. Both which if he eskape, he shall live.lxxxx. years and shall die
in exile and out of his own Country. Likewise, concerning his good fortune,
he shall reign and bear rule over his own Country, and shall have
authority to judge either such as is a thief or malefactor, or of another
man, or else such as was his own fugitive or Verlet. Moreover he shall be of
power to do many things with Lords and Piers of Realms. He shall be very happy
in matters of husbandrye. He shall have a very fair and beautiful wife,
whose color shall be salowe like to one that has the green sickness, and she
shall be one of his own kynred, whom when he has married, GOD will give unto
him much substance according to the efficatie and influence of this sign. He
shall avoid many perils and shall enjoy goods abundaunt. He shall have
pains in one his of feet and shall be bereft of both. He shall be deprived of one
of his bones. And upon his belly shall be hurt, either with iron or fire. In
his affairs he shall not accomplish his will, except it be in Winter time or in
the Spryng. Six months he shall be fortunat in his busynes, even according to
his Hearts desire: That is to say, in September, October, November, December,
January, and Februarye. In Summer and Autumn he shall not be so fortunate. He
shall lose much goods, and his labor shall little avail, by reason of the
three marks in his breast. Let him not pass from one Country to another,
because change is not profitable to him. If therefore he will be fortunat, let
him continue in one place certain.

The.iiij. Chapter mencioneth the judgment of Leo touching the male. Where
note, that what soever man Child is borne in this sign. First touching the
universal disposition of the body. search the.iij. particular signs of Leo
aforesaid, and there see the conditions equal of the same. And touching the
disposition of the mind, he shall be naturally witty, subtle, eloquent,
coragious, irefull, and sollen. For he will be soon angry, and soon pleased
again. His stomach and subden anger is such, that by reason of his natural
animositie he shall sustain much contumely and displeasure. He shall be very
covetous, arrogant bold and wilful to al things, which he sees or hears, in
so much as what soever he either hears or sees, all that does greatly please
him, and that he embraseth and desires to enjoy and do the same, according to
the exigence and manner of the thing he hears or sees, and specially, if the
thing heard or seen be stable and able to be suffered, but within a while
after he will be werye thereof, and care nothing for it. Likewise he is
bountiful and liberal, because he can not keep secret the thing he
possesses, and although he would keep it secret, he can not but with great
difficulty. He is naturally gentle and quiet, but yet a derider and mocker.
And touching his life and manner thereof, he shall have.vij. terms or special
sicknesses, whereof the first three shall be very vehement.

The first shall be when he is.x. years old. The second when he is.xx. And
the.iij. when he is.xl. And if he pass and skape the said.iij. diseases, then
naturally and with happiness enough, he shall attain to.lxxx. and.viij. years.
In like manner touching his good fortune, he shall with good success abide the
brunttes of malice, and the state of his life. He shall have dominion over his
Country, and shall vanquish his enemies, although he shall object him self to
many afflictions and dangers, from the which he shall by Godds help right
well eskape. From xxx. years upward he shall aspyre to his better fortune, and
then shall see his substance augment. Of honorable personages he shall purchase
much wealth, and thereby his house shall be plentiful of money and abundaunt of
riches.

Concerning his evil fortune, he shall have a fall from an high place, and
shall have pain in one of his feet, and by water shall sustain trouble. He
shall not keep his first wife. Twesday shall be his contrary day, wherein if he
be wise, let him do no new matter or begin any enterprise. In the.v. Chap.
is entreated the judgment of Leo, touching the female.

Who according to the manner and state of her body, shall have a broad breast
and small thighs which are tokens of boldness and stoutnes of stomach. She
shall be very menstruous and fertile enough, not withstandinge she shall have
but few Children, with certain other conditions of her body before declared in
the iij. particular signs. After the disposition of her mind she shall be
naturallye subtle witty, and desirous of learning. She shall be chaste,
shamefast, courtilike diligent and of good stomach, by reason whereof she
shall be, very prone and subden to anger and yet shall be soon again appeased. And
not withstanding her anger, yet in her own household very liberal, by whose
means the house shall be plentiful of meat and drink. And because of her
natural subtlety, she shall be very bold, for as much as what soever she
hears or sees if it seem to comprise any subtlety or difficulty of
matter, imidiatly she will desire to know it. She is liberal because she can not
keep close such things as she has. She is very lowly and humble, and if she
chance to be spotted with any sin, imediatly she will fall down prostrat upon
the ground, and humbly ask mercy and forgeuenes of her Creator. Concerning her
life and manner thereof, she shall suffer the lunatike passion and a notable
pain of her heart and stomach, which if she eskape, she shall live till she
be.lxxxv. years of age. She shall also be pained in her toes. She shall have
sufficient reuengement upon her enemies. And after her evil fortune she shall
have many fortunes. For first she shall have a fall from an high place, and her
body hurt with iron or fire. When she is.xxiij. years old she shall be married, and
by her husband atteyn to promotion. Her husband shall not live long, but shall
die by mean of poison or witchecrafte. And at length shall marry another who
shall love her derely. Of her neighbor she shall receive damage in her
treasure. When she is.xij. years old unless she take good head shall be
deceived by oppression upon her body, and shall lose her maidenhead. She
shall be troubled in the water and in danger of life. Thursday is her contrary
day, and therefore let her do no notable thing upon that day, wash her head or
put on any apparel. And here is also to be noted, that the best remedy to
avoid all her misfortunes, is first to address her self, by prayer to our
Lord GOD only, with all her heart. And to carye about her precious Stones
such as be orient and glisterynge. And then easly she shall overcome al her
misaduentures by gods help.

The.vj. Chapter determines the general judgment of Leo, and is to be noted
that this sign has a singular fortune in warfare and dominion: besides which
they yt be borne in Leo, have pains in the stomach, apostumes, and pestiferous
agues Such as be borne in the service of great men, the same this sign
presents to their service. He shall be fortunat to gold brass, horses, and to
such merchandise as be of color red. From the mid of October to the mid of
April, and from the mid of July to the mid of August, he shall prosper
otherwise not. And touching the weke, he shall have.iij. happy days, to wete,
Sunday, Twesdaye, and Wednesday. Saturday is his unfortunate day. But Monday,
Thursday, and Friday, be indifferent. Likewise his fate is toward the East,
and therefore let him place his chamber door, bed, window, and all his
affairs into that part, especially if they be notable.

Virgo the syxte celestial and principal sign.


virgin

THe.v. treatise of this book entreats of the.vj. entier and celestial
sign called Virgo, with the three principal parts thereof. The first being
the head of Virgo. The second the first part of the tail, and the third the
second part of the same. And is divided into.vj. Chapters. The first Chapter
mencioneth the head. The.ij. the first part of the tail. And the.iij. the.ij.
part. The.iiij. the judgment of Virgo, touching the male. The.v. the female.
And the.vj. the common and indifferent fortune of Virgo.

The first Chapter determines the head of Virgo, being the.xiiij. particular
sign called Lacxa, and has.v. stars in this form disposed. And he that is
borne in this sign, shall be fair and beautiful, and of comely stature,
white upon his breast, but his hears shall be read. And by the force of this
constellation. He is naturally inclined to have curled hear and read, and by
nature loves the same, in so much that if he have not such hear of that
color, yet he will seek to have the same colored by art. He shall also be
naturally marked in the face, bellye, thigh and leg, and upon his right
Elbowe, and the said mark can not by any means be put away. Concerning the
disposition of his mind, he shall be honest, skillful, apt, shamefast, a
lover of justice. His mind shall be good and his voice vehemente and loud.

He shall be as simple as a Lamb, having no regard or care upon the goods
of the world, or the goods of fortune. He shall know nothing that is good,
nor shall take heed of any man, but shall trust all men. He shall take no
regard of harms wherwyth he might be infected, and that by reason of the
four natural marks upon his Face, Bellye, Thyghe, and Legs, aforesaid.

And by force of the same, he shall be very negligent, employing more care upon
his own affairs as is aforesaid. But if he would take heed, no doubt he
might bring them to good effect. He shall be desirous and covetous. He shall be
irefull and subden, and by reason of his soubden foresyght of offense, he shall
prevent the anger of his brethren. Touching his life and manner thereof, if this
man be borne in the.iiij. hour of the natural day, he shall dye without any
sickness, but if he be borne in the fifte hour, then before his death he shall
be very sick. He shall have.iiij. terms or principal sickennesses. The
first, when he is xv. years of age. The.ij. at.xxij. The.iij. at.xxxvj. And
the.iiij. and last at fiftye, which if he escape, he shall atteyne to.lx.
Likewise touching his good fortune, the man so borne shall have a good fate,
and by reason thereof shall be exalted, and have great preferment. He shall
have many Children, and if he would use diligence upon his own busynes, he
should profit very much, especially in tillage. When he is.xxxvj. years old
he shall be preferred to honor and dignity. But if he be borne in the first
hour of the natural day, then he shall be a great king or lord. But if in
the third hour then king of all kings, a mighty Sovereign. He shall have
great prosperity, and shall exagarat to him self infinite treasure. Likewise
touching his evil fortune, when he is married his wife shall live but a short
space, and he him self shall dye with her, or within a while after. And
although he shall be abundaunt in Children, yet few of them shall live. He shall
fall into many miseries, because he shall be payned in the belly or some other
place. He shall moreover be marked in his priuye parts.

If he be borne in the.iiij. hour of the natural day, then shall he dye
soddenly without any disease. He shall be divorced from his wife, whereof he
shall have great heaviness and sorrow.

The.ij. chapter entreats of the first part of the tail of Virgo, called
Alecaneth, and has.v. stars shaped in this form, and is the.xv. particular
sign. Whosoever is borne in this sign, the 15. particular sign
after his bodies disposition, and first according to the quantity. He shall be
high in stature. He shall have a broad and large face and a beautiful, a long
and great beard, a fair nose. After the quality of the same he shall have fair
hear, narow eyes, and al his body shall be white. He shall be naturally marked in
the forehead, in the upper hip, upon his shulders, the paulme of his hand, in
his belly and guts. After the disposition of the mind, he shall be wise, his
counsel shall be heard and apt to every thing. He shall be lowly, good, devout,
and shall love to be praised. He shall by nature atteyn to live to.lxij. years,
and shall dye before he be old. And touching his good fortune, he shall have
two wives, which shall be very substanciall and rich, in so much as by them he
shall possess great riches. Likewise he shall be very apt to every thing which
has a good end.

Concerning his evil fortune, he shall be bitten of a Dog in the face and on
his body. He shall have few Children, and they shall not be long lived, but
shall die in short space. Further, all such things as are spoken of in this
Chapter are general, and generally belong to all such as are borne in this
sign. If the party borne in this sign happen to be borne upon the Fridaye,
then he shall have great misfortune. If he be borne in the night, then he
shall have a natural mark upon the Crown of the Head, the Bellye, the Face,
or foot, and shall have great Feet.

And touching the disposition of the mind, he shall be an vpryght man
walking iustelye, seldom exceadynge the pathe of equity. Likewise he shall
have two dyseases especial, whereof the first shall be when he is fouretene
years of age.

The other at.lv. or.lxxx.viij. and shall dye in his own house, but the cause
of his death shall be a stroke with Iron or a sword. After his good fortune he
shall marry two wives, and one of them shall have a very small neck. Likewise
he shall have much by means of his Children. Also touching his evil fortune
in old age he shall fall into the thraldom of a man of honor or power, and
shall be stricken with Iron, and in his own house shall dye of the said stroke.
In gettinge of riches shall take much pains and labor, and strangers shall
enjoy the fruits of his travel.

the 16. particular sign
The.iij. Chapter entreats of the ij. and last part of the tail of Virgo
called Aliena, being the.xvj. sign particular. Where is to be noted, that
whosoever is borne in this sign, touching the disposition of his body and the
quality thereof. He shall have a fair stature and a simple countenance. He
shall have a natural sign not able to be put away upon his right Elbowe.
According to the disposition of the mind, he shall be honest, apt to learning,
wise, good and shamefast. He shall be very covetous in tillage, but in other
affairs he shall be remiss and negligent, whereas if he would take heed he
should greatly profit. Likewise touching his life, he that is borne in this
sign, and specially if he be borne in the.v. hour of the day, he shall
naturally have.iij. sickennesses whereof the first shall be when he is.xij.
years old. The ij. when he is.xxxij years old. And the.iij. and last, when he
is xl years old. If he chance to eskape the first, which wylbe very
dangerous then he shall be afflected with the.ij. which if he also eskape, then
he shall attein to the.iij. And touching his fortune before he be.xxxvj. he
shall obtain to a certain of honor and office. He shall have many Children and
shall profit greatly in tillage as is aforesaid. And if he would be careful and
diligent, he should greatly profit in all matters. His evil fortune is, yt he
shall fall into many troubles by reason he shall be much payned in the bellye, or
by some other means shall be extremely vexed. He shall have a strype upon his
Head, or his Face, or upon both, but notably in his priuye parts, where he
shall be greatly pained. And although he shall have many children, yet few shall
remain on live, and in that point shall be very unfortunate. He shall be a great
Horder, and a great gatherer together of money, but by myschaunce shall lose
his money so gathered. If he be borne in the.iij. hour, then he shall be most
puysaunt a King of Kings, and consequently most fortunat, if he borne in
ye.iiij. hour he shall be infortunat, because he shall die soddenly. If he be
borne in ye 5 hour then in his body he shall be very foul and deformed, but in
riches he shall be very abundant plentiful.

The fourth Chapter discourses the judgment of Virgo touching the male, and
first touching the disposition of the body, he shall be beautiful, of good
behavior, and shall have a natural mark in his shulders and loins, and in
none other place. He shall be long lived. He shall have.iij. fortunate and
special days in the week. That is to say: Sunday, Twesday, and Wednesday.
His infortunat day is Friday. And that day ever is somewhat unfortunate. His
good fortune is toward the South. And therefore let him dispose his affairs
that way, together with the door and bed. The same is naturally of the
Melancolyke complexion, and is of nature cold and dry. Therefore his apparel
ought to be of some dark or black color.

The fifte Chapter touches the judgment of Virgo, concerning the female.
Wherefore note that the maid or woman borne in this sign, shall be marked in
the said places as is described in this Chapter precedent. Touching the
disposition of her mind, she shall be witty, shamefaste, chaste, gentle,
beneuolent and glad to please al men, whereby she shall be beloved of all men.

But she shall be somewhat curste, and that only belongs to her evil fortune.
About.xvij. years of her age, she shall marry, and her first husband she shall
not love, who shall dye, and afterward marry the.ij. Her first Child shall be of
excellent beautye. She shall be enrapped with many sorrows. She shall suffer
diverse maladies, which if she eskape she shall live.lxx. years.vj. months,
and v. days. Her fortunat days be Wednesday and Sunday. Her infortunat day
is Saturday. Therefore upon that day let her begin no new work, but abstain
from all notable busynes.

They that be borne in this sign as well men as women shall suffer much pain in
their thighs, feet, and head. Her fortune is toward the South, etc. as in
the former Chap. And both kynds shall be liberal.

The.vj. Chapter compriseth the common fortune of Virgo. Where is to be noted
that the borne in this sign have their fortune in tillage, and in all things
generally thereunto apperteining, especially in all things that be sown. They
be subject to pains of the thighs and feet as fistulas or such like, ache
in the head, dropsy, the flixe or colic, besides others before mentioned.
And emonges other countries they shall visit the city of Jerusalem, the river
of Euphrates, Spain, and other countries adjoining. And their good fortune or
chief dominion is toward the South. Their fortunate days are Sundaye, Twesday
and Wednesdaye. Their unfortunate is Fridaye and Saturday: but Friday to them
that be borne in this sign is ever unfortunate. He that is borne in this
sign, as is aforesaid is melancholic, cold, and dry. And therefore let him
wear black apparel, or such as be of dark color, and of no light color,
because this sign is altogether melancolick that is to say: earthie.

Libra the seventh celestial and principal sign.


depiction of scale

THe.vij. treatise does demonstrate the effect of the.vij. Celestial sign
called Libra, and is divided into.v. Chapters. The first determines the head
of Libra. The.ij. the tail of Libra. This sign has but only the said two
principal parts. The.iij. Chapter mentions the judgment of Libra touching
the male. The.iiij. touching the female. The.v. and last the general and
common fortune of Libra.

The first Chapter of this treatise entreat^^h of the head of Libra, the 17.
p^^^^^culer sig^
which is the.xvij. celestial and particular Sign and has.iiij. stars
disposed in this form. Be it known therefore that whosoever ever is borne in this
sign first touching the proporcion and disposition of his body, he shall be
fair in face, well favored, painful, and learned. Concerning his life and
manner thereof, he shall suffer pain of his head, heart, and galle. He shall
have a pain in his neck, and in his joints. He shall have three special
diseases. The first when he is.xv. years old, which if he recover, he shall
have the.ij. at.xxxviij. Which if he likewise eskape, he shall atteyn to.lxxxx.
years, and then shall suffer his last and final infirmity. Touching his good
fortune, being borne in the second hour of the natural day, he shall be the
chiefest of all his kynne, and although he be of power and authority yet the
execution thereof shall not be profitable or prosperous. He afteer his evil
fortune shall lose his first wife. He shall be in danger of a sword, therefore
let him take good heed thereof.

The second Chapter of this.vij. treatise argues of the tail, and latter
part of Libra, the 18. particular sign
which is the.xviij. particular sign called Alcabenech, having two stars,
disposed in this sort. Where note that who soever is borne in this sign,
touching the disposition of the body, shall be beautiful, and shall be naturallye
marked in the head and mouth, or nere the mouth. He shall be hurt upon the
mouth, and his face shall be read, his hear smothe and read. After the
disposition of the mind, he shall be meary, thristie, specially for him self,
he shall be of good stomach, known and honored emonges his kynred, and shall be
of will fervent. Thirdly he shall be greatly payned in the heart, and shall have
three special diseases. The first shall be when he is.xvj. years of age. The
second when he is xxxvj. The third and last when he is xlviij. Touching his
good fortune, he shall enjoy great patrimonies and riches by his parents.
And by reason of a natural mark which he has in his head after many evil
fortunes, he shall possess much good, and shall be full of children. In his
youth he shall lie with a woman of excellent beauty. He shall be a Chauncelour
or head of the people: touching his evil fortune, he shall be stricken with a sword.
He shall lose one of his bones. He shall die either by the stripe of a sword or
else of the pain of the belly. He shall fall into a river, but shall rise
again, and shall be in danger of fire. And in the end of his life shall
susteyn poverty.

The.iij. Chapter entreats of the judgment of Libra, touching the male Where
note, that who so ever shall be borne in this sign, first touching the
disposition of the body, he shall be well made and proporcioned. He shall have a
natural mark upon one of his arms. Touching the disposition of the mind.
He shall be a great fornicator, merye, hold, fortunate especially upon the
water. He shall excogitate and search out many secrets, and shall be very
perylous. He shall be very desirous to wander in the world to view the
fashions therein, and the sundry vanities and conditions thereof, and for that
cause shall traiuell into many countries. He shall be freatynge inwardly by
fittes, and by fittes also shall be quiet. Toward strangers he will use
flatteryng words and sweet communication, but toward his own servants,
if they be evil, he will use sharp and crooked words. He shall be suspected of
a great crime, but it shall be so close as it can not be proved. He shall suffer
great pain in his neck, joints, and bellye, and shall have.iij. especial
sickennesses. The first shall be when he is.xv. years of age. The.ij. when he is
xxxviij. And the.iij. when he is.lxxxx. at what time he shall dye. Concerning
his good fortune, in his youth he shall be neither poor nor rich, but
afterward he shall accumulate unto himself great substance. He shall
occupye and have to do with other men's money. He shall triumph over his enemies.

Touching his evil fortune he shall be wounded with iron, a clubbe, or with a
stone, emonges the rest of his misfortunes. He shall be in danger of a sword,
and therefore let him beware thererf. He shall continue in the place where he
was borne, not withstandyng for a time he shall travel into far countries,
which fortune may be to him indifferent, he shall forgo his first wife,
which also is a fortune indifferent. Thursday is his contrary day, and
therefore upon that day, let him not wash his head, and put on no new apparel
nor begin any notable enterprise.

The.iiij. Chapter declares the judgment of this sign touching the female,
where note that the maid borne therein, first touching the disposition of the
body, she shall be fair, and of excellent beauty. Touching the disposition of
her mind she shall be frendlye, amiable, witty, and a lover of her own
family. Concerning her life and manner thereof, she shall suffer a natural
pain in her stomach. She shall have two diseases. The first shall be
dangerous, and when she is two years old. And the second when she
is.lxxviij. years of age. After her good fortune she shall have in occupyinge a
great mass of money. In her second husband she shall greatly rejoice, and
shall triumph over her enemies. According to her evil fortune, she shall have
a strype or wound in some place of her body. She shall have two husbands,
and by the death of her first husband she shall be unfortunate.

Thursdaye is her unlucky day. And therefore let her not wash her head upon
that day, or begin any thing notable.

The fifte Chapter describes the common and universal fortune of Libra.

Where note that Libra has his fortune in beasts equitable or apt to be
ridden, especially if they be of color white. Likewise Libra his fortune is
in all fair things, and in the bargains thereof especially if they be white,
and generally in all beautiful things, belonging to worldly delectatio^, chiefly
in women's aparel, and in all things proceeding from the water, and in all things
yt be transported from a far, and that be of smalest weight. The borne in this
sign are above others given to embrace lerning, and the study of the sciences.
The good and fortunat days, are Monday and Friday. The unfortunate day is
Wednesday. The borne in this sign shall be troubled with infirmities and
diseases of the belly, as with ye dissenterie, lienterie, grypynges, and other
pains procedyng of wind, and chiefly about the back bone. They be naturally
of sanguine complexion, and thereby whote and moist. And because he is
fortunate in things that be white, therefore let him use white apparel. The
good fortune of this Sign is toward the West. And therefore his house,
bed, and all his affairs, such as be notable are to be directed that way.

Scorpio the eight celestial and principal sign.


scorpion

THe.viij. treatise entreats of Scorpio, the.viij. sign celestial, and
conteyneth.vj. Chapters. The first speaks of the head of Scorpio. The.ij. of
the bellye of Scorpio. The.iij. of the tail. The.iiii. of the judgment of
Scorpio touching the male. The fifte touching the female. The.vi. and last of
the common and general fortune thereof.

the 19 particular sign
The first Chapter entreats of the head of Scorpio, which is the.xix.
celestial and particular sign called Alchayt, and has.vij. stars in this
manner. Where note that what soever as well male as female, being borne in this
sign, first touching the disposition of the body, is well colored and has
much hear. His body fair and white, saving that his Nose is foul and
deformed. His eyebrowes narrow, and his Chekes small. He has a mark
natural not far from his Nose, upon his left foot and shulders. Also the
like upon the paulme of his hand, and upon the leg. He shall be courteous
of speech discrete and profitable in many arts. He shall be beloved with his
Parents, Neighbors, and Friends, and especially with his Parents, and such
as he loves, he shall liberallye enryche with much goods and honor.

Toward women he shabe of a light and inconstaunte mind, and yet shall use
no deceypte or malice toward them. But if he were of small conscience, he
might do with them and use them as he lysted, because he shall be greatly
beloved with them.

Likewise touching Gluttony, which is the very Handemayde of Lecherye, the
party borne in this sign above all meats shall love bread, especially
crustye bread, whereof he shall be a great eater. He shall be very irefull,
and thereunto soddenlye dysposed.

He shall be a greater talker. He shall be faynte hearted and fearful. And
although his anger be vehement, and yet the chiefest effect thereof shall
consist in words. One of his family he shall greatly hate. His first wife
shall be fair and a clear of complexion. Concerning his life and manner thereof.
He shall live honestly and quietly with his wife. He shall naturallye be full of
diseases, but yet thereof very pacient. He shall have.iij. special maladies.
The first when he is xiiij. years of age. The.ij. when he is xliij. The.iij.
and last when he is.lxv. Concerning his good fortune. He shall be a man that
shall use correction, and shall be very discrite. He shall be honorable and from
one degree of estate shall ascend to another. And according to his evil
fortune, he shall be stryken upon the head, and shall be bitten with a Dog, or some
other beast. He shall dye upon a swords poynct. He shall be greatly affected
with selfwel, and with vehemency of words and tauntes. He shall be nanaturally
inclined to have pain in his bellye, wherewith he shall be much troubled. He
shall fall into the hands of great men. He shall have carnal company
with.iiij. women, whereof the.iiij. shall be marked upon the check.

The.ii. Chapter makes declaration of the bellye of Scorpio which is the.xx.
particular Sign having three stars shaped in this form, for whosoever is
borne in this sign, shall be fair, and yet not pure white, but mixed, somewhat
disposed to read, and shall be read headed. His mouth and head shall be great,
and shall be of a mean and comely stature. He shall be a great pratler, and
notable lecherous, angrye, and therein very vehement. His anger shall be disposed
to mischief, and ready to reuengement, much like an Adder. And although he be
one day merye, yet another day he shall be sad. He shall do much mischief.
Likewise touching his life and manner thereof. First in his back he shall
suffer much pain. He shall naturallye be aflected with an infirmity in his
heart and stomach. Three peciall sickennesses he shall have during his life.
The first when he is.xv. years of age. The second when he is xxxvj. The third
and last when he is xlix. Concerning his evil fortune. He shall incur into
many troubles and misaduentures. He shall be marked or hurt with some tool or
instrument of iron upon his head, face, breast, right side and priuye parts.
And here note that all ye things aforesaid, are general and spoken generalli,
and touch al and singular such as are borne in ye belly of Scorpio, whether it
be in the day or night, or what hour soever it be. But yet here further is to
be considered, that the borne in this sign, whether it be in the day or
night, over and besides the premises touching his body, shall be effeminate,
and touching his life and manner thereof, he shall be flatteryng, skappye, and
shall have a pain in one of his feet, if he be borne in the third hour of
the day it signifies good fortune, for he shall be luckye in tillage of
ground, but in marchaundise little fortunate. But yet not wythstandynge in
those trafiques, which he shall attempt he shall receive much profit.
Semblablye touching his evil fortune, he shall dye of a strype with a sword
or else in his journey trauelynge and shall have a mark upon his knee and
back.

The third Chapter describes the tail of Scorpio called Elebrah, which is
the one and twenty particular Sign, and has six stars in this manner,
where note that who soever is borne in this Sign. Wheather it be by Day or
Night, or what hour so ever it be.

Furst touching the disposition of the body shall be beautiful, neat, having
fair, eyebrowes, clear eyes and small lean checkes and thin and under his
Iawe shall have a mark. If any be borne in this sign in the time of Winter,
then his complexion shall be effeminate. If he be borne in the Summer then
touching the disposition of his body he shall be beautiful, but yet gross and
fat under his apparel. Also if any woman be borne in this sign, she shall
be of an indifferent stature and beauty, her face faier, of smothe here and by
reason of her cold complexion she shall desire to wear much clothyng. She
shall have a blemishe in her eyes, and shall be marked upon her arm, fingers,
and knee. If he be a man, he shall be of sanguine complexion, and mischiefuous in
geuynge a blow. He shall be naturally inclined (not, withstanding it seem
merueylous) to contradictories, that is to say, to justice and unrighteousness,
to loss and gain, to truth and falshold, and all by reason of the concurrence
of the opposites and contrary signs, and yet not withstanding the sign that
is of greatest force, shall bear the chief rule touching the premises.
Touching justice, he shall be naturally given to honestye, he shall be just
and of much equity, and in all his affairs greatly inclined to justice. And
touching the contrary he shall be a great Inuenter of news, a Talebearer, a
Liar, deceyptfull, envious, and false, prone to deceyte as well by his look as
by his laughter. He shall be full of discord and a sower of debate, chieflye
emonges brethren and friends, whereby it appears that he is naturallye
inclined to iniquity and unrighteousness, craft and deceipte not withstanding
his nature also to the contrary. But yet the sign of most force as is
aforesaid does principallye bear rule in this nativity. And to say any
thing touching his life, and manner thereof, touching his future inclination,
we can not. For as much as the concourse of the stars in this nativity are
diverse. Likewise concerning his good fortune or indifferent fortune, this man
at one time shall want, and at another time shall have sufficient.

He shall have three wives, whereof the first shall be a wydowe. The second
and third shall be virgins, but the third shall bury him. And here is meet
to be known that by reason of the generality of this sign, and of the
concourse of the signs, this native should be coupled to four wives, but
yet the chiefest shall prevail. He shall be of power and liberty to do and
accomplish his own desiers. Happy shall he be to the femine kind, that is to
say, to things of that kind, as cattaill and such like. He shall be twice
bitten with a dog or other beast upon the shulder and on his nose ornostrels
shall have a mark. He shall be in danger or thrall of men of power or
authority. His last Wife shall burye him by reason of the mark upon his
arm, or the bytte of the Dog as his constellation does thereunto chyefelye
enclyne.

The fourth Chapter describes the judgment of Scorpio, touching the male.
Where note that the Child borne in this Sign (touching his body) upon his
feet and hands shall have a natural mark. And touching his mind, he shall
be bountiful and liberal, so that he shall not keep secreate his substance.

In the service of others, he will be mearrye, trustye, bold and pleasant.
In his conditions strong, stable, and not wauerynge, not desistynge or leauyng
of from his affairs being once begone. Touching his life, he shall have
three principal diseases the times whereof be not here noted, which if he
chance to eskape he shall live.C.x. years and.x. months. And according to
the virtue of this sign there shall be no impediment in the constellation, except
it happen by some particular cause.

His fortune shall be good for that in hearing and seeing his luck shall be
prosperous. He shall atteyne to great wisdom and learning, and to the
magike science he shall greatly apply himself, and the mysteries thereof
diligently search out. And yet his diligence so taken does include a certain
doubt or duplicitie, by reason of the force and efficatie of the word. For it
may signify great inuestigation and diligence and that perteyneth to his
good fortune, or else it may signify a causable infirmity procedynge of the
said Magike science, which belongs to evil fortune. He shall have great
abundaunce of money, and the same daily shall increase and multiplye. By
means of a woman he shall be greatly enriched, and over his enemies he shall
have the victory. In forreyne places he shall exercise tillage, and at length
shall return home into his own country with gain. Of his betters by way
of reward, he shall receive Horses, Sheep, Oxen and other beasts. This
native shall be in great danger, and except he take heed, he shall be
hurt with a sword. Saterdaye shall be his contrary day, and therefore upon
that day, let him not wash his Head, or put on any new garment, or else
attempt any strange enterprise. And some affirm that he that is borne about
the end of this Sign, shall be of neither kind, or of both, that is to
say, as well male as female.

The fifte sign declares the effect of Scorpio concerning the woman.

Who has her recourse to the parts of this sign before mentioned in each
Chapter. Notwithstanding over and besides the premises, thus much is to be
spoken. For first, you shall note that she shall be of a frendlye condition,
obedient serviceable, fearful, and shamefaste. She shall be wrathful and
have him in deadly hatred that does her any displeasure. She shall have
Children by three husbands, and with them shall live in great felicity. She
shall vanquyshe her enemies, but yet tylle she be thyrtye years of age she
shall sustain much sickennesse. Nevertheless, of Cattayle she shall have
haboundaunce, and many people shall be under her government. But yet in her
youth she shall abuse her body in playinge the Harlot, if the force of the
iminent constellation do take his effecten, bitte she shall be with a Dog,
and in the end shall be blind. Of her brethren and parents she shall receive
much trouble. Saturday shall be to her infortunat day, therefore upon that day
let her not wash her head, put on any new garments, or do any other
strange fact.

The syxte Chapter entreats of the general fortune of Scorpio. Therefore the
borne in this Sign is naturallye moist, Phlegmatycke or Sanguine. And such
shall be singulerlye fortunate of all things that be of color read, and
in byinge and selling of all such. The like fortunate in all things
factible, or to be forged with or in the fire, extrahible or belonging to the
same, and in marchaundyse of unknowing things. And therefore as much as he
can, let him wear such garments as be Read. The like fortunate in
Warrefare and Tillage, and in all Beasts belonging to the same. Fortunate in
Hospitalytye, whether it be done for money sake, lucre, or for Gods sake.

The unfortunate Days be Thursdaye and Saterdaye. The rest be good,
especially Twesdaye. He shall be affected with the Chyragre or Gout in the
Hands. With the Sciatica and pain in the Head.

And if Saturn be found to be asscendent, than he shall have great payns in
his toes. His fortune is toward the South, and therefore let him dispose his
affairs that way, and convert to that part his chamber Door, Bed Wyndowe,
and the like.

Sagitarius the.ix. celestial and principal sign.


depiction of archer

THe.ix. treatise makes relation of the.ix. celestial and principal sign
called Sagitarius, which is divided into two parts, that is to say, the head
and the tail, containing five Chapters. The first entreats of of the head
of Sagitarius. The.ij. of the tail. The.iij. of the judgment of Sagitarius
concerning the male. The iiij. of the female. And the.v. and last of the
general fortune thereof.

And over and besides the said five Chapters, there is a general rule next
after the second Chapter, not wythstandyng the generality mentioned in the
end of this treatise.

The first Chapter entreats of the head of Sagitarius called Albaham, being
the.xxij. particular sign, the 22. particular sign
and has viij. starsfashioned in this manner. Where note that who so ever is
borne in this Sign, first touching the disposition of his body, has a
beautiful body, comely to behold, long and talle, and throughout
beautiful, a little head, a thycke face, a fair nose, white teeth and short.
Upon the left part of his Head he shall have a strype, and the like upon
the Crown of his Head, his left Hand his Fyngers, Arms, Teates, and against
his Heart. He is nymble, swifte on his feet, and very expedite in runnyng. He
shall have a natural mark upon his pryuye members. He is of color black,
whose face shall be like to them that have the green sickennes.

Touching the disposition of the mind he shall by nature have a good wit,
and a sharp, and therewithal constant and firm. He shall love wise men, and
shall embrace all such as be of discretion.

Therefore touching this part of nature, and the natural constellation
bearyng rule in this nativity, he shall acquire unto him self possession with
wise men.

And although that he have a covetous mind naturally disposed to avarice, by
reason of the concourse of certain stars, yet by means of the dominion of
this Sign, he shall be studious of good things, and shall be inclined to virtue,
and especially to the virtue of liberality.

And therefore he shall not be much inclined to the opposite or contrary, nor
yet to extorte other men's goods. And because principally he is bent to
virtue, it will follow that he shall be of great authority, and exalted in high
degree of honor. Moreover although he be naturallye inclined to liberality,
and not to rapine or extorcion, yet he shall be procliue and given to many vices,
that is to say, to pride, covetousness, lechery and glotonye, and chiefly to
pride little esteemyng other men's doyngs or sayings, very haultye, in so much
that what soever question any do ask of him, be shall get no answer at his
hands. And by reason of his pride aforesaid, he shall be a great Cauillour,
Liar, Chyder, and full of contention. He shall have a very pestiferous and
venomous tongue. And although he be naturally inclined to a certain spice of
liberality, for that he will covet to possess nothing unjustly, yet he shall
be desirous to get substance, and couetously to enjoy it.

Whereby consequently it appears, that wholly he is not given to covetousness,
but to a certain spyce thereof to a desire to have. Likewise he is inclined to
Lechery. For with three women specially he shall have to do, but some times (by
natures impediment) he shall not project his seed, although he be very desirous
thereunto. He is much disposed also to glottony chiefly to catyng of herbs and
in his meat does greatly love them.

Furthermore note here that the premises do not only belong to the man, but to
the woman also subject to that constellation. Concernyg his life and manner
thereof. He shall be long sick, and shall have a pain in his heart. He shall
have three special sickennesses. The first when he.xx. years of age. The.ij.
when he is.xlvij. The.iij. and last, when he is.lxxx. Touching his good
fortune, he shall be in great estimation and honor. He shall have many
children, and amongs al he shall have a twinne or two borne at one birth, and
of them he shall see the third generation. He shall atteyn to his fathers
enheritaunce. In all his affairs he shall prosper and daily he shall see his
goods increase. He shall come into the world with his own star, that is to
say, he shall enjoy all things according to the influence of his sign. He
shall have much trouble in the water. He shall fall into a river but he shall
eskape drownyng. He shall lose the most part of all his goods and shall fall
into the hands of his enemy and sometimes into hands of a woman a she enemy.
He shall be bitten with a beast in the midst of one of his fingers of his
right hand, and shall dye an exile out of his country. His most derest friend
beloved above others he shall lose, and he shall be wonderfully troubled with
deuilles and evil spirits.

The second Chapter describes the condition of the tail of Sagitarius,
which is.xxiij. particular sign called Albeyda, the 23 particular sign
and has vij. stars fixed in this manner. He that is borne in this sign,
first touching the disposition of his body. He shall have a body comelye, a
ruddye face, read hear, narowe eyebrows, eyes like a Catte, he shall be
balde, and beautiful to behold, naturally marked upon the head, his left
side, and upon his right nostrill.

After the disposition of the mind he shall be very ready to anger, and therein
also shall be very sonbden, and the pain being past, he will soon be appeased.

He shall be of an excellent wit, and naturally given to the exercise of
riding and shotynge. He shall not he circumspect in his doings, nor yet
foreseyng in things that may happen. He shall have much pain in his guts,
and in his head, especially he shall suffer three several sickennesses. The
first when he is.xxj. years old. The second when he is.lxij. years of age.
And the third when he is.lxxx. And touching his good fortune, if he do not
take away or remove the natural mark which shall be upon his right buttocke,
or right nostrell, then his Constellation shall be prosperous. But if the
said mark be violently removed from the place, then his fate shall be
hindered and empeched. He shall be valient in arms, and therein also
victorious. But if the hour of Saturn do concur with Saturn in his
nativity, he shall be impotent by reason of the influence of that planet, and
therefore shall with great labor atteyne to any commodity, and with much
difficulty acquire his former good luck. But yet not withstandyng the
impediment of Saturn, if the marks aforesaid be not taken away yet he shall
obtain the victorious feats aforesaid. But if his mother parhappes do take
away that mark from the places aforesaid, some evil hap may chance unto
him. For he shall have much a do to repel the influence of Saturn. The said
marks do vehementlye resist the malice of the planet by reason of their
notable virtue.

So that Saturn shall do no great hurt although he do some hinder. And
touching the evil fortune of the borne in this Sign of Sagitarius. He shall
be in many troubles. He shall be hurt with whotte burning iron.

He shall be in danger of Thieves not only by traueylynge by the way, but
also in Cytyes. He shall also lose and forgo many possessions purchased by
him self, which shall be confiscate and taken from him through the malice of
certain natural marks, whereof one shall be in his stones.

And another upon his left side, by force whereof, he shall not long after lose
his sight.

Likewise thou shall have in remembrance this rule following, touching the
tail of Sagitarius, generally apperteyninge to all men borne in this sign.
And first thou shall know that if it happen he be borne in the second hour of
the day, not withstanding the premises he shall be foul and evil favored.
He shall be balde, and his Children also shall be balde, by reason of the marks
aforesaid, whereof the one shall be upon his ribs, and the other upon his
left side. Also by force of this constellation, he shall be very lecherous, and
shall be diseased with a great infirmity. but he shall recover. In like manner
touching his good fortune, he shall have two Children borne at one birth. His
possession and living shall be indifferent, for sometimes it shall be
diminished, and sometimes increased. All these things thou shalt diligently
note, over and besides the things contained in the two Chapters aforesaid.

In the third Chapter entreatyng of Sagitarius judgment touching the male.
There is to be noted that he that is borne in this Sign, shall have a merye
and pleasant countenance.

Likewise, touching the disposition of the mind, he shall be gentle,
faithful, meek, liberal mixte with stubburnesse, by reason whereof, he shall
be of great authority, gentle, kind, courtelyke, and a great bankettour, by
reason of which his curtesye many well repair unto him, and be gestes at his
table. And by means of his liberality he will be a bountiful geuer of
Horses and other fourefooted beasts. He shall be very ingenious, wyttye,
artificial, sobre, grave, paynefull, and careful of his affairs. He shall
be subtle and very ware about his doyings. So that he will not disclose his
secreates to no man, but secreatelye will keep them to him self, and the same
will very finely keep hid in his breast, for that almost he is mistrustfull
all men.

He shall be with many vices encombred, because he is naturallye given to be a
great fornicatour, and one that will be soon angrye, and yet soon appeased
again, and when his anger is once done, then he will utter much fair and
gentle talk somewhat joined with couetouusnes. He shall be skabbye and very
full of ytche. He shall be aflected with two notable and strong sickennesses.
The one when he is.xxxiij. years of age, which shall be so vehement that he
shall stand in great hazard of life, which if he eskape, then shall he have
the second, which shall happen when he is four skore and eyghte years of
age, whereof he shall dye. Semblablye, touching his good fortune. The first
Child that he shall have, shall be a son. He shall have to his friend a Pier
of a realm, with whom he shall dwell in household and shall possess other
men's gooddes. In like manner chynge his evil fortune, he shall be in danger
of three several frayes, and her that should be his first wife he shall not
enjoy. And by the malice of others he shall be in displeasure with his friend
aforesaid, and yet in the end he shall overcome their malice, and be
reconsiled to his frendshyppe again. He shall be hurt with Iron unless
warely he take heed thereof.

Sunday is his contrary day, therefore upon that day let him attempt no
new enterprise, nor wash his head, or put on any new apparel.

The fourth Chapter of this present Treatise describes the Judgment of
Sagitarius touching the female. And here to learn for to know the
disposition of her body, you must repair to the Chapters of the head and
tail of Sagitarius (which is before recited) where you shall find many
things spoken of the female borne in this Sign.

And touching the disposition of the mind, she shall be very much given to
the Arts of Magic, and to Witchecrafte, and by reason of the subteltie of
her wit, she shall put the same Arts in practyse. She shall be very
curste, careful, merciful, chyldebearynge and a great Liar. She shall incur
great peril, especially for one offense that she shall commytte, for which
offense she shall be brought to Judgment: Which peril if she eskape, then
she shall live till she be three score and.viij. years old. She shall fullye
accomplish her fate.

And although she be subecte unto much malice and danger, yet she shall
obtain the vyctorye over them all. She shall have two husbands, whereof the
second shall be the better. Sunday shall be her unfortunate day, and for
that cause, let her attempt no new enterprise or other notable or new
thing.

The fifte and last Chapter makes rehearsal of the general Fortune of
Sagitarius. And first the borne in this Sign shall be Fortunate, both in
the law of GOD, and also in the law of the World.

He shall be happy in all kinds of Marchaundyse, especyallye in that Art
that chyefelye uses the Press, and in Taylours craft. Also in the Drapers
science. Chyefelye in clothes of fayreste Color, if they be retayled
percelle meal by the Yard, or Elle.

Also in the Bouchers occupatyon, and Beasts which are accustomed to be
sold in the Shambles. This Sign is also Cholerycke by nature, and therefore
the borne in this Sign is naturallye Cholerycke, by reason whereof he is whotte
and dry. And he shall have a great pain and gryefe by means of a soore
Impostume in the Lunges. And also of a consumyng and vehement Ague, which is
called Hectica.

And also of an inflammation that shall proceed from the Lounges, according to
the qualitye of this Sign.

The apparelles and the colors which ought to be most used of the borne
in this Sign, is Graye, Brown, Yelowe or Read, which Colors by reason of
the heat and Fire, are most apt, most necessary, and conueniente.

The one half of the life shall be fortunate, and the other half
unfortunate, not only in days, and hours, and in Months, or Weeks, but
also in whole years by the number of six. That is to say: by six and six.
Six good years, and six badde, years.

The Male or Female that is borne in this Monethe, has his special Fortune
placed in the Weste. And therefore toward that part of the World let him
dyspose all his doings, concerning his House, his Door, and his Bed, and
all his special affairs, and notable acts. etc

Capricornus the.x. celestial and principal sign.


sea-goat

THe.x. treatise entreats of the.x. principal and celestial sign called
Capricornus. This sign is divided into.ij. principal parts, that is to say,
the head and the tail, for that cause it is divided but into.v. Chapters
whereof the first entreats of the head, The.ij. of the tail. The.iij. of
the male. The.iiij. of the female. And the v. and last of the common and
general fortune of Capricornus.

The first Chapter entreats of the head of Capricornus being the, the 24.
particular sign
xxiiij. particular sign and is called A^^adab which has three stars
dysposed in this manner.

Where is to be noted that the borne in this Sign touching the disposition
of the body, has a fair body and comelye well fashioned, especially in
youth it shall not be properlye Black nor White, but some what given to be
Read. Likewise, he shall have certain natural Signs in the Head, the Breast
and the Knee. The eyes soore, and full of pain. He shall be naturallye
simple, learned, and wise, and yet not wythstandynge, very incredulous and
hard of belyefe. In so much, as he will believe no man, although he swear. He
shall be angrye and Chollerycke, and in his anger very noyous and hurtefull.
A man of blood, and greatly thrystynge after the blood of his enemies. So
that if he chance to have the superiority over his enemies, he will destroy
them all, or the most part of them, if not with his own hands, yet be means
of others. He shall be very craftye and subtyle, and that unfeignedly. And yet
in his doings true dealyng and very just, and a great lover of truth, doing
the thing that he goes about with much thought, although therewyth some craft
be included. His gate and going very crafty although outwardly it shall not
appear. Who in his age shall be very profitable and good to many. This man
does naturally love the trymmyng of his body, and has so great delyght in
his own beautye, that he shall think none to be like unto him self. And his
special respect shall be toward his Head, his Bearde, and Hear.

Likewise, by reason of the vehemencye of his natural Complextion he is by
nature much enclyned to sleep after meat, and at the Table, which commonly
he puts in practyse.

Likewise, touching his life, and manner thereof. Touching diseases and
syckennesses, there is nothing to be found certain in this Chapter. And yet
in the fourth Chapter where the Judgment of Capricornus is entreated
concerning the woman, it is read that the borne in this sign, shall have one
special and principal disease when he is.xxxix. years of age, which if he
eskape, he shall live till he be.Cviij. years of age. And touching sickness. He
shall be naturallye diseased and singulerlye affected with the pain of the heart
and stomach, whereof he shall dye. Also touching the evil fortune of this
sign, ye shall understand that the borne in this sign, that is to say, in
the head of Capricornus according to the force of the constellation he shall be
deprived of one of his members, and some of his teeth.

In the.ij. Chapter of this.x. treatise is expressed the tail of Capricornus,
which is the five and twentye particular Sign called Astaldabor having two
stars placed in this sort. Where is to be noted that whosoever is borne in
this sign after the disposicio^ of his body, he shall be beautiful white and
smothe heared, fair eyes, his eyebrowes, well made, his color Yelow, and
shall be naturally marked in the face and also in his body, with many sundry
marks. That is to say: about his neck, and near unto his eye. He shall
have short lips, in so much that for the shortness thereof, when he speaks,
he shall show all the teeth in his head. He shall be well learned, and
somewhat bent to be proud, which shall happen even by nature. He shall be a
sower of Corn upon other men's labors, that is to say: he uses other men's
doings to the commendation of him self. He shall despise all men, and be a
great prayser of him self, dispysinge others, and greatly standinge in his
own conceyte. He shall be irefull, and very fierce in anger, in so much that
he shall be greatly offended with his own parents. He shall be very
lecherous and a lover of all sorts of women, and specially he shall commit
adultery with nine sundry woman, besides all other syngle and common women,
and not withstandyng this his great desire and affection to women, sometimes by
wichecrafte and sorcerye, he shall be let from committynge fornication with
diverse women. Likewise he shall be a notable great drynker. But not wythstandynge
the vices aforesaid, whereunto he shall be much apt and inclined, yet he shall be
a just man and much inclined to justice, a despyser of evil and a great lover
of his companions. And where he shall be naturally given to be a drynker, yet in
his meat and diet, he shall be very spare and temperat. He shall feel great
pain in his head. But yet the second pain, that is to say, the pain of his
belly, shall be greatlyer in him. He shall also in his going be troubled with a
pain in his Leg. Also he shall have eight special sicknnesses.

The first, when he is fourtene years old. The second, when he is twenty.
The third, when he is one and twenty. The fourth, when he is thyrtye.

The fifte, when he is six and thyrtye. The sixte, when he is four and
fourtye. The.vij. when he is six and fourtye. The.vij. when he is.lx. And then
by force of his constellation. He shall dye through the weakness of his
members.

Moreover, touching his good fortune he shall have two sons, and shall
receive inheritance from his Progenitors. And his end shall be better then
his beginning. He shall be naturallye given to the marchaundyze of Goats,
and therein shall be both fortunate and luckye, if he will diligently follow
the same traffic.

Likewise, touching his evil fortune, he shall be subject to the hand of
his enemies. He shall be deprived of one of his members, and thereby shall be
maimed. And before the time of his death, he shalll suffer many and sundry
great troubles at the hands of a noble man.

The third Chapter determines the judgment of Capricornus touching the male.
And for the man child borne in this sign, there is nothing found certain,
touching the disposition of his body in this Chapter, and therefore recourse
must be made, to the Sign wherein the male Child is borne.

That is to say, to the head of Capricornus, or else to the tail, and there
the truth concerning his corporal disposition may be found.

And yet not wythstandynge (over and beside the premises) such one has a
little head, hollow eyes, and a soft speech. And touching his mind he shall
be very incredulous and hard of belief, in so much as them that swear, and
confirm their sayings with oath, he shall not credit. And therefore like as
he shall not believe others, even so it is as meet that other shall be as
hard of belief to him, and shall not credit his words though he bind them
with oaths. He shall naturally be very subtell and secret in all his
affairs, and therein shall be a subteil and crafty deceyuour, and a bold
sufferer and bearer of adversity. Likewise he is naturally covetous, irefull,
and therein very soubden and mischeuous, using a mischeuous and ungracious
stomach, and therefore with great difficulty he shall return to his former
quiet. And not withstanding the aforesaid vices he shall be naturallye given
to be civil, honest, amiable, and pleasant. Moreover, touching his life and
manner thereof, he shall be full of sickennes. But if he eskape one very
vehement sickennes (which shall happen when he is twentye years of age) he
shall live by force of this Constellation, eight and fifty years unless some
natural impediment of any particular or universal cause opposite do occur
and happen. His life shall be shortened by reason of the truncation and
cuttyng of some of his members.

He shallbe married to two wives, and the second he shall marrye, when he is
one and thyrty years of age, which shall be his better Wife, by whom he shall
be greatly enryched. He shall enter into other men's labors, and enjoy
gooddes gotten by others.

He shall tread the ground of many Countries, and at length shall return
to his own Country, and to the place of his nauitie with great gain and
substance. He shall have to do with much treasure, and shall enjoy part of
the same.

Touching his evil fortune, he shall suffer much adversity in the place
where he was borne. And for that he is naturallye subtyle, and of myschieuous
mind. He shall suffer much trouble and yet shall overcome it well enough.
His first Wife shall dye before he be one and thyrtye years old. Sunday is
his contrary and unfortunate day. Therefore upon that day let him
attempt no new fact, or any notable enterprise.

He seems to be of a melancolycke or earthye Complexion. And therefore he
has his Fortune chyefelye dysposed toward the North part.

And here thou shalt diligently note, that he which is borne in the end of
this Sign, shall be borne in Adulterye. And this Sign has no power in the
nativity of women, but only of the males.

The fourth Chapter of this tenth Treatise descrybeth the Judgment of
Capricornus, touching the female. And thou shalt note that the woman-borne in
this Sign, has nothing in this present Chapter that is certain touching
the dysposition of her body. And therefore look in what part of this sign
soever she be borne, there thou shalt find her natural and corporal
disposition. And therewyth also thou shalt have recourse unto the next
Chapter ensuynge, and the difference shall be found to be great between both
the kinds.

For as much as the bodily disposition, as well the stature as the other
composition of either kind is indifferent and equal. Moreover touching the
disposition of the mind. The woman Child borne in this sign shall be very
wise, and a geuer of good counsel, in so much as by reason of her great
wisdom and consideration she shall be acceptable to all sorts of men. She
shall atteyne to a good fate and constellation joined with much joy, and
mean of her wit. She shall bring her devises to good effect. She shall be
naturally given to be of curste heart, very whotte and wylfull specially in
those things touching the disposition of her wit and policy and thereby
very desirous to know such things as be most pleasant unto her with her
neighbors, and specially such as be most acquainted with her. She shall be
courteous and friendly. She shall be soon abashed and desirous to see the world,
and therefore shall travel in unknown places. She shall receive hurt of a four
footed beast, whereof if she eskape she shall live four skore years.
Likewise touching her good fortune, she shall be called a mother of Children for
that by force of her constellation, she shall be chyldebearynge and apt to
Children especially to sons. She shall also be abundaunte in four footed
beasts, and after she is passed the age of fourtye years, her time following
shall be more prosperous. And concerning her evil fortune. She shall be hurt
of four footed beasts, and shall be very fearful upon the water. Her luck
over her Cattle shall not be very prosperous. Sunday is her unfortunate day,
and therefore upon that day let her attempt no special matter, especially of
any great effect.

The.v. Chapter of this.x. treatise having his title of the general and
universal fortune of Cappricornus, is chiefly prosperous in husbandrye, and in
all kinds of Beasts and Cattle, concerning the same, and in all weighty and
ponderous matters touching earth, and that which is possible to be done with
earth, with stones with wodd, and with the hydes of the beasts before
remembered. Likewise, in bying and sellyng of grain, and other heavy matters
abundant upon the earth, and especially growing in the same. This sign is
prosperous in dull and heavy beasts as Asses, Swine, Oxen, and such like, and
in all kynds of works possible to be done with great and painful labor. The
borne in this sign shall be more healthful in travel then in doing
nothing. Likewise this sign over and besides the particular euentes, is much
disposed to Impostumes of the stomach, to the Coughe, and to inflammations of
the Liver. Also his time touching his indifferent Fortune, is divided into two
principal parts, not only in days, weeks and months, but also in years,
for the time is divided by the number of five, because continually there
shall be five good years and five badde. This sign also extends his Fortune
toward the Southe. And therefore let him dyspose all his wholle affairs (if
he mind to prosper) that way. And from time to time let him use to wear
Black garments.

Aquarius the.xi. celestial and principal sign.


water-bearer

THis.xj. Treatise making mention of the.xj. Sign called Aquarius, is divided
into three principal parts, comprehendynge.vj. several Chapters. The.j.
conteyneth the head of Aquarius. The.ij. part the belly. And the.iij. the
tail. The.iiij. the male. The v. the female. The.vj. and last, the common and
general fortune thereof.

The.j. Chapter making declaration of the head of Aquarius, being the.xxvj.
particular Sign, has two stars framed in this sort, and is called Astrad.
Where is to be noted, yt who so ever is borne in this sign, shall be beautiful
in the face and body, having a natural mark in the head, the breast, and
left foot. The color not altogether white, but somewhat disposed to black, and
to the color of Honny. Touching the disposition of the mind very well
learned, but naturally unjust and a doer of much wrong, very desirous to walk
after meals. And not withstandyng the natural inclination to the doing of
wrongs, yet he is of nature godly, pitiful, pacient, and a lover of
companions, and yet somewhat inclined to the contrary, as to impiety and
godlynes, iniquity and right, unrighteousness, justice and mercy. He shall be so
pitiful that he shall accuse no man, but rather be an excuser. He shall
naturallye suffer an ache in the Head, and a pain of the Heart. He shall have
two natural sickennesses. The first, when he is twenty years of age. The
second, when he is fiftye. He shall be greatly honored, and from many
troubles, which he shall suffer, almightye GOD shall mercifullly deliver him.
And his Fortune shall be indifferente. That is to say, some time having
sufficient, and at other times also he shall lack.

Also, a Dog shall grievously byte him upon his Thyghe or Leg.

He shall wander into a strange land, and in the myddest of his wealth and
substance much adueruersitie shall happen.

The second Chapter of this present Treatise describes the Bellye of
Aquarius, which is the.xxvij. particular Sign called Alscadabra, and has
xij. stars formed in this sort. Who so ever is borne in this sign shall have
a good body well complexioned and made. And this body shall be White
naturallye, and shall have some natural mark in his Face, Back, and Elbowe.
His Body shall be naturallye full of holes, and shall have upon his head a
blow or strype with a sword or dagger. This man shall be very wise, meek
chaste, and shamefaste. And shall love no vanities, but rather shall embrace
truth and virtue.

He shall fear GOD, and desire to do rather good then evil, to which good
qualities he is naturally given. And by reason he is tender, he shall have no
natural force to do any actual or corporal labor, and consequently not
given to walk much. He shall be much payned in the raines of his back. He shall
have iij. principal diseases. The.j. when he shall be.xxix. years of age.
The.ij. when he is.xxxvij. The.iij. and last when he is lxxxx. Concerning his
good fortune, that although he shall enjoy in his own country no kind of
office or promocion, yet in a strange country he shall attain to much
honor. Concerning his evil fortune, he shall suffer much trouble, and sundry
discommodities over and besides the bityng of a Dog or some other beast,
either upon his arm or leg. He shall have much evil fortune by means of
his Parents, for they shall be taken from him by death, and from them shall
receive no kind of inheritance or substance. And by force of this
Constellation, he shall end his life in a strange Country, and in the water.

The third Chapter of this treatise descrybeth the Tail of Aquarius, being
the.xvij. particular Sign of Heaven called Algassarall, which has two Stars
placed in this manner. Where is to be noted that who so ever is borne in this
Sign. First touching his bodies disposition, shall be fair of body, and of
a ruddye face, short in stature and somewhat balde.

Touching the quality of the mind he shall be naturallye very lecherous,
and greatelye given to the love of women, vehemently desirynge their company.
A great Surfetour, greatly occupyinge him self in bankettynge and Bellye
cheer, frequenting the same without measure.

He shall be very covetous and desirous to have, for what he sees he will covet
to have. Which vices not withstanding yet given to quietness, greatly embrasinge
peace and concord, and much abhorrynge discord, avoiding the means
thereof, as much as lies in his power. Likewise, he shall be endewed with a
certain frenzy, and shall by a natural sickness in a strange Country yield
forth his breath.

Three principal terms or diseases he shall suffer. The first, when he is
twentye years of age. The second, when he is five and fourtye. And then he
shall be in great danger of death. But if he eskape the same, he shall live
one hundred and twentye years, and three days. Likewise, touching his good
fortune, he shall live a long space with his Wife and shall get much
substance and riches. And although he shall have great loss, yet he shall
have plentye. Touching his evil fortune, he shall be without a head, and
deprived of his Parents, and Brother. In a strange Country he shall end his
life, as before is remembered.

The.iiij. Chapter entreats of Aquarius judgment touching the male. And to
learn the disposition of the body, recourse must be made to those things
that be reported in the three Chapters before mentioned, where very largely is
intreted the particular fortune of Aquarius. Over and besides he shall have a
great audacitie of speech. Semblablye touching the disposition of the mind,
and especially concerning his life, he shall be covetous, lecherous, prone to
anger, contencious, a liar, because he shall speak one thing and do another,
and that shall be by force of his principal constellation.

Not withstanding the said vices, he shall be very ware and circumspect, wise,
pollityke, trusting in his own wisdom, and shall have a certain
excellency of art and knowledge. Careful over his affairs even from his
youth.

Singulerlye beloved, courtelyke honest and good. Honest he shall be for that
he shall be conversant with the honest. Good he shall be by virtue of the
Constellation, and therefore naturallye inclined to goodness, singulerly
embrasing all things good and honest. Merciful, for that he shall extend the
same to such as have need of mercy, specially Orphans and wydowes, to whom
he shall not only be pitiful, but a benefactour and defender. He shall
wander into many places, and thereby by little and little shall be enriched.

Likewise, touching his life and manner thereof. He shall have two special
sickennesses. The first when he shall be six and thyrtye years of age,
which shall be very vehement and dangerous, whereof if he be acquieted,
then he shall feel the other, when he is four skore and ten years of age, and
of that last disease without fail he shall dye. In like manner touching his
good Fortune, he shall be happy, for that he shall be skillful in Art and
knowledge by reason whereof, he shall atteyne to preferment. He shall have the
charge and government of many and diverse sommes of money, and by a strange
man shall unlooked for enjoy much treasure. And concerning his evil
Fortune, his abode shall not continue in the place of his own nativity, but
wandering abroad shall perambulate strange places, and in them shall
continue. And not withstanding this his peregrination and dewellynge in such
places is indifferente either to good or evil Fortune. Therefore as seems to
me, it tends indifferentlye both to good and evil fortune. He that is thus
borne, his first wife shall not long tarry with him, and after she is dead,
all things shall have moore prosperous success with him.

And the loss also of this Wife, as specially I do note, seems not to me
to belong to evil Fortune, but to indifferente.

Likewise, upon the water he shall be very vnfortune, which by nature he shall
abhor. He shall be enwrapped with many and sundry dangers and among
others specially with his wife and woman. Saturday is his contrary and
unhappy day. Therefore upon that day he must attempt no notable enterprise or
fact, nor yet upon that day wash his Head, put on new garments, or do
other novelties remembered and spoken of in the treatise before.

The.v. Chapter of this.xj. treatise descrybeth the judgment of Aquarius
touching the woman. And here is to be noted, that the woman borne in this
sign touching the disposition of her body, shall be delicate and tender, and by
force of this constellation shall have a mark in her right hand. She shall
be true, faithful, constant, wyttye, and of a good complexion, and disposed
to all goodness, specially to mercy and pity. Likewise, touching her life and
manner thereof, she shall have a great disease in her eyes, and shall have two
special sickennesses, whereof the chiefest and most dangerous shall be when
she is of eyghtene years of age. And the second she shall have (if she
chance to eskape the first) when she is four skore years old, and then shall
dye according to the effect of this constellation.

Also touching her good fortune, she shall abound in Children. She shall be
enryched with other men's goods, and shall atteyne to an indifferent wealth.
When she is.xv. years of age, Fortune shall favor her better, and she shall
enjoy a better state. Much evil Fortune shall happen unto her in her time,
and among others, her good name shall be blotted with infamye, and shall be
defamed with the corruption of her virginity, and shall have experience of
strange places, and be very odious to her enemies. Her first Husband shall
put her from him. She shall be hurt with four footed beasts, or shall be
very near the same. But it seems to me she shall passiuelye receive a hurt
or danger.

The.vj. Chapter entreats of the common and general fortune of Aquarius,
which consists special in tillage and in beasts meet for tillage together,
and in all beasts of great quantie and fatnes, as Asses, Moyles, Swyne, Oxen,
Kyne, and such like. Likewise, fortunate in buyldings, in earth, in stone, in
wod, in hydes of beasts, specially the beasts before remembered. Furthermore, it
is commonly and for the most part fortunate in those things which be done with
great labor and exercise. This sign is fortunat toward the west, therefore
they must dispose their affairs that way. The Sunday is unfortunate for
them, therefore that day let them not do any new notable work, as is said
in the other treatises. They shall be vexed with long fevers quotidians and cold.
According to the virtue of the constellation, their time is divided into.xv. so
that the first.xv. years going before, are good and lucky, the.xv. years
following are unlucky and unfortunate: and nevertheless in the good fortune of the
first.xv. years the Sunday is always unfortunate. As touching the good fortune
of the first.xv. years, among the unfortunate days, the Twesday and Saturday
have the principal point in the good Fortune. They be naturally fanguine,
whote, and moist, and therefore they must wear read and black garments.

Pisces the.xii. celestial and principal sign.


depiction of fish

THe.xij. treatise of this Book speaks of the.xij. and last principal
sign of Heaven, called Pisces, and is divided into two principal parts, the
Head and the Tail. This treatise conteyneth five Chapters. The first, makes
mention of the Head of Pisces. The second of the Tail. The.iij. of the
judgment of Pisces for the male. The iiij. of the judgment for the female.

The.v. and last, of the common fortune of Pisces, both of the male and female
together.

The first Chapter makes mention of the Head of Pisces, which is the.xxix.
particular sign of Heaven, called Algafayser, and conteyneth two stars thus
set. He that is borne in this sign, shall be White, and soft of body, and
namely of a white face. He shall have a large breast, a comely beard, a fair
forehead, fair eyes, more black then white. He shall have many natural
marks on his body, by the which according to the virtue of the Constellation
rulynge, he shall be naturally inclined to fidelity and wisdom, but rather he
shall be faithful and wise in deed. Moreover, he shall have a natural mark
upon his Elbowe or in his Foot, and shall peradventure lose one of his
members, or else it shall fail him. He shall be of a smylyng countenance,
merrye, and loving pleasure and play, naturally inclined to equity: but yet
covetous according to the conjecture taken of his Constellation. And though
he be naturallye subject to the pain of the Head, he shall be healthful, of a
sound wit, and of a wholesome complexion. By the virtue and lyuelynesse of
his complexion, he shall live naturally three skore and ten years without any
notable sickennesse, sauinge the head ache, which he shall often times have.
As concerning his good fortune, he shall get much money, and possess many
possessions. He shall have three Wives, and shall be troubled with the third.
When he shall be in publycke office, many would hurt him, and yet they
shall do him no hurt, because of their weakness, and finallye he shall
surmounte them: for their envy and malice shall have no power against him. As
concerning his evil Fortune, he shall fall into many adversities and
troubles by his Constellation: Yet not so but that all these fore said things
in this Chapters be general as touching the influence and efficatie of the
Sign, and that they do appertain generallye to all that be borne in this
Sign. For if it chance that any be borne in the third hour of the day, as
touching the disposition of the body, he shall have a natural mark in his
Nostrelles, and shall have long eyes. As concerning the disposition of his
mind and wit, he shall be a very suspecte man hard of belief, and
therefore not believed.

As concerning the manner of his living, he shall have a great sickennes and
fervent in his Nostrels, so that by the feruentnes of it he shall dye where he
was borne. He shall have.iij. grievous sickennesses. The first at.xxvij. years.
The.ij. at.liiij. The.iij. at.lxx. years. And then he shall dye of this
sickness, if he eskape the other twain, or else be in great danger. As
concerning his good fortune, although by the effect of the Constellation, he
should fall into a river, yet he shall be saved from it, and shall rise out of
it again if he fall in, which thing belongs to his good fortune.

He shall have many Children. He shall be mighty, and rule in Islands.

By the mercy of GOD, and the goodness of the Constellation, he shall eskape
from all his trouble.

As concerning his evil fortune, he shall fall into a river as is aforesaid.
And also into the hands of a mighty man, and into much trouble. Yet not
wythstandynge that these things do appertain to his evil Fortune, they
shall have a good issue and end. For he shall be delivered from these
verations as before is said. Whereof it follows, that this fortune is evil by
accide^t. Furthermore, because of the mark that he shall have in his
Nostrelles, he shall burye his Parents, which he shall lose according to his
Constellation. Which thing belongs somewhat to his evil Fortune.

He shall lose some of his temporal gooddes, which he shall have gotten with
great labor, and shall wholly be spoiled of them, or of the most part of
them.

The second Chapter makes mention of the Tail of Pisces, which is the.xxx.
and last particular Sign of Heaven called Luaten, having twentye Stars,
set and disposed in dew order, in such manner and form as here follows.

He that is borne in this sign in the first hour of the natural day shall be
fair of look, having fair eyes, fair face, and fair of all his body. He
shall naturally have many marks. As concerning the mind and wit, he
shall be witty, and prudent, and amiable, his voice well sownyng, and liberal
more toward strangers then to his neighbors. Staungers shall have much
riches of him that is thus borne. He shall have three vehement sickennesses.
The first at.xxviij. years. The second at.lvj. The third and last at.lxxx.
years.v. months, at the second hour of the fifte month. He shall be a good
while without Children in wedlock, yet he shall have many. He shall have a
charge in a strange country: But he shall dwell in his own native country.
And if it chance he be borne at the second hour, than as touching the
disposition of his body, he shall be marked in the breast, and in his Finger.

As concerning the disposition of his mind, he shall have naturally all the
signs and marks that he shall have which is borne in the first hour, or in
another, saving the second hour, for he that is borne in the second, is
naturallye lyberall, and yet covetous.

As concerning the manner of his life, you must say of him that is borne in
the second hour, as of the other that is borne in another hour of this
sign. He shall be aboundaunte in vittayle and riches. He shall out live two
Wives that he shall marrye, by whom he shall have his gooddes and possessions.
He shall be mighty and strong by Sea and by land, and shall have a son of
power and might, of whom he shall see great things, and shall have
generation of him. Some of his members shall be diminished: and if he eskape such
a passion, he shall fall no more into it, which things appertains to his good
fortune. And finally, he shall be delivered from all adversity.

Touching his evil fortune, he shall lose some of his goods by violence. He
shall fall into a river, whereoute he shall rise again, and shall take no hurt
at all, as is aforesaid. He shall come into the hands of a puysante man, from
whom he shall be delivered. He shall lose by violence much riches which he had
gotten, without recovery or hope of recouerye.

The third Chapter determines of the judgment of Pisces for the male. The
man child borne in this Sign shall have a natural mark in his head shulder,
or foot, and a scarre in the midst of his body, or some where else.

He shall be a player, merrye, a dispyser of Fortune, very hard of belief,
lecherous beyond measure, and have great fansye to women, whereby he shall
suffer great contumelye and hynderaunce. He shall be furious and hastye to
anger: but as he is soon angrye, so shall he be soon pacified again.

He is naturally covetous, hardye, standing in his own conceyte, frendelye,
unkind, a liar. Yet not withstanding these vices he is witty, according to
his nature, auaricious, covetous and greedye of learning, eloquente, obstinate
in his learning, defending his conclusions obstinatly and wittilye.

And though he have a small wit, yet it is ready, sharp, and prompte. Such
a one borne thus is given to the company and love of good men, earnestlye
loving his friends, and wyllynglye will venture him self for them, whereby he
shall suffer hurt and detriment. He shall have seven great syckennesses,
whereof three shall be very extreme, and specially the syxte, which he
shall have at four and thyrtye years of age. And if he eskape it, he shall
live.lxxxv. years, and.iij. months, and.xiij. days, he shall dye of the vij.
sickness. Until.xxxiiij. years of his age, he shall not be rich nor poor,
nor shall come to any honor. He shall be rich by the death of his kynsfolke.

He shall get much gooddes by his labor, travel, and notable industrye.

He shall have the revenge of his enemies, and see the punishment of them. He
shall marrye at.xxxiij. years, and if he marrye before, he shall not keep his
Wife long, but shall marrye another. He shall be called the father of
Children, and shall have many, yet he shall not have a son at the beginning.

If he will remedy his evil fortunes, and be delivered from them, he must
call earnestly upon GOD, desiring mercy for Jesus Christ's sake, and by that
means he shall be delivered. In marriyng a Wife he shall be somewhat
unfortunate, because it shall not be expedient for him then, but in the age of
xxxiij. years as is said. He shall be hurt by his neighbor in his gooddes.
He shall have many suytes in the law, because of his gettyng: and shall suffer
much and diverse tribulation, and specially in his youth, wherein certain
things shall come luckely to pass with him. The Saterdaye shall be
unfortunate for him: Therefore that day he may not attempt nor take in hand
any new thing.

The.iiij. Chapter describes the judgment of Pisces for the female.

The maid that is borne in this sign, shall have a mark by nature in her head
or face. She shall be fervent and earnest very honest, loving the deckynge of
her body: desyryng to have brave apparel: hardy, eloquent, having a ready
tongue to speak, wyttye, wise, pitiful, merciful, faithful, amiable,
liberal, of a merrye heart. She shall be tormented with the grypynge and
frettynge of the Bellye, pain of the stomach, with the Lunatike passion or
Fransie, whereby she shall have great trouble the space of eyghte months:
and after that she is eskaped from it, she shall live two and seuentye years.
She shall comme to great honor, and have many Children, and shall be called
the mother of Children: yet hereof she shall have some misfortune: because her
first Child shall be a daughter and not a son according to the
constellation. As for the man's part being inclined to the contrary, and
surmountinge the natural complexion of this maid, sometime for the meetynge
of certain particular causes, which may alter the complexion of the man and
of the woman, and may sum thing change it. She shall be burned and hurt
with fire. And if it chance that her first Child be a son, he shall not
be a true male, because of the opposition and inclination of the mother,
whereof I have already spoken. At.xxv. years of her age, she shall have suyte
with her father or mother, or against them both, if they live. The Saterdays
shall be contrary to her and unlucky, therefore that day she may not begin
any notable work.

The.v. Chapter recites the common fortune of Pisces. They that be borne in
this sign, have their fortune, in art of a handy crafts man, and in
merchandise of cloth, if they be fair, also in metalls, and in marchaundise of
flesh, and namely in merchandise of corn and wheat and barley: and moreover
in horse, in divinity and the civil law, they shall be subject to whot
sicknesses and burninge, as to fevers, fretting of the belly, poison, specially
at ye years of 44 and 68, they shall have 3 lucky days in ye weke, Monday,
thursday and friday, the twesday and saturday unlucky, ye wednesday and sunday
indifferent. Furthermore they have 6 good years and 6 bad, they have their good
fortune toward the south therefore they must dispose their door, bed, and such
like affairs that way, they be choleric, whereby they be balde, and they must
wear gray apparel or black, and not red, grene, white, or blewe.

Besides that which is written in the Prologue set before the treatises here
expressed by Chapters, you must number and reken this letter N. among ye
numerall letters that signify ye number, and it is as much as two being
compoundes and made twice of the letter. I.

Now, for to find the total or principal sign, you must divide the number
by.12. Of a thousand there remains the number of 4.

Of 900 nothing. Of 800 8. Of 700 4. Of 600 nothing. Of 500 8. Of 400 4. Of 300
nothing. Of 200 8. Of 180 nothing. Of 160 4. Of 140 8. Of 120 nothing. Of 100
4. Of 80 8. Of 60 nothing. Of 50 2. Of 40 4. Of 30 6. Of 20 8

The number that comes of the letters of number, must be divided by 30, for
to find the particular sign of the child that is borne, because there be 30
particular signs, and because of the tail of Virgo, which is divided into
two parts, whereof follows the division of the numbers by 30.

Of 1000 10. Of 900 2. Of 800 20. Of 700 10. Of 600 nothing. Of 500 20. Of 400
10. Of 300 nothing. Of 200 20. Of 180 nothing. Of 160 10. Of 140 20. Of 120
nothing. Of 100 10. Of 80 20. Of 60 nothing. Of 50 20. Of 40 10.

Furthermore, you must note that the number which comes of the numerall
letters of the name of the Child and of his mother must be divided by 29
whereof the division follows.

Of 1000 remains 14. Of 900 1. Of 800 17. Of 700 4. Of 600 20. Of 500 6. Of
400 23. Of 80 22. Of 60 2. Of 50 21. Of 300 10. Of 200 26. Of 180 6. Of 160 15.
Of 140 24. Of 120 4. Of 100 13. Of 40 11. Of 30 1.

The numerall letters signifiyng the number.

I. one. II. two. V. five. X. ten. L. fyftye. C. a hundred. D. five hundred.
M. thousand.

Some men will not admit N. for a signifiynge letter of two among the other
seven: yet there be certain names wherein this letter may serve in the steed
of other letters.

FINIS.
OF PHISIOnomie. Now, for as much as the manners of the mind do follow the
temperature of the body, I have thought it meet and convenient to add here
some signs of the Phisionomie, according to the quantity or quality of some
parts of the body,
Signs. Nature. The head Great. Of a dulle wit. Asses. Very small. Fools.
Mean. Of a good wit. Natural. Sharp poynted like a Sugar lofe.
Unshamefast. Vaunters. With Hear right upward. Fearful. Passion. With Hear
right downewarde. Simple. With Hear much curled. Fearful. Ethiopians. With
thycke Hear. Evil. With Hear curled at the end. Of good courage. Lions. The
forhead. Very small. Hard to be taught. Hogs. Round. Of a dull wit.
Asses. Long. Flatterers. Dogs. Square. Courageous. Lions. Without wrynckles.
Flatterers. Passion. Rough and wrynckled. Hardye. Lions. Hangyng over the eyes.
Sad. Passion. High and loftye. Liberal. Lions. the ears. Small. Gesters.
Appes. Great. Dulle. Asses. Black and hangyng. Folyshe. Asses. Mean. Of good
wit. Natural The eyebrowes. Joined together. Sad. Separated much. Fools.
Hogs. Fine and soft. Courageous. Lions. Thyn and hard. Vncleanelye. Hogs.
Thycke hanging downewarde. Fools. the eyes. Somewhat read. Shamefaste.
Passion. Moist and shynnynge. Merye. Of good manners. Watrye weepyng.
Drunkardes. Passion. Runnyng. Sleepye. Passion. Very little. Faynte hearted.
Apes. Very great. Slow. Oxen. Mean. Of good disposition. Natural. Far
into the head. Malicious. Apes. But a little into the head. Courageous. Lions.
Bolt out of the head. Fools. Asses. Somewhat great, and not far inward.
Meek and gentle. Oxen, Often wynkynge. Fearful. Passion. Read. Angrye.
Passion. Very black. Fearful. Blewe. Fearful. Black yellowyshe. Of a
good stomach. Chollerycke. Furious. Goats. Sparkelynge. Merye shameless.
Dogs. Of many colors. Fearful. Passion. Bright and clear. Lecherous.
Cocks. The nose Round blunt and great. Courageous. Lions. Like a Hawks byll.
Courageous. Egles. With great ends. Covetous. Oxen. Sharp at the end.
Angrye. Dogs. Flat in the mids. Lecherous. Buckes. Wide and open. Angrye.
Passion. Very black. Fearful. Ethiopians. Very white. Fearful. Women.
Somewhat brown. Strong. Meanness. Aberne. Of a good heart. Lions. Freckled.
Subtell. Foxes. Read. Wyttye. Enflamed. Angrye. Passion. The face Sharp
poynted. Faithful. Dogs. the Chyn With a rough nodde. Liberal. Lions.
Great. Strong. Long. Fearful and eaters. the neck Sklender and small.
Weak. Women. Fleshye. Angrye. Bulls. Short. Deceytfull. Wolves. Mean.
Courageous. Lions. The backbone hearye. Unshamefast. Brute beasts. the hands
The fingers coupled. Vncleanelye. Hogs. Short and great. Rash and cruel.
Nails large and white. Manlye. Narrow and long. Cruel. Oblyque or awrye.
Impudent. Small. Craftye and subtle. Breast. With hear. Inconstant. Birds.
Without hear. Shameless. Women. Ample and large. Strong. Lions. Navel.
Far from the breast. Gluttons. Equally distant. Praise worthy. the place
about the priuye members. Full of bones or sharp. Strong. Male. Fleshye and
fat. Weak and delicate. Female. Hanches. Full of sinowes. Strong. Male.
Fleshye. Weak and delicate. Female. Thighs Full of sinows and thick.
Strong. Full of sinows and small. Lecherous. Great and evil fashioned.
Unshamefast. Legs. Full of sinows and evil fashioned Strong. Male. Fleshy
and well formed. Weak and tender. Female. Feet. Full of sinows and equally
proporcioned. Strong. Male. Narrow and small. Weak and tender. With crooked
and nails. Unshamefast, ravenous, greedye. With right nails. Commendable.
Natural. Body. Very small. Wyttye, sharp. Very great. Slow. Mean. Wise.
Evil proporcioned. Craftye. Well compassed. Strong. Of a light flesh. Wise.
Of a soft flesh. Forgetful. Of a hard flesh. Dull and heavy of spirit.
Mouyng. Light. Inconstant. Slow. Of a gross wit. Heavy. Grave,
courageous. Voice. Strong. Grave injurious. Asses Grave ending sharpelye.
Fearful, egre or fierce. Oxen, Soft and low. Gentle. Sheep. Grave and
moderate. Strong. Dogs. Sharp and strong. Angrye. Goats.

HEre by the nature you must understand the inclination and natural
complexion, which specially we may conjecture by the color of the body.
For naturallye black men are fearful as the Ethiopians be.

White men also be timorous and fearful: and they that be of a mean
color Black and White, be strong and bold. They that be yellowe of the
color of Gold be courageous as Lions. And if they be to yellowe, they be
malicious as Foxes.

They that be some what pale and darcke colored be fearful: and this is
referred to the perturbation that comes of fear. They that be very pale,
and almost green for palenesse be cold: and therefore they are unapt to
moouynge, slow, and negligent to work. They that be of sanguin color and
somewhat read, are nimble and ready to work. They that be of a fiery and
enflamed color become out of their wits, and be like mad men, when they be to
much chafed. So you must conjecture of other colors that take part of the
aforesaid. They that desire to see many other signs and tokens of the natural
inclination, must have recourse to Aristotle's little book entitled of the
phisiognomy: and to the works of Galene, specially to his little book, where he
says that the manners of the mind do follow the temperature of the body.
Furthermore, you must note yt we have four humors, which Galene calls the
elements of living things yt have blood, to weete: blood, fleme, collor, and
the melancoly humor. The blood is whote, moist and sweet. The spettle called
fleme, is cold moist, and without quality, as the water is, if it be not
depraved. The collor or flaua bilis is whote, dry and bitter. The melancoly
humor is cold, dry, bitter and earthy. The blood norisheth. The fleme helps
the moving of the joints. The collar cleanses and makes clean the flematike
excrements of the bowels: and provoke the power or strength excretiue.

The melancolicke humor helps the bellye in his actions: For, because it is
egre and bitter, it constreyneth and presses the mouth of the Ventricle or
bellye called the stomach, and makes it embrace and reteyne the meat, until
the digestion be made. The blood makes men moderate, merye, pleasant,
fair, and of a ruddye color, which be called sanguine men.

The fleame makes men, slothful, sluggyshe, neglygente, drowsye, fat, and
soon to have graye Hears.

The Choler makes them angrye prompte of wit, nymble, inconstante, lean
and of a quycke digestion. The melancolike humor, which is as it were the
substance, the bottom, and leese of the blood, makes men rude, churlyshe,
careful, sad, auaricious, deceyuours, traitors, envious, fearful, weak
hearted, and dreaming and imagining evil things, vexed with the trouble of
the mind as though they were haunted with a malignaunte spirit. These humors
than may be referred to the Phisonomye: for by them a man may know the
natural inclination of men. You may also refer thereunto the temperature of
ages. For the puerilitie or Chyldehode, which is from the birth unto fiftene
years or there about, is whote and moist. The adolesce^cie or youth, which
endures until five and twentye years, is of a good and mean temperature. The
youth or floryshynge age of man's state, which endures till five and thyrtye
years, is of a whote and dry temperature. The fourth age is the first part of
old age, which endures till fourtye and nine years: and then men begin to
ware cold and dry, and like unto a plant that dries up and wythereth, and
they be called in Latyne Senes The second part of old age endures until
end of the life: and the men be called in Latin Seniores. And this age is also
divided into two or three degrees. They that be in the first degree, have yet
their green old age, which yet may handle and execute civil matters. They
be of the second degree, which draw them selves by little and little from the
said affairs because of their weakness. They of the third degree are in
extreme feebleness. If you desire to know any moore of the signs of
Phisognomie, you shall find them by diligent reading of authors.

The prediction of the manners and natures of men, by considering of their face
and other parts of their body.
Of the judgment of the head.
Seeing that the head is the part that is most seen of all the parts of man's
body, Hypocrates in his.vj. book of common sicknesses, not without cause
shows how to judge of the whole body by the consideration of the head. For
that which is either greater or lesser then it ought to be is always faulty
and not good, and they that have this fault or lack, have also those things
that do evidently appartain to the faulty and hurted minds. And now even as
the head which is little, is never without fault, so that which is great, is
not altogether parfite and good: but sometime good and sometime ill. It is a
sign of goodness or of wickedness.

But the best fashion is the round head, and somewhat low on both sides, as if
you should imagine a very round Sphere made of Ware to be somewhat low of
each side. The best form then and shape of a head, is that which is meanly
great, and has a comelye convenient roundnesse: which appears before and
behind somewhat low. The principal cause why the head is little, is the lack
of matter or substance. And the cause of the greatness of it, is the abundaunce
and superfluity of the substance and seed man. But if there be little matter
with the force of the first formatiue virtue, it shall be of a good form and
shape, and less evil, for as much as in the creature the noughtines of the
fashion is joined with smalenes of the head. The brain follows the form and
fashion of the skull. For if the skull be corrupt, the brain shall be also
corrupt. The head of man has more brain proporcionallye then all other
beasts. The male has more brain then the female. The head of man has more
ioynynges then all other things: and the male more then the female. A well
fashioned head is like a mallet, whereof the fore part and the hinder part,
be lofty and high. The form or fashion of the mean ventricle, must be a
little pressed together, and so the cogitatiue is the more noble. If the form
before be low, the man has no judgment. And the hinder part be low, he
has no memory, and has a weakness of mouyng his synowes, and consequentlye
of all his body: for by the force of the brain is declared the force of the
neck and synowes: and also the brodenesse of the shulders and of the breast,
and the parts of the sides called Hypocondria, which be ioynynges to the
liver and lunges. The head that is of a reasonable fashion augmenteth the wit
and virtue, and declares a magnificence in the man: but when it is evil is
fashioned it shows the contrary.

The judgment of the head.
THey that have a great head, and yet not out of measure, are commonly fair
and well condicioned. They that have a great head out of measure be fools,
idiotes, dull heads. When the head is great proporcioned to the body, and
specially to the neck, so yt the neeke be strong, and meanelye great with the
sinowes great and strong, it is a very good sign. The head fashioned like a
Sugar lofe, declares the man to be paste shame, a deuourer, bold and rash,
which thing comes of the heat and dryness of the brain. It is a another
thing when the head is great and the other members are not great accordynglye.
The head is of a good fashion, when the ventricle before is also of a good
fashion, and moist enough. For the taking of the kinds comes of the
moisture, and the reteynyng comes of drynes in the part behind. The head
with a mean ventricle somewhat pressed together about the sides, declares the
ventricle cogitatiue to be ready to comprehend and devise, that which is
comprehended, and that because of the unity of the spirits that are in that
place.

The head round signifies, mobilitie, unstableness, forgetfulness, small
discretion and little wisdom in the man, for sometimes the moving of the
spirits stays. The little head necessarily shows an evil sign, for as much
as it soon falls into a sickennes, because that in it there is little brain,
and the ventricles narowe, wherein the spirits to straightly kept do not
their office: for they are oppressed, enflamed, and choked up, wherefore they
imagine not well, they dispose nothing well, they have no memory. Such men are
commonly soon angry, and are fearful, and keep their anger long, by reason of
the great drought, and whote temperature of the brain. They take in hand false
matters they speak ill, and have a double tongue. The long head without
measure, having the Organes a wrye, and not right, notes unshamefastness and
follye. The head low and flat betokens insolency and dissolutnesse.

The head high before betokens pride. The head that has as it were a holow
hoole behind and is low and holow, declares man to be subject to anger and
deceyte. The great head with a large forehead and a face like a Gyaunt, is a
sign of a slow man, gentle, strong, and not easy to be taught. When the
head is right and almost flat in the myddest, and of a mean greatness, it
shows the man to have great wit, and to be courageous. If the head be in
all points of a good measure, it is a sign of a great wit and that the man
is sharp and liberal. We mean the head not to great nor to small, but
according to the quantity and measure of the body.

The Judgment of the body by the color.
BLacknes in a man like a glistering horn is a token of adustion as well in the
members as in the hear. A black color shows the man to be of a small
courage in feats of war fearful and craftye and is to be compared to them
that dwell in the southe. A green color, dark, or black, declares the man
ready and prompte to anger. Men that have a very read or read headed in
color are subtle and crafty. As the common saying among the French men is
l'ay veu bein peu de petites gens humbles, and rousseaux fideles, that is to
say I have seen few little me^ humble or lowlye, and few read headded men
faithful and true. They that have a pale and a dead face, and yet a red
forehead and low eyes, are altogether shamefaste. And to them you may
attribute passion. The white color and samewhat ruddye, signifies the man
very strong and courageous. Such are the northen men. The color that is
very white shows the man to be contrary to virtue. A pale color
sygnifyeth the man to be without courage in deeds of war, fearful, and a
turner of his back, if syckenes be not the cause of this palenes. When a
brown color is myxed with a pale, it declares the man to be a blabbe of his
tongue and a prater, sone angrye, and a speaker without any temperature. This
color then tends to an extreme folly. They that be but a little red and
freckled and have quauering and moouinge lyppes and wide nostetrells be
commonly courageous and ready to wrath and anger: and to them also is
passion attributed. A mean read color notes a ready and pregnaunt wit
and understanding. They that be of a fyrye color or very near, keep their
anger long and are hard to pacyfye or to be ruled when they are angrye. When
the veins of the brain and of the temples be seen and the eyes sanguyne, it
is a sign that the man is subject to vehement wrath, and that sometime he is
folyshe and out of his wyts. When the face is read, it is a sign of shame or
drunkenness you shall then know this color by the signs of the eyes.

The judgment of the hear by the substance.
THe hear smooth and thick betokens meekenes, cold and moisture. The
further that the brain is from heat, the more hearye is the head. The heat
of a man that goes to the upper parts percinge through from all parts goes
through the skin of the head and makes an humor to comme out of the holes
that it makes, and the fynest part of this humor vanysheth away but the
grosser remains within and is turned in to hear. Which is harder than the
skin and that by the means of the outward cold, and the hear is as big
as the pore or hole, and as long as the violence and force of thrusting it out
is great. When the hear comes out slowlye, it is a sign of a moist
complexion and not sanguyn. If they come a pase the body shall enclyne rather
to dryness than to moisture. And when heat and drougth do join together the
hear comes out the sooner, and therewithal grosser. The multitude of hears
declares a hot man and the grossnesse of them shows him to be full of
fumosite. And therefore that happens more in young men than in young
children. For in children the substance is more vaporous than moist. But in
young men it is contrary wherefore contraries follow their contraries. Abundaunce
of hear in young children shows their complexion that increases and
augmenteth, to tend to melancolines. The curlinge of the hear signifies
heat and drines, and comes of the crokednes of the pores. The hears that be
right up in the head and the hear also that stands vprighte in the rest of
the body betoken fearfulnes in ye man. The hears right or thick declare the
man to be cruel and when they be rare then they show him to be a deceiuour
and if they be curled and turninge upward it is a sign of a hoate complexio^.
And they be fast together appearing up on the forehead they declare a mighty
courage and a brutall as the courage of bears. The hears that be pressed
down and couched together upon the myddle of the forehead rising together upon
the top of the head show the man to be hoate, and without knowledge of
honestye. The hears that be thine slender and few in number beside the
temples declare the man to be cold and without force. The reason is for in
that place, are the great arteres and that place ought naturally to be hoote,
and consequently to have abundance of hears for as much as the generation and
growing of hears comes of heat. Therefore when the hear is thin and
slender in that place, there is lack of heat, and this ought to be ascribed
unto women for they never have a bondance of hear in that place. The hear
thin and hard beside the temples declare the man to be cold and fearful.
And when they be thycke in the same place and beside the ears it is a sign of
heat and whordome. And they be there stable, black or yellowe they signify a
violent mind or courage. If they be gross and somewhat whiter, it is a sign
that the man shall be indocible whom men shall not rule nor tame. The abundance
of gross hears and pressed down, with the abundance of hear in all the rest
of the body, do show in an infant a melancolines to come, that is to say,
that he shall fall into a furye or folly. When hears grow in a man that is
already aged it is a token of great adustio^ by nature, yt which engenders
folly and privation of wit and sense. Women are never bald, for their nature
is like the nature of infantes or children. The gelded men likewise never wax
bald for they be almost of the nature of women. The hears yt are made curled
by touching like unto the wrinkling of pepper do sygnifye weakness in the
virtue digestive and age coming hastelye on.

The Judgment of the color of the hear.
THE signification of the color of the hear is not veryfyed for the most part
but in temperate climates. Yet a man may Judge thereof some thing in every
climate in making comparison of men of ye climate unto other as to ye Flemynges
and Ethiopians. For the Ethiopians be black and their hear is curled and
extreme crooked. Yet therefore their complexion shall not be hoate but this
heat and curlynge of hear comes of an outward heat.

For they be rather cold, for as much as the heat goethe out by vapors. But
Fleminges which dwell in cold regions, are whit and have their hear some what
of a yellowe color flat and plain. And yet for all that we may not say that
generally they be cold but rather that their complexion is very hot: for the
heat is within them as it comes to pass in winter etc. A white color
signifies either a vehement cold, as it appears in old men that have white
hears or else a great dryenesse, as it happens in things vegetative when
they dry up, the which for their blacknes or greenesse turn in to whiteness.
And that never happens unto men but at the end of sicknesses dryinge up.
Hears have four principal colors to weete black read, aberne and white or
graye. The regions and air do some thing in the aperation of the hears. The
whytenesse of hears comes by want of natural heat or by rotten fleame.
And is a sign some time of wanton manners and conditions. The black hear
comes of superabundant coler aduste or of blood aduste, read hear
sygnifyethe heat which is not aduste for they be of a diminished heat The
hears that be very read declare the man to be a craftye deceiuour, deprived
of wit colerycke, full of wrath and furious without reason. The hears that
be of a cheste nutte color declares the man to be vpryght, just and well
beloved of men. Golden hears, that is to say yellowe hear or of the color
of gold, come of cold diminished. The abern colored or yellowe hear hold
something of cold, and the heat is dead in the moist, and this is referred
unto infantes. The people of the north notwythstandinge have this heat
because of the region. And therefore this must be noted for such things do
many times deceive the Iudgers of Phisyognomye. The blackenesse of hears
which is like to a bryghte horn with some roughnes and crookednes declares
the heat of the complexion: but the hear that is only black sygnifyeth
fearfullnesse and covetousness. The color that is as it were a bright
glistering horn, is like to the nature of Mars. Nevertheless the hears be not
gross, but somewhat fine of the finesse of the humors, and are made black
with a great heat, which thing appears in bread tosted upon the coals
because the moisture in gone. But when the rest of the body is to heary then
Mars and Saturn do employ their forces. And such men are commonly thieves and
robbers and when they have their breast only hearie, it is a sign of heat
and of a great courage. When all the body is covered with hear, it is rather a
sign of ye courage a fowerfooted beast then of a man: when the nod of ye neck
is covered with hear even from the head it is a sign of strength and of
courage and in that the man is like to the lion.

The Judgment of the forehead.
THe face is the only party where the man only becomes. They that have a
great forehead are commonly slothful and are compared to oxen. They that have
a broad forehead commonly chang their mind and if it be very great, they be
fools of little discretion and rude of wit. Understand take this brodnes with
the just quantitye of the length and largenes. They that have a round forehead
are subject to wrath and anger specially if their forehead be open and plain.
And they be also insensible like unto Asses. They yt have a little forehead and
narrow be fools, and doltes, not easily to be taught, slouens, deuourers like
swine. They ye have a metly long forehead have good wits and ar easily to be
taught but yet they are some what vehement as dogs be. They yt have square
forehed of a mean greatness for mall to the head are virtuous, wise, and
courageous like Lions. They that have a plain and flat forehead and with out
wrinkle will not bow, and be without wit contumelious, and much subject unto
anger, obstinate, and full of contention. They that have a long and stretched
out foreheade be flatterers and such have their part of passions. They that
have a darcke and covered foreheade be audatious and terrible. A low forehead
and obscure, makes the man ready to weep, and in that he folowethe the
pecockes. The forehead that is great has ever much gross flesh, and
contrary the little forehead has fine and thin flesh. The little forehead
and finesse of the skin betoken a fine wit and wauerynge. Now than the
spirit or wit, is a fine body engendered of the vapors of the blood. And
this spirit or wit bears the virtues of the soul to the spiritual
members. And therefore where there be gross humors there a good wit cannot
be. When a foreheade is to much wrinkled, it is a sign of a man without shame,
and this wrinkling comes of to much moisture, although that sometime it
proceeds of dries, and if the same be not in all ye forehead, it declares
the man to be full of anger, and very subject to anger and keeps long his
anger and hatred without cause. They that have a short foreheade, the temples
and the checkes flat priest down, and large chawbones he subject to the
disease called the kings evil. They that have as it were a little cloud on ye
top of their nose or in ye mids, as narrow are coumpted angry men as
bulls and Lions. A high forehead large and long signifies increase of goods.
A low foreheade is no sign of a manly man. The forehead that is some what
swelling up about the temples with a grossenes of fleeshe with the Jaws also
full of fleeshe, declares a great courage anger, pride and a gross
understanding.

The Judgment of the eyebrowes.
THE eyebrowes are places in the ioynture of the bones, and therefore they
grow in many men when they be old. The eyebrowes that be very heary declare
folyshnes of manners and mischeife. The eyebrowes thick with abundance of hear
joined to the beginning of the nose do sygnifye a great adustion, and such men
are of an evil nature. If the eyebrows yt be high upward do descend to the
beginning of the nose and above are rysyng to the temples, it is a sign that
heat and drougth do rule, and such men be crafty and malefactors If ye
eyebrows descend downwardon ye side of the nose, and rysyng upward on the side
of the temples, they declare men to be without shame and dulle and that because
of a furyous heat. The eyebrows thin and of a competent greatness, declare
the, temperature and goodness of the humors and they that have them so are of a
great wit. The eyebrowes long show the man to be arrogant and without
shame, but when they be long with much hear they sygnifye the man to think
and to have his mind upon great things. The eyebrowes which descend
downewarde on the side of the nose, and raised upward on the side of the
temples, and hangyng downward on both sides declare the man to be without
shame envious, folyshe insatiable, and like unto hogs. The eyebrowes which
descend crooked on the side of the nose declare the man to be witty in naughty
things, and when they be crooked on the out side of the eye, they signify the
man to be recreatife and merry. If ye eyebrowes be right as though they were
drawn with a line and long it is a sign of an evil mind weak and femnine
and as women's minds be. When the eyebrowes comme together, they show the man
to be very pensyfe and not very wise. Hanging eyebrows and falling down upon
the eyes, declare envy: but if they be crooked they sygnifye a small memory.
The eye brows that be round compassed like a bow, so that they join almost
to the nose, declare the man to be subtle wytty and studious. The eyebrowes
thynne meet or measured by the diamenter, and great betoken a good wit.

The Judgment of the eyelyddes.
THE eyelyddes are set above the great coueringes of ye small veins by a
gross vapor. The fynenesse of the skin declarethe the substance of the
matter that is to say of the humors and that coler has the domynion. And
they that have such hear, be malycyous and vicious unto whom you may also
ascribe the other passions of colere.

And when that place is very fleshye (as the eyes of the Dules) it is a sign
of fraud and guyle. The eye lidde appearyng high above, and seems fuller
then it is, declynynge a little above the eye, declares the sight to be other
then the common sight of men, and to much fixed and set upon one thing. But
if the said eye lydde tend downwarde, it is a sign that the man is full and
fat, and namely when it is read round about, it is a sign that the man is
a dronkarde and riotous, etc, which thing I have tried in many men which did
haunt tauernes. The reason is, because such a disposition of the eye lydde
signifies weakness of the eyes, and consequentlye of the brain. Wherefore
they that have them so, fear often times the Wine. If they be thin and fine
downward, so that the white of the eye be covered, it is a sign of dryness
of humors. And if that happen in any sharp passion, it is a sign of death.
When the hear of the Eyelyddes is crooked downewarde, or naturally turned or
wreathed at one side, it is a sign of lyinge and subteltie. They that have
very great or gross Eyelyds, see farthest of, for they conserve their sight
with heat and outward cold. When the corners of the Eyes be broad, it is a
sign of diseases of the Eyes. And if they have any fleshye appearance, they
signifye Dronkennes, and specially when ye Eyes be apparent and clear, and
have their couerynges dried up.

The Eyelyds above the Eyes, which cover them beneath signify long life.
They that wagge and remove often their Eyelyddes, be fearful, and without
good sense or wit.

The Eyelyddes thynne, sygnifye health, and declare the thought of the man to
be nygh unto good.

The judgment of the eyes.
THe complexion of the Eyes is moist, and they be made of.vij. lids, which
are called in Latyne Tunicae oculorum, with three humors. The passions of the
mind be declared specially by the Eyes, as tribulation, mirth, love, hatred,
and such other.

The Eyes have four principal colors, to wit, black, somewhat white,
chaungeable, darcke, and taunye. The form of the Eyes that be round, are the
most wauerynge and rollyng that be, the most parfyte, and vncorrupt, because
there is no squarenes in them. The Eyes that have corners are most filled with
superfluities in ye same corners: the eyes yt be great betoken fearfulnes and
weakness, for their grossenes comes to a great abundance of moisture in ye
brain, wherein there is a certain coldness, which is spread among ye me^bres, and
quenches ye blood: wherefore even as the sprite of the blood makes the man
bold, so the complexion that is cold and moiste makes him fearful. The eyes
that be bolt forewarde, declare follye in the man. But when they be hollow
inward they show a malicious subteltie in the man. Broad eyes tendynge to the
largenes of the body, and like unto Hogs eyes, declare a moisture of the
body. They that have their appearing outward and loftye see not very well:
for their eyes be far of from their fountain which is the brain. And
such men are commonly great babblers and praters. The hollow eyes far in
the head have a sharper sight than the other. The rollynge or waggynge of the
eyes comes of heat and betokens wrath, lecherye, and boldenes. When the
eyes move deformely, so ye now they run, and now they stand still, it is a
sign of great malice, and that such men are full of wicked cogitations. They
that remove their eyes swiftly with a sharp sight, be thieves, unfaithful, and
full of deceyte. Such men have a subtell wit, but it is readyer to evil
than to good. A steadfast look, comes of two great and steadfast cogitation,
and oftentimes of a desire they have to deceive. They that have a look like
women, are whoremaisters and without shame: for that disposition comes to
them by such a complexion as women have. When a man looks as though he were
a child, so that his face and eyes, be always smylyng, it is a sign that he
shall be of a long and merrye life. Merrye and laughyng eyes with the rest of
the face, betokens flattery, lecherye, and backebytinge. The eyes that be as
it were yellowe, signify crueltye and deceyte, as it appears well enough in
baudes and murderers, this color comes of a Choler reigning and adust.
Little eyes signify malice, folly, and weakness in a man. The hollownes of
the eyes comes of a dries, which dries up the muscles and ligamentes.
Whereof ensues a contradiction in the inward parts, and that the man becomes
brainles. The eyes are set and situat naturally in man according to the
largenes of the body. The Eyes that are of diverse colors and dim in the
balle of them betoken folyshnes. The boltyng out of the Eyes does represent
diverse obiectes, whereby it comes to pass that the man is confuse with this
diversity of obiectes, going about to behold them all together. The Eyes
that tend upward, signify goodness, but if they be red and great tending
upward, they signify wickedness, folly, and dronknes, And that comes of the
weakness of the brain, which is very moist and not temperate. The elevation
of the Eyes comes by accident, for the cause of it is to much heat, the
Sign whereof is the red color: whereof also comes the perturbation of the
reasonable soul.

As we see in the great anger of men.

The extention of the Eyes and of the face, show the malice of the man:
because that heat and drynes be the cause thereof. And the whote soul,
brings commonly some evil sign. The Eyes that be as it were hidden in the
head, see further of then other and signify suspicion, malice, dangerous
anger and naughtye conditions: they declare the man to have a great memory,
and specially of Injuries: audacious, cruel, full of craft, a liar, vicious,
and a Whoremonger. etc. When the Eyes are now shut now open, and by and by
stand still, such men have not yet committed any crimes, but they have them
in their heart. The Eyes have diversities of colors because they be Diaphanes
and of a rare substance and fine. And therefore the spirits of the sight show
their qualities in the Eye. As a woman that has her flowers spotteth the
looking glass, and marreth children in the cradell, and sometime hurts whole
and sound eyes: when there be many apparent spots in the ball of the Eye it is
a sign of noughtynes.

And yet shall the spotted eye be worse, if it be of diverse colors. The
chaungeablenes of the eyes comes of nothing but of heat raysynge up the
vapors unto the eyes. And the greater the variety is, the greater is the
heat. For as much as the spots be diverse, the adustion of the spirit raised
up, is the greater, whereof comes the diversity of manners, and the multitude
of vices. And of this great variety, the honest and commendable judgment is
corrupted. The eyes that be red as coals, signify wickedness and
obstinatie. For by the color of fire, is signified great Choler. They that
have mean eyes, enclinynge toward the color of the sky, or somewhat black,
have a sharp and pearsyng understanding, and be faithful and curtesye.
Almansor says that the best and most commendable color of the eyes is
between black and chaungeable, if they be not full of beams, or if there be
not any rednes or yellownes in the^, those eyes declare discretion and
understanding. His reason is, because they be without Choler or Melancoly
adust. The color of the eyes graye and black, specially where be no spots,
is cause of moist humors and temperate without adustion, whereof follows the
spirit like unto the nature. And of this spirit comes the understanding
and speculation: the diverse colored is made of a moore clear visible spirit,
therefore such men are well borne, and seekers of knowledge and science. The
worser eyes have white spots or black or read, or of some other color. And
they that have such eyes are worse then all other, and more to be reproved.
The chaungeable great and of aberne color, if they have little read sparks
very dustye signifies the man to be troubled in his mind and vicious: but
yet bold and wyttye. When there be little read spots in the eyes, and turn
moore to black than to red so that they seem black, it is a sign of a noble
heart, just, good and witty. The Eyes that shine within as spots of White
betoken clean men, stable, and very courtise.

The Eyes that have little spots all together red, and yet not round but
square, and shynynge like fire within and underneath, and that there be other
beside them that be pale, and other blood color, and that the circles which
close in the ball of the Eye be sanguine, and that the Eye be of a good
greatness, and that the Eyelyds and the ball do remove and wagge much, it is a
Sign of a cruel heart, moore than a man would think: the redder those little
spots be and the smaler, so much the moore do they show the great anger and
wickedness in the man: the spots that be greater and darker, diminishe those
great vices: but they take them not away all together: the black spots or
sanguine in the black ball of the Eye or brown do signify malice or
poysonyng. The pale spots signifye secreate wickedness. And you must note
that as much as the colors are moore vehement, the moore efficatie they have.

Yet there be some Eyes colored like the Rainebowe, the which if they be
dry, declare great lack of wit: But if they be moist, they signify
magnificence and wisdom: yet with wrath and infamous whoredom. If the ball
of the Eye be black, and closed in with the foresaid yellowe color, or if it
seem like gylt (as the Physicians say) it betokens the bloody Flixe in the
nether parts.

The great Eyes and long Eyebrowes, betoken short life. They that have in their
Eyes a blackyshe White, are commonly great Personages, and live in great honor.

The waueryng or moouyng Eyes and sharp, sygnifie theft, which is attributed
unto Hawks.

The dry eyes and full of veins, betoken privation of wit to come or
present. The eyes compassed about with dim darkness, declare that the man
is seasoned with evil dotrine, and that he is unfaithful and temperat. But
when they shine much and be without spotte, it is a token of goodness. When the
eyes shine very much, and are brown, and sanguine it is a sign of rashenes
and of privation of wit: But if they be well proporcioned, they betoken good
state of the wit. The color of the eyes mean between black and chaungeable
is commendable above all other sorts aforesaid, if they be not full of
beams and streakes, either yellow or red. If the eyes be great, and very
clear and clean, they signify justice, docilitie, providence, and good
aduertisment. If they be eminent, red, and small, it shall be a sign of the
thought and the tongue unruly, and of an unconstant mind. Tremblyng eyes and
brown, betoken a man without shame, unfaithful and unjust.

When the eyes have a competente greatness, and be very bright, it is a sign
of magnanimity, and that the man enterpryseth great things and brings to
pass great matters. Sometime it is a sign of anger, and that the man is given
to Wine, that he is a thief, and covetous beyond measure.

When the eyes be great and smiling it is a sign of a dull man, lecherous,
and that foreseeth not what shall come after. Hollow eyes and smylyng as it
were lying in wait, or to spy, specially, if the cheeks, the eyebrowes, and
the lyppes do move all together, it is a sign of wicked cogitations, deceytes,
and namely, if sometime the eyelids be joined together, and touch one another,
it is a sign of most wicked thoughts. Sad eyes are not much to be feared:
for they be to the cogitations of moist eyes, and betoken study of good
sciences. But if the eye brows and the Forehead be of a good bredeth and
still, and that the Eyelyds be good, it is sign of a faithful mind, grave
and gentle: the sad Eyes and dry with sharpenes of the Forehead and steadfast
look, and castyng down of the Eyelyds signify hurt and cruelty, and that the
man has a rash boldness: they that have watery Eyes are lovers of Wine, and
become bald, and such men have always a moist Brayn and weary: they that have
their Eyes very watery and running, are slepy and love to sleep. Blerines or
watrynes of the Eyes comes of gross blood, and of a melancoly humor which
falls into the Eye lyds: the watrynes of the Eye by the look of the
disposition, betokens drunkenes: if it be with depression of the Eyes, it
declares sleep.

The flat Eyes sygnifye slownes: wherein the man is compared to Oxen. The
means of the Eyes sygnifieth goodness and purity. The Eyes that be somewhat
hollow, betoken magnanimity. But if they be moore hollow, it is a sign of
mekenes. If the ball be black, it is a sign of a slothful and dull man. The
ball of the Eye that has round about certain Pearls, signifies the man to be
envious, a babbler, fearful, and very dangerous. The Eyes that stand awry
with a vehement ague, sygnifye death. If the Eyes tarry long open, it is a
sign of folyshnes, and that the man has no shame.

The Eyes that be very black, betoken fearfulness, and desire to scrape
together gooddes. And if they be not very black, but somewhat yellow, it is
a sign of a good and virtuous mind: the Eyes that be Brown, or White,
signify fearefulnes, and specially the White: the eyes that be not altogether
Brown, betoken a good courage and mind: the Eyes that be full of veins,
signify folishe men and destitute of their wits, and that is referred unto
Goats.

Now the eyes are called full of veins which have many little lines or
streakes, as the minutes of veins be, by the which the color of the eyes is
made diverse. The eyes that be enflamed signifies the man to be paste shame.
The eyes are enflamed when they shine and are brighte, and glyster like fire:
for they be kyndled with ire and wrath. And if they see one thing, they
think they see twain. The eyes and the cheeks red betoken dronkenes And when
they be red and dry, it is a sign of wrath and anger. When the eyes be
brown or troubled, it is a sign of fear. The mean eyes and low, betoken
shamefastness and honestye. The steddye eyes snd somewhat red betoken
whoredom and devouring The chaungeable eyes and short declare a covetous man
and desirous of goods. But if he have the forehead and eye brows half retyerd
he is the moore covetous.

The Judgment of the face.
THE face is taken symplye for a natural look: but the vysage is understand
of the quality of the mind. The face of them that be very clean is mean in
the cheeks and temples and somewhat fat. And that face is a true face,
loving and not disdaynefull. The merrye face comes of a merry heart, and so
the contrary. The mean form that is to say neither to great nor to little,
is very handsome. He that has a full and fat face is importune, a liar, a
deuourer, and not very wise. A fat face makes the man circumspecte in his
affairs, and sygnifyeth a sharp wit. The thynnes of the face betokens the
man to be pensive. A round face sygnifyeth folly: and a great face sygnifyeth
sloth. The face that is very little sygnifieth naughtinea, craft, flattery, no
liberalite: and fearfulnes. They yt have a crooked face, are of a naughty and
wicked dysposytion. A long face testifyeth the man to be without shame and
injurious and that comes of heat. The temples swolle^ with great veins and
arteries, signifye wrath and anger. If the fleshye face be somewhat thick, and
not very neat it is a sign of fearfullnes and of great follye. A gross and
rusticall face with broad Jaws, sygnifyeth a rude and blount nature.

The Judgment of the visage or of the face.
THe asperite or sharpnes of ye face, of ye state of the lips, of ye chekes,
of the forehead, and of the countynaunce, sygnifieth a folyshe man and without
sense or wit. The face that sweteth often, yea with a little moving betokens
heat, leacherie, gluttony, and that the man is a great eater, and therefore
falls into indigestion: and at the last into great sycknesses. When the face
is hollow like a valley, more lean than fat, it sygnifyeth the man to be
injurious, envious, a liar, a rioter cruel, and specially if he be of an adust
color and somewhat black or else yellow. The face well proportioned of
flesh, of color, and other things appartaining, declare a commendable life,
and abundance of virtues. Every fat face and full signifies an ignorant
man, and given to pleasures. Take heed you be not deceived in the judgment of
Lazer men for their eyes become round and their veins appear. The little
visage hears witness of a little understanding, of wyckednes, of folly and
of ignorance.

The judgment of the nose.
THe nose that reaches down even to the mouth of a competent bigness
declares the gristle and the brain thereof to be of a hoate complexion and
sygnifieth goodness and audacitye. When the nostrells be great and wide it is a
sign the man's codds and stories be great, and that he is a whoremonger, a
traitor, false, audatious, a liar, envious, covetous, a nyggard, and but a
little fearful and of a gross understanding. The Nose shows the
disposytion, of the heart: if it be great, it is a sign that the man is subject
to wrath. A little nose and a great also declare the secret parts of the
man, and of the woman. The pryuye member of a man great, comes of a gross
and hot matter. Yet the foot of the woman declares her matryce. A narrow
foot, long lean shows the like of the matryce of the woman, and so the
contrary. The measure of half the foot being bare, is the measure of the
length of the matrice, yea in all women. Great lips declare the skin or
the lyppe of the gate to be great, and so contrary And specially in a maid.
The nostrells of the Nose show the stones of the man. If they be great and
wide it is a sign that his coddes be great and large: but if they be small
it is a sign that the coddes be narrow and small. Wherefore the rule cannot
fail (unless it be by accident) that is to say by syckenes and ill rule, as
dauncyng, or such like. For travail and labor increases the member. And so
many have their right hand greatter then the left because it labors
more. A hawke Nose sygnifyeth magnanimytye and courage, cruellty, rapacitye,
and boldness which thing comes of heat. And therefore they that have this
hawke Nose are commonly angrye and full revenge and give themselves to
unlawful things. A flat Nose sygnifyeth violence whoredom and yet
nevertheless weakness. For that comes of fleame and of moisture If the nose be
short the mouth little and the teeth short and great, that comes of moystenes
and cold. A sharp nose, a long neck, and the voice fayer and shrill come of
coleryke temperature. When the nose is broad in the mids toward the typpe,
it is a token of superfluity of words, of lyeing of anger. I have known such
men exceedinge in vices and chieflye in lies. They that have their nose sharp
at the end are commonly liars hurtful, and contentious. For that proceeds of
coler. The nose that is great at the end, declares desyrours of things as
oxen are. And such men covet all that they see, and specially in carnal
voluptuousnes. And moreover are commonly very angrye. Large and wide nostrells
betoken whoredom. The nose that is great at the end signifies insenble men
past shame and unapt to be taught. The nose turned upward and round at the end
is a sign of magnanimity and great courage which is in lions. The nose
thynne and small at the end like a birds byll signifies lightness and folly.

The Judgment of the nose and nostrells.
THE nose that is crooked and hard from the forehead to the mouth, is a sign
that the man is without shame. A hollow nose and the forehead round and
emynent above, declares leacherous men. If the nose be crooked nygh unto the
forehead it is a sign of a man past shame and without honesty. The nostrelles
crooked are ascribed to men of a good heart. The Nose tending to the laterall
parts of the man, if it declyne only to one part of the posytion, going from
the gyrdle on the side of the last part betokens some hurt: But divided into
both the parts of the posytion, it shows syckenes or hurt, and that comes
either of the primatyue cause, or of the cause goeyng before. The Nose that is
in his beginning almost flat. Betokens lyberalitye such are the Lions. A red nose which has a hole at the very foundation, and the breadth of it
somewhat swellynge, after the fashion of strawberies, betokens dronkenes: and
such men are commonly moist and lecherous, specially if that sign be on the
body of a small measure. And this has been tried. Open and wide nostrelles
sygnifye readynes to anger. The thin and very open nostrelles, betoken
cruelty and disdainful thought. The nostrelles thynne and long sygnifye
unstableness and lyghtnes. And if they be thynne and sharp they signifye
quarelyng men. When one part of the nostrelles is myxed with the forehead and
taken honestly from the forehead and separated by a good composition so that it
be not to high nor to low with some line descendyng it is a sign of
constancy, manlines and prudence. The nostrelles right up betoken
distemperance of tongue. The nostrelles that be in all things greater, are
better than the lesser. The little nostrelles are naturallye ascrybed unto
servile and bound wits and to vnfaithefull men. The wide Nostrells show a
token of myrthe and strength. And when they be very narrow, round, and
almost stopped they betoken follye. The largenes of the nostrells, the Jaws
fat, and the small quantity of hear on the cheeks, sygnifye a moist
complexion. If the hear that grows in the nostrells of a man be great
thycke, and much, it is a sign of a hard wit and spirit and vnmoouable.
But if there be little hear and soft, it betokens a gentle and easy
wit, and good to be taught.

The judgment of the ears.
THE great Ears are engendered of abundance of matter and such men have
commonly a little neck, and fayer.

They be sanguine somewhat colericke with gross blood and some thing aduste.
And those men are very impatient and prone to anger. When the ears be great
and right beyond measure it is a sign of follye, and abundaunce of many
superfluous words and long life. If they be so great that they may be
compared to Asses ears, it is a sign of follye and slownes. And when they be
great and hang downward, they sygnifye riches. If they be thynne and dry,
it is a sign of great unstableness, and that the man shall not have much
goods. Very small ears betoken folyshe men thieves and whoremongers. The
small ears sygnifye the same thing that the other before do and therewith all
they sygnify deceyte and malignite. When the ears be narrow and very long it
is a sign of envy. And if they be very long they show and declare an
envious man. Little ears, sygnifye short life. The ears that be to round
declare an indocible man. If the muscle of the ears be joined fast with the
flesh of the throat. it is a sign of follye, and vanitye. Pliable ears
declare the proportion of the heat and moisture. The right ears stiff and
full of gristles, declare that drynes has dominion. The ears that be like
half a cyrcle mean, and hollow, and Joined to the line and middle somewhat
pressed together toward the center, styckinge near to the head declare goodness
of nature. The ears that be couched close to the head sygnifie dull men slow
and slowthfull. The ears that be hydden and fyxed right to the head betoken
slowth. The ears that be hearye betoken long life and a good hearing.

The mean ears among all the sorts aforesaid are good, and tokens of
goods, If there be any great quantitye of long hear and thycke in the
ears it betokens a hoate courega and a desire of carnal pleasure.

The Judgment of the Jaws and chekes.
MAlae be the emynent parts under the eyes and Maxillae is the diminutiue. The
chaffes be the parts of the Jaws out of the which the beard grows. The
Jaws are taken offten times for the chaffes. The Jaws specially declare the
complexion of ye man. The Jaws that is to say the eminent cheke of the upper
part of the mouth with the length of ye Jaws of the part of the composition
sygnyfye malicious men. The short Jaws and far out from the upper part of
the mouth sygnifye malice backbiting violence envy, specially when in those
parts there is no flesh. The lean Jaws and of a thin substance brown or
somewhat yellowe declare a hot and a dry complexion. The Jaws that be as it
were black, with a purged substance of flesh signifye exces of dryenes and
colds as it appears in a melancolye man. The gross flesh of the Jaws is a
sign of a gross nature of cowardnes and sometime violence. The Jaws that be
to thynne betoken malignitye. And they that be soft and long sygnifye
importunate babblynge and prating. The cheeks that be full, with full and
blown temples, betoken great wrath. When the chekes are small and so sytuate,
that they appear cut and separated from the eyes, it is a sign of
abundance of evil humors.

The roundenes of the cheeks declare envy. When the cheeks be light and
evil set, they sygnifye length of tongue, importunitye and much talk. Read
cheeks (as is above said) signify dronknes.

The nature of the mouth.
THE mouth great and wide betokens wrath, boldness and war. And such men are
commonly glottons. A wide mouth without measure. as thought it were cut and
stretched out sygnifieth ravening inhumanite, wickedness, a warlyke heart and
cruel, like unto beasts of the sea. Such men are great talkers, boasters,
babblers, enuions, liars, and full of follye. The mouth that has but a
little closing and a little opening, sygnyfyeth a fearful man, quiet and yet
unfaithful. The mouth that is very apparent and round with thyckenes of
lyppes, sygnifyeth uncleanliness, follye, and cruelltye. The mouth which has a
quantity in his sytuation with a little shutting, and smiling eyes with the
rest of the face, sygnifyeth a carnal man a lover of daunses, and a great
liar. When the mouth turns in speakinge it is a sign that it is infected with
some catarre or murre as it is manifest enough. The long chynne declares the
man to be very little subject to anger, and of a good complexion: and yet he
is somewhat a babbler and a boaster of himself.

They that have a little chinne, are much to be avoided and taken heed of, for
besides all vices with the which they are filled they are full of impietye and
wyckednes and are spies, like unto serpents. If the end of the chynne be
round it is a sign of feminine manners and also it is a sign of a woman. But
the chynne of a man must be almost square.

The judgment of the lips.
THE lyppes be of soft flesh with a good moouinge because of the speech. The
great lyppes are meet for fools and dullardes. The red color of the
lyppes, on the side of the opening of the mouth, comes of the veins that
be in that place. The natural color of the lyppes is read in the utter
parts because of the fynesse of the skynnes, and sygnyfyeth cleanes of
complexion and without myxtition of troubled blood in great virtue. The
blacknes of the Lyppes sygnifieth the contrary, for the virtue of the blood
and natural heat is gonne and those that have such Lyppes are syckely. The
nether lip lose and very read sygnifyeth great fleshelynes, and
unshamefastness in a woman. The lips gross declare great substance of matter
drawn of heat. And the grossenes declares the humors and the gross
spyrites, of the which proceeds dulnes of understanding. If they be right
and thycke, that is to say fyrme and fast, and Joined together Mars is their
planette. And likewise when the mouth is great.

Soft lyppes and somewhat smiling which be in a merrye face betoken
fleeshelyenes. Yet sometime they be also deceyuours, thieves and full of fraud
and gyle.

They that have not red lyppes within are sick, or very near to sickness. The
lyppes of the mouth very great, and slack, or to much turned outward
signify simplicity, and readiness to wrath and gross wit: and fleame rules
in them. Thynne lyppes and lose in the uppermost parts, so that the upper
lyppe be bowynge down to the ioynyng of the lyppes, signifies magnanimity:
thynne lyppes and hard appearyng about the teeth signify a beastly
understanding and wit unapt to be taught. The lyppes that be great beneath
in the nether part, betoken folysh men, and like to Asses. The upper lyppe
very apparent in the Gummes, signify men that love contumelies and evil
slaunderynge, and are always in brawling and contrauersies: the little lyppes
with a little mouth, signifies weakness of the spirit and naughty craft.
The best manner or sort of lyppes and mouth is when they are not to moist, for
the moystnes of the mouth and lyppes, sygnifye fearfulness and malignitye.
The great blabbe lyppes, betoken great follye, babblynge and audacitie. The
lyppes that be neither to thycke nor to thynne, and somewhat turned outward,
sygnifye, secretenesse, policy, wrath, and a great wit. The lyppes that
be well colored, moore thynne then thycke, signify a fair condicioned man,
and chaungeable to two ways: But rather unto virtue. And of such men Jupiter
is the Plannette. The lyppes that be not equal, so that one is greater then
the other, declare the man to be wise and of a chaungeable fortune. The upper
lyppes small and somewhat loftye, signify the man to be a blabbe and a long
tongue, very envious, and an accusour.

Thynne upper lyppes, hanging and turned insyde out, betoken a thief, and a
deceyuour. You may not judge of the Ethiopians lyppes unless you have been
conuersaunt among them and diligently noted and observed their qualities. But
of our regions and countries, we may give judgment.

Of the teeth.
WHen the teeth that be like Dogs teeth, be long and fast, and that they
stycke out of the mouth, it is a sign of a glotton, subject to anger, wicked
and a fool.

Weak teeth thynne and small, declare all the body to be weak, and the life
of the manne to be short and weak. The sownde made with the teeth betokens
follye or lack of wit, which thing happens sometime to Children
sleepynge, which is a token of Worms.

Great and broad teeth, apparente either within, or without, sygnifye
vanity in a man, slouthe, simplicity, but yet a good wit.

Some say that is is sign of a gross wit, procedynge from gross humors:
the teeth that be extreme dry altogether without moisture, signify in a
sick man death, and in a healthful man they show a sickness very nigh at
hand, for the moist root seems to be consumed. And the bodies of such men
are as a lamp without Oil: ye teeth that be full of reume signify a fault
of the head, or else of the stomach, through the communicatyng of the head
and the lunges, which becauses of a descendyng or runnyng at the nose (which
goes by the throat) of coughing or quinseys, and of swellyng in the throat.
Beasts that have their teeth gagged like a saw drink lyckynge: but those
that have them uniform and even drink suppyng.

Of the tongue.
THe tongue is made to taste and to pronounce words and to utter the voice.
The tongue that is turned right down, or that stutteth or stumbleth,
signifies the flixe of the belly: they that be subject to laskes and flixes
become stutters, because of the matter which descends from the head, which
enters into the poores of the tongue and muscles, whereof it comes to pass,
that the tongue is the greater, and thereby made brother, and so shorter: and
therefore some stammer and stutte. The tongue that is tied before, can not well
pronounce words or letters, but pronounces C, insteade of S: and that makes
the man to stutte. And if it be tied behind it can not well pronounce the
letter R, but in stead of R, it pronounces L, they that stutte fear wine,
for they will be drunk commonly, and therefore drunkards do stammer, and can
not well pronounce this word (Trentatry). The heaviness of the tongue in youth,
signifies soddayne death after it waxes once light. The great and broad
tongue declares a rude wit and understanding and flematycke humors. He
that stutteth and repeteth often the first syllable of a word is ready to
melancolynes. The tongue that is touched with a light mouynge and is cause of
repetynge the words by corruption of speech, betokens follye violence and
wrath: because of the moouyng of the spirits, and of the heat which hastes
the provocation unadvisedly. When the tongue is long and read withal, it is
a sign of wisdom: for it declares good and commendable humors. A white
tongue betokens poverty and miserye. The tongue that is hurt or marred with
heat unnatural sygnifieth distemperaunce and evil disposition specially of
the belly and breast. A long tongue, gross and so round that a man may wype
his own nose with it, declares a nature like an Ox. The tongue that is
shortened with some humors loses his taste. All men that stutte be rude of
body and proud.

Of the voice.
THey that have a slow voice and grave, are quiet men and easy to be spoken
to, merry and well manered. The voice that is grave and drawn long, betokens
strength I mean the gross voice, and that sounds like a trumpet. The force
of the voice, follows the wydenesse of the Veins, and the multitude of
spirits: all the which things come of heat. The men that have a gross
voice are very injurious and are compared to Asses. They that have a gross
voice by nature, without forcynge it are strong, and that is referred to
Dogs. They that have a gross voice, and sowndynge well, are warrelyke and
eloquent.

A sharp or shryll voice signifies fearfulnes. By this voice I mean a small
voice and not a great: the voice shryll and soft, and broken betokens a
womanlyke fear, and is attributed unto them yt be effeminate: the voice sharp
and strong, declares men to be full of anger, it is the property of Goats.

A weak voice betokens narrow arteries, and want of spirit, which things
come of cold. A soft voice and not drawn or stretched out, betokens
meekenes, which is in sheep. For you must refer and compare the voice as
well as all other things to the likeness of beasts. The antiuocates, that is to
say, they that speak great at the first and small at the last, and have a
sharp voice are full of wrath, and yet they be soon appeased again, and are
of a gentle affection. A mean voice in sound and in greatness, declares the
man to be wise, circumspecte, just, and true. They that have an unpleasant
sound of their voice, and discordyng are numbered among the fools: they that
be hasty in their speech (specially if they have a shryll voice) are commonly
wicked and great fools, importune, and liars. But if the voice be great, the
man will commonly be angry, and of a noughty nature. They that have a soft and
sweet voice are envious, and full of suspicion.

They that move much and often and speak with mouinge of their hands, are
uncleanly, eloquent, and deceyuours: But they that move not so their hands,
have a perfect wit and understanding, and have also a good disposition and
good counsel: they that speak in the Nose are liars, evil wyllers, and
envious.

The manners and conditions of men and provinces.
THe Spaniards are meanly strong but for to do all other things, which are
possible to be done, they surmount and pass many other nations. And there be
many among them very excellent, and that in diverse manners in castyng the stone,
in nymblenes and in many other things.

In Portugale the men are melancolye and sanguyne for the most part: many of
them are sufficient strong, although they have no lyuelynesse of wit or
spirit.

The Sicilians are collericke, and melacolicke, and strong of body: they
exercise them selves in wrastelynge, or at the casting of the bar, and are
nymble and quycke.

The Italians for the most part are weak men, and some among (although the
number be small) have great strength, and are wont to be moore excellent
than other, but yet rather of imitation then by invention. They be slender,
and of a stature between great and mean.

In Germanye the men are flematicke, which show manifestlye the nature of
that complexion, that is to say, that they be flematycke and very
Chollerycke. Furthermoore, they he of a great body, but yet few there are
among them that have great bodylye strength, or any great actiuitie and
nymblenesse, to do any hard things, though they be very industrious to
do material things, which concerns any work of the hands.

The Frenchmen be made and proporcioned of fleame and of Chollere, and are for
the most part slow and weak. Yet there are some of them singular, and
surmounte others in many things, but the number is small. They be robute and
strong, but they have not the mean and way how to use their strength.

The judgment of other parts of the body.
THey that have a little Neck and a long, have a good voice and great and are
fools, fearful and maligna^t. But they that have a short neck, are very
whote and great deceyuours.

They that have a great neck, are great fools, and great eaters: the nod of
the neck long and broad, signifies good courage and pride: the elevation of
humor, signifies a rude and unfaithful nature. When the arms of the body
that is right up, are so long that the hands reach to the knees, it is a
sign of actiuitie and nymblenesse at work, of audacitie, and of goodness, with
liberality: But when they be shorter it is a sign of a lover of discord,
and of an ignorant person.

The paulme of the hands long, with long fyngers, signify an apt man to
many arts, namelye to mecanycall and handye crafts, and prudent and ware in
all his affairs. For there is in him a sign of good regiment and governance:
the greatness of the fingers sygnifie folly and imprudencie.

You must also measure the place from the navel unto the end of the breast
and to the beginning of the neck. If the part of the breast be bygger, it is
a sign of prudencie and wisdom, but if that which is in the breast unto the
navel, be greater it is a sign of a deuourer. If the bellye be to slack,
as though it were emptye, it is a sign of fearefulnes, of wyckednes and of
deuouryng: the bellye that is somewhat softer and deeper, is a sign of the
force and virtue of the wit, and of magnificence. The sides thynne and narowe
and deep, betoken fearfulness: But when they be moore fleshy and hard,
they show the man to be dnapt to be taught. And they that be round, as
though they were swollen, sygnifie much unprofitable talk.

The back broad and sound, is a sign of manlynes, and the woman's is
contrary. If the body of the^ that have crooked bodies be soft, it is not so
evil as if it were in a thick and hard body. If the lower part of ye chyne of
the back be hidden in the breadeth and to abundaunt, and environed with flesh,
it agrees with women. That which is long and sharp at the end, it
declares distemperaunce of the carnal desire, and fearefulnes. Then the chyne
of the back of a man is that which is manifest in the bones moderate and
sound. The haunches hard and solyde, and separate from the bones, betoken a
strong and warrelyke man. But if they be broad, ample, and full of flesh,
they signify a feminine understanding and wit: But if they be to lean and
full of wrynckles and compassed about with a thyn skin, they signify the
wickedness of Apes.

When the knees touch one the other in going, they be referred to the woman
kind. When the lower parts of the shynnes next to the heels, and the
heels, and the under part of the feet be broad, and full of flesh, it is
a sign of a foolyshe man, or without wit. The under part of the feet
separated from the synowes and arteries, shows a clear understanding,
noble, and manly. If the feet be soft, and enuyroned with flesh, it is a
sign of a soft and womanlyke wit. The feet very long show the man to
be vigilant and given to deceyte, seekynge the hurt of many men. The feet
very thynne and short, betoken malignitie. The short feet having the sole
hollow is an evil sign.

Of the going of the feet.
THey that march or go a great pase are stout men and attain to the end
of their enterpryses. But they that go alytle pase, and short, have but a
little courage. The crooked going, is cause of grief, and of obscurity of
wit. When the man goes lyghtlye having all his body vpryghte, it is a
sign that he will take in hand some enterprise, and by and by do some great
thing.

But if a man go swiftly with his eyes lookyng downewarde, and go altogether
crooked, it is a sign of a nyggard, fearful and subtyle. They that have the
nod of the neck short, are audacious and bold, and yet fearful. They that
have a hard brain, it is a sign that they be indocible. The nod of the
neck turned upward, signifies insolence, rygour, follye and vanity.

When the nod of the neck hangs on the pectorall parts, they declare the
mind to be occupied in thoughts and imaginations. And it is also a sign of
sparynge and of wyckednes. The throat sharp sygnifieth lightness. The shulders
thynne, right, and poynted, sygnifie the man to be a liar in wait to deceive.
The Elbowes thynne, sygnifie imbecillitie and weakness. And when they be very
full of flesh they betoken weakness. But when they be meanly solyde and
hard great of artires and muscles, they betoken a noble body, and of good
courage. When the fingars are soft it is a sign that the man is easy to be
instructed and taught. When they be hard he is strong and unapt to be taught.
When the hands be short and the fyngars strong it is a good sign. If the
fat and little hands have very short fyngars they be. token a deceyuour, a
spy, and a thief. The hands thin and crooked, show the man to be a great
talker and babbler. The nails white broad and some what read sygnifie a very
good Judgment. But when they be narrow and very long it is a sign of folly,
and cruelty. The nails yt be bowed and crooked signify impudency, and violent
rapacite. The nails that be deep within the flesh and stick to fast unto it
signify excessyue crueltye and great folly. The nails that be to short pale
black, and sharp, declare a naughtye malignant man. These signs that be
attributed to the nails of them selves have no virtue nor force. But wha^ they
be joined unto other greater they have some efficacy or forte. When the
fingars be joined and sticking the one to the other, they signify uncleanliness.
And that be cafte and fast together round show malignitie, covetousness and the
man to be a whoremonger. Wha^ they be small and thin it is a sign of folly.
The short fingars and great signify envy, audacity, and cruelty. And when
they be two long and to slender, it a sign of a wyttles man and far from
wisdom. And if there be to great distaunce between them, it is a sign of
lightness and of to much talk. But when they be meanly great and of an honest
form and fashion it is a sign of very good manners. Now these things are
meant as well of the nails and of the tooes as of the fyngars and hands. A
slender and thin breast and without virtue or strength, signifies weakness of
heat. They yt have their pappes hanging and their breast environed with soft
flesh, are given to wine, and to leachery yea excessiuelye. They that wagge
their shulders and lift up their neck shall be cou^pted arrogant and proud. But
they that wagge all their body show evidently that they be effeminate. And
among al these the most tolerable kind are they ye bow down their body on
the right side when they stir, and the folyshest are they that turn body
toward the left side.

Of the breath.
When the breath sometime rests and than a long time after breaks out in
great abundance, declares the man to be in great trouble of mind. Also when
the head shakes and sigheth, it is a sign that their is in it some naughty
and evil framed thing. The spirit that makes a noise, and is greatly moved
and thrust out, it is a sign of cruelty and that the man is given to wine.
They also yt have their breath troubled and gross as they that have run
long are void of counsel and subject to anger, and have also a facilite
readiness to do and to speak. This rule ought to be observed in all signs and
tokens so that you must take the superfluity in evil part and the mean and
temperature to be good. Wha^ ye thighs be to crooked and to heary it is sign of
whoredom. This is referred unto the goats. Aristotle says more yt the
buttocks that be very dry signify virility and ma^lines and they yt be very
fleshy and moist signify effemination, and they that be as it were cut,
declare the wickedness of ye man. And this is referred unto bears and apes. The
signs of an impudent man be such as follow. First he has bright shining eyes
and open, the eyelides far a sonder: great feet, and great hands he reiseth
himself against the^ ye behold him. He is red of color and has a sharp
voice. And beside all these signs of impudency he is injurious. The heary man
which has black hear right and smoth, the mouth, the chinne, and the temples
heary, great eyes and glisteryng, is furious, inclined to whoredom: a lover of
fraies and fightinge, evil tounged, Ieronimus Gardanus a Physician of Milan a
man truly of great learning and knowledge says thus in his.xii. book de
subtilitate. Eue^ as all lame me^ are wicked so all they which are in health
have not good manners. For it is more requisite, and there is more a do to
form a mind without fault, than a body. Wherefore the most wicked of al other,
are ye croke backed men seeing the fault of them is near unto the heart which
is the prince of all ye body. Next are the blind and the squint eyed men,
forasmuch as nature has failed about ye brain. After them come the dome and
the deffe. And then the halting men and after the^ are they yt have their
fingars fast joined together, or to far a sounder the one from the other for
nature has failed in them, in members less necessary. They that be full of
wartes have the next and last place and the scarred bodies follow them.

The Judgment of other parts of the body.
THE largnes of the breast and the greatness of the shulders and back sygnifye
bouty, and audatitye, with capacitye of wit and wisdom But ye smallnes of
the back declares the man to be of a discordaunt nature. The means of the
breast and equalnes of the back is a very good sign. The shulders lose
declare weakness of the mind and fearfullnes. They that have a great belly are
indiscreet, fools, proud and whoremongers.

The mean belly and narrow stomach sygnifie hyghnes of understanding and good
counsel. The smallnes of the legs declare ignorance and the greanes of the^,
sygnifie audacitie and strength of body. Abundance of flesh at the knes
sygnifyeth debilitie and weakness or effemination. They that have a wide pase in
going and slow, prospere commonly in their doings and affairs. But they that
have a little pase are violent, and of small strength and in their works of an
evil will. Finallye he has a good memory and well composed in nature that
has a soft flesh moist and mean between rough and soft, and when he is
neither to great nor to little when he is white, declining to reddenes: or when
he is neither to much but meanly black. Gentle of continuance having the
hear full and mean. Great eyes somewhat round A mean head, and of a good
fashyon, with a great neck well and equally set. The shulders fast and
ferme without wauerynge to or fro not having much flesh in the small of the
legs, and knees. A clear voice small temperate: some what smilyng and not
mockig: having a like look of mirth etc. Yet you may not be to hastye in
gyuing Judgment or advise in one of these signs: But take the testimonye of
them all. And you have the dyuersyte of signs tending to diverse things turn
always to the better part and the most approved. Then may you pronosticate
and give Judgment more assuredlye of great and small things to comme, yea
of every man what soever he be, for as much as you shall know moore
certaynely his deeds and his manners, in keepynge this rule and way.

FINIS.
R. H.


