FLOVVRES OF SION.

BY WILLIAM DRVMMOND of Hawthorne-denne.

TO WHICH IS ADJOINED HIS CYPRESS GROVE.

Printed 1623.

FLOWERS OF SION: OR SPIRITVALL POEMS, BY W. D.
TRiumphant Arches, Statues crowned with Bays,
Proud Obeliskes, Tombs of the vastest Frame,
Colosses brazen Atlases of Fame,
Phanes vainly builded to vain Deities praise:
States which unsatiate Minds in blood do raise,
From the Crosse-starres unto the Articke Teame,
Alas! and what we write to keep our Name,
Like Spiders Caules are made the sport of Days;
All only constant is in constant Change,
What done is, is undone, and when undone,
Into some other figure does it range,
Thus rolls the restless World beneath the Moon:
Wherefore (my Mind) above Time, Motion, Place,
Thee raise, and Steps not reached by Nature, trace.
A Good that never satisfies the Mind,
A Beauty fading like the Aprile flowers,
A Sweet with floods of Gall that runs combind,
A Pleasure passing ere in thought made ours,
A Honor that more fickle is than wind,
A Glory at Opinions frown that lowres,
A Treasury which banckrupt Time deuoures,
A Knowledge than grave Ignorance more blind*
A vain Delight our equalles to command,
A Style of greatness, in effect a Dream,
A fabling Thought of holding Sea and Land,
A servile Lot, decked with a pompous Name:
Are the strange Ends we toil for here below,
Till wisest Death make us our errores know.
LIfe a right shadow is,
For if it long appear,
Then is it spent, and Deaths long Night draws near;
Shadows are moving, light,
And is there ought so moving as is this?
When it is most in Sight,
It steals away, and none can tell how, where,
So near our Cradles to our Coffines are.
Look how the Flower which lingringly does fade,
The Mornings Darling late, the Summers Queen,
Spoiled of that Juice which kept it fresh and green,
As high as it did raise bows low the head:
Right so my Life Contentments being dead,
Or in their Contraries but only seen,
With swifter speed declines than erst it spread,
And (blasted) scarce now shows what it has been.
Therefore, as does the Pilgrim, whom the Night
Hastes darkely to imprison on his way,
Think on thy Home (my Soul) and think aright,
Of what yet restes thee of Life's wasting Day,
Thy Sun posts Westward, passed is thy Morn,
And twice it is not given thee to be borne.
THe weary Mariner so fast not flies
An howling Tempest, Harbor to attain,
Nor Shepherd hastes when frayes of Wolves arise
So fast to Fold to save his bleeting train,
As I (winged with Contempt and just Disdain)
Now fly the World, and what it most does prize,
And Sanctuary seek free to remain
From wounds of abject Times, and Enuies eyes;
To me this World did once seem sweet and fair,
Whiles Senses light, Minds Prospectiue kept blind,
Now like imagined Landscape in the Air,
And weeping Raine-bowes, her best Joys I find:
Or if ought here is had that praise should have*
It is a Life obscure, and silent Grave*
TOo long I followed have on fond Desire,
And too long painted on deluding Streams,
Too long refreshment sought midst burning Fire,
Run after Joys which to my Soul were Blames;
Ah! when I had what most I did admire,
And proved of Life's Delights the last extremes,
I found all but a Rose, hedged with a Bryer,
A naught, a thought, a show of golden Dreams.
Henceforth on thee (mine only Good) I Will think,
For only thou can grant what I do crave;
Thy Nails my Pens shall be, thy Blood my Ink,
Thy Winding Sheet my Paper, Study Grave:
And till that Soul from Body parted be,
No Hope I Will have but only only Thee.
OF this fair Volumne which we World do name,
If we the sheets and leaves could turn with care,
Of him who it corrects, and did it frame,
We clear might read the Art and Wisdom ^are?
Find out his Power which wildest Powers does tame,
His Providence extending euery-where,
His Justice which proud Rebels does not spare,
In every Page, no, Period of the same:
But ^illie we like foolish Children rest,
Well pleased with colored Velumne, Leaves of Gold,
Fair dangling Ribbones, leaving what is best,
On the great Writers sense never taking hold;
Or if by chance we stay our Minds on ought,
It is some Picture on the Margin wrought.
THe Grief was common, common were the Cries,
Tears, Sobbes, and Groans of that afflicted Train,
Which of Gods chosen did the Sum contain,
And Earth rebounded with them, pierced were Skies;
All good had left the World, each Vice did reign
In the most monstrous sorts Hell could devise,
And all Degrees, and each Estate did stain,
Nor further had to go, whom to surprise;
The World beneath, the Prince of Darkness lay,
In every Phan who had himself installed,
Was sacrifiz'd unto, by Prayers called,
Responses gave, which (fools) they did obey:
When (pitying Man) God of a Virgins womb
Was borne, and those false Deities struck dombe.
Run (Sheepheards) run, where Bethleme blessed appears*
We bring the best of News, be not dismayed,
A Savior there is borne, more old than years,
Amidst the rolling Heaven this Earth who stayed;
In a poor Cotage inn'd, a Virgin Maid,
A weakeling did him bear who all vpbeares,
There he is swadl'd in Clothes* in Manger laid,
To who^ too narrow Swadlings are our Spheres.
Run (Sheepheards) run and solemnize his Birth,
This is that Night, no, Day grown great with Bliss,
In which the Power of Satan broken is,
In Heaven be Glory, Peace unto the Earth.
Thus singing through the Air the Angels swame,
And Cope of Stars re-echood the same.
O Than the fairest day, thrice fairer Night,
Night to best Days* in which a Sun does rife,
Of which that golden Eye which cleares the Skies,
Is but a sparkling Ray, a Shadow light;
And blessed ye (in silly Pastors sight)
Mild Creatures in whose warm Crib now lies,
That Heauen-sent Yongling, holy-Maide-borne Wight,
Midst, end, beginning of our Prophesies:
Blessed Cotage that has Flowers in Winter spread,
Though withered blessed Gra^se, that has the grace
To deck and be a Carpet to that Place:
Thus sang unto the soundes of oa^en Reed
Before the Babe, the Sheepheards bowed on knees,
And Springs ran Nectar, Honey dropped from Trees.
TO spread the azure Canopie of Heaven,
And make it twinkle with those spangs of Gold,
To stay the pondrous Globe of Earth so even,
That it should all, and naught should it uphold;
To give strange motions to the Planets seven,
Or Jove to make so meek, or Mars so bold,
To temper what is mo^st, dry, hot, and cold,
Of all their Iarres that sweet accords are given:
LORD, to thy Wisedome's naught* naught to thy Might,
But that thou should (thy Glory laid aside)
Come meanly in mortality to bide,
And die for those deserved eternal plight,
A wonder is so far above our wit,
That Angels stand amazed to muse on it.
THe last and greatest Herald of Heavens King,
Girt with rough Skins, hyes to the Deserts wild,
Among that savage brood the Woods forth bring,
Which he than Man more harmless found and mild;
His food was Locusts, and what there does spring,
With Honey that from virgin Hi^es distilled,
Parcht Body, hollow Eyes, some uncouth thing
Made him appear, long since from Earth exilde,
There burst he forth, All ye whose Hopes rely
On GOD, with me amidst these Deserts (...)
Repent, repent, and from old errors tu^ne*
Who listened to his voice, obeyed his cry?
Only the Echoes which he made relent,
Rung from their flintie Caves, repent repent*
THese Eyes (dear Lord) once Brandons of Desire,
Frail Scoutes betraying what they had to keep,
Which their own heart, then others set on fire,
Their traitrous black before thee here out weep;
These Locks of blushing deeds, the gilt attire,
Waves curling, wrackefull shelfes to shadow deep,
Rings wedding Souls to Sins lethargicke sleep,
To touch thy sacred Feet do now aspire.
In Seas of care behold a sinking Bark,
By winds of sharp Remorse unto thee driven,
O let me not exposed be Ruins mark,
My faults confessed (LORD) say they are forgiven.
Thus sighed to TESVS the Bethanian fair,
His teare-wet Feet still drying with her Hair.
I Countries changed, new pleasures out to find,
But ah! for pleasure new I sound new pain,
Enchanting Pleasure so did Reason blind,
That Fathers love and words I scorned as vain:
For Tables rich, for bed, for following train
Of careful servants to observe my Mind,
These Herds I keep, my fellows are assigned,
Rock is my Bed, and Herbs my Life sustain.
Now while I famine feel, fear worser harms,
Father and Lord I turn, thy Love (yet great)
My faults will pardon, pity mine estate.
This where an aged Oak had spread its Arms
Thought the lost Child, while as the Heardes he led,
Not far off on the ackornes wild them fed.
IF that the World does in amaze remain,
To hear in what a sad deploring mood,
The Pelican powers from her breast her Blood,
To bring to life her yonglings back again?
How should we wonder of that sovereign Good,
Who from that Serpents sting (that had us slain)
To save our life's, shed his Life's purple flood,
And turned in endless Joy our endless Pain?
Ungrateful Soul, that charmed with false Delight,
Have long long wandered in Sins flowrie Path,
And did not think at all, or thoughtst not right
On this thy Pelicanes great Love and Death,
Here pause, and let (though Earth it scorn) Heaven see
Thee power forth tears to him powered Blood for thee.
IF vhen far in the East ye do behold,
Forth from his Crystal Bed the Sun to rise,
With rosy Robes and Crown of flaming Gold?
If gazing on that Empress of the Skies
That takes so many forms, and those fair Brands
Which blaze in Heavens high Vault, Nights watchful eyes?
If seeing how the Seas tumultuous Bands
Of bellowing Billows have their course confined?
How vnsustain'd the Earth still steadfast stands?
Poor mortal Wights, ye e're found in your Mind
A thought, that some great King did sit above,
Who had such Laws and Rites to them assigned?
A King who fixed the Poles, made Spheres to move,
All Wisdom, Pureness, Excellency, Might,
All Goodness, Greatness, Justice, Beauty, Love;
With fear and wonder hither turn your Sight,
See, see (alas) Him now, not in that State
Thought could forecast Him into Reasons light.
Now Eyes with tears, now Hearts with grief make great,
Bemoane this cruel Death and drearie case,
If ever Plaints just W^e could aggrauate?
From Sin and Hell to save us human Race,
See this great King naill'd to an abject Tree,
An object of reproach and sad disgrace.
O unheard Pity! Love in strange degree!
He his own Life does give, his Blood does shed,
^or Wormelings base such Worthiness to see.
Poor Wights, behold His Visage pale as Lead,
His Head bowed to His Breast, Locks sadly rent,
Like a cropped Rose that languishing does fade.
Weak Nature weep, astonished World lament,
Lam^nt, you Winds, you Heaven that all contains,
And thou (my Soul) let naught thy Griefs relent.
Those Hands, those sacred Hands which hold the r^ines
Of this great All, and kept from mutual wars
The Elements, bear rent for thee their Veins:
Those Feet which once must trade on golden Stars,
For thee with Nails would be pierced through and ^orne,
For thee Heavens King from Heaven himself ^ebarres:
This great heart-quaking Dolor wail and mourn,
Ye that long since Him saw by might of Faith,
Ye now that are, and ye yet to be borne.
Not to behold his great Creators Death,
The Sun from sinful eyes has veiled his light,
And faintlie^journeyes up Hea^ens saphyre Path:
And cutting from her Brows her Tresses bright,
The Moon does keep her Lords sad Obseq^ies,
Impearling with her Tears this Robe of Night.
All staggering and lazy lowre the Skies,
The Earth and elementall Stages quake,
The long since dead from bursted Graves arise.
And can things wanting sense yet sorrow take,
And bear a Part with him who all them wrought?
And Man (though borne with cries) shall pity lack?
Think what had been your state, had he not brought
To these sharp Pangs himself, and prized so hie
Your Souls, that with his Life them life he bought.
What woes do you attend? if still ye lie
Plunged in your wonted ordures? wre^ched Brood,
Shall for your sake again GOD ever die?
O leave deluding shows, embrace true good,
He on you calls, forgo Sins shameful trade,
With Prayers now seek Heaven, and not with Blood.
Let not the Lambs more from their Dames be had,
Nor Al^^rs blush for sin, live every thing,
That long time longed for sacrifice is made.
All that is from you craved by this great King
Is to believe, a pure Heart Incense is
What gift (alas) can we him meaner bring?
Haste sinne-sicke Souls, this season do do not miss,
Now while remorselesse Time does grant you space,
And GOD invites you to your only Bliss:
He w^^ you calls will not deny you Grace,
But low-deepe burrie faults* so ye repent,
His Arms (lo) stretched are you to embrace.
When Days are done, and Life's small spark is spent,
So ye accept what freely here is given,
Like brood of Angels deathlesse, all-content,
Ye shall for ever live with him in Heaven.
COme forth, come forth ye blessed triumphing Bands,
Fair Citizens of that immortal Town,
Come see that King which all this All commands,
Now (ouercharg'd with Love) die for his own;
Look on those Nails which pierce his Feet and Hands,
What a sharp Diadem his Brows does crown?
Behold his pallid Face, his Eyes which sown,
And what a throng of Thieves him mocking stands.
Come forth ye empyrean Troops, come forth,
Preserve this sacred Blood that Earth adornes,
Gather those liquid Roses off his Thorns,
O! to be loost they be of too much worth:
For Streams1, Juice2, Balm3 they are, which quench1, kills2, charms3,
Of GOD1, Death2, Hell3, the wrath1, the life2, the harms3.
Soul, which to Hell wast thrall,
He, He for thine offense,
Did suffer Death, who could not die at all*
O sovereign Excellence,
O life of all that lives,
Eternal Bounty which each good thing gives,
How could Death mount so hie?
No wit this Point can reach,
Faith only does us teach,
For us He dyed at all who could not dye*
LIfe to give life, deprived is of Life,
And Death displayed has Ensign against Death,
So violent the Rigor was of Death,
That naught could daunte it but the Life of Life:
No Power had Power to thrall Life's Powers to Death,
But willingly Life down has laid Life,
Love gave the wound which wrought this work of Death,
His Bow and Shafts were of the Tree of Life.
Now quakes the Author of eternal Death,
To find that they whom erst he re^t of Life,
Shall fill his Room above the listes of Death,
Now all rejoice in Death who hope for Life.
Dead JESUS lies who Death has killed by Death,
No Tomb his Tomb is, but new Source of Life.
RIse from those fragrant Climes, thee now embrace,
Unto this World of ours O haste thy Race,
Fair Sun, and though contrary ways all year
Thou hold thy course, now with the highest Sphere,
Join thy blew Wheels to hasten Time that lowres,
And lazy Minutes turn in perfect Hours;
The Night and Death too long a league have made,
To stow the World in Horrors ugly shade:
Shake from thy Locks a Day with saffron rays
So fair, that it outshine all other days;
And yet do not presume (great Eye of light)
To be that which this Day must make so bright,
See, an eternal Sun hastes to arise,
Not from the Eastern blushing Seas or Skies,
Or any stranger Worlds Heavens Concaues have,
But from the Darkness of an hollow Grave:
And this is that all-powerfull Sun above,
That crowned thy Brows with Rays, first made thee move.
Lights Trumpetters, ye need not from your Bowres
Proclaim this Day, this the angelicke Powers
Have done for you; But now an opall hew
Bepaintes Heavens Crystal, to the longing view
Earths late hid Colors glance, Light does adorn
The World, and (weeping Joy) forth comes the Morn;
And with her, as from a Lethargicke Transe
Breath (com'd again) that Body does advance,
Which two sad Nights in rock lay coffined dead,
And with au iron Guard environed,
Life out of Death, Light out of Darkness^ springs,
From a base Iaile forth comes the King of kings;
What late was mortal, thrall'd to every woe,
That lackeyes life or upon sense does grow,
Immortal is, of an eternal Stamp,
Far brighter beaming than the morning Lamp.
So from a black Eclipse out^peares the Sun:
Such [when a huge of Days have on her run,
In a far Forest in the pearlie East,
And she her self has burnt and spicie Nest]
The lonlie Bird with youthful Pens and Comb,
Does soar from out her Cradle and her Tomb:
So a small seed that in the Earth lies hid
And dies, revi^ing burstes her cloddie Side,
Adorned with yellow Locks, of new is borne,
And does become a Mother great with Corn,
Of Grains brings hundreths with it, which when old,
Enrich the Furrows with a Sea of Gold.
Hail holy Victor, greatest Victor hail,
That Hell do ra^sacke, against Death prevail,
O how thou longed for comes! with Iubeling cries
The all-triumphing Palladines of Skies
Salute thy rising, Earth would Joys no more
Bear, if thou rising did them not restore:
A silly Tomb should not his Flesh enclose,
Who did Heavens trembling Tarasses dispose,
No Monument should such a Jewel hold,
No Rock, though Rubye, Diamond, and Gold.
Thou only pity did us humane Race,
Bestowing on us of thy free^giuen Grace
More than we forfaited and loosed first,
In Edens Rebel when we were accursed.
Then Earth our portion was, Earths Joys but given,
Earth and Earths Bliss thou have exchanged with Heaven.
O what a hight of good upon us streams
From the great splendour of thy Bounties Beams?
When we deserved shame, horror, flames of wrath,
Thou bled our wounds, and suffer did our Death,
But Fathers Justice pleased, Hell, Death o'rcome,
In triumph now thou risest from thy Tomb,
With Glories which past Sorrows contervaile,
Hail holy Victor, greatest Victor hail.
Hence humble sense, and hence ye Guides of sense,
We now reach Heaven, your weak intelligence
And searching Powers, were in a flash made dim,
To learn from all eternity, that him
The Father bred, then that he here did come
(His Bearers Parent) in a Virgins Womb;
But then when sold, betrayed, crowned, scourged with Thorn,
Naill'd to a Tree, all breathlcsse, bloodlesse, torn,
Entombed, him risen from a Grave to find,
Confounds your Cunning, turns like Moles you blind.
Death, theu that heretofore still barren wast,
Nay, did each other Birth eat up and waste,
Imperious, hateful, pitiless, unjust,
Impartial equaller of all with dust,
Stern Executioner of heau^nlie doom,
Made fruitful, now Life's Mother art become,
A sweet relief of Cares the Soul molest
An Harbenger to Glory, Peace and Rest,
Put off thy mourning Weeds, yield all thy Gall
To daily sinning Life, proud of thy fall,
Assemble thy Captives, bide all haste to rise,
And every Corse in earthquakes where it lies,
Sound from each flowrie Grave, and rockie Iaile,
Hail holy Victor, greatest Victor hail.
The World that wa^ning late and faint did lie,
Applauding to our Joys, thy Victory,
To a young Prime essays to turn again,
And as ere soyl'd with Sin yet to remain,
Her chilling Ag^es she begins to miss,
All Bliss returning with the LORD of Bliss.
With greater light Heavens Temples opened shine,
Mornes smiling rise, Euens blushing do decline,
Clouds dappled glister, boistrous Winds are calm,
Soft Zephyres do the Fields with sighs embalme,
In ammell blew the Sea has ^usht his R^ares,
And with enamored Curles does kiss the Shoares:
All-bearing Earth, like a new-married Queen,
Her Beauties hightenes, in a Gown of Green
Perfumes the Air, her Meades are wrought with Flowers,
In colors various, figures, smelling, powers,
Trees wantone in the Groves with leauie Locks*
Her Hills empampred stand, The Vales, the Rocks
Ring peales of Joy, her Floods and prattling Brooks,
(Stars liquid Mirrors) with serpinting Crookes,
And whispering murmures, sound unto the Maine,
That Worlds pure Age returned is again.
The honnye People leave their golden B^wres,
And innocentlie pray on budding Flowers,
In gloomie Shades pearcht on the tender Sprayes
The painted Singers fill the Air with Lays:
Seas, Floods, Earth, Air, all diversely do sound,
Yet all their diverse Notes has but one ground,
Re-echoed heeredowne from Heavens azure Veil,
Hail holy Victor, greatest Victor hail.
O Day on which Deaths Adamantine Chain
The LORD did break, ransacking Satan's Reign,
And in triumphing Pomp his Trophies reared,
Be thou blessed ever, henceforth still endeared
With Name of his own Day, the Law to Grace,
Types to their substance yield, to thee give place
The old New-Moones, with all festival Days,
And what above the rest deserves praise
The reverend Saboath, what could else they be
Than golden Heralds, telling what by thee
We should enjoy? shades past, now shine thou clear,
And henceforth be thou Empress of the year,
This Glory of thy Sisters sex to win,
From work on thee, as other Days from Sin,
That Mankind shall forbear, in every place
The Prince of Planets warmeth in his race;
And far beyond his paths in frozen Climes;
And may thou be so blessed to out^date Times,
That when Heavens Quire shall balze in accents loud
The many Mercies of their sovereign Good,
How he on thee did Sin, Death, Hell destroy,
It may be aye the Burden of their Joy.
BEneath a sable veil, and Shadows deep,
Of inaccessible and dimming light,
In Silence ebane clouds more black than Night,
The Worlds great Mind his secrets hid does keep:
Through those thick Mists when any mortal Wight
Aspires, with halting pace, and Eyes that weep
To prye, and in his Mysteries to creep,
With Thunders he and Lightnings blastes their Sight.
O Sun invisible, that do abide
Within thy bright abysmes, most fair, most dark,
Where with thy proper Rays thou do thee hide,
O euer-shining, never full seen mark,
To guide me in Life's Night, thy light me show,
The more I search of thee, the less I know.
IF with such passing Beauty, choice Delights,
The Architect of this great Round did frame,
This Palace visible, short listes of Fame,
And silly Mansion but of dying Wights?
How many Wonders, what amazing lights
Must that triumphing Seat of Glory clame?
That does transcend all this great Alls vaste hights,
Of whose bright Sun ours here is but a beam.
O blessed abode! O happy dwelling place!
Where visiblie th'Invisible does reign,
Blessed People which do see true Beauties Face,
With whose far Shadows scarce he Earth does daigne:
All Joy is but Annoy, all Concord Strife,
Matched with your endless Bliss and happy life.
Love which is here a care,
That Wit and Will does mar,
Uncertain Truce, and a most certain War,
A shrill tempestuous Wind,
Which does disturb the Mind,
And like wild Waves our designs all commo^e;
Among those Powers above,
Which see their Makers Face,
It a contentment is, a quiet Peace,
A Pleasure void of Grief, a constant rest,
Eternal Joy, which nothing can molest.
THat space where raging Waves do now divide
From the great Continent our happy Isle,
Was sometime Land, and now where Ships do glide,
Once with laborious Art the Plough did tyle:
Once those fair Bounds stretched out so far and wide,
Where Towns, no, Shires enwall'd, endeare each mile,
Were all ignoble Sea and marish vile,
Where Proteus Flocks danced measures to the Tide.
So Age transforming all still forward runs,
No wonder though the Earth does change her Face,
New Manners, Pleasures new, turn with new Suns,
Locks now like Gold grow to an hoarie grace;
Nay, Minds rare shape does change, that lies despised,
Which was so dear of late and highly pris'd.
THis World a Hunting is,
The Prey poor Man, the Nimrod fierce is Death,
His speedy Gray^ounds are,
Lust, Sickness, Envy, Care,
Strife that near falls amiss,
With all those ills which haunt us while we breath.
Now, if by chance we fly
Of these the eager chase,
Old Age with stealing pace
Castes up his Nets, and there we panting die,
WHy (Worldlings) do ye trust frail Honors dreams?
And lean to guilted Glories which decay?
Why do ye toil to registrate your Names
On ycie Pillars, which soon melt away?
True Honor is not here, that place it clames
Where blacke-brow'd Night does not exile the Day,
Nor no farre-shining lamp dives in the Sea,
But an eternal Sun spreades lasting Beams:
There, it attends you, where spotless Bands
Of Sprits, stand gazing on their sovereign Bliss,
Where years not hold it in their canckring hands,
But who once noble ever noble is.
Look home, lest he your weakened Wit make thrall,
Who Edens foolish Gardner erst made fall.
AS are those Apples, pleasant to the Eye,
But full of smoke within, which use to grow
Near that strange Lake where God powered from the Sky
Huge showers of flames, worse flames to ouer-throw:
Such are their works that with a glaring Show
Of humble holiness, in Virtues dye
Would color mischief, while within they glow
With coals of Sin, though none the Smoke descrie.
Ill is that Angel that erst fell from Heaven,
But not more ill than he, nor in worse case
Who hides a traitrous Mind with smiling face,
And with a Doves white feathers maskes a Raven:
Each Sin some color has it to adorn,
Hypocrisy All-mightie God does scorn.
NEw does the Sun appear,
The Mountains Snowes decay,
Crowned with frail flowers forth comes the babye year,
My Soul, Time posts away,
And thou yet in that frost
Which Flower and fruit has lost,
As if all here immortal were do stay:
For shame thy Powers awake
Look to that Heaven which never Night makes black,
And there at that immortal Suns bright Rays,
Deck thee with Flowers which fear not rage of Days.
THrice happy he who by some shadie Grove,
Far from the clamorous World, does live his own,
Though solitary, who is not alone,
But does, converse with that Eternal Love:
O how more sweet is Birds harmonious Moan,
Or the hoarse Sobbings of the widowed Dove?
Than those smooth whisperings near a Princes Throne,
Which Good make doubtful do the evil approve?
O how more sweet is Zephyres wholesome Breath,
And Sighs embalmed, which newborn Flowers unfold,
Than that applause vain Honor does bequeath?
How sweet are Streams to Poison drunk in Gold?
The World is full of Horrors, Troubles, Slights,
Woods harmless Shades have only true Delights.
SWeet Bird, that sing'st away the early Hours,
Of Winters past or coming void of Care,
Well pleased with Delights which present are,
Fair Seasones, budding Sprayes, sweet smelling Flowers:
To Rocks, to Springs, to Rills, from leauie Bowres:
Thou thy Creators Goodness do declare,
And what dear Gifts on thee he did not spare,
A Stain to humane sense in Sin that lowres.
What Soul can be so sick, which by thy Songs
(Attired in swee^nesse) sweetly is not driven
Quite to forget Earthes turmoiles, spights, and wrongs?
And lift a reverend Eye and Thought to Heaven?
Sweet Artlesse Songstarre, thou my Mind do raise
To Airs of Spheres, yes, and to Angels Lays.
AS when it happens that some lovely Town
Unto a barbarous Besieger falls,
Who there by Sword and Flame himself enstalles,
And (shameless) it in Tears and Blood does drown;
Her Beauty spoiled, her Citizens made Thralles,
His spite yet can not so her all throw down,
But that some Statue, Arch, Phan of renown,
Yet lurkes vnmaym'd within her weeping walls:
So after all the Spoil, Disgrace and Wrack,
That Time, the World, and Death could bring combind,
Amidst that Mass of Ruins they did make,
Safe and all scarre^lesse yet remains my Mind:
From this so high tran^cending Rapture springs,
That I, all else defaced, not envy Kings.
LEt us each day enure our selves to dye,
If this (and not our fears) be truly Death,
Above the Circles both of Hope and Faith
With fair immortal Pinniones to fly?
If this be Death our best Part to untie
(By ruining the Iaile) from Lust and Wrath,
And every drowsy languor here beneath,
It turning deniz'd Citizen of Sky?
To have more knowledge than all Books contain,
All Pleasures even surmounting wishing Power,
The fellowship of Gods immortal Train,
And these that Time nor force shall e're devour?
If this be Death? what Joy, what golden care
Of Life, can with Deaths ouglinesse compare?
AMidst the azure clear
Of Iordans sacred Streams,
Jordan of Libanon the offspring dear,
When Zephires flowers unclose,
And Sun shines with new Beams,
With grave and stately grace a Nymphe arose.
Upon her Head she ware
Of Amaranthes a Crown,
Her left hand Palms, her right a Brand^n bare,
Vnvail'd Skins whiteness lay,
Gold hairs in Curles hang down,
Eyes sparkled Joy, more bright than star of Day.
The Flood a Throne her reared
Of Waves, most like that Heaven
Where beaming Stars in Glory turn ensphear'd,
The Air stood calm and clear,
No Sigh by Winds was given,
Birds left to sing, Herds feed, her voice to hear.
World-wandring sorry Wights,
Whom no thing can content
Within these varying li^ts of Days and Nights,
Whose life (ere known amiss)
In glittering Griefs is spent,
Come learn (said she) what is your choicest Bliss*
From Toil and pressing Cares
How ye may respit find,
A Sanctuary from Soule-thralling Snares,
A Port to harbor sure
In spite of waves and wind,
Which shall when Times Houre-glasse is run endure.
Not happy is that Life
Which ye as happy hold,
No, but a Sea of fears, a field of strife,
Charged on a Throne to sit
With Diademes of Gold,
Preserved by Force, and still observed by Wit;
Huge Treasures to enjoy,
Of all her Gemmes spoil Inde,
All Seres silk in Garments to employ,
Deliciouslie to feed,
The Phoenix plumes to find
To rest upon, or deck your purple Bed.
Frail Beauty to abuse,
And (wanton Sybarites)
On past or present touch of sense to muse;
Never to hear of Noise
But what the Ear delites,
Sweet Musicks charms, or charming flatterers voice.
Nor can it Bliss you bring,
Hid Natures Depthes to know,
Why matter changes, whence each form does spring,
Nor that your Fame should range,
And after-Worlds it blow
From Ta^na^is to Nile, from Nile to Gange.
All these have not the Power
To free the Mind from fears,
Nor hiddeous horror can allay one hour,
When Death in steal does glance,
In Sickness lurk or years,
And wakes the Soul from out her mortal Trance.
No, but blessed life is this,
With chaste and pure Desire*
To turn unto the load-starre of all Bliss,
On GOD the Mind to rest,
Burnt up with sacred Fire,
Possessing him to be by him possessed.
When to the baulmie East
Sun does his light imparte,
Or when he diueth in the lowly West,
And rauisheth the Day,
With spotless Hands and Heart
Him chearefullie to praise and to him pray.
To heed each action so,
As ever in his sight,
More fearing doing ill than passive woe*
Not to seem other thing
Than what ye are aright,
Never to do what may Repentance bring:
Not to be blown with Pride,
Nor moved at Glories breath,
Which Shadow-like on wings of Time does glide;
So Malice to disarme,
And conquer hasty Wrath,
As to do good to those that work your harm:
To hatch no base Desires
Or Gold or Land to gain,
Well pleased with what by Virtue one acquires,
To have the Wit and Will
Consorting in one Strain,
Than what is good to have no higher skill.
Never on Neighbors well,
With Cocatrices Eye
To look, nor make an others Heaven your Hell;
Not to be Beauties Thrall,
All fruitless Love to fly*
Yet loving still a Love transcending all:
A Love which while it burns
The Soul with fairest Beams,
In that vncreatde Sun the Soul it turns,
And makes such Beauty prove,
That (if Sense saw her Gleames?)
All lookers on would pine and die for love.
Who such a life does live,
Ye happy even may call
Ere ruthlesse Death a whished end him give,
And after then when given,
More happy by his fall,
For Humanes, Earth, enjoying Angels, Heaven.
Swift is your mortal Race,
And glassie is the Field,
Vaste are Desires not limited by Grace,
Life a weak Tapper is,
Then while it light does yield
Leave flying Joys, embrace this lasting Bliss,
This when the Nymph had said,
She diu'd within the Flood,
Whose Face with smyling Curles long after staid,
Then Sighs did Zephyres press,
Birds sang from every VVood,
And Echoes rang, this was true Happiness.
AN HYMN OF THE FAIREST FAIR.

I Feel my Bosom glow with wontlesse Fires,
Raised from the vulgar preasse my Mind aspires
(Winged with high Thoughis) unto his praise to clime,
From deep Eternity who called forth Time,
That Essence which not moved makes each thing move,
Vncreatde Beauty all-creating Love;
But by so great an object, radiant light,
My Heart appalled, enfeebled restes my Sight,
Thick Clouds benighte my laboring Ingine,
And at my high attempts my Wits repine:
If thou in me this sacred Rapture wrought,
My Knowledge sharpen, Sarcells lend my Thought?
Grant me (Times Father, world-containing King)
A Power of thee in powerful Lays to sing,
That as thy Beauty in Earth lives, Heaven shines,
It dawning may or shadow in my Lines.
As far beyond the starrie walls of Heaven,
As is the loftiest of the Planets seven
Sequestered from this Earth, in purest light
Out-shining ours, as ours does sable Night,
Thou all-sufficient, Omnipotent,
Thou euer-glorious, most excellent,
GOD various in Names, in Essence one,
High art enstalled on a golden Throne,
Out-reaching, Heavens wide Vastes, the Bounds of naught,
Transcending all the Circles of our Thought,
With diamantine Scepter in thy Hand,
There thou give Laws, and do this World command,
This World of Concords raisde vnliklie sweet,
Which like a Ball lies prostrate to thy Feet.
If so we may well say (and what we say
Here wrapped in flesh, led by dim Reasones ray,
To show by earthly Beauties which we see
That spiritual Excellence that shines in thee,
Good Lord forgive) not far from thy right Side,
With curled Locks Youth ever does abide,
Rose-checked Youth who garlanded with Flowers,
Still blooming, ceasleslie unto thee powers
Immortal Nectar in a cup of Gold,
That by no darts of Ages thou grow old,
And as ends and beginnings thee not clame,
Successionlesse that thou be still the same.
Near to thy other side resistlesse Might,
From Head to Foot in burnisht Armor dight,
That ringes about him, with a wa^ing Brand,
And watchful Eye, great Sentinel does stand,
That neither Time nor force in ought impair
Thy Workmanshippe, nor harm thine Empire fair,
Soon to give Death to all again that would
Stern Discord raise which thou destroide of old,
Discord that foe to order, Nurse of War,
By which the noblest things dimolisht are,
But (catife) she no Treason does devise,
When Might to naught does bring her enterprise,
Thy all-vpholding Might her Malice raines,
And her in Hell throws bound in iron Chains.
With Locks in waves of Gold that ebb and flow
On y^orie neck, in Robes more white than Snow,
Truth steadfastlie before thee holds a Glass,
Indent'd with Gemmes, where shines all that was,
That is, or shall be, here ere ought was wrought.
Thou knew all that thy Power with time forth brought,
And more, things number less which thou could make,
That actuallie shall never being take,
Here thou beholdst thy self, and (strange) do prove
At once the Beauty, Lover and the Love.
With Faces two (like Sisters) sweetly fair,
Whose Blossoms no rough Autumn can impair,
Stands Providence, and does her looks disperse.
Through every Corner of this Universe,
Thy Providence, at once which general things
And singular does rule, as Empires Kings,
Without whose care this world (lost) would remain,
As Ship without a Master in the Maine,
As Chariot alone, as Bodies prove
Deprived of Souls, whereby they be, li^e, move.
But who are they which shine thy Throne so near?
With sacred countenance, and look severe,
This in one hand a pondrous Sword does hold,
Her left stays charged with Balances of Gold,
That with, Brows girt with Bays, sweet-smiling Face,
Does bear a Brandon, with a babish grace
Two milke-white VVings him easily do move,
O she thy Justice is, and this thy Love!
By this thou brought this Engine great to light,
By that it framed in Number, Measure, Weight,
That destine does reward to ill and good;
But Sway of Justice is by Love with-stood,
Which did it not relent and mildly stay,
This World ere now had had its funeral Day.
What Bands (enclustred) near to these abide,
Which into vaste Infinity them hide?
Infinity that neither does admit,
Place, Time, nor Number to encroach on it:
Here Bounty sparkleth, here does Beauty shine,
Simplicity, more white than Gelsomine,
Mercy with open wings, ay-varied Bliss,
Glory, and Joy, that Blisses darling is.
Ineffable, all-pow'rfull GOD, all-free,
Thou only live, and each thing lives by thee,
No Joy, no, nor Perfection to thee came
By the contriuing of this Worlds great Frame,
Ere Sun, Moon, Stars began their restless race,
Ere paint'd with purple light was heavens round Face,
Ere Air had Clouds, ere Clouds weept down their showers,
Ere Sea embraced Earth, ere Earth bare Flowers,
Thou happy lived; World naught to thee supplied,
All in thy self thy self thou satisfied:
Of Good no slender Shadow does appear,
No age-worne tracke, which shined in thee not clear,
Perfestions Sum, prime^cause of every Cause,
Midst, end, beginning, where all good does pa^se:
Hence of thy Substance, differing in naught
Thou in Eternity thy Son forth brought,
The only Birth of thy unchanging Mind,
Thine Image, Patterne-like that ever shined,
Light out of Light, begotten not by Will
But Nature, all and that same Essence still
Which thou thy self, for thou do naught possess
Which he has not, in ought nor is he less
Than Thee his great Begetter; of this Light,
Eternal, double, kindled was thy Spright
Eternally, who is with thee the same,
All-holie Gift, Ambassador, Knot, Flame:
Most sacred Triade, O most holy One,
Vnprocreatde Father, euer-procreatde Son,
Ghost breathed from both, you were, are* aye shall be,
(Most blessed) Three in One, and One in Three,
Incomprehensible by reachlesse Hight,
And vnperceaued by excessiae Light.
So in our Souls three and yet one are still,
The Understanding, Memory, and Will;
So (though unlike) the Planet of the Days
So soon as he was made begat his Rays,
Which are his Offspring, and from both was hurld,
The rosy Light which comfort does the World,
And none fore-went an other: so the Spring,
The Wellhead, and the Stream which they forth bring,
Are but one selfsame Essence, nor in ought
Do differ, save in order, and our Thought
No chime of Time discernes in them to fall,
But Three distinctlie bide one Essence all.
But these express not Thee, who can declare
Thy being? Men and Angels dazel'd are,
Who force this Eden would with wit or sense
A Cherubin shall find to bar him thence.
Alls Architect, Lord of this Universe,
Ingulph'd is Wit would in thy Greatness pierce,
Ah! as a Pilgrim who the Alps does pass,
Or Atlas Temples crowned with winter glass,
The ayrie Caucasus, the Apennine,
Pyrenes clifts where Sun does never shine,
When he some heaps of Hills has ouer-went,
Begins to think on rest, his Journey spent,
Till mounting some tall Mountain he do find,
More hights before him than he left behind:
With halting pace so while I would me raise
To the unbounded Circuits of thy Praise,
Some part of way I thought to have o're-runne,
But now I see how scarce I have begun,
With Wonders new my Spirits range possessed,
And wandering waylesse in a maze them rest.
In these vaste Fields of Light, eth^riall Plains,
Thou art attended by immortal Trains
Of Intellectual Powers, which thou brought forth
To praise thy Goodness, and admire thy Worth,
In numbers passing other Creatures far,
Since Creatures ^^st noble maniest are,
Which do in knowledge us no less out-runne
Than Moon in light does Stars, or Moon the Sun,
Unlike, in Orders ranged and many ^ Band
(If Beauty in Disparitie does stand?)
Arch-angells* Angels, Cherubes, Seraphines,
And what with name of Thrones amongst them shines,
Large-ruling Princes, Dominations, Po^res,
All-acting Virtues of those fl^ming To^res;
These fred of Vmbrage, these of Labor free,
Rest ravished with still beholding Thee,
Inflamde with Beams which sparkle from thy Face,
They can no more desire, far less embrace.
Low under them, with slow and staggering pace
Thy Hand-maide Nature thy great Steps does trace,
The Source of second Causes, golden Chain
That linkes this Frame as thou it does ordain,
Nature gazed on with such a curious Eye
That Earthlings often her deemed a Deitye.
By Nature led those Bodies fair and great
Which faint not in their Course, nor change their State,
Vnintermixt, which no disorder prove,
Though aye and contrary they always move,
The Organes of thy Providence divine,
Books ever open, Signs that clearlie shine,
Times purpled Maskers, then do them advance,
As by sweet Music in a measured dance;
Stars, Host of Heaven, ye Firmaments bright Flowers,
Clear Lamps which ouer-hang this Stage of ours,
Ye turn not there to deck the Weeds of Night,
Nor Pageant-like to please the vulgar Sight,
Great Causes sure ye must bring great Effects,
But who can discant right your grave Aspects?
He only who You made deciphere can
Your Notes, Heavens Eyes ye blind the Eyes of Man.
Amidst these Sapphire farre-extending Hights,
The neuer-twinkling euer-wondring Lights
Their fixed Motions keep, one dry and cold,
Deep-Leaden colored, slowly there is rolled,
With Rule and Line for Times steps meating even
In twice three Lustres he but turns his Heaven.
With temperate qualities and Countenance fair,
Still mildly smiling sweetly debonnaire,
An other cheares the World, and way does make
In twice six Autumnes through the Zodiac.
But hot and dry with flaming Locks and Brows
Enraged, this in his red Pauillion glowest:
Together running with like speed if space,
Two equally in hands atchieue their race,
With blushing Face this often does bring the Day,
And vsheres often to stately Stars the way,
That various in virtue, changing, light,
With his small flame impearles the veil of Night.
Prince of this Court, the Sun in triumph rides,
With the Year Snake-like in her self that glides,
Times Dispensator, fair life-giuing Source,
Through Skies twelve Posts as he does run his course,
Heart of this All, of what is known to sense
The likest to his Makers excellence,
In whose diurnall motion does appear
A Shadow, no, true pourtrait of the Year.
The Moon moves lowest, silver Sun of Night,
Dispersing through the World her borrowed light,
Who in three forms her head abroad does range,
And only constant is in constant Change.
Sad Queen of Silence, I near see thy Face,
To wax, or waine, or shine with a full grace,
But straighi (amazed) on Man I think, each Day
His state who changes, or if he find Stay,
It is in drearie anguish, cares, and pains,
And of his Labors Death is all the Gains?
Immortal Monarch, can so fond a Thought
Lodge in my Breast? as to trust thou first brought
Here in Earths shadie Cloister wretched Man,
To suck the Air of Woe, to spend Life's span
Midst Sighs and Plaints, a Stranger unto Mirth,
To give himself his Death rebucking Birth?
By sense and wit of Creatures made King,
By sense and wit to live their Underling?
And what is worst, have Eaglets eyes to see
His own disgrace, and know an high degree
Of Bliss, the Place, if he might thereto clime,
And not live thralled to imperious Time?
Or (dotard) shall I so from Reason swerue,
To deem those Lights which to our use do serve,
(For thou do not them need) more nobly framed
Than us, that know their course, and have them named?
No, I nee're think but we did them surpass
As far, as they do Asterismes of Glass,
When thou us made, by Treason high defiled,
Thrust from our first estate we live ex^^d
Wandering this Earth, which is of Death the Lot,
Where he does use the Power which he has got,
Indifferent Vmpire unto Clownes and Kings,
The supreme Monarch of all mortal things.
When first this flowrie Orb was to us given,
It but in place disvalu'd was to Heaven,
These Creatures which now our Sovereigns are,
And as to Rebels do denounce us war,
Then were our Vasselles, no tumultuous Storm,
No Thunders, Quakings, did her Form deforme,
The Seas in tumbling Mountains did not roar,
But like moist Crystal whispered on the Shore,
No Snake did met her Meads, nor ambusht lowre
In azure Curles beneath the sweet-Spring Flower;
The Nightshade, Henbane, Napell, Aconite,
Her Bowelles then not bare, with Death to smite
Her guiltless Brood; thy Messengers of Grace,
As their high Rounds did haunte this lower Place;
O Joy of Joys! with our first Parents Thou
To commune then did daigne, as Friends do now:
Against thee we rebelled, and justly thus,
Each Creature rebelled against us,
Earth, reft of what did chief in her excel,
To all became a Iaile, to most a Hell,
In Times full Term until thy Son was given,
Who Man with Thee, Earth reconciled with Heaven.
Whole and entiere all in thy Self thou art,
All-where diffusd, yet of this All no part,
For infinite, in making this fair Frame
(Great without quantity) in all thou came,
And filling all, how can thy State admit,
Or Place or Substance to be void of it?
Were Worlds as many, as the Rays which stream
From Days bright lamp, or madding Wits do dream,
They would not reele in naught, nor wandering stray,
But draw to Thee, who could their Centers stay;
Were but one hour this World disioyn'd from thee,
It in one hour to naught reduced should be,
For it thy Shadow is, and can they last,
If seuer'd from the Substances them cast?
O only blessed, and Author of all Bliss,
No, Bliss it self, that all-where wished is,
Efficient, exemplarie, final Good,
Of thine own Self but only understood;
Light is thy Curtain, thou art Light of Light,
An euer-waking Eye still shining bright,
In-looking all, exempt of passive Power,
And change, in change since Deaths pale shade does lowre:
All Times to thee are one, that which has run,
And that which is not brought yet by the Sun,
To thee are present, who do alwayss see
In present act, what past is, or to be;
Day-li^ers we rememberance do loss
Of Ages worn, so Miseries us toss
(Blind and lethargicke of thy heavenly Grace,
Which Sin in our first Parents did deface,
And even while Embryones cursed by justest doom)
That we neglect what gone is, or to come,
But thou in thy great Archiues scrolled have
In parts and whole, what ever yet has past,
Since first the marble Wheels of Time were rolled,
As ever living, never waxing old,
Still is the same thy Day and Yesterday,
An undivided Now, a constant Ay.
O King whose Greatness none can comprehend,
Whose boundless Goodness does to all extend,
Light of all Beauty, Ocean without ground,
That standing flowest, giving do abound,
Rich Palace, and Endvveller ever blessed,
Never not vvorking ever yet in Rest;
What wit can not conceive, words say of Thee,
Here where we as but in a Mirror see,
Shadows of shadows, Atoms of thy Might,
Still owlie eyed when staring on thy Light,
Grant that released from this earthly Iaile,
And fred of Clouds which here our Knowledge veil,
In Heavens high Temples where thy Praises ring,
I may in sweeter Notes hear Angels sing.
GReat GOD, whom we with humbled Thoughts adore,
Eternal, Infinite, Almighty King,
Whose Dwellings Heaven transcend, whose Throne before
Archangells serve, and Seraphines do sing;
Of naught who wrought all that with wondering Eyes
We do behold within this various Round,
Who makes the Rocks to rock, to stand the Skies,
At whose command Clouds peales of Thunder sound:
Ah! spare us Worms, weigh not how we alas
(Evil to our selves) against thy Laws rebel,
Wash off those spots which still in Conscience Glass
(Though we be loath to look) we see too well*
Deserved Revenge of do not do not take,
If thou revenge what shall abide thy Blovv?
Pass shall this World, this World which tho^ did make,
Which should not perish till thy Trumpet blovv,
What Soul is found whom Parents Crime not stains?
Or what with its own Sins defyl'd is not?
Though Justice Rigor threaten (ah) her Raines
Let Mercy guide, and never be forgot.
Less are our Faults far far than is thy Love,
O what can better seem thy Grace divine,
Than they that plagues deserve thy Bounti^ prove,
And where thou shovvre may Vengeance, there to shine?
Then look and pittye, pitying forgive
Us guilty Slaves, or Servants now in thrall,
Slaves, if alas thou look how we do live,
Or doing ill, or doing naught at all?
Of an ungrateful Mind a foul Effect,
But if thy Gifts which largely heretofore
Thou have upon us povvr'd thou do respect,
We are thy Servants, nay, than Ser^ants more,
Thy Children, yes, and Children de^relie bought,
But what strange Chance us of this Lot (...)?
Po^re vvorthles VVights how lovvlie are we brought,
Whom Grace once Children made, Sin has made Slaves?
Sin has made Slaves, but let those Bands Grace break,
That in our wrongs thy Mercies may appear,
Thy VVisdome not so mean is, Povv'r so vveake,
But thousand vvayes they can make Worlds thee fear.
O VVisdome boundless! O (...) Grace!
Grace, Wisdom which make (...) dim Reasons Eye,
And could Heavens King bring from his placelesse Place,
On this ignoble Stage of Care to dye:
To dye our Death, and with the sacred Strea^^e
Of Blood and Water gushing from his Side,
To make us clean of that contagio^^ Blame,
First on us brought by our first Parents Pride.
Thus thy great Love and Pitye (heavenly King)
Love, Pittye which so well our Loss prevent,
Of Evil it self (lo) could all Goodness bring,
And sad beginning cheer with glad event.
O Love and Pitye! ill known of these Times,
O Love and Pitye! careful of our need,
O Bounties! which our horride Acts and Crimes
(Grown numberless) contend near to exceed.
Make this excessive ardour of thy love,
So vvarme our Coldness, so our Life's renew,
That we from Sin, Sin may from us remove,
Wit may our Will, Faith may our Wit subdue.
Let thy pure Love burn up all worldly Lust,
Hells candi'd Poison killing our best part,
Which makes us joy in Toys, adore frail Dust
In stead of Thee, in Temple of our Heart.
Grant when at last our Souls these Bodies leave,
Their loathsome Shops of sin and Mansions blind,
And Doom before thy royal Seat receive,
They may a Savior, not a Judge thee find.
A CYPRESS GROVE, BY W. D.

A CYPRESS GROVE.
THough it has been doubted if there be in the Soul such imperious and
superexcellent Power, as that it can by the vehement and earnest working of it,
deliver knowledge to another without bodily Organes, and by the only
Conceptions and Ideas of it produce real Effects; yet it has been ever and
of all held as infallible and most certain, that it often (either by outward
inspiration, or some secret motion in it self) is augure of its own
Misfortunes, and has Shadows of approaching dangers presented unto it before
they fall forth. Hence so many strange apparitions and signs, true Visions,
uncouth heaviness, and causeless uncomfortable languishings: of which to
seek a reason, unless from the sparkling of GOD in the Soul, or from the
God-like sparkles of the Soul, were to make Reason unreasonable, by reasoning
of things transcending her reach.

Having often and diverse times, when I had given my self to rest in the quiet
solitariness of the Night, found my Imagination troubled with a confused
fear, no, sorrow, or horror, which interrupting Sleep did astonish my senses,
and rowse me all appalled, and transported in a sudden agony and
amazedness; of such an unaccustomed perturbation, not knowing, nor being able
to diue into any apparent Cause, carried away with the stream of my (then
doubting) Thoughts, I began to ascribe it to that secret foreknowledge and
presaging Power of the Propheticke Mind, and to interpret such an Agony to be
to the Spirit as a faintness and universal weariness uses to be to the
Body, a sign of following sickness, or as winter Lightnings or Earthquakes
are to Commonwealthes and great Cities-Herbingers of more wretched events.

Hereupon not thinking it strange if whatsoever is human should befall me,
knowing how Providence ouercomes Grief, and discountenances Crosses; and that
as we should not despair of Evils which may happen us, we should not be too
confident, nor lean much to those Goods we enjoy: I began to turn over in
my remembrance all that could afflict miserable Mortality, and to forecast
every thing that with a Mask of horror could show it self to human Eyes:
Till in the end, as by Unities and Points, Mathematicians are brought to great
numbers, and huge greatness, after many fantastical glances of the VVoes of
Mankind, and those incombrances which follow upon Life, I was brought to
think, and with amazement, on the last of human Terrors, or (as one termed
it) the last of all dreadful and terrible Evils, Death. For to easy censure
it would appear, that the Soul, if it foresee that divorcement which it is
to have from the Body, should not without great reason be thus ouer-grieued,
and plunged in inconsolable and unaccustomed Sorrow: considering their near
Union, long familiarity and love, with the great change, Pain, Ugliness,
which are apprehended to be the inseparable attendants of Death.

They had their being together, Parts they are of one reasonable Creature, the
harming of the one, is the weakening of the working of the other; what sweet
contentments does the Soul enjoy by the senses? They are the Gates and
VVindowes of its Knowledge, the Organes of its Delight. If it be tedious to an
excellent Player on the Lute, to abide but a few Months the want of one, how
much more must the being without such noble Tools and Engines be plaintfull
to the Soul? And if two Pilgrims which have wandered some few miles together,
have a hearts-griefe when they are near to part, what must the Sorrow be at
the parting of two so loving Friends and neuer-loathing Lovers as are the Body
and Soul?

Death is the violent estranger of acquaintance, the eternal Diuorcer of
Marriage, the Rauisher of the Children from the Parents, the Stealer of Parents
from their Children, the interrer of Fame, the sole cause of forgetfulness, by
which the Living talk of those gone away as of so many Shadows or age* worn
Stories: all Strength by it is enfeebled, Beauty turned into deformity and
rottenness, Honor in contempt, Glory into baseness. It is the reasonlesse
breaker off of all Actions, by which we enjoy no more the sweet Pleasures of
Earth, nor gaze upon the ^^a^elie revolutions of the Heavens, Sun
perpetually sets; Star^es never rise unto us, It in one moment robs us
of what with so great toil and care in many years we have heaped together:
By this are Successions of Linages cut short, Kingdoms left heirelesse, and
greatest States orphaned: it is not overcome by Pride, smoothed by Flattery,
diuerted by Time, Wisdom save this can prevent and help every thing. By
Death we are exiled from this fair City of the World, it is no more a World
unto us, nor we any more people into it. The ruins of Phanes, Palaces, and
other magnificent Frames, yield a sad prospect to the Soul, and how should it
without horror view the wrack of such a wonderful Maister-piece as is the
Body?

That Death naturally is torrible and to be abhorred, it can not well and
altogether be denied, it being a privation of Life, and a not-being, and every
privation being abhorred of Nature, and evil in it self, the fear of it too
being ingenerate universally in all Creatures; yet I have often thought that
even naturally to a Mind by only Nature resolved and prepared, it is more
terrible in Conceit than in Verity, and at the first Glance, than when well
pryed into, and that rather by the weakness of our Fantasy, than by what is
in it, and that the marble colors, of Obsequies, Weeping, and funeral Pomp
(which we our selves cast over it) did add much more Gastlinesse unto it than
otherwise it has. To aver which conclusion, when I had gathered my wandering
Thoughts, I began thus with my Self.

If on the great Theater of this Earth amongst the numberless number of men,
To die were only proper to thee and thine, then undoubtedly thou had reason
to repine at so severe and partial a Law? But since it is a necessity, from
the which never an Age by-pa^^ has been exempted, and unto which they which
be, and so many as are to come, are thralled (no consequent of Life being more
common and familiar) Why should thou with unprofitable, and naught availing
stubbornness, oppose to so inevitable and necessary a Condition? this is the
highway of Mortality, our general home, behold what Millions have trod it
before thee, what Multitudes shall after thee, with them which at that same
instant run. In so universal a calamity (if Death be one) private
Complaints cannot be heard, with so many royal Palaces, it is no loss to see
thy poor Caban burn. Shall the Heavens stay their euer-rolling Wheels (for
what is the motion of them, but the motion of a swift and euer-whirling Wheel,
which twineth forth, and again vprolleth our life?) and hold still time, to
prolong thy miserable days, as if the highest of their working were to do
homage unto thee? Thy death is a piece of the order of this All, a part of the
Life of this World, for while the World is the World, some Creatures must dye,
and others take life. Eternal things are raised far above this Sphere of
Generation and Corruption, where the first Matter, like an euer-flowing and
ebbing Sea, with diverse waves, but the same water, keeps a restles and
neuer-tyring current; what is below, in the universality of the kind, not in
it self does abide, Man a long line of years has continued, This Man every
hundredth is swept away. This Globe environed with air, is the sole Region of
Death, the Grave where every thing that takes Life must rotte, the Stage of
Fortune and Change, only glorious in the inconstancy and varying alterations
of it, which though many seem yet to abide one, and being a certain entire
one, are ever many. The neuer-agreeing bodies of the elementall Brethren turn
one in another, the Earth changes her countenance with the Seasons, sometimes
looking cold, and naked, other times, hot and flowrie: Nay, I cannot tell
how, but even the lowest of those celestial bodies, that mother of months,
and Empress of seas and moisture, as if she were a Mirror of our constant
mutabiltie appears (by her too great nearness unto us) to participate of our
changes, never seeing us twice with that same Face, now looking black, then
pale and wanne, sometimes again in the perfection and fullness of her beauty
shining over us. Death no less than Life does here act a part, the taking
away of what is old, being the making a way for what is young. They which
fore-went us did leave a Room for us, and should we grieve to do the same to
those which should come after us? who being suffered to see the exquisite
rarities of an Antiquaries Cabinet is grieved that the curtain be drawn and
to give place to new Pilgrims? and when the Lord of this Universe has showed
us the amazing wonders of his various frame, should we take it to heart, when
he thinks time, to dislodge? This is, His unalterable and inevitable Decree,
as we had no part of our will in our entrance into this Life, we should not
persume of any in our leaving it, but soberlie learn to will that which he
wills, whose very willing gives being to all that it wills, and reuerencing
the Orderer, not repine at the order and Laws, which all-where and all-wayes
are so perfectly establi^hed, that who would essay to correct and amend any of
them, should either make them worse, or desire things beyond the Level of
Possibility.

If thou do complain that there shall be a time in the which thou shall not
be, why do thou not too grieve that there was a time in the which thou wast
not? and so that thou are not as old, as that enlifening Planet of time? for
not to have been a thousand years before this moment, is as much to be
deplored, as not to be a thousand after it, the effect of them both being one:
that will be after us which long long ere we were, was. Our childrens
children have that same reason to murmr that they were not young men in our
days, which we have to complain that we shall not be old in theirs. The
Violets have their time, though they empurple not the Winter, and the Roses
keep their season though they disclose not their beauty in the Spring.

Empires, States, Kingdoms, have by the doom of the supreme providence their
fatal Periods, great Cities lie ^adlie buried in their dust, Arts and Sciences
have not only their Eclipses, but their wainings and deaths, the gastlie
wonders of the world, raised by the ambition of ages are ouer-throwne and
trampled, some Lights above, not idly entitled Stars, are loosed and never
more seen of us: The excellent Fabrike of this Uniuerse it self shall one day
suffer ruin, or a change like a ruin, and poor Earthlings thus to be
handled complain.

But is this Life so great a good, that the lose of it should be so dear unto
Man? if it be? the meanest Creatures of Nature thus be happy, for they live
no less than he; If it be so great a felicity, how is it esteemed of Man
himself at so small a rate, that for so poor gains, nay, one disgraceful
word, he will not stand to loose it? what excellency is there in it, for the
which he should desire it perpetual, and repine to be at rest, and return
to his old Grandmother Dust? of what moment are the labors and actions of it,
that the interruption and leaving off of them should be to him so distasteful,
and with such grudging lamentations received?

Is not the entering into Life weakness? the continuing sorrow? in the one he
is exposed to all the injuries of the Elements, and like a condemned trespasser
(as if it were a fault to come to the light) no sooner borne than manacled and
bound; in the other he is restlesly like a Ball tossed in the Tenis-court of
this world, when he is in the brightest Meridian of his glory, there mistereth
nothing to destroy him, but to let him fall his own hight, a reflex of the
Sun, a blast of wind, nay, the glance of an eye, is sufficient to undo him:
How can that be any great matter, which so small instruments and slender
actions are masters of?

His Body is but a mass of discording humors boiled together by the
conspiring influences of superior Lights* which though agreeing for a trace of
time, yet can never be made uniform, and keept in a just proportion. To what
sickness is it subject unto, beyond those of the other Creatures? No part of
it being which is not particularly infected and afflicted by some one, nay,
every part with many? so that the Life of diverse of the meanest creatures of
Nature has with great reason, by the most wise, been preferred to the
natural life of man: And we should rather wonder how so fragill a matter
should so long endure, than how so soon decay.

Are the actions of the most part of men, much differing from the exercise of
the Spider? that pitcheth toils and is tapist, to pray on the smaller
creatures, and for the weauing of a scornful web eviscerateth it self many
days, which when with much industry finished, a tempestuous puff of wind
carries away both the work and the worker? or are they not like the plays of
Children? or (to hold them at their highest rate) as is a May Game, or what is
more earnest, some study at Chesse? every day we rise and lie down,
apparel and disapparrell our selves, weary our bodies and refresh them, which
is a circle of idle trauells, and labors (like Penelopes task) unprofitably
renewed. Some time we are in a chase after a fading Beauty, now we seek to
enlarge our bounds, increase our treasure, feeding poorly, to purchase what
we must leave to those we never saw, or (happily) to a Fool, or a Prodigal
heir: raised with the wind of Ambition, we court that idle name of Honor,
not considering how they mounted aloft in the highest ascendant of earthly
Glory, are but like tortured Ghosts wandering with golden fetters in glistring
Prisons, having fear and danger their inseparable executioners, in the midst
of multitudes rather guarded than regarded. They whom opake imaginations and
inward melancholy, have made weary of the worlds eye, though they have
withdrawn themselves from the course of vulgar affairs, by vain
contemplations, curious searches, are more diquieted, and live a life worse
than others, their wit being too sharp to give them a true taste of their
present infelicitie, and to increase their woes; while they of a more shallow
and simple conceit, have want of knowledge, and ignorance of themselves, for a
remedy and antidote against all the calamities of life.

What Cameli^n, what E^ripe, what Moon does change so often as man? he seems
not the same person, in one and the same day, what pleases him in the morning
is in the evening unto him distasteful. Young he scorns his childish
Conceits, and wading deeper in years (for years are a Sea into which he
wadeth until he drown) he esteems his Youth inconstancy, Rashness,
Folly; Old he begins to pity himself, plaining, because he is changed that
the world is changed, like those in a Ship, which when they launch from the
Shore, are brought to think the Shore does fly from them. When he is fred of
evil in his own estate, he grudges and vexes him self at the happiness and
fortunes of others, he is pressed with care for what is present, with sorrow
for what is past, with fear for what is to come, nay, for what will never
come, and as in the Eye one tear forces out another, so makes he one sorrow
follow upon a former, and every day lay up stuff of grief for the next.

The Air, the Sea, the Fire, the Beasts, be cruel executioners of Man, yet
Beasts, Fire, Sea, and Air, are pitiful to Man in comparison of Man, for more
men are destroyed by men, than by them all. What scorns, wrongs, contumelies,
imprisonments, torments, poisons, receives man of man? What engynes and new
works of death are daily found forth by man against man? What Laws to thrall
his liberty? fantasies and scarbugs, to inveigle his reason? Amongst the
Beasts is there any that has so servile a lot in another behalf as Man?
yet neither is content, nor he who reigns, nor he who serves.

The half of our life is spent in Sleep, which has such a resemblance to
Death, that often it seperats as it were the Soul from the body, and teaches
it a sort of being above it, making it soar beyond the Sphere of sensual
delights, and attain Knowledge unto which while the body did awake it could
scarce aspire. And who would not, rather than abide chained in his loathsome
Galley of the world sleep ever (that is dye) having all things at one Stay
be free from those vexations, misaduenters, contempts, indignities, and many
many anguishes, unto which, this life is inuasseled and subdued? and well
looked unto our greatest contentment and happiness here, seems rather to
consist in the being released from misery, than in the enjoying of any great
good.

What have the most eminent of mortals to glory in? Is it Greatness? Who can
be great on so small a Round as is this Earth, and bounded with so short a
course of time? How like is that to Castells or imaginary Cities raised in the
Sky by chance-meeting Clouds? Or to Giants modelled (for a sport) of Snow,
which at the hoter looks of the Sun melt away, and lie drowned in their own
moisture? such an impetuous vicissitude towseth the estates of this World. Is
it Knowledge? But we have not yet attained to a perfect Understanding of the
smallest Flower, and why the Grass should rather be green than red. The
Element of Fire is quite put out, the Air is but Water rarefied, the Earth
moves, and is no more the Center of the Uniuerse, is turned into a Magnes;
Stars are not fixed, but swim in the eth^riall spaces, Comets are mounted
above the Planets, some affirm there is an other world of men and creatures,
with Cities and Towers in the Moon, the Sun is lost, for it is but a cleft
in the lower heavens, through which the light of the highest shines: Thus
Sciences by the diverse motions of this Globe of the brain of man are become
opinions. What is all we know, compared with what we know not? We have not
yet agreed about the chief good and felicity. It is (perhaps) artificial
Cunning, how many curiosities be framed by the least Creatures of Nature,
unto which the industry of the most curious Artizanes does not attain? Is it
Riches? What are they but the casting out of Friends, the snares of liberty,
bands to such as have them, possessing rather, than possessed, Mettalls which
Nature has hid (foreseeing the great harm they should occasion) and the
only opinion of man has brought in estimation? like Thorns which laid on an
open hand, may be blown away, and on a closing and hard gripping, wound it,
Prodigalles misspend them, Wretches miskeepe them: when we have gathered the
greatest abundance, we our selves can enjoye no more thereof, than so much as
belonges to one man: What great and rich men do by others, the meaner sort do
themselves. Will some talk of our Pleasures? It is not (though in the fables)
told out of purpose, that Pleasure in have being called up to Heaven, did
here forget her apparel, which Sorrow thereafter finding (to deceive the
world) attired her self with: And if we would say the truth of most of our
Joys, we must confess that they are but disguised sorrows; the drames of
their Honney are sowred in pounds of Gall, Remorse ever enseweth them, and
never do they existe but by their opposite sadness, nay, in some they have no
effect at all if some wakning grief has not preceeded and forewent them. Will
some Ladies vaunt of their beauty? that is but skinne-deepe, of two senses
only known, short even of Marble-Statues, and Pictures, not the same to all
eyes, dangerous to the beholder, and hurtful to the possessor, an enemy to
Chastity, a thing made to delight others, more than those which have it, a
superficial luster hiding bones and the brains, things fearful to be
looked upon: growth in years does blaste it, or Sickness, or Sorrow
preventing them. Our strength matched with that of the unreasonable Creatures,
is but weakness: all we can set our eyes on, in these intricate mazes of
life, is but vain perspectiue and deceiving shadows, appearing far other
ways a far off, than when enjoyed and gazed upon in a near distance.

If Death be good, why should it be feared? And if it be the work of
Nature, how should it not be good? For Nature is an ordinance and rule, which
GOD has established in the creating this Universe (as is the Law of a King)
which can not err: For how should the Maker of that ordinance err? since in
him there is no impotencie and weakness, by the which he might bring forth
what is imperfect, no perverseness of will, of which might proceed any vicious
action, no ignorance by the which he might go wrong in working, being most
powerful, most good, most wise, nay, all-wise, all-good, all-powrefull; He is
the first orderer, and marshalleth every other order, the highest Essence,
giving essence to all other things; of all causes the cause, He works
powerfullie, bonteou^lie, wisely, and makes (his artificial Organ) Nature
do the same. How is not Death of Nature? since what is naturally generate, is
subject to corruption, and such an harmony (which is Life) rising from the
mixture of the four Elements, which are the Ingredients of our body, can not
ever endure; The contraritie of their qualities (as a consuming Rust in the
baser Metalles) being an inward cause of a necessary dissolution. Again, how
is not Death good? since it is the thaw of all those vanities which the frost of
Life binds together. If there be a facietie in Life, then must there be a
sweetness in Death? The Earth were not ample enough to contain her offspring
if none dyed: in two or three Ages (without Death) what an unpleasant and
lamentable Spectacle, were the most flourishing Cities? for what should there
be to be seen in them, save bodies languishing and cou^bing again into the
Earth? pale disfigured faces, Skelitons in stead of men? and what to be heard,
but the exclamations of the young, complaints of the old, with the pitiful
cries of sick and pining persons? there is almost no infirmity worse than age.

If there be any evil in death, it would appear to be that pain and
torment, which we apprehend to arise from the breaking of those strait bands
which keep the Soul and body together; which, since not without great
struggling and motion, seems to prove it self vehement and most extreme. The
senses are the only cause of pain, but before the last Trances of death, they
are so brought under that they have no (or very little) strength, and their
strength lessening, the strength of pain too must be lessened. How should we
doubt, but the weakness of senselesseneth pain, Since we know that weakened
and maimed parts which receive not nurishment, are a great deal less
sensible, than the other parts of the body; And see, that old decrepit
persons leave this world almost without pain, as in a sleep? If bodies of the
most sound and wholesome constitution be these which most vehemently feel
pain? it must then follow, that they of a distemperate and crasie
constitution, have least feeling of pain, and by this reason, all weak and
sick bodies should not much feel pain, for if they were not distempered and
evil complexioned, they would not be sick. That the Sight, Hearing, Taste,
Smelling leave us without pain, and unawares, we are undoubtedly assured, and
why should we not think the same of the Feeling? That which is capable of
feeling, are the vital spirits, which in a man in a perfect health are spread
and extended through the whole body, and hence is it that the whole body is
capable of pain: But in dying bodies we see that by pauses and degrees the
parts which are furthest removed from the heart, become cold, and being
deprived of natural heat, all the pain which they feel, is that they do
feel no pain. Now, even as ere the sick be aware, the vital spirits have
with drawn themselves from the whole extension of the body, to succor the
heart (like distressed Citizens which finding their walls battered down, fly
to the defense of their Cittadell) so do they abandone the heart without any
sensible touch: As the flame, the oil failing, leaves the wicke, or as light
the Air which it does inuest. As to the shrinking motions, and convulsions of
sinews and members, which appear to witness great pain, let one represent
to himself the strings of an high-tuned Lut, which breaking, retire to their
natural windings, or a piece of Ice, that without any out-ward violence,
cracketh at a Thawe: No otherwise do the sinews of the body, finding
themselves slack and vnbended from the brain, and their wonted labors and
motions cease, struggle, and seem to stir themselves, but without either,
pain or sense. Sowning is a true pourtrait of death, or rather it is the same,
being a cessation from all action, motion, and function of sense and life: But
in Sowning there is no pain, but a silent rest, and so deep and sound a
sleep that the natural is nothing in comparison of it; What great pain then
can there be in Death, which is but a continued Sowning, and a never again
returning to the works and dolorous felicity of life?

Now although Death were an extreme pain, since it is in an instant, what can
it be? why should we fear it? for while we are, it comes not, and it
being come we are no more. Nay, though it were most painful, long continuing,
and terrible, ugly why should we fear it? Since fear is a foolish passion
but where it may preserve; but it can not preserve us from Death, yea rather
the fear of it, banishing the comfortes of present contentmentes, makes Death
to advance and approach the more near unto us. That is ever terrible which is
unknown, so do little children fear to go in the dark, and their fear is
increased with tales.

But that (perhaps) which anguisheth thee most, is to have this glorious
pageant of the World, removed from thee, in the Spring and most delicious
season of thy life; for, though to dye be usual, to dye young may appear
extraordinary. If the present fruition of these things be unprofitable and
vain, what can a long continuance of them be? Stranger and new Halcyon, why
would thou longer nestle amidst these unconstant and stormy waves? Have thou
not alreddy suffered enough of this World, but thou must yet endure more? To
live long, is it not to be long troubled? But number thy years, which are now
() and thou shall find, that where as ten have ouer-liued thee, thousands have
not attained this age. One year is sufficient to behold all the magnificence
of Nature, nay, even one day and night, for more is but the same brought
again: This Sun, that Moon, these Stars, the varying dance of the Spring,
Summer, Antumne, Winter, is that very same which the golden Age did see. They
which have the longest time lent them to live in, have almost no part of it at
all, measuring it either by that space of time which is past, when they were
not, or by that which is to come: Why should thou then care, whether thy
days be many or few, which when prolonged to the uttermost, prove, paralel'd
with eternity, as a Tear is to the Oeea^? To dye young, is to do that soon,
and in some fewer days, which once thou must do; it is but the giving over of
a Game that, after never so many hazardes, must be lost. When thou have lived
to that age thou desire, or one of Platos years, so soon as the last of thy
days rises above thy Horizon, thou will then as now, demand longer respit,
and exspect more to come: It is Hope of long life, that makes life seem
short. Who will behold, and with the eyes of advice behold, the many changes
depending on humane affairs, with the after-claps of Fortune, shall never
lament to dye young. Who knows what alterations and sudden disasters, in
outward estate or inward contentments, in this wilderness of the world, might
have befallen him who dies young, if he had lived to be old? Heaven
fore-knowing imminent harms, takes those which it loves to it self before
they fall forth. Pure and (if we may so say) Virgin Souls, carry their
bodies with no small agonies, and delight not to remain long in the dregs of
humane corruption, still burning with a desire to turn back to the place of
their rest, for this world is their Inn and not their Home. That which may
fall forth every hour, cannot fall out of time. Life is a Journey in a
dustie way, the furthest Rest is Death, in this some go more heavily
burdened, than others: swift and active Pilgrims come to the end of it in the
Morning, or at Noone, which Tortoyse-paced Wretches, clogged with the
fragmentarie rubbidge of this world, scarce with great travel crawle unto at
Midnight. Days are not to be esteemed after the number of them, but after the
goodness: more Compass makes not a Sphere more complete, but as round is a
little as a large Ring; nor is that Musician most praise worthy who has
longest played, but he in measured accents who has made sweetest Melody, to
live long has often been a let to live well. Muse not how many years thou
might have enjoyed life, but how sooner thou might have lossed it, neither
grudge so much that it is no better, as comfort thy self that it has been no
worse: let it suffice that thou have lived till this day, and (after the course
of this world) not for naught, thou have had some smiles of of Fortune, favors
of the worthiest, some friends, and thou have never been disfauoured of the
Heaven.

Though not for Life it self, yet that to after-worlds thou might leave some
monument that once thou wast, happily in the clear light of reason, it would
appear that life were earnestly to be desired: for since it is denied us to
live ever (said one) let us leave some worthy Remembrance of our once here
being, and draw out this Spanne of life to the greatest length, and so far
as is possible. O poor Ambition! to what I pray thee may thou concreded it?
Arches and stately Temples, which one age does raise, does not another raze,
Tombs and adopted Pillars, lie buried with those which were in them buried:
Has not Avarice defaced, what Religion did make glorious? all that the hand of
man can vpreare, is either ouer-turned by the hand of man, or at length by
standing and continuing consumed: as if there were a secret opposition in fate
(the inevitable decree of the Eternal) to control our in dustrie, and
conter-checke all our devices and proposing. Possessions are not enduring,
Children lose their names, Families glorying (like Marigolds in the Sun) on the
highest top of Wealth and Honor (no better than they which are not yet borne)
leaving off to be: So does Heaven confound what we endeavor by labor and art
to distinguish. That renown by Papers, which is thought to make men immortal,
and which nearest does approach the life of these eternal Bodies above, how
slender it is, the very word of Paper does import, and what is it when
obtained, but a multitude of words, which coming Times may scorn; How many
millions never hear the names of the most famous Writers, and amongst them to
whom they are known how few turn over their Pages, and of such as do, how
many sport at their conceits, taking the verity for a fable, and often a fable
for verity, or (as we do pleasants) use all for recreation? Then the arising
of more famous, does darken, and turn ignoble the glory of the former, being
held as Garments worn out of fashion. Now, when thou have attained what praise
thou could desire, and thy fame is emblazoned in many Stories, it is but an
Echo, a mere Sound, a Glow-worme, which seen a far, casts some cold
beams, but approached is found nothing, an imaginary happiness, whose good
depends on the oppinion of others: Desert and Virtue for the most part want
Monuments and Memory, seldom are recorded in the Volummes of admiration,
while Statues and Torphees, are erected to those, whose names should have been
buried in their dust, and folded up in the darkest clouds of oblivion: So do
the rank Weeds in this Garden of the World choacke and overrun the swetest
Flowers. Applause whilst thou live, serves but to make thee that fair mark
against which Envy and Malice direct their Arrows, at the best is like that
Syracusians Sphere of Chirstall, as frail as fair: and borne after thy death,
it may as well be ascribed, to some of those were in the Troj^n Horse, or to
such as are yet to be borne an hundredth years hereafter, as to thee, who
nothing knows, and is of all unknown. What can it avail thee to be talked
of, whilst thou art not? Consider in what bounds our fame is confined, how
narrow the lists are of humane Glory, and the furthest she can stretch her
wings. This Globe of the Earth which seems huge to us, in respect of the
Universe, and compared with that wide wide pauillon of Heaven, is less than
little, of no sensible quantity, and but as a point: for the Horizon which
boundeth our sight, divides the Heaven as in two halfes, having always six
of the Zodiac Signs above, and as many under it, which if the Earth had any
quantity compared to it, it could not do. More if the Earth were not as a
point, the Stars could not still in all parts of it appear to us of a like
greatness; for where the Earth raised it self in Mountains, we being more
near to Heaven, they would appear to us of a greater quantity, and where it
is humbled in Valleys, we being further distant, they would seem unto us
l^sse: But the Star^^s in all parts of the Earth appearing of a like
greatness, and to every part of it the Heaven imparting to our sight the half
of its inside, we must avouch it to be but as a point. Well did one compare it
to an Ant-hill, and men (the Inhabitants) to so many Pismires, and
Grasshoppers, in the toil and variety of their diuersified studies. Now of
this small indivisible thing, thus compared, how much is covered with Waters?
how much not at all discovered? how much uninhabited and desert? and how many
millions of millions are they, which share the remnant amongst them, in
languages, custumes, divine rites differing, and all almost to others unknown?
But let it be granted that Glory and Fame are some great matter, and can
reach Heaven it self, since they are often buried with the honored, and pass
away in so fleet a revolution of time, what great good can they have in them?
How is not Glory temporal, if it increase with years and depend on time?
Then imagine me (for what cannot Imagination reach unto?) one could be famous
in all times to come, and over the whole World present, yet shall he be for
ever Obscure and ignoble to those mighty Ones, which were only heretofore
esteemed famous amongst the Assyrians, Persians, Romans. Again the vain
affectation of man is so suppressed, that though his works abide some space,
the worker is unknown: the huge Egyptian Pyramides, and that Grot in
Pa^silipo, though they have wrestled with time, and worn upon the waste of
days, yet are their authors no more known, than it is known by what strange
Earth-quackes, and deluges, Yles were divided from the Continent, or Hills
bursted forth of the Valleys. Days, Months, and Years, are swallowed up in
the great Gulf of Time (which puts out the eyes of all their Glory) and only
a fattall oblivion remains: of so many Ages past, we may well figure to our
selves some liklie apparances, but can affirm little certainty.

But (my Soul) what ailes thee, to be thus backward and astonished, at the
remembrance of Death, since it does not reach thee, more than darkness does
those farre-shinning Lamps above? Rowse thy self for shame, why should thou
fear to be without a body, ^ith thy maker and the spiritual and
supercelestiall Inhabitants have no bodies? Have thou ever seen any Prisoner,
who when the Iaile Gates were broken up, and he enfranchised and set loose,
would rather plain and sit still on his Fetters, than seek his freedom? or
any Mariner, who in the midst of Storms arriving near the Shore, would launch
forth again unto the Maine, rather than stricke Sail and joyfully enter the
leas of a save Harbor? If thou rightly know thy self, thou have but small
cause of anguish; for if there be any resemblance, of that which is infinite,
in what is finit (which yet by an infinite imperfection is from it distant) if
thou be not an Image, thou art a shadow of that unsearchable Trinity, in thy
three essential powers, Understanding, Will, Memory; which though three, are
in thee but one, and abiding one, are distinctlie three: But in nothing more
come thou near that Sovereign Good, than by thy perpetuity, which who
strive to improve, by that same do it prove: Like those that by arguing
themselves to be without all reason, by the very arguing, show how they have
some. For, how can what is wholly mortal, more know what is immortal, than
the eye can know sounds, or the ear questione about colors; if none had eyes,
who would ever descant of light or shadow? To thee nothing in this visible
World is comparable; thou art so wonderful a beauty and so beautiful a
wonder, that if but once thou could be gazed upon by bodily eyes, every
heart would be inflamed with thy love, and ravished from all servile baseness
and earthly desires. Thy being depends not on matter, hence by thine
Understanding, do thou dyue into the being of every other thing; and therein
art so pregnant, that nothing by place, similitude, subject, time, is so
conjoined, which thou can not separate; as what neither is, nor any ways can
exist, thou can feign, and give an abstract being unto. Thou seem a World
in thy self, containing Heaven, Stars, Seas, Earth, Floods, Mountains,
Forests, and all that lives: Yet restes thou not satiate with what is in thy
self, nor with all in the wide Universe, until thou raise thy self, to the
contemplation of that first illuminating Intelligence, far above Time, and
even reaching Eternity it self, into which thou art transformed, for, by
receiving thou (beyond all other things) art made that which thou recceiuest.
The more thou know, the more apt thou art to know, not being amated with
any object that excels in predominance, as Sense by objects sensible. Thy
Will is vncompellable, resisting force, daunting Necessity, despising Danger,
triumphing over Afliction, unmoved by Pity, and not constrained by all the
toils and disasters of Life. What the Airts-master of this Universe is in
governing this Universe, thou art in the body; and as he is wholly in every
part of it, so art thou wholly in every part of the body. By thee man is
that Hymen of eternal and mortal things, that Chain together binding
unbodied and bodily substances, without which the goodly Fabric of this
World were imperfect. Thou have not thy beginning from the fecunditie, power,
nor action of the elementall qualities, being an immediate maister-piece of
that great Maker: Hence have thou the forms and figures of all things
imprinted in thee from thy first original. Thou only at once art capable of
contraries, of the three parts of Time, thou make but one. Thou know thy
self so separate, absol^^e and diverse an essence from thy body, that thou
disposest of it as it pleases thee, for in thee there is no passion so weak
which maistereth not the fear of leaving it. Thou should be so far from
repining at this separation, that it should be the chief of thy desires; since
it is the passage and means to attain thy perfection and happiness. Thou art
here but as in an infected and leprous Inn, plunged in a flood of humors,
oppressed with cares, suppres^ed with ignorance, defiled and destained with
vice, retrograde in the course of virtue; small things seem here great unto
thee, and great things small, Folly appears Wisdom, and Wisdom Folly.
Fred of thy fleshly care, thou shall rightly discern the beauty of thy
self, and have perfect fruition of that all-sufficient and all-suffizing
Happiness, which is GOD himself; to whom thou owe thy being, to Him thou
owe thy well being, He and Happiness are the same. For, if GOD had not
Happiness, He were not GOD, because Happiness is the highest and greatest
Good: If then GOD have Happiness, it can not be a a thing differing from Him;
for, if there were any thing in Him, differing from Him, He should be an
essence composed and not simple, more what is differing in any thing, is either
an accident or a part of it self; In GOD Happiness can not be an accident,
because He is not subject to any accidents, if it were a part of Him (since
the part is before the whole) we should be forced to grant, that some thing
was before GOD. Bedded and bathed in these earthly ordures, thou can not
come near this sovereign Good, nor have any glimpse of the farre-off dawning
of his vncessable brightness, no, not so much as the eyes of the Birds of the
night have of the Sun. Think then by Death, that thy shell is broken, and
thou then but even hatched, that thou art a Pearl, raised from thy Mother, to
be enchaced in Gold, and that the death-day of thy body, is thy birthday to
Eternity.

Why should thou be feare-stroken, and discomforted* for thy parting from
this mortal Bride thy body, since it is but for a time, and such a time, as
she shall not care for, nor feel any thing in, nor thou have much need of
her? Nay, since thou shall receive her again, more goodly and beautiful, than
when in her fullest perfection thou enjoyed her; being by her absence made
like unto that Indian Crystal, which after some reuolutions of Ages, is
turned into purest Diamond. If the Soul be the form of the Body, and the
form separated from the matter of it, can not ever so continue, but is
inclined and disposed to be reunited thereinto: What can let and hinder this
desire, but that some time it be accomplished, and obtaining the exspected
end, rejoyne it self again unto the body? The Soul separate has a desire,
because it has a will, and knows it shall by this reunion receive perfection:
too, as the matter is disposed, and inclines to its form when it is without
it, so would it seem that the Form should be toward its matter in the
absence of it. How, is not the Soul the form of the body, fith by it, it is,
and is the beginning and cause of all the actions and functions of it: For,
though in excellency it pass every other form, yet does not that
excellency take from it the nature of a form? If the abiding of the Soul
from the body be violent, then can it not be everlasting, but have a
regresse: How is not such an estate of being and abiding not violent to the
Soul, if it be natural to it, to be in matter, and (separate) after a
strange manner, many of the powers and faculties of it (which never leave it)
are not duly exercised? This Union seems not above the Horizon of natural
reason, far less imposible to be done by GOD, and though Reason can not
evidently here demonstrate, yet has she a mistie and groping notice. If the
body shall not arise, how can the only and Sovereign Good, be perfectly
and infinitlie good? For, how shall he be just, nay, have so much justice as
Man, if He suffer the evil and vicious, to have a more prosperous and happy
life, than the followers of Religion and Virtue; which ordinarlie uses to fall
forth in this life? For, the most wicked are Lords and Gods of this Earth,
sleeping in the lee port of honor, as if the spacious habitation of the World
had been made only for them; and the Virtuous and good, are but forlorn
cast-awayes, floting in the surges of distress, seeming here either of the
eye of providence not pityed, or not regarded: being subject to all
dishonours, wrongs, wrackes, in their best estate, passing away their days
(like the D^zies in the Field) in silence and contempt. Since then he is most
good, must just, of necessity, there must be appointed by him an other time
and place of (...), in the which there shall be a reward for leaving well, and
a punishment for doing evil, with a life whereinto both shall receive their
due; and not only in their Souls di^^^ted, for, ^ith both the parts of man
did act a part in the right or wrong, it carries great reason with it, that
they both be araigned before that high Justice, to receive their own: Man is
not a Soul only, but a Soul and Body, to which either guerdon or
punishment is due. This seems to be the voice of Nature in almost all the
Religions of the World; this is that general testimony, charactered in the
minds of the most barbarous and savage people; for, all have had some rouing
gesses at Ages to come, and a dim du^kish light of another life, all
appealing to one general Judgment Throne. To what else could serve so many
expiations, sacrifices, prayers, solemnities, and mystical ceremonies? To what
such sumptuous Temples, and care of the dead: to what all Religion? If not to
show, that they expected a more excellent manner of being, after the
navigations of this life did take an end. And who does deny it, must deny that
there is a Providence, a GOD, confess that his worship, and all study and
reason of virtue are vain; and not believe that there is a World, are
creatures, and that He Himself is not what He is.

But it is not of Death (perhaps) that we complain, but of Time, under the
fatal shadow of whose ^inges, all things decay and wether: This is that
Tyrant, which executing against us his diamantine laws, alters the
harmonious constitution of our bodies, benumning the Organes of our knowledge,
turns our best Senses senseless; makes us loathsome to others, and a burden
to our selves: Of which evils Death releiueth us. So that if we could be
transported (O happy colonie!) to a place exempted from the laws and
conditions of Time, where neither change, motion, nor other affection of
material and corruptible things were; but an immortal, unchangeable,
impassible, all-sufficient kind of life, it were the last of things wishible,
the term and center of all our de^ires. Death makes this transplantation;
for the last instant of corruption, or leaving off of any thing to be what it
was, is the first of generation, or being of that which succeeds; Death then
being the end of this miserable transitory life, of necessity must be the
beginning of that other all excellent and eternal: And so causleslie of a
virtuous Soul it is either feared or complained on.

As those Images were pourtraited in my mind (the morning Star now almost
arising in the East) I found my thoughts in a mild and quiet calm; and not
long after, my Senses one by one forgetting their uses, began to give
themselves over to rest, leaving me in a still and peaceable sleep; if sleep
it may be called, where the mind awaking is carried with free wings from out
fleshly bondage? For, heavy lids, had not long covered their lights, when I
thought, nay, sure I was where I might discern all in this great All; the
large compass of the rolling Circles, the brightness and continual motion of
those Rubies of the Night, which (by their distance) here below can not be
perceived; the ^iluer countenance of the wandering Moon, shining by another
light, the hanging of the Earth as (e^uironed with a girdle of Crystal) the
Sun enthronized in the midst of the Planets, eye of the Heavens, Gemme of
this precious Ring the World. But whilst with wonder and amazement I gazed on
those celestial Splendors, and the beaming Lamps of that glorious Temple
(like a poor Countrie-man brought from his solitary mountains and flocks,
to behold the magnificence of some great City) There was presented to my fight
a Man, as in the spring of his years, with that self same grace, comely
feature, Majesticke look which the late () was wont to have: on whom I had no
sooner set mine eyes, when (like one Planet-stroken) I became amazed: But he
with a ^ild demeanor, and voice surpassing all Humane sweetness, appeared
(me thought) to say,

What is it does thus anguish and trouble thee? Is it the remembrance of Death,
the last Period of wretchedness, and entry to these happy places; the
Lantern which lightneth men to see the mystery of the blessedness of
Spirits, and that glory which transcendeth the Courtaine of things visible?
Is thy Fortune below on that dark Globe (which scarce by the smalnes of it
appears here) so great, that thou art heart-broken and dejected to leave it?
What if thou were to leave behind thee a () so glorious in the eye of the World
(yet but a mote of dust encircled with a Pond) as that of mine, so loving ()
such great hopes, these had been apparent occasions of lamenting, and but
apparent? Do thou think thou leauest Life too soon? Death is best young;
things fair and excellent, are not of long endurance upon Earth. Who lives
well, lives long; Souls most beloved of their Maker, are soonest relieved
from the bleeding cares of Life, and most swiftly wa^ted through the Surges of
Humane miseries. Opinion that great enchantresse and peiser of things, not as
they are, but as they seem, has not in any thing more, than in the conceit of
Death abused Man: Who must not measure himself, and esteem his estate, after
his earthly being, which is but as a dream: For, though he be borne on the
Earth, he is not borne for the Earth, more than the Embryon for the mothers
womb. It plaineth to be relieved of its bands, and to come to the light of
this World, and Man wailleth to be loosed from the Chains with which he is
fettered in that valey of vanities: It nothing knows whither it is to go,
nor ought of the beauty of the visible works of GOD, neither does Man of the
magnificence of the intellectual World above, unto which (as by a Midwife)
he is directed by Death. Fools, which think that this fair and admirable
Frame, so variouslie disposed, so rightly marshalled, so strongly maintained,
enriched with so many excellencies, not only for necessity, but for ornament
and delight, was by that Supreme Wisdom brought forth, that all things in a
circularie course, should be and not be, arise and dissolve, and thus
continue: as if they were so many Shadows cast out and caused by the
encountering of these Superior Celestial Bodies, changing only their fashion
and shape, or fantastical Imageries, or printes of faces into Crystal. No
no, the Eternal Wisdom has made Man an excellent Creature, though he feign
would vnma^^e himself, and return to nothing: And though he seek his
felicity among the reasonlesse Wights, he has fixed it above. Look how some
Prince or great King on the Earth, when he has raised any stately City, the
work being atchi^^ed, is wont to set his Image in the midst of it, to be
admired and gazed upon: No otherwise did the Sovereign of this All, the
Fabric of it perfected, place Man (a great Miracle) formed to his own
pattern, in the midst of this spacious and admirable City. GOD contains all
in Him as the beginning of all, Man contains all in him, as the midst of all;
inferior things be in Man more noble than they exist, superior things more
meanly, Celestial things favor him, earthly things are vassaled unto him,
he is the band of both; neither is it possible but that both of them have
peace with him, if he have peace with him, who made the Covenant between them
and him? He was made that he might in the Glass of the World behold the
infinite Goodness, Power, and glory of his Maker, and beholding know, and
knowing Love, and loving enjoye, and to hold the Earth of him as of his Lord
Paramount; never ceasing to remember and praise Him. It exceeds the compass
of conceit, to think that that Wisdom which made every thing so orderly in
the parts, should make a confusion in the whole, and the chief Maister-peece;
how bringing forth so many excellencies for Man, it should bring forth Man for
baseness and misery. And no less strange were it, that so long life should
be given to Trees, Beasts, and the Birds of the Air, Creatures inferior to
Man, which have less use of it, and which can not judge of this goodly
Fabric, and that it should be denied to Man: Unless there were another
manner of living prepared for him, in a place more noble and excellent.

But alas! (said I) had it not been better that for the good of his native
Country a () endued with so many peerlesse gifts, had yet lived? How long
will ye (replied he) like the Ants, think there are no fairer Palaces, than
their Hills; or like to poreblind Moles, no greater light, than that little
which they shun? As if the master of a Camp, knew when to remove a
Sentinel, and He who places Man on the Earth, knew ^ot how long he had need
of Him? Every one comes there to act his part of this Tragicomedi^ called
Life, which done, the Courtaine is drawn, and he removing is said to dye.
That Providence which prescriueth Causes to every event has not only
determined a definit and certain number of days, but of actions to all men,
which they cannot go beyond.

Most () then (answered I) Death is not such an evil and pain, as it is of
the Vulgar esteemed? Death (said he) nor painful is, nor evil (except in
contemplation of the cause) being of it self as indifferent as Birth: Yet can
it not be denied, but amidst those dreams of earthly pleasures, the
vncouthnesse of it, with the wrong apprehension of what is unknown in it, are
noisome, But the Soul sustained by its Maker, resolved, and calmlie retired in
it self, does find that Death (^ith it is in a moment of Time) is but a short,
nay, sweet sigh; and is not worthy the remembrance compared with the smallest
dram of the infinite Felicity of this Place. Here is the Palace Royal of
the Almighty KING, in which the incomprehensible comprehensiblie manifests
Himself; in Place highest, in substance not subject to any corruption or
change, for it is above all motion, and solid turns not; in quantity
greatest, for, if one Star, one Sphere be so vast, how large, how hudge in
exceeding demensions, must those bounds be, which do them all contain? In
quantity most pure and orient, Heaven here is all but a Sun, or the Sun
all but a Heaven. If to Earthlings the Foote-stoole of GOD, and that Stage
which He raised for a small course of Time, seems so Glorious and
Magnificent; What estimation would they make (if they could see) of His
eternal Habitation and Throne? and if these be so wonderful, what is the
sight of Him, for whom, and by whom all was created; of whose Glory to behold
the thousand thousand part, the most pure Intellegences are fully satiate, and
with wonder and delight rest amazed; for the Beauty of His light and the Light
of His Beauty are incomprehensible? Here does that earnest appetite of the
Understanding content it self, not seeking to know any more; For it sees
before it, in the vision of the Divine essence (a Miroi^ in the which not
Images or shadows, but the true and perfect Essence of every thing created,
is more clear and conspicuous, than in it self) all that may be known or
understood. Here does the Will pause it self, as in the center of its
Eternal rest, glowing with a fiery affection of that infinite and
all-sufficient Good; which being fully known, cannnot (for the infinite
motives and causes of love which are in Him) but be fully and perfectly
loved: As He is only true and essential Bounty, so is He the only
essential and true Beauty, deserving alone all love and admiration, by which
the Creatures are only in so much fair and excellent, as they participate of
His Beauty and excelling Excellencies. Here is a blessed Company, every one
joying as much in another Felicity, as in that which is proper, because each
sees another equ^llie loved of GOD; Thus their distinct joys are no fewer,
than the copartners of the joye: And as the Assembly is in number answerable
to the large capacity of the Place, so are the joys answerable to the
numberless number of the Ass^mblie. No poor and pitiful mortal, confined
on the Globe of Earth, who has never seen but sorrow, or interchangeablie
some painted superficial pleasures, can rightly think on, or be sufficient
to conceive the tearmelesse Delights of this Place. So many Feathers move not
on Birds, so many Birds dint not the Air, so many leaves tremble not on
Trees, so many Trees grow not in the solitary Forests, so many Waves turn
not in the Ocean, and so many grains of Sand limit not those Waves: As this
triumphant Court has variety of Delights, and Joys exempted from all
comparison. Happiness at once here is fully known and fully enjoyed, and
as infinite in continuance as extent. Here is flourishing and neuer-fading
youth without Age, Strength without Weakness, Beauty never blasting,
Knowledge without Learning, Abundance without Lothing, Peace without
Disturbance, Participation without Envy, Rest without Labor, Light without
rising or setting Sun, Perpetuity without moments, for Time (which is the
measure of endurance) did never enter in this shining Eternity. Ambition,
Disdain, Malice, difference of Opinions, can not approach this Place,
resembling those foggie mists, which cover those Lists of sublunarie things.
All Pleasure paragon'd with what is here is pain, all Mirth mourning, all
Beauty deformity: Here one days abiding, is above the continuing in the
most fortunate estate on the Earth many years, and sufficient to conteruaile
the extremest torments of Life. But, although this Bliss of Souls be great,
and their joys many, yet shall they admit addition, and be more full and
perfect, at that long wished and general meeting with their Bodies.

Amongst all the wonders of the great Creator, not one appears to be more
wonderful (replied I) than that our Bodies should arise, having suffered so
many changes, and Nature denying a return from Privation to a Habit.

Such power (said he) being above all that the Understanding of Man can
conceive, may well work such wonders; For, if Man's Understanding could
comprehend all the secrets and counsels of that Eternal Majesty, it must of
necessity be equal unto it. The Author of Nature is not thralled to the
laws of Nature, but works with them, or contrary to them, as it pleases
Him: What He has a will to do, He has a power to perform. To that power
which brought all this All from naught, to bring again in one instant any
substance which ever was into it, unto what it was once, should not be thought
impossible; For, who can do more, can do less, and His power is no less,
after that which was by Him brought forth is decayed and vanished, than it was
before it was produced; being neither restrained to certain limits, or
instruments, or to any determinate and definit manner of working: where the
power is without restraint, the workeadmitteth no other limits, than the
workers will. This World is as a Cabinet to GOD, in which the small things (how
ever to us hid and secret) are nothing less kept, than the great. For, as
He was wise and powerful to create, so does His Knowledge comprehend His own
Creation; yea, every change and variety in it, of which it is the very
Source. Not any Atome of the scattered Dust of mankind though daily flowing
under new Forms, is to Him unknown: and His Knowledge does distinguish and
discern, what once His power shall waken and raise up. Why may not the
Arts-master of the World, like a Molder, what he has framed in diverse shapes,
confound in one mass, and then severally fashion them out of the same? Can the
Spargiricke by his Art restore for a space to the dry and withered Rose, the
natural Purple and Blush: And can not the Almighty raise and refine the body
of Man, after never so many alterations on the Earth? Reason her self finds it
more possible for infinite power to cast out from it self a finit world, and
restore any thing in it, though decayed and dissolved, to what it was first;
than for Man a finit piece of reasonable misery, to change the form of matter
made to his hand: the power of GOD never brought forth all that It can, for
then were it bounded, and no more infinite. That Time does approach (O haste ye
Times away) in which the Dead shall live, and the Living be changed, and of
all actions the Guerdon is at hand; Then shall there be an end without an end,
Time shall finish, and Place shall be altered, Motion yielding unto rest, and
another World of an Age eternal and unchangeable shall arise: Which when He
had said (me thought) He vanished* and I^ all astonished did awake.

On the Report of the Death of the Author.
IF that were true which whispered is by Fame,
That Damo^s light no more on Earth does burn,
His Patron Phoebus physic would disclame,
And clothed in clouds as erst for Phaeto^ mourn*
Yea, Fame by this had got so deep a Wound,
That scarce she could have power to tell his Death,
Her Wings cut short; who could her Trumpet sound,
Whose Blaze of late was nurc'd but by His Breath?
That Spirit of His which most with mine was free,
By mutual traffic enterchanging Store,
If chased from Him it would have com'd to me,
Where it so often familiare was before.
Some secret Grief distempring first my Mind,
Had (though not knowing) made me feel this loss:
A Sympathy had so our Souls combind,
That such a parting both at once would: toss.
Though such Reports to others terror give,
Thy heavenly Virtues who did never spy,
I know Thou, that can make the dead to live,
Immortal art, and needs not fear to die.
Sir WILLIAM ALEXANDER.

To S. W. A.
THough I have twice been at the Doors of Death,
And twice found shoot those Gates which ever mourn,
This but a lightning is, Truce taken to Breath,
For late-borne Sorrows augurre fleet return.
Amidst thy sacred Cares, and courtly Toils,
Alexis, when thou shall hear wandering Fame
Tell, Death has triumphed over my mortal Spoils,
And that on Earth I am but a sad Name;
If thou e're held me dear? by all our Love,
By all that Bliss, those Joys Heaven here us gave,
I conju^e Thee, and by the Maids of Jove,
To grave this short Remembrance on my Grave.
Here Damon lies, whose Songs did some time^ grace
The murmuring Eske, may Roses shade the place.
To the Memory of the most excellent Lady, JANE Countess of Perth.
THis Beauty which pale Death in Dust did turn,
And closed so soon within a Coffin sad,
Did, pass like Lightning, like to Thunder burn;
So little Life, so much of Worth it had.
Heavens but to show their Might here made it shine,
And when admired, then in the Worlds Disdain
(O Tears, O Grief!) did call it back again,
Lest Earth should vaunt She kept what was Divine.
What can we hope for more? what more enjoy?
Since fairest Things thus soonest have their End,
And, as on Bodies Shadows do attend,
Since all our Bliss is followed with Annoy?
Yet She Is not dead, She lives where She did love,
Her Memory on Earth, Her Soul above.

