ARS AVLICA OR The Courtiers Art.

Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos. MAR. Et Principibus placuisse viris,
non vltima laus est. HOR. at, at Felice chipuo.

LONDON, Printed by Melch. Bradwood for Edward Blount. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and most Noble Brothers: The Lord WILLIAM, Earl of
Penbrook, And Lo. PHILIP, Earl of Montgomery.
RIght Honorable and worthy LORDS, This small Treatise happening to speak
English at this time; how I know not, but by a kind of fate, should seem
destined to your protection: who from your own practice in Court can
cleereliest judge of his art. You, whose individual and innated worths,
besides my particular duty, challenge this so equal Patronage; and bind me
the most humbly devoted to your honors.

ED. BLOVNT.

Da Dio si prega per appoggio fermo: Che, fra gl'huomini gia non c'e piu
schermo.
A Fiori, a fumo, a sogno ed ombra vana,
Molt' assomigliano lo nostro stato;
Anzi io per me, non trouo cosa humana,
Che l' histrion, e'l palco; cui dar a lato
Il mondo rio, and mente nostra insana.
Theatro e quello, and questa per il fato,
E fatta histrion', cangiando a mill modi
Habiti, and persona; dispreggi and lodi.
Per che ti chieggio,
O gran Chorago de i celesti chori,
Chi co'l cenno sopra i piu bassi palchi
Da leg; a chi, hor, chi tardo e d'vscir fuori,
Per far mostra a te, and tuci gran siniscalchi,
Quanto tutti possono pur megliori,
Et secondo dai merce, o fai diffalchi.
Fa, ch'io tal mi comporti in questa scena;
Ch'al mondo, no^ che da te io seampi pena,
Fatto che deggio.
Poluere minuta. G. G.

LORENZO DVCCI to the Noble Courtiers.
WOrthy gentlemen, I cannot conceive what more befitting and fruitful Present
may be offered unto you, than that which with an apparent brevity contains
in it the means how to compass and obtain that End, which by service is
desired. To which purpose having finished this present Discourse, by me named
The Art of the Court, inperfection according to the module of my conceits: I
give it, and as I conjecture, most justly dedicate the same unto you: not,
because either by virtue of a long experience, or of an exact judgment, I make
profession to be a Master in this Art, but to manifest, that by the North
guide-star of methodicall knowledge, a man may furrow the deepest seas of
unknown discipline; and happily far from the dangerous rocks of reasonable
censures, arrive at the Port of true and commendable doctrine. If then my (...)
herein misgiue me not, my desired reward shall be the profit you shall make of
it: but if any man think otherwise, the way lies open, no less to the trial
of his own knowledge, than (if he can) to the correction of other men's
labors. Fare you well From the Castle of Ferrara the 29 of January 1601.

The Preface.
IT is my intent to make trial if by the way of certain principles, there
may any precepts be established, for the instruction and institution of a
worthy Courtier: Not to show what virtues belong unto him, but, presupposing
him already to have that habit, which the Court requires, to teach him in
what manner he should carry himself to run the course of his service with
happiness. And because multiplicitie of words is toilsome to the writer, and
breeds confusion in the Readers mind, I will make my proof^ with that brevity,
which may exclude obscurity in the understanding, and yet lie very plain unto
indifferent capacities.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
CHAP. I. WHat should be the Courtiers end or scope. CHAP. II. A declaration of
the foresaid ends. CHAP. III. Of the choice of the Prince to be served. CHAP.
IIII. That the Courtier must conceal the endeavor of his proper commodity,
under the apparent desire of the Princes service. CHAP. V. Of the Courtiers
office or duty. CHAP. VI. If in all things the Courtier be^ bound to serve his
Prince. CHAP. VII. If the Courtier upon occasion be bound to spend his life
an^ goods in the Princes service. CHAP. VIII. Of the Princes bond or duty
toward the Courtier. CHAP: IX. Of two sorts of services considerable. CHAP. X.
Of service by duty of affectioned. CHAP. XI. Of voluntary or assistant
service. CHAP. XII. Means how to know the nature and affection of the Prince.
CHAP. XIII. The manner how to accommodat^ himself to the Princes humor. CHAP.
XIIII. Whether it be fit to have often speech or conference with the Prince.
CHAP. XV. How many and what be the kinds of speeches or discourses the
Courtier is to have with his Prince. CHAP. XVI. How to take opportunity to
induce a conference of State. CHAP. XVII. What is to be observed in the passing
of this conference. CHAP. XVIII. How to induce conference of enterteinment.
CHAP. XIX. The order that must be kept in conference of enterteinment. CHAP.
XX. Of Praise and flattery. CHAP. XXI. Of the soundings and trials which
Princes sometimes use with their Courtiers. CHAP. XXII. Means how to
distinguish and come to the knowledge of these trials. CHAP. XXIII. What the
Courtier is to do knowing and perceiving these soundings or trials. CHAP.
XXIIII. Of the subsidiarie aides and mean to obtain the Princes favor. CHAP.
XXV. Of the help which may be drawn from the Princes kindred for procurement
of his favor. CHAP. XXVI. Of the help which may be drawn from the Princes
friends. CHAP. XXVII. Of the help which may be drawn from the Princes
servants. CHAP. XXVIII. How to keep in favor once obtained. CHAP. XXIX. What
is to be observed with the Prince for the continuing in his favor. CHAP. XXX.
What is to be observed with other Courtiers, and the manner how to make them his
friends. CHAP. XXXI. The means how to obtain of the Prince those favors and
graces which are desired. CHAP. XXXII. What must be observed not to have the
Courtiers his enemies, and to avoid ill turns and offices. CHAP. XXXIII. How
the Courtier is to carry himself with his enemies and persecutors. CHAP.
XXXIIII. How he may keep back his concurrents and corriualls. CHAP. XXXV. The
means how to avoid envy. CHAP. XXXVI. What the Courtier is to do, who shall
find himself slenderly respected of his Prince.
ARS AVLICA, OR The Courtiers Art.
CHAP. I. What should be the Courtiers and or scope.
ALL Humane actions have for their end and scope some good or benefit of him
who is the actour of them. The chiefest good principally thirsted after by man
is happiness: For this, all actions are done; which either mediatly or
immediately regard the same; so that every Agent properly works for his own
benefit. True it is, that many times in the atchieuement of some desired good
being very difficult, the help of another is expedient, his own forces not
bastant or sufficient. For this cause, in the beginning, were Societies
instituted; in the which if every one should work for his own good, without
respecting that of his fellow; doubtless, they should be vain and friutlesse.
Wherefore in these, it is behooffull not to work for proper commodity, but
for public benefit; for that in this manner every one as interessed, do agree
to effect and facilize the obtaining of that good which is desired. The end
then of every Society is the common good of those who are comprehended therein.

The respect and relation of him that commands, toward him that serves, I
dare not call it a Society; for such is the inequality of the terms, that by
many wise men the servant is held the Commanders instrument; whereby it
follows, that among them there is no other end, than the good of the master,
knowing it to be clear, that we can not distinguish the end of the instrument,
from that of the agent which mooues the same. Heere-hence it follows further,
that the Servant owes all his actions (as a servant) unto his Master, and the
Master nothing unto his servant; and that therefore receiving any benefit from
the commander or Master, he is by far more bound, than by serving he can oblige
the other; since in serving he does but the actions of an instrument, the which
are to be acknowledged from the agent, but in receiving of a benefit, he has
the same from another as from an affected cause: From the same principle many
excellent and important consequences might be deduced, the which
notwithstanding I will reserve, as for a place more fit, in that part of active
Philosophy, which contains precepts of Oeconomicall prudence.

In the mean time we say, That not entreating here of natural or violent
servitude, but of voluntary and elective service, it seems, and not without
reason, it may pretend to have in some sort the quality and nature of a
Society, and that by consequence we may attribute unto it for the end thereof
a kind of communion of good. And certainly that herein the service due to the
Master is most considerable, may be gathered by what already has been said,
as also by weying or judging of their mutual bonds: for, if any demand What is
the servants duty or bond, there is none I think that will not answer, To
serve his lord and master: But on the other side seeking what is the Masters
duty, we shall find it, To benefit the servant according to his merit. So
that by this mutual obligation, these two terms Master and Servant are united
together in a society; the which as has already been said, has for the end a
common profit. This granted, it seems that the Masters scope or end is, the
servants benefit, and that of the Servant, the Masters service, since their
duties have these references. And if it be so, there grows a doubt how it may
be verified, that every one works for his peculiar profit, or that this is
the natural inclination of every man, and of all working things* But it is
answered, that the ends are of two sorts, either desired or intended by
themselves, or by accident and caused by another. Whereby it follows, that
two, which between themselves seem contrary, may desire one thing without
repugnancy, as in this present case it happens. For the servant desires for
himself, and works for his proper benefit, moved unto it by a natural
instinct: but by accident, and for this cause desires and works in the
service of his Lord, since that from hence finally he draws the profit and
commodity which he longs after; whereby there is no contradiction at all,
that the servant should have for his end his proper benefit, and withal the
service of his Master.

Yet this does not wholly resolve the propounded doubt, because it seems,
that if the true and principal end of the servant be his own proper
commodity, we might say that his duty were to work, not for his Masters
service, but for his own profit: and therefore this is by every man with great
reason rejected. Wherefore we say that a servant may two ways be considered,
either as he is sociable, or as he is associated: if as sociable, without doubt
the end of his actions is his proper benefit: if as associated, by the bond of
duty which binds him, his End is the service of his Master. Or if in other
terms, we will say the same thing, that is, that the servant has two Ends or
Respects, one which moves him to contra^ this society, and this out of a^
question and resolutely is his proper benefit; the other is the end of the
society, and this doubtless is the commodity or service of the master,
though not disbanded or disioyned from the profit of the servant, by the
participation that this habitude or respect of society has between the
Master and the servant, the which, as it is said, ends always in a common
profit.

To conclude then, and to reserve that unto another place, which here (as not
so proper) we will but briefly touch. We say, That the end for the which the
Courtier voluntarily submits his neck unto the yoke of servitude, is his own
profit, for the which as his end principally intended, he both labors and
endures much. But his end, as a Courtier, obliged in society and duty of
servitude, is the service of his Lord, the which he uses as a means unto the
former and more principal, which is his proper benefit, with the intercourse
of favor which follows the actual service. For the Courtier first of all
longs after his own profit; but not able otherwise to compass the same than
by the love and favor of his Prince, he propounds his service, and
diligently working therein, obteineth his favor, which breeds his own
profit and commodity above all other things by him desired.

It appears then that the ends or scopes that the Courtier has are three,
that is, his proper interest, and this is that which chiefly he endeavors:
next, the favor of the Prince, as the cause of his first end: and then, the
service of the Prince, as the efficient cause of that favor. But because these
things have in themselves some difficulties, a larger declaration is necessary.

CHAP. II. A declaration of the foresaid ends.
PRoper interest, Service, and the Princes favor are, as it is said, the
Courtiers ends, of the which his proper interest is the first, and by it self
desired; the others by accident and as means. Now what is meant by this term
favor, is so manifest, that it needs no other explication: but those of proper
interest, and the Princes service, are not so well understood, both the one and
the other term containing many things, unto the which (it may be) the end and
duty of a Courtier does not extend.

Let us first then consider the Service, and say thus; There is no doubt, but
the Prince has diverse and many sorts of men which serve him; as the soldiers
in the war, the Magistrates in time of peace, and those which in his house
perform his necessary business. If all then (as it is most plain) are bound
to serve him, all their ends shall be the service of the Prince: and so if he
be a Courtier whose end is the Princes service, all those above named, and
particularly such which are in actual service should be Courtiers: but it
seems not only a new term, but withal, contrary to common sense and the
true signification of the name of a Courtier, to comprehend therein, the
Soldiers, the Judges and other Magistrates; wherefore we can not say they are
all Courtiers which serve, but only some of them, amongst whom we can not
deny those to be held for such which privately serve him. So as it is fit to
consider in the Prince two persons, one public, which makes him to be a
Prince; the other private, by the which we suppose him to be the head of a
family, as by the other (as a Prince) he is head of a Kingdom or
Commonwealth. Those then who serve him as a Prince, that is, in the actions
belonging to the public benefit, were never called by the name of Courtiers;
but those only who serve him privately, and are comprehended in his family or
Court. From this principle, we draw that which at the first we sought for,
that is, what things this service contains; for that, from it are wholly
excluded all civil ends and public actions; on the other part are received
all those which the domestical business or that of the family requires, in
such sort, that as the Magistrate, in another place, shall be by us termed the
Princes instrument as a public person, so is the Courtier his instrument, as
the head and father of a family; so that all works belonging to the charge of
housholdrie are embraced and contained in his end as a Courtier: and therefore
when we say his end to be the service of the Prince, it is understood (as we
have said) of all that which exceeds not the limits of household affairs.

Let us now come to declare what is understood by proper interest. It can not
be doubted that this term interest does not contain all kind of humane good,
though to this large scope of signification, it seems the common use thereof
has extended it, but we ought with reason to aduert the exclusion of that good
which cannot be obtained from another: because in vain should the Courtier
serve the Prince to that end, to obtain from him that thing, which neither he
nor any other could impart unto him: as for example are the virtues, which in
vain are expected from any other, than from our own well ordered and proper
nature: so that this good excluded, it seems (and in this likewise the vulgar
opinion does agree) that for two things principally he does take upon him and
undergo this servitude; for profit and for honor. Some serve for profit, not
esteeming of honor, as the mercenaries; others for honor only, as the noble,
either by birth or greatness of mind and spirit; others both for the one and
the other.

Well, let it be so that every man serves for these two either jointly or
severally. Profit particularly includes in it riches, the which are in
abundance of necessaries for our life; as money, lands, cattle, moueables,
furniture for houses, and such like. But by honor, is not understood at all
that which follows the actions or virtuous qualities, since that this good
(as already has been said) depends on our proper election and faculty,
and may without others help be obtained; for I think none of opinion, that
freely to use prudence, fortitude, justice or magnanimity, it is necessary to
enter into the Court of Princes; but there rather to obtain degrees of power
and dignity, which commonly are called honors; or be it that worthily by
means of virtuous actions they are attributed as honor given in reward of
virtue; or because, as they say, Honor is the opinion held of another virtue:
by means whereof they obtain in the world an opinion of merit, or because he
that possesses it, is honored. So that the honors which are the Courtiers
end, are degrees, dignities, power, wealth and the reputation, which spring
from them; and not the whole compass of honor. For since the actions of
virtue may as well be used out of the Court, as has been declared, the honors
answerable thereunto may also without being a Courtier be in like manner
obtained.

CHAP. III. Of the choice of the Prince to be served.
OVt of these thing may easily be drawn a rule which the Courtier is to
observe in the election of the Prince to whom he is to dedicate his service;
the which requires great consideration, for the inconveniences which otherwise
may follow: because if in this an error be committed, it is clearly impossible
ever to obtain the end for which he serves; whereby vain is the labor he shall
afterward undertake in service, false his hope of reward, unprofitable his
repentance, and the amendment very dangerous: for that unto the easy change of
Masters follows a conceit of lightness, and a difficulty not happily to be
new placed, by reason of the impediments opposed, either by the authority and
power of the abandoned Prince, or by the foresaid opinion of instabilitie, or
hard to be contented, or of arrogancy according as the cause of the change may
be variably reported or believed: the which happening by reason of the Princes
discharge or casting off, can not be for the most part without a great stain
or blot unto the Courtier. Wherefore it is very necessary to be careful that
this election should be wisely made, and it shall be such, when the Prince which
is chosen may give cause unto the Courtier of that end, which principally he
pretends above all others. But to make a perfect judgment herein, we must
consider the quality of the intended end, and the ability and proportion which
the Prince bears to the same.

The Courtiers end has alredie been said to be his propt commodity, that is,
his profit and honor. And because there is no limitation in desired ends,
which are (as they say) infinite, whereupon the Merchant coueteth an infinite
gain, and the Captain a most singular victory, so no less does the Courtier
desire a profit without end and honor in the highest degree that may be
obtained.

The Princes ability consists in power and will, they had wont to join
thereunto knowledge; but in this affair it has so little part, that without
error it may be let pass. We must then examine his ability and his
willingness, diligently beholding what proportion they hold with the forsaid
ends, and if we know them to have proportion upon an effectiue cause, most
assuredly it shall be good to make choice of such a Prince: and to speak more
plainly, I say, that if propounding any profit, there shall be any Prince that
both can and will impart the same unto the Courtier, he is the most worthy
whom he should serve. In like sort may we reason of the other end, which is
honor, aduertizing, that the Courtier either by himself, or by means of some
other who have greater and more inward knowledge than he, may learn if these
two principals, that is, Power and Will to benefit, be truly in the Prince,
whose power may easily be understood, as a thing for the mos^ part commonly
known, an^ must be considered not onel^ immediately, as proper in himself, but
mediatly and by other helps; for that, if by himself he can not perform much,
b^ by his authority be able, so that by means of him it shall be lawful for the
Courtier to hope for his desired end, we may iust^ say that he is able: but if
neithe^ by himself nor by means o^ another he be able, in vaine^ the service
that shall be undertaken with him.

The Will is yet harder to be known, the which by nature (...) ouershadowed
with many vales howbeit, it is discoured an^ unmasked by due observation o^ the
effects: for if the Prince be accustomed to be beneficial and seems
inclined thereunto, we may suppose an habit of beneficence, which wanting, he
is assuredly incaple of honorable service. But in this particular we must
consider a division, because some Princes are not of a beneficent and liberal
nature toward their servants; others are, but much more with their servants,
to whom by merit of their service they think themselves in some sort bound.
The illiberall niggardly and absolute not beneficial, are unworthy of life,
since they live unprofitably in this humane society, wherein nothing is
required more necessarily, than beneficence and liberality; such Princes
toward their servants are not woorthily enabled for the service of the
Courtier instructed in this art; wherefore for the most part they are served
with mercenarie people without spirit or feeling of honor, and to conclude,
worthy of them.

Amongst those who are beneficial toward their servants, there are some, who
sparingly and with hardness grant their benefits and favors, not because they
do not love the good of their servants, but doubting lest having profited
them, they should abuse their favors, or suspecting lest showing themselves too
gentle, they should grow too confident and secure. With these kind of Princes
a man may with commendations contract service, but how he is to proceed to
obtain these favors shall be fully declared in his place. Some others there
are, who by benignity of nature most easily incline to benefit and to do
favors, who notwithstanding very consideratly and with a just proportion
dispense and divide the same; and these are those who above all the rest
deserve the service of the most honorable and accomplished Courtiers: wherefore
upon these does fall the wise election, as of Princes or Lords, from whose
magnanimity, by means of service, there is in all reason hope to obtain
their desired profit and reputation.

CHAP. IIII. That the Courtier must conceal the endeavor of his proper
commodity under the apparent desire of the Princes service.
But to return to the Courtiers end, and to speak of some things worthy
special confideration, you are to understand, that the end, by it own nature,
has a desire in it self to move and induce an operation or working; wherefore
laboring in favor thereof, those are judged provident and wise, who are seen
to take a good way proportionate and apt for the obtaining and compassing of
the same. But in the particular of a Courtier this rule fails, since it is
not sufficient that the actions be wise and discreet, which manifestly appear
to tend to his end, that is, his proper interest; but those also which seem to
belong to the profit and service of the Prince: and the reason is, because the
Courtier is not to expect benefit, without the love and favor of the Prince,
which shall never be obtained if he discover his interessed service, since such
kind of Courtiers are esteemed as mercenaries, and more selfe-friends than
their Masters; who supposing that the Society which they hold with their
servant should tend to their profit, take it for an injury unto them, whilst
perverting the order, another end is preferred, which by accident (in their
opinion) should be desired. This part was excellently well understood of a
great Courtier of whom many and very considerable observations are read in
Cornelius Tacitus, Ann. 4.
who causes Seianus thus to speak: Fulgorem honorum a se nunquam praelatum,
excubias ac labores, vt vnum ex militibus pro incolumitate Imperatoris, malie:
He never laid before him bright shining honors, but wished rather watchings
and labors as one of the common soldiers for the Emperors safety. And
Tigillinus says: Idem 14.
Non se vt Burrhum diuersas spes, sed solum incolumitatem Neronis spectare: He
had not diverse hopes like Burrhus, but respected the only health of Nero. This
man in his time was likewise in great favor, and by his art surpast and
overcame all his concurrents. In sum, this advertisement is so necessary,
that taking any other course, all hope of ever being fortunate in Court is cut
off: wherefore he must not only make profession in words, but with effects make
perfect show to have no other interest than the absolute service of his lord:
which to do we will now teach the means.

The scope of the Courtier is his proper interest, that of the Prince, is his
profit. Amongst the actions which the Courtier can perform, some respect only
his proper interest, some the service and commodity of the Prince, and some
are common to both. Of those respecting the proper interest, some are contrary
to the Princes service, some not: likewise, of those respecting the Princes
profit, some are repugnant and contrary to the Courtiers good, others not.
Now, seeking in what manner by means of our labor, we may conceal the desire
of our proper interest, with an apparent will of the Princes service; we say,
first it is necessary that we who wholly abstain from those actions which
behold our proper commodity to the prejudice of the Prince. It is also
necessary (although it should not be so great an error to do the contrary) to
beware to do any thing which immediately respects our proper good. And of all
this the reason is clear enough by what has been said before.

Those actions now which are common to the end, both of the one and the other,
are not greatly hurtful nor profitable to the Courtiers intention: but those
actions are profitable which regard the Princes commodity, and especially
those which seem to contain any danger or damage to the servant. Amongst those
of greatest importance to mask the appetite of our proper commodity, are
those which are wrought in benefit of the Prince with great danger and
detriment of things most dear. But we must note here, that the end of the
Courtier being double, that is, of profit and reputation; in that of honor or
reputation we must have special consideration and regard, because it shall be an
action most commendable in a Courtier (as a Courtier) to despise or refuse some
honor or dignity to continue in the service of his Prince; and in this sort
to suffer a damage, is a thing to be desired; but withal it should not be
commendable, if for any respect of his Lord he should suffer any blot or stain
in his reputation: for that is a thing which amongst men ought to be preferred
(as commonly it is) yea before life it self. But in that which belongs to
the profit and good service of the Prince, he may securely make any loss, the
which by how much either in adventure or in effect it shall be greater, by so
much the more does it answer to courtly wisdom. And because under the name of
profit I mean the goods which may be given or taken, and in deed all are
termed actions of this kind (virtue and honor excepted) as when for the honor
of his Prince he spends liberally; when he aduentureth friends and kindred;
when he leaves his own pleasures, and many times his necessary commodities
of living or of healthful living, as meat, rest, sleep and such like, so
far as nature will suffer, to prefer the service and execute his Princes
commandment, and above all, when he exposes his life to danger for the
honor, safety, and pleasure of his Prince.

Cornelius Tacitus an excellent Master of Courtiers, with an example of
Seianus, most plainly teaches all that hitherto has been spoken to this
purpose: because whilst Tiberius was yet in doubt how far he might have
confidence in Seianus, against whom many things were muttered: Ann. 4.
Forte, inquit, illis diebus oblatum Caesaeri anceps periculum auxit vana
rumoris, praebuitque ipsi materiam, cur amicitiae constantiaeque Seiani magis
fideret: By chance, says he, in those days a doubtful peril being offered
unto Caesar, increased the vain report, and gave matter why he should be more
confident in the friendship and constancy of Seianus. Then showing the fall of
the grott wherein Tiberius banketed, eius os lapsis repent saxis obruit quosdam
ministros, hinc metus in omnes, and fuga eorum qui conuiuium celebrabant; at
the mouth whereof certain stones falling down, slew some of the seruitors,
whereupon all fearing, those that prepared the banquet fled. But Seianus, borne
to obtain, and (as it were) to impatronise himself in his Princes favor,
genu, vultuque and manibus super Caesarem suspensas opposuit se incidentibus,
with knees, face and hands ouer-panching Caesar, opposed himself against the
imminent ruins. This then is one of those actions which we before have pointed
at, and is by the circumstances in the highest degree, as well, happening so
great a danger of life, as that the remedy was immediately taken, and that
without any premeditated discourse; whereby was perceived a mind most ready
and well disposed toward the Prince: because it seemed that by a strong motion
of nature it self well inclined, a work of so great safety to his Lord was
performed. Wherefore worthily followed the reward which the same Author
adioyneth: Mayor ex eo, and quamuis exitiosa suaderet; vt non sui anxius, cum
fide audiebatur: He grew greater hereby, and although he should persuade
dangerous matters, they were yet faithfully heard, as from one not respecting
himself. Where these words are of especial note: vt non sui anxius, as not
respecting or careless of himself: because they confirm the principle of
hiding the appetite of our proper interest, under the vale of apparent desire
to do the Prince service. Such then is the drift or end of the Courtier, and as
has been declared must be covertly or ouertly desired, if he will induce the
Prince to accept of his service, and make a passage for the obteining of
favor, by means whereof he wins the possession both of profit and honor;
marks which in his principal intention he chiefly aims at.

CHAP. V. Of the Courtiers office or duty.
ALl those desseignes which men purpose, are to be compassed by action or
endeavor, the end being first duly considered, that course or action which is
taken for the obteining thereof, is the office of the agent: wherefore the
Courtier being bound (as a Courtier) to have immediately in his intention, and
withal to procure, the Princes service; it is manifest that the action which
he purposes to do, is, to serve; not in show and in will, but effectually and
in act: and this is so true, that according to the quantity and quality of
such operation, the favor in proportion is answerable, which is the mediate
reward of service; and the Prince which equally divides the same, ought to
measure it by the rule of merit, the which (as it is said) grows from actual
service, in such wise, that who most serves, meriteth most favor, and who
less, less reward. This is Courtly right, or law: as the right or law
politic and civil is founded upon merit in the Commonwealth, that is, of
benefits done unto his country, which desert is recompensed according to
distributive justice, whose rule is (as in the morals it is taught)
Geometrical proportion: but to speak more fitly to the common capacity, we
say, that the axiom or ground being true, That most is due to him that serves
most, and less to the less serving, and nothing at all to him who actually is
not in service; it follows, that they are greatly deceived, who think with
nobility only, with abundance of wealth, singularity in learning, arms, or
such like, to merit more than those unto whom in respect of service, they are
far inferiors; because the reward of the Court (as has been said) must be
proportioned as from the efficient cause from whence it grows, unto the
actual service. For as if you were to make choice of a Captain to undertake
some dangerous enterprise, their pretention should be very vain, that would
persuade themselves, either for their beauty of body, learning, wealth or
nobility, to be preferred in choice, before the more experienced and practiced
in matters of war, though less learned, and inferior unto them in other
qualities: the like opinion is held of those who in Court pretend greater
desert, for such like respects, whilst others in diligence of service go far
beyond them, because Courtly desert is not brought into the Court, but is
necessarily to be sought for there, and is by labor obtained: which labor
properly of the Courtier is to serve. I say not now, that a learned Courtier is
not of quality greater and more estimable than an ignorant, and a noble man
than a plebean, although in service; but I say, these are qualities, which not
put in practice or exercised in the Princes service, reap no reward with him,
they cause indeed a precedencie of one man before another, as members of a
civil society, but not as Courtiers. So likewise, if (for example) we
consider of one nobly borne in comparison of a vulgar person, it is most clear
he is of greater estimation, as a man and part of the City; but if we peize
and compare them as soldiers, wherein, it may be, the ignoble is more practiced
and better disposed (supposing at least it be so) without all doubt he shall
be preferred, and the noble man pretending the contrary should take a vain and
undue exception.

But here we must not let pass a difficulty, occasioned by common observance,
and justly commended of all: that is, let us suppose two in the Princes
household, whereof one far excelles in nobility, learning and other like
qualities, but little employed in service; the other much inferior unto this:
It is thought fit by all, that the more noble and qualified should more
honorably be entertained: wherefore we see him sometimes honored by the Prince
at his table, receives greater commodities, of lodgings, of servants,
precedence in place, in title, in standing covered and in complement; in fine,
the Princes respect of him in estimation is very conveniently more then of the
other, whereupon we may doubt, how this may be an effect of Courtly justice,
or how the foundation of desert should be service. Whereunto we answer thus; he
who is comprehended in the Princes household may two ways be considered,
either as such a man with such conditions and qualities, or as a Courtier only.
If only as a Courtier, I say it shall be injustice to him who serves more to be
less rewarded, or but in equal liberality with him, who in actual service
was his inferior. If as such a man and so qualified, it is very reasonable,
that who excels in good parts esteemed of in common ^ociety, should be had
in greater account and reputation. But there rests a doubt if we shall
prefer one consideration before an other, and that when, and in what things:
for that we see many times the consideration of one as qualified to be
preferred before the other, as a Courtier, and therefore although he serve
less, is not withstanding in better place. We see also on the other side, that
the best qualified in some things stand far inferior, to the better and
diligent serving Courtier. For, speaking of favors (for the most part) the
best beloved obtain them, and those are, the diligent careful in service,
they have greater authority with the Ministers of the Court, and of the
household affairs of the Prince, yea and of the public also, respecting the
power of a Courtier-fauorite, and the recompense with profit and dignity,
presupposing their abilities, which ordinarily and without compare is more
large toward them. And surely the name of Minion, or Priuado, which we see
commonly attributed to those greatly favored in the Court, is not obtained by
the best learned, by the greatest captains, the most noble, or the happiest in
fortunes blessings; but by those who in their Princes service are most ready.
So we see Seianus preferred in favor with Tiberius, and with greater
liberality rewarded then any other that served at that time; albeit we may
safely believe, there were many, in many other things that did surpass him.
And also those Pallanti-Narcisi, and Calisti with Claudius and Tigillinus about
Nero, were not so far in authority and favor above others, as unto an
infinite number of those times, they were without all comparison most inferior
in all other good qualities.

Wherefore we say that the benefits which the Prince does, are of two sorts,
one which he bestows amongst his servants answerable to their qualities, as
men in that kind enabled; these benefits are apparent and do not grow upon any
Courtly desert of those on whom they are bestowed, but upon the love and favor
of the giver; which is plain, because they are bestowed in the beginning of
service, when we cannot say there was any desert before, and might as well have
been granted before any service, and it may be greater. The other kind of
benefit, is that which is given to those, who with great diligence have served;
and these are not granted but after service begun, and are augmented as the
favor by service does increase, which makes us attain sometimes to that pitch
of grace that Seianus did, Ann. 4.
qui varijs artibus Tiberium deuinxit adeo, vt obscurum aduersum alios, sibi
vni incautum intectumque efficeret; who by sundry wiles had so bewitched
Tiberius, that being close to all others, to him alone he had him open and
uncircumspect. But that which more imports, he came to that height of favor,
that in the journey which he made with Tiberius out of the city, the Senators,
non modo aram clementiae, aram amicitiae, sed effigies quoque circum Caesaris
and Seiani censuere; not only erected an altar of Clemency and another of
Friendship, but thought meet to place the images of Caesar and Seianus about
them. Neither stayed he here, crebris precibus efflagitabant, visendi sui
copiam facerent, most earnestly entreating they might have the favor to behold
him, using the servant as fellow with the Prince; but more, that which seeemes
incredible, he durst hope for, yea, and in scorn of wonder obtained in
marriage the widow, daughter in law to his Lord. Neither, it may be, is it of
less consideration with the same Author, that, which a principal man of the
Senate, called in question for his friendship with Seianus should say (amongst
other things) in his excuse, being fallen unto a miserable end through the
whirle of fortunes rouling wheel; Etiam Satrium atque Pomponium venerabamur,
we did likewise Court Satrius and Pomponius; neither did this suffice,
libertis quoque ac Ianitoribus eius notescere pro magnifico accipiebatur; to
be known to his freed-men and doore-keepers we accounted a special grace. He
says not to be dear to them or in favor, but notescerre, that they would
take notice of them: neither does he say that it was necessary or profitable,
but, pro magnifico accipiebatur, as a high and special grace. At that time it
was a reputation and credit unto the Senators of Rome, not as then having
altogether lost the brightness of their place, to be known to Seianus
freed-men and doore-keepers: To such degree of state sometimes does fortune
heave a circumspect and provident Courtier, by means of his place woorthily
performed, unto which pitch of height, it is not recorded that ever any
attained by favor or recompense of his Lord who did not serve, but by some
other way of merit lived in the Court. Wherefore we must conclude that the
office and duty of a Courtier is actually to serve, and that this is the action
wherewith oftentimes he becomes not only possessor, but dispensor too of
the favor of his Lord.

CHAP. VI. If in all things the Courtier be bound to serve his Prince.
But to the intent it may the better be understood what hitherto has been
spoken of the office and duty of a Courtier, and that every man may know within
what bounds the duty of him that serves is confined, and what things his
office a^^ bond embraces, whereupon also the resolution of many things
depends; it is very necessary to be understood of the Courtier to whom it
belongs actually to serve his Prince, (as already is concluded) be therefore
bound to serve in all things without exception.

For clearing of this doubt, sifted and discussed by many, me thinks, very many
effectual things may be said, neither spoken of nor heard of heretofore,
wherein we will proceed briefly and so far as the vnproperty of the place will
permit, in this manner.

If it were possible without external help to obtain humane felicity, so
that every man by himself, were of sufficiency to compass it, Societies ^ould
be superfluous: but (...) this is impossible, it has been thought necessary,
not only to institute them, but with all to make them the more effectual,
fruitful and firm, to give them ability and virtue, to bind all those that
are comprehended in them, to perform and act some thing worthy thereof, in
such sort, that every associate, (as such an one) is bound to endeavor himself
to that end whereunto the society tends: and that this is true, there is no
Society found without Bond, nor Bond without Society, either real or
rational, that is, with terms and fellows really and apparent, or at least
distinct in works of the mind and understanding, as more plainly we will set
down in the active Philosophy, which is the proper place. Wherefore the bond
or duty, is not other thing then the habitude respect or custom which the
associats have together, which is an impulsive beginning to labor for their
common good, as their only end. The labor or working which does grow hereupon
is called the office or duty of the associats, the which duty in fine, is no
other thing then an actio^ springing from that bond, although this word, bond,
is attributed also unto the action, so that in saying he does his duty, bond or
office, it has all one signification. Now it is clear that this duty has a
proportion with the End, because that is the cause of the working, and
therefore from it, it receives the rule, order and moderation, which ought to
be such as the end proposed requires. Wherefore he does his duty who works
proportionably to the end set down, and he who does actions prejudicial to
such end, does the contrary. But he does more then his duty who does things
comprehending the end and more: and he less, who does things that in their
own nature, are not answerable to the destinated End, or leaves many things
undone, which to the obtaining of the purposed end are very necessary.
Whereupon, both duty and bond, as has been said, being all one, every
associate is bound to labor and endeavor for the end intended by the society
wherein he is, and who does less, answers not his duty, and who does more,
is said to exceed in duty and is commendable, so it does not prejudice the
society in any sort: who does any action not belonging to the End, works idly
and in vain, but who does things hurtful to the pretended end does things
contrary to his duty and bond. Wherefore we conclude, that by the purposed end
of every Society, is drawn and known what actions every of the associats are
bound to perform, and from which to abstain, adding thus much for a greater
declaration, of the actions which may be performed in a society, some are
commanded and fall under the bond which in that fellowship binds the
associats thereof, and these are the necessary actions for the obtaining the
desired end, others are forbidden and do discredit the actours thereof, and
those are prejudicial or contrary to that end: In both, the bond of duty has
power, but in those which are necessary it binds to the performance, and in
those which are contrary to the abstinence.

Let us come now to our particular purpose: it has been already said, there
is a kind of society between the Prince and the Courtier; the which for the
inequality of terms, has not altogether the common benefit for end: yet if
not that alone, at least principally that of the Master, wherefore the Courtier
is bound to do all that which does comprehend the benefit, profit or service
of his Lord. And because above we have sufficiently declared that the service
which is the end of this society is restrained to the household or oeconomicall
part, in sort, that all the household actions which may redound to the benefit
of the Prince, fall under the bond of the Courtier, that is, bind him to
effect the same for the service of his Lord: and on the contrary, all that may
prejudice this oeconomicall service, is forbidden the Courtier, and doing it,
does a thing unworthy his name; and by that reason may be called an infamous
servant, since that as doing well, to the desired end of the society, he
obteineth honor thereby: so who works to the contrary is defamed; yet not
simply or wholly, but answerable to the society and his bond of duty. As for
example, he should be a very infamous soldier, who at the giving battle
should throw away his arms and fly, but not wholly disgraced, because he
might then justly be so called, as if he had betrayed his Prince and country,
or such like: for the reason which shall be showed elsewhere: so likewise he is a
dishonorable Courtier who acts any thing contrary to the oeconomicall service
of his Prince, but not altogether a disgraced man or infamous citizen.

CHAP. VII. If the Courtier upon occasion be bound to spend his life and goods
in the Princes service.
THe Courtier then is bound, as appears by what has been said before, to
serve his Prince in all oeconomicall actions, and not bound but exempt from all
other not contained therein, as particularly has been declared touching the
public affairs. Not, because doing any thing therein, he shall not deserve
commendations; but, because not intermedling or not willing to deal therein,
he can not justly be censured. The like both may and ought to be understood of
the particular offices of the Court, for that as the Courtier in general
comprehends all the household service, and is not otherwise bound to any
thing, as not contained therein; so a particular officer or minister of the
Court is bound only to those actions, which particularly belong to his charge,
and for the which he has contracted service with the Prince: in the other
there is no bond to constrain him. But because it has been said, that
generally the Courtier ought to do all things belonging unto oeconomicall
service, there rises a doubt, if therefore he be bound to neglect all other
respects, and not to care for any loss particularly either of life or goods,
fully to effect the same. For solution then of this difficulty, it is
necessary again to speak of some things very important, concerning society,
but moderatlie, because in our actual Philosophy we must speak thereof with
greater plainness and more distinctly. We say then in the mean time, that
particular societies do aim at some particular good wherewith more easily they
obtain that only happiness whereunto every humane desire and thought is
bent, as to the last and most noble end, unto the which the others do serve as
means and helps, with such order that those nearest unto it are the more noble
and more desired, so that the inferior is commanded and ruled by the superior,
or at least without the hurt or offense of it, nature not permitting, that a
thing less desired, should be procured with the offense or hurt of an other
more dear and noble, for so should the course and order of causes be
overthrown, and with that confusion deprive the second causes of that virtue
and efficacy which they receive from the first, and by consequence make a
surceasing of the motions which succeed: the which is true, not alone in the
causes of natural motion, amongst the which the superior taken away, the
inferior can work or move nothing at all. As doubtless the elements should
be idle, if the heaven the superior cause were not, neither would the heaven
move, if the internal parts assisted not, nor should that have force of
motion, if from the superior, and finally from the first mouer, by tradition
from one unto the other, there were not virtue imparted. But so likewise it
falls out in designs and purposed Ends; amongst the which that is the first
and chiefest, which by influence (as it were) does impart the virtue of moving
the desire to all the rest, and does make it happy, as has been said, and by
degrees does much more qualify the next adjacent Ends, in such sort, that it
is impossible for an inferior to move any affection without the virtue of the
superiors purpose: but much more to be able to move the desire toward
himself, with a prejudice of that good, which does exceed it. By example it
will be made more plain. There is no doubt, but the sickeman for his health
sake longs for a medicine: and therefore I say, that it is impossible he
should wish for it, or in any sort consent to the taking thereof imagining it
hurtful to his health, and the reason is, because the lesser or inferior
purpose or end, does not move but by virtue of the greater and more eminent,
and therefore when no virtue does flow from this, that other by no means can
be desired, neither then does it impart any virtue at all, when the inferior
purpose or end does prejudice or hurt the superior, as has been said of the
potion hurtful to the health.

Now let us come to our own case, and give solution of the propounded
difficulty, which most easily will be done: I say that the Courtier can not
desire in the service of his Prince, any thing that shall be hurtful or
contrary to his own profit and commodity; the reason is, because he desires
not the Princes service, as thereby moved unto it. But by reason of his own
profit which giving virtue and efficacy to that service, to move the
Courtiers desire and appetite, does not suffer for the reasons before noted,
that he desire it to his prejudice. Wherefore all that is contrary to the
Courtiers profit, meaning that profit, which (as a Courtier) is the end he
aims at; has without question no place in his desires, whilst he desires
to serve the Prince: all which is occasioned by the dependancie of Ends,
amongst which, his own profit is chiefest and superior; the Princes service,
the lesser and inferior, whereupon of necessity that must be granted, because
howbeit this Society be not fully a society, for the disparity of terms, so
also is there not assigned for the scope thereof a benefit and commodity
equally common. Yet notwithstanding since in the contracting thereof, the
election of the Prince interposeth it self as well as that of the Courtier, it
should in some sort make common the benefit thereof. For if you bound it within
this term, that the scope thereof be the Princes service, but yet so, as
joined in a sort to the Courtiers benefit, because it is absolutely impossible
to work for an other, not having an intention for some proper benefit. And
this being known (as is said) by the Prince, he contracteth the society with
a band on his part also, that is, to benefit the servant (as hereafter shall
be declared) and is contented the Courtier serve him, intending his own
profit: wherefore the Prince desiring, that either without this, or contrary to
this interest, the Courtier should serve, requires a thing contrary to all
right: neither is the Courtier in any sort bound to serve him. And more
particularly to come to the propounded difficulty, I say, that neither the
Prince can look for it, nor the Courtier is bound to spend his life for his
Lord, the reason why, is, because the life is far more dear, then all that
he can either hope for, or desire in service. Whereupon as he should be held
for one unadvised, who for a lesser good, should choose the loss of a greater
benefit, so should that Courtier have little discretion, who for the obtaining
of the purpose of his service, which consists in profit, dignity and power,
would adventure the hazard and loss of his life, which by many degrees is more
dear unto him, then al these benefits; yea such as without the which the rest
cannot be obtained: and if weresolue thus touching the life, much more ought we
understand the same in case of honor and reputation, according to the Civil
opinion, which is far more precious then the life in the highest degree.
Concerning Goods, the resolution is not so easy, since those who propound unto
themselves, the increase or winning of profit, it is necessary they consider
what they lose and what they hope to get, because it may be answered in this
sort: That it is fit to spend less of a man's ability in his Masters service,
then that which he is in hope to get by the same: neither is it meant the
Mercenary Courtier is bound to impouerish himself, and suffer detriment in his
wealth, fully and competently to serve his Lord. But who so prefers
dignities, honor and power, respects of much greater estimation then riches,
may securely for the obteining of them spend of his own, as voluntarily, not
of duty, if the contract either expressly or covertly bind him not thereunto.
The which point of contracts is very considerable, amongst the which are the
use and custom of the Courts, the which more or less tie the Courtiers to
like expenses. As if the Prince in any Court use to keep table for his
servants, the Courtier knowing the same, and bound to service, is to serve at
his own charge; which in other Courts he were not, where the custom is the
Courtiers shall be found their diet. But of like matters, as things of small
note, there needs no longer discourse.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Princes bond or duty toward the Courtier.
Having now resolved and made plain the proposed difficulties, it is requisire
before we pass any farther, to show, (and indeed the Courtier may in reason
desire to be satisfied) what the Princes office or duty is toward him, having
fully set down the Courtiers duty unto the Prince; to the end he may know
what to hope for by his service, and how far to stretch the limits of his
pretentions, because hereof it may follow, that he will neither indiscreetly
make offer of his service, not knowing to what end he shall labor, nor happily
shall unjustly complain of his Lord, as nothing liberal or beneficial toward
him: a thing which as it many times falls out, so is it with all possible care
to be removed, since iars and contentions do stop the passage to favor, and
for the most part breed disgusts and pikes of ill satisfaction and diffidence
both on the one side and on the other. But because these things shall be more
largely treated of elsewhere, we will only here restrain our reasons to
brevity, and point at that which to our present matter seems necessary. We
say then that though the society of the Prince with the Courtier (as before is
noted) be not a perfect society whereby the end thereof is not as in others,
wholly the common benefit, there is no doubt notwithstanding, but the Prince
has likewise on his part a certain bond, by virtue whereof he is tied not
alone to desire, but withal to look out and perform, some thing which may be
beneficial and commodious for his servant. And this is that which at this time
we purpose to manifest, that is, unto what kind of benefit, and unto what
terms he is bound: because as the Courtier (by what has been said) is not
bound to serve him, but in some things, and in those also by certain limits;
it seems very reasonable, that withal, neither the duties of the Prince
should extend to every benefit, whereof the Courtier is capable, but unto some
only, and in those, unto some determinate end, so that the one bond may be
answerable unto the other, and that between them, there may be a due and just
proportion, that it may not seem, this Society is rashly or inconsiderately
made. There is no doubt then, but moderating this duty by the End, such should
the action be, as the first purpose requires, and since we have said the
final end or scope of the Courtier to be his Proper interest, it is most
clear, that as he is bound to work or endeavor to bring to pass that End,
which moved the Prince to conclude society with him, which is his Proper
service: in like sort the Prince is bound to work for performance of that end
which moved the Courtier to link himself in bonds of servitude with him. So
as we may say, that the Prince is bound to work for the benefit of the
Courtier, in those things that the Courtier propounds to obtain by service,
and those are Profit and Honor. But the greatest difficulty rests, that is,
how far forth, or in what measure And truly, if we consider that in cases of
Society, no man performs his duty if he give not satisfaction to his
companion, which if he do, it will be judged that he has performed the
expectatation, this satisfaction then rises from the proportionate working to
that end which his associate desires.

Ends, as has been said before, are in themselves infinite, that is, desired
without measure: so as the Courtier desires not an indifferent profit, or a
mean degree or dignity, but the greatest that may be obtained. I speak not
indefinitely, but as from that Prince, because he must not in his desires
extend himself further then the Princes ability does serve, that rule being
well known, that no man is bound to an impossibility: it should be an
insatiable desire, which should so far carry any man to request more of his
lord then he can do, or grant or procure by his authority. It seems then
hitherto, that the Prince is bound to offer al those honors and profits unto
his Courtier, which immediately or mediately he can grant. Notwithstanding we
must note, that as the Courtier himself, is not bound to do all that he can
in service of his Prince, when the performance thereof shall be prejudicial
to his proper interest: so much less is the Prince bound to benefit the
Courtier in such things as are damageable or offensive to his service, and so
much the more, by any action prejudicial to more important and desired
benefits of his own profits: hence may be gathered, whether he be bound to
benefit the Courtier in things which bring dishonor or special detriment to his
own affairs or fortunes, danger to his life, disage to his person, or
displeasure to his mind: by these principles also may be examined, if he be
to benefit that Courtier, who of necessity is to abandon his service, and many
other commendable things worthy the knowledge of the curious. But because to
proceed further herein were to exceed those terms wherein a methodicall
writer is to contain this art, they are differred and shall be (God willing)
fully handled in that part of active Philosophy, which treats of Oeconomicall
prudence.

CHAP. IX. Of two sorts of services considerable.
FOrasmuch as I suppose we have sufficiently discoursed of the purposed scope
or end of the Courtier, and of his duty in general: as well the order of the
treaty as their profit to whom we intend it, requires, that we draw unto the
particulars so much as we may, to confirm and establish precepts and rules for
the more provident proceeding therein. You shall understand therefore; that
there are two kind of service which may be done unto the Prince, the first is
due and answers to the particular charge or office which is held in court,
either of Steward, Treasurer, Auditor, Secretary, or such like. The second is
not otherwise contained in duty, but offers it self of a free will and
election beyond all duty, and the reason hereof is, that the favor being
answerable to the service that is done: who desires greater favor, then that
deserved by this particular service and proper charge which he holds in the
Court, must likewise enlarge himself in service, and by that means merit a
greater portion of favor, by prefiguring unto himself an object which in the
amplitude thereof may be answerable to the whole compass of the service he
may do to the Prince, but so, that the parts respectively and in proportion
correspond unto the parts of his service, in such sort, that to the office of
Secretary, of Auditor, and the like, there be allotted such measure of favor,
so restrained within his limits, that it partake not with that of an other
office. Wherefore it is necessary for the Courtier who has in purpose to be
absolutely possessed of al favor not to content himself within the terms of
his particular service, but wisely to endeavor the extention of his confines in
a more ample sort. Yet with this condition, not rashly to discover himself an
usurper or intruder upon other men's offices or charges, because this would
breed hatred amongst the Courtiers, and a conceit of presumption with the
Prince. And therefore must rather choose to deal with those which privately
belong not to any one, but are indifferent to all, and may therefore be
exercised by any Courtier without the prejudice or displeasure of any one. This
kind in what it consists shall be declared in his place, in the mean time we
will call it, voluntary service, as the first service of duty.

But there arises here a doubt, which is this, if he may not have the whole
favor, who takes not upon him the whole service, which cannot be done without
the offense of others, and it may be the little satisfaction of the Prince: it
follows then that it is impossible ever to be full possessor of the entire
favor. Whereunto it is answered, that to intrude into an other man's charge,
not called and without authority, does breed bad effects as has been noted
before; but either called or provoked thereunto by the Prince, or put in trust
therewith through confidence obtained with him, then he both may and must do
it, where you shall understand that the order to obtain such favor, is thus:
by serving diligently to the Princes liking in his special or appointed
office, that part of grace or credit is thereby obtained correspondent
thereunto, offering of himself in voluntary services that do increase credit
and favor, from which increase, occasion is offered (as more distinctly shall
be set down) to insinuate himself into the confines of other men's offices: so
that by well serving, favor is augmented, and by this increase grows
occasion to posses the entire service; whereunto afterward is answerable, the
absolute embracement of the Princes love and favor; for the winning whereof the
Courtier chiefly laboreth as the only cause of his felicity.

Yet here rises a greater question, because it is very manifest to be vain
and superfluous to increase diverse essences and things without special need
or necessity: though it be not without cause, the institution of many officers
in a Court, since one alone cannot sufficiently satisfy the Princes affairs:
and if then it be so, he laboreth in vain, whosoever hops (as has been
said) alone to undertake the whole service, and by consequence, it shall be
labor lost, to aspire the winning of the whole favor. To this it is easily
answered, showing first by example, that in the greatest administrations, one
alone may sustain the charge of all the service of a great Prince: as has
been done by the ancient Pretors and Proconsuls: who were sent into diverse
Provinces: and by the Viceroies and governors who are at this day destinated to
the greatest charges, and who doubtless undertake the whole service of the
Prince in those governments, for that in him, that is in his authority, the
whole multitude of inferior officers are united. Wherefore I say, that one
effectually or in act of execution is not capable of all the offices in the
whole Court; some of them being so nice and troublesome, that they require a
whole man, free from all other care: but in effect he may contain them all,
being able by his authority to institute, ordain, distribut, moderate and move
all; so that the whole domestical business of the Prince may be perfectly
satisfied: for that how be it this seems the office of the Master and not of
any servant, we see notwithstanding for the most part, affairs to be so little
pleasing unto Princes, especially of household matters, that they had rather
leave the whole charge, to the wisdom and fidelity of some one thought worthy
thereof; in which sort it is not impossible that it should be undertaken by
one alone. Yet it rests that we discourse more particularly of the two kinds
of services propounded, and first of service due.

CHAP. X. Of service by duty or affectioned.
IT is necessary that first we begin our deserts with some particular duty,
a thing which ordinarily happens to all that will have footing in Court,
because for the most part there is some special title of service assigned
them, in the which they must by all the possible means they can, give
satisfaction to the Prince. So that, as according to the old sentence, ex
nihilo nihil fit, in like sort, it is impossible for him ever to obtein any
favor, who has no portion or place of service; but he that possesses any
part, as necessarily every Courtier does, may make himself passage to special
favor. And certes he deserves the name of a wise Courtier, who in the
beginning can give such force and vigor to his service, or any part thereof,
wherein he shall be employed, that he grow fruitful and fertile in his
Princes favor, even to the last and highest degree: for those in course are
most commendable, who by their dexterity and Courtly valor come nearest to
this mark. To do the same then, it seems very requisite to begin (as it has
been said) from the worthy and due performance of his proper charge and
place, whereof we may not here give precepts. Because if the Courtier be to be
Master of the horse, let him have recourse to Cauallerizzi and such as teach to
manage them; if an Auditour, to those skilful in accounts, and such like: the
which as every man may see are not within the terms of this Art. But
howsoever, let him endeavor to be skillful in his own office, for thereby he
shall obtain that favor and grace correspondent thereunto; it being a thing
not questionable, that an excellent Divine, a Secretary, or Auditour,
manifesting themselves by their works, should provoke and allure the love and
favor of the Prince, by so much the more, as they are more rare and excellent.
True it is that here we must call to mind that which before in another place
has been spoken, that is, that the favor of the Court is not gotten by the
opinion of virtue, but by the use and exercise thereof to the Princes profit.
Whereupon none of them that will deserve well, must content himself to be
singular and perfect in his profession alone, but how with greatest perfection
and rarity in service to give satisfaction and pleasure to his Prince. This
chiefly consists in manifesting an exact diligence with a desire to spare no
pains fully to give him satisfaction: for as benefits joined with love and
kind demonstrations infinitely increase respect and duty, so likewise service
done with an earnest affection and a kind of partiality toward the Prince,
works marvelous effects; this being most certain, that many petie
services, and almost unworthy consideration, only accompanied with an
affectiue show, have been the beginnings of special rewards and incredible
favors: and to say truth, there is no such price or means to compass or win
love, as love it self. But heerin we must stand well advised to shun a most
dangerous rock, that is, curious and open affectation, which may breed an
opinion in the Prince of want of judgment, in knowing what is convenient, or else
that which is more perilous, a doubt or supect of dissimulation, and by
consequence an effect of hatred or scorn, not alone with the Prince, but with
the Courtiers also, who take no pleasure that any man should be ouer-diligent,
or in appearance too-too passionate in the Princes service. Next, not to give
matter of jest by being seen beyond all terms of modesty or decorum to
become like an inamoured lover in the service of his Lord. This affection which
is an excess, consists in nothing else than in making the show before named
with greater ardencie and more earnestly than is fit, either in the action,
which requires no such diligent affect, or at least, not of him that does it,
but of persons more inwardly conioint, and of the Princes confidents: or in
respect of the place and time, as where the Masters eye is present, or else such
persons as necessarily or in all likelihood will give him notice of the same,
it should be coniectured that therefore he does exceed in show thereof, the
which by so much the more grows odious, by how much it is discovered to be
done for his own profit and commodity: and the more ridiculous, being known
the effect of a weak judgment, to observe decorum in himself, or in his
actions, place or time, and other circumstances, al which proceed from a
plebean and a servile mind. But on the other side, it seems such
demonstration and show is done with reason and conueniency, when in the
execution of that which to our proper charge belongs, we do so much as is
thought fit and necessary, and besides that, perceiving in the Prince a desire
that the action be reiterated, or that a greater diligence be used therein, we
endeavor fully to satisfy him, showing to do the same, not only without any
grudge or murmuring, but with a willingness and pleasure, though it may be
inwardly it be grievous and displeasing, and therefore we must not attend til
by command the Prince discover his desire, but diuing (as it were) into his
mind, make an encounter with his pleasure, preventing the discovery; because
the Prince by nature earnestly desiring his proper service, which consisting
in the Courtiers diligence, of necessity takes pleasure to see him, not
liberal alone, but prodigal (if we may say so) in an earnest curiosity and
desire to consume himself, for his absolute and complete satisfaction. And in
this sort we must think, the Courtier exactly does perform his duty in his
particular charge, from whence there is hope offered him, when time shall
serve, to propagate and enlarge his confines, within the which his office is
restrained, it being very likely, that the Prince being satisfied of his
ability and readiness in his private office, will give a passage and entrance
unto greater affairs, which shall be the fruit to have performed his duty, as
was requisite, by reason of the place he bears in the Court.

CHAP. XI. Of voluntary or assistant service.
But if notwithstanding all this diligent observation of the things above
said, the Prince shall afford unto the Courtier no more favor then is justly
answerable to his particular service; it is fit he seek out other means for
his promotion, and to say truth, whosoever* will have, a greater reward then
which of due belongs unto him, it seems very requisite, that he do also some
thing more, then that which of right apperteines to him, wherefore he must not
only endeavor himself diligently to satisfy his own charge or place, but to
employ himself withal in some other things, whereby the Prince may make
conjecture of the Courtiers love, and incessant will to do him service. Yet
true it is, that herein we must be very circumspect, because to insinuate or
thrust himself into other men's charges without order from the Prince, should
be a rashness and presumption; wherefore he shall note that there are
certain endeavors to this purpose very fit, as those which not only are not
hateful, but very acceptable.

Chiefly this assistance seems to be in places, where the being is both
honorable and commodious to the Prince, and these are in the forechamber or
that of the Presence, where many strangers meeting, either by occasion of
business, or other complement, it cannot but be very grateful unto the
Prince, to see it well frequented with his servants, creatures and favorites,
by whom they are received, honored, enterteined, and in the end brought before
him. In like sort when he feeds, it cannot but be pleasing unto him to be
incircled with many attendants; As also in his visitations, or if he chance
to go abroad, to have many about him, assuredly will be very acceptable,
as well for their readiness upon any occasion that may be offered, as by the
honorable respect which he receaueth, not so much by the multitude, which is a
sign of magnificence, as by their diligent service, which argues a liberal and
beneficial mind in him; wherefore the Courtier must not think it tedious or
time lost to be present upon such occasions, the which thing will make so much
the greater impression, if such be his office, as by virtue thereof he may well
be excused, because by how much less he is bound thereunto, the greater note
is taken of his affection. This then is the benefit which is gotten by this
attendance or assistance, which in sum, is the Princes satisfaction, but the
fruit which it brings with it, is of much more importance by the occasions
which are offered of infinite consequence in this art: for that by this
attendance, in place where he is often subject to the eye of the Prince, he
wins every day a greater familiarity, and accustoming his sight to the
object of his person, the Courtier does still keep himself in a fresh
remembrance: besides all this, many times there falls out occasion of
business in some matters, the execution whereof either in their own nature, or
for want of time or other cause, is not committed to those to whom in Court it
does properly belong; but to such whom chance or choice made present; and
although this belong not to their office, as has been said, yet yielding
satisfaction, by the dexterous performance thereof, it mooueeth in the Prince a
thought and will, choicely or by name to command him at an other time, and in
the end to possess him wholly with that charge. I leave to speak of the
accidents which may fall out, by one whereof, or very few of them, the entire
favor may be obtained. It is most clear, that Seianus by many sleights made
conquest of Tiberius love: yet that accident of falling of the grott or cave,
whose ruins he held up, defending the life of his Prince, with peril of his
own, did so far advance his favor, that afterward even at his pleasure
they might dispose of him. But amongst the rest of al these, there are two most
important benefits, by this diligent assistance or presence, the one is the
knowledge of the nature and humor of the Prince: the other is occasions, which
often fall out, to have discourse or talk with him. The knowledge of the
nature, customs, affections and humor of the Prince, is most necessary, for
imitation and accommodating your self unto him. The occasion of discourse or
talk with him, is of no less infinite consideration and profit; whereof it
being so, that we shall speak hereafter; we will in the mean time say
something of the means how to know the humor of the Prince, and of fitting
your self thereunto; and after we will treat of reasoning and discourse with
him.

CHAP. XII. Means how to know the nature and affection of the Prince.
IF it be necessary every artizan have knowledge of the matter wherein he is
to show the essence and form of his art and occupation; as the Tailor of
cloth; of iron the Smith; and the Mason of marble: If the Physician can not put
in practice his faculty, without a precedent knowledge of the body, curable,
and to be short, of every agent, presuppose the knowledge of the subject
wherein they are to work: we may also say it is great reason, that the
Courtier being by his labor and industry to induce and gently wrest into the
Princes mind a love and liking of him, should by so much as is possible have a
full and perfect knowledge of him, to the end that by this foreknowledge, he
may order, rule, and moderate al his actions: since it is out of question, that
there is not one manner of proceeding with all men: for we may by some way
obtain the favor of one, which would procure the hatred of another: wherefore
if the nature of every one lay open and were manifest, so that easily it might
be learned and perceived, it were an idle thing to give precepts to observe
it, or to obtain the knowledge thereof. But because, than it, there is nothing
more close or secret to him that has not prying eyes always open as well of
body as mind, it shall not be superfluous briefly to discourse of this matter.

We say then that diverse are the means whereby the natures of men are known,
amongst the which the art of Physiognomy does help very much, by means whereof
some have been able to penetrate and search into the inmost and most concealed
affects of the mind of other men: And howbeit the art seem full of
fallacies, yet when many signs concur together signifying one and the same
affect, then wisemen will not that it be vain to give credit, as settled upon
natural grounds. Galen on their side is of opinion, and has largely
discoursed thereupon, that Animi mores sequantur temperaturam corporis. And
unto him the whole College of the best Physicians do consent, that the
temperature and composition of the body being known, it is most easy to guess
what are the affects, manners and natural inclinations of the mind. The
Rhetoritians, amongst whom Aristotle, as chief and Prince, teach this excellent
rule, to consider the age and condition; as whether old or young, or of a middle
time, whether noble or ignoble, rich or poor, whether potent or of mean
fortune, and such like, unto which conditions he does attribute their
particular affects and manners, so that knowing in which of them any man is
found, presently are his affections known: we may besides join unto these the
education and profession, apt also to qualify and give a habit to their
subjects. Likewise in the books by me set forth of Eloquence it is declared,
that from the phrase of speech and metaphors that are used, the nature of him
that forms them may be perceived, and this also to have been the opinion of
ancient sages, whereof as I suppose in that work I have given sufficient
reason.

But because these and such like ways are too much grounded upon Generals, and
to the Courtier by reason of the place he holds, there is a more secure
passage offered, we say that the true means to attain to the knowledge of the
Princes nature and custom is by his actions: and yet not all, but those of
choice, because these discover the inclination, as by the effect the cause is
known; and although dissimulation, at first sight putting on a colorable
habit, and occasion of the action, either different or contrary to the natural
propension and inclinement, it is yet notwithstanding impossible to conceal or
hide the same, from a circumspect and wise Courtier, for that if watchfully he
shall observe actions, it will easily appear whether he work naturally and by
a contracted habit, or else dissemblingly; because nature being ever the same,
and habits being gotten by custom, the actions must needs be uniform and
alike within themselves. But dissimulation wherewith nature is not invested,
but ouer-shadowed cannot be of that force, but that some beam or raie of the
true and natural inclination at one time or other will pierce and pass the
same, and this is so true, that as yet there has never been seen, nor is it
possible, ever to see so excellent a dissembler, who has not been discovered
and unmasked by him who familiarly shall deal with him and carefully consider
his actions by due comparing them together. Because the art of dissembling
grows of a forced and contrary habit unto nature, it cannot be, but many
times of his proper force withdrawing it self from under so heavy a yoke it
will work actions quite contrary to those of dissimulation. True it is that
the cunning dissembler is cautelous and wary, and therefore does not disrobe
himself of his habit, but either by violence or confidence: by Violence, I
mean forced by some mighty hand to say or work the truth, a thing which
cannot fall out between the Prince and the Courtier. But there is an other
kind of violence, very profitable, and to be considered, that is, an excess
of the affections stirred up or moved: the cause is, reason being sometimes
troubled induces forgetfulness of that caution, opens the secrets of the
heart, and discovers that, which dissimulation kept most secret, besides the
promptnes or difficulty it self of falling into these excesses lays open
what is the true natural habit, because from hence it grows that he is more
or less prone or apt to perturbations upon such like motions. But the
consideration of Confidence is of most special importance, the which
particularly consists in places and persons, and in the persons is considered
the benevolence wherewith they are made firm, or the opinion of their
incapacity to understand and penetrate, as also to make manifest that which
they know in the places, for that the chiefest end of dissimulation being to
mask or shadow natural instinct, when the places give assurance, promising
secrecy by their remoteness from the knowledge of men they do easily entice
the dissembler to give the raines and liberty to the force of nature; and by
the same reason, to discover himself to muddy persons of little understanding,
and less accustomed to their caution: or rather because natural actions, are
done with more ease and pleasure, they put off, or at least ease themselves of
that habit of dissimulation: they do this and much more with persons of whose
love they are very confident, and therefore it is reported that Seianus varijs
artibus Tiberium deuinxit adeo, vt obseurum aduersum alios, sibi vni incautum
intectumque efficeret: By sundry sleights had so bewitched Tiberius, that being
secret to all others, to him alone he lay open and uncircumspect.

The Courtier then who earnestly desires to sound his Princes mind must,
mal-gree dissimulation, have notice of his actions in his most retired places,
know what talk he has with common persons, particular confidents, and with
those that either by age or want of wit may make him more secured, because by
the collection of the actions and talk observed and compared together, and the
conformity or disagreement between them well considered, the way will be very
plain to know him as well within as without. Taking care notwithstanding to do
this in such sort, that for a Courtier you be not taken as a spy, and withal
remember, that tamnescire quaedam, quam scire oportet: It is as fit not to know
some things as to know them: To conclude, all these actions must be tempered
and accompanied with dexterity, the which cannot be taught, but must be
natural, though by experience in many things, it be much refined.

CHAP. XIII. The manner how to accommodate himself to the Princes humor.
NOw that the Courtier shall have perfect knowledge what is the humor and
inclination of his Prince, it rests to consider in what sort he is to
conform himself thereunto in his service; wherefore we say, that the nature
of the Prince, either is plain and open, and as they say, absque fuco, and
fallacia, or it is encombred and shadowed with a skreene of dissimulation. If
it be open, the rule is easy therein to be observed, because to what he is
seen to incline, to the same without all question is the Courtier to enable
and conform himself, professing arms if the Prince be of nature martial;
learning and letters, if he delight in knowledge; in holiness and religion, if
he be devout; neat and delicate in apparel, entertainments and all other
things, if he urge this; diligent and quick in execution, if he in his actions
be exquisite and by nature speedy. To conclude, he is to adapt and fit himself
by all the means he may unto his will, and make himself, if it be possible,
the very portract of his properties and fashions. Because self love which is
the root of all other loves, chiefly extends it self unto his like, and more
toward those who conform themselves in manners and natural inclination
thereunto. Besides, if he make show of imitation not by pronenesse of nature,
but by will and of choice purpose, this also is very pleasing, and is as an
approbation of his actions, manners, and choice; a thing of all men desired: or
at least as in terms of obedience and consent.

It is by odds a thing more difficult to fit himself to dissembled humors:
because framing himself to that which fainedly the Prince professes, it is
most clear that such conformity does not light upon his natural inclination,
and therefore does not search unto the quick, but rests upon a superficial
affectation: On the other side, if he will make profession of the Princes
fashions with a close dissimulation, it cannot be pleasing unto himself
without his own prejudice, knowing that no man praises or commends that in
another, which he does truly hate in himself (I speak in matter of carriage or
behavior) and surely he should feed himself with a vain hope, that should
think to be pleasing by intemperance, to him that makes show to be devoted
unto continency: or by a desire of revenge to him, who either openly or
covertly declares himself easy to forget all injuries. To conclude, the
Prince dissembling, cannot openly be delighted with any one, that shall make
show to have a habit in that, which colourably he is feign to cover, without
manifesting the truth of his inward meaning, and making the false appearance to
be known. But on the contrary, he does not truly conform himself unto the
Prince who does not wholly fit himself to his true and natural inclination.
Wherefore in these difficulties, it seems the indifferent way is not to
discover himself openly or by a professed habit to be contrary to the
dissimulation of the Prince; (for example) showing himself incontinent, with
one that professes temperance. For that this might in reason seem a despising
of him, and to have in slight esteem the disgust or displeasure which he by
these actions and contrary courses might give to the Princes open and apparent
disposition: or else might breed suspect of his knowledge of the disguise or
counterfeiting; a thing, which questionles might win him hatred. But the
Courtier must show himself to be naturally inclined thereunto, although in
reason he repugne the same, and be same to force himself thereunto: because
that which is truly natural unto the Prince, shall so much the more be judged
a natural inclination in him, though masked with a veil o^ di^^^mulation.
Hence it is very likely would grow great good liking in the Prince, and the
high way unto confidence would be made easy: besides, since needs be must lie
open unto some, it is clear, he will sooner discover himself unto one, to be
of like affect, and much more if happily the Courtier be able to serve him in
that inclination; wherefore we say it is necessary in terms of obedience and
of dutiful regard toward the Prince dissembling, to conform himself in some
part to the colored affect and fashion. But to make passage unto confidence,
it is more profitable to give apparent signs of a true, or a truly dissembled
inclining in himself, the which inclining must be like to that which he
knows truly to be natural in the Prince, unto whose humor in my opinion this
is the next way to be conformable.

CHAP. XIIII. Whether it be fit to have often speech or conference with the
Prince.
WE come now to speak of the conferences with the Prince, and first of all let
us consider, if it be profitable to the Courtier to have easy access unto the
Princes ears, because on the negative part, it seems there are these
reasons, as doubtless that this manifest favor breeds him great envy with
the other Courtiers, and how pernicious a thing that is, is very plain,
whereof we mind to speak at large in due place: besides many informations are
made unto the Prince, whose author not being known, it is attributed unto
those, who often have conference with him, whereupon follows the hatred, not
alone of those offended but of others who have reason to fear the like, beside
the note of a malignant detractor. Heereunto is added a weighty consideration,
that in reasoning the Courtier uses many or few words: if few, he does not fit
his Lords intention, who many times gives him this access, for entertainment
of the time which he desires. In this case to walk too warily, besides that
it makes a show either of a severe or a dissembled nature, it gives no pleasing
gust, but breeds a diffidence: if many words, a provident and witty Prince,
(such as we suppose the Prince worthy to be served by our Courtier instructed
in this art) will easily see into his manners and affections, which happily
with more profit might have been concealed, nor can this be but very hardly
helped, because the Courtier being to make answer to demands, and to persist in
his discourse, so long as it shall please the Prince, it is almost impossible
to go so covertly to work, that truth it self glides not, or glanceth out
sometime. And surely as love is a most sweet torture, which oftentimes vnlockes
the cabinet of closes secrets, whereupon they are wont to say that, il caldo
del letto, dilegua souuente il ghiaccio della taciturnita: The heat of the bed
ofttimes does thaw the Ise of secrecy, which husbands should in many things
conceal: So from a mind not well established and made immovable against the
winds of Courtly ambition, the pleasure of the masters conference steals many
things from the servant, which to their greater profit should have been better
kept.

But for all this there are on the part affirmative, more lively reasons and of
greater force, because for certainty amongst all the passages offered to the
Princes favor, there is not one of them, that by a more plain and easy way
does lead to our desired end than this, because it does intrinsecate and make
familiar, yet so far forth as a modest servant may be with a reverenced
master: It gives fit occasion and opportunity to bear his humors and
affections, and to give an earnest and taste of our own proper virtue and
valor: a thing not of small regard with those who consider how many are in
Court who through want of that commodity to make their talent known unto their
Prince, keep the same buried in sterilitie. Besides the reputation which it
brings is held inestimable, not alone, because making profit of the Princes
judgment, he cannot but be commended also, who is thought worthy his
domesticke and familiar speech. But yet much more in this, that because the
Courtiers reputation consisting in the favor of the Prince, which in respect of
other favors we may term ability and power to pleasure others; it is most
clear that this is chiefly expected from those who have liberty of often
conference, and by consequence fit times to present the petitions and requests
of other men.

But above all the rest, more estimable, is the facility which grows
thereby, to diue and sound into the deepest thoghts and affections of his Lord,
and to show in himself a disposition and nature pliable and conformable
thereunto. To this purpose I must not leave to note; that for oftentimes in
reasoning and like conference, the quick and lively sharpness of the wit, or
else the dullness and poverty of spirit is discovered, it is a most necessary
observance, to mark and search of what kind that of the Princes is herein,
because though it seem very reasonable, that by how much the more the
officers are of spirit, life and capable of every command, by so much they
should be more respected and held more dear: yet shall you find some kind of
Princes, that as they will fly the extremity of folly in followers, so are
they better pleased with a mediocrity and indifferency, then with this
singularity and superexcellency. Mark what Cornelius Tacitus speaks of
Poppaeus Sabinus: Is modicus originis prencipum amicitia consulatum ac
triumphale decus adeptus, maximisque prouincijs per quatuor and viginti annos
impositus, nullam, ob eximiam artem, sed quod par negotijs, neque supra erat.
He was but of mean parentage, yet through the favor of Princes, that is of
Augustus and Tiberius, he obtained the honor of Consulship, and triumphed,
being governor of many great provinces for four and twenty years, not for
any great skill that abounded in him, having so much as was only equal to his
imploiments, and no more. And this grows either of fear, lest from these
excellent wits some thing might be plotted against their government, or of
shame to be under them in virtue, over whom they are in fortune, or lest their
actions should be censured and their affections known, though arteficially
shadowed: Or suspecting to want rewards answerable to their deserts and which
might satisfy their expectation, knowing that high spirits, aim not at base
and vulgar marks; Or (in fine) for some other hard and impenetrable cause. It
is therefore manifest, that it behooves the Courtier to be well advised, and
with circumspection to proceed and present himself with such manner of speech
unto the Prince, as he perceives may please his humor; whereupon, confidence
will easily succeed, by virtue and means whereof many imploiments not
belonging to his charge shall be conferred upon him, and next by consequence,
the chiefest secrets, according to the qualities which by little and little the
Prince shall discover in him, and this is the way and means to enlarge the
confines of his particular service in the Court: next unto the which follows
in proportionable course the possession of that favor, which with so great
labor is procured.

Therefore as this occasion is greatly to be desired, so is it necessary to
teach the means to make use thereof, which we will diligently do, when we
shall by answer have cleared the difficulties on the contrary part set down in
the beginning. To the first therefore we say, that of two evils it is good to
avoid the worst; wherefore the apparent favor of a Princes conference may
breed envy, yet is this much better, then by such scruple or fear to lose the
occasion of greatest efficacy (that is, to insinuate himself into the favor
of his lord) which a long and tedious course of servitude can afford; besides
that multa experiendo fiunt, Ann. 15.
quae segnibus ardua videantur: Many things by adventure are brought to pass,
which unto the slothful cowards do seem hard. And who well observes the
courses of principalities and courts shall find that true which Tacitus says;
Ann. 4.
Dommandi spes in arduo, vbi sis ingressus adesse studia and ministros, steps
to soueraignety are hard, but once entered upon, both favorers, furtherers and
followers are present, but especially and particularly unto those who are not
sorted only with fortune and audacity, but guided and accompanied with
judgment and wisdom. Thus much we say when envy cannot be conquered, unto
which purpose we will hereafter give more necessary aduertizements. To that
difficulty of hatred (of easy growth by the opinion of reports and bad
offices) we say, that who will be friend to all, pleasing, and at least no
apparent pretendor, gentle and officious, shall easily find remedy against
this conceit; and particularly if he shall in effect abstain from so hateful
an action, whereof in his due place we will abundantly speak. Next follows
the danger he may incur with the Prince in case of being too brief or too large
in speech, wherein he must take counsel of nature, who is scarce and sparing
of words unto some, and unto others too abundant and plentiful, aduising to
correct natures defect by the help of art, giving suppliment to want, and
abatement to abundance, by a judicious prescription, which in such like cases
must be the truest level, and wherewith he must be fully fraught, who
pretends to port himself in the chiefest harbor of his Princes favor. But as
touching the unadvised manifesting his defects or discovering some thing else
that might be dangerous, we answer: this art is not set down to men of so
slight a stuff, that are not masters of their own conceits, and who cannot
shelter or defend themselves (if at least they cannot avoid and hide the same)
in such sort, as with silence to ouerpasse that which for their profit must be
kept in secrecy. But unto such as must be apt to sincke into the inmost parts
of his Prince, by means of things connext in one, or many speeches: forming
unto himself by virtue of them, certain conclusions, the which if not
demonstratiuely and by necessity, yet at least by conjecture, and other
observations taught before, may give notice, what are his inclinements,
pleasures, and cogitations; so that he may as well wisely detect his closest
designs, as shun the danger to be detected by the Prince, although it
cannot be denied, the Commander to have the advantage in this espial and
discovery, as he to whom it does belong to interrogate, continue or to change
discourse at pleasure: yet these things do not conclude, that to have often
access to speak with the Prince is not very profitable and to be desired by
the Courtier.

CHAP. XV. How many and what be the kinds of speeches or discourses the
Courtier is to have with his Prince.
SInce to speak generally in matters of action is not so profitable, as by so
much as we may to come unto particulars; it is necessary that we treat in
special of the kinds of speeches which the Courtier may have with his Prince,
and in every of them give those aduertisements which are fit profitably to
pass them. But to do this, we must first see how many and what these kinds
be, wherein not proceeding in a strict and philosophical manner, but rather
conformable to common capacity, the thing in my opinion will not be very hard.
Wherefore without keeping so precisely the precepts of division (one of the
hardest things in humane understanding) we will say, that we talk or reason
with the Prince, either for his pleasure and delight, to ouerpasse that time of
leisure for recreation from the toils of ordinary affairs belonging to his
state and calling, and these we call speeches of entertainment; or else our
talk with him is limited to some end either of a thing done, or to be done,
and which belongs to his honor, interest or state, and these we call
conference of state: All others, if any such there be, are reduced under these
two. Of the which, because those of State are most important, we will handle
them in the first place, and those of Entertainment afterward.

CHAP. XVI. How to take opportunity to induce a conference of state.
THe first consideration is concerning the manner how to induce or begin these
conferences, the which are either touching the Princes interest, or things
which in some sort belong unto the Courtiers charge, and will easily give an
entrance to insinuation. But because every Prince, who for the variable
multitude of his actions (will have as reason requires, some order) is used to
divide his time, appointing to certain hours settled imploiments, this thing
must be most diligently observed, for that doing otherwise, besides the
molestation he should give the Prince in disordering of his course he shall
receive many times but little satisfaction, and get the name of Busie-bodie.
And if the business have no determinate and set hour, it shall be good
counsel to reserve it unto some of those appointed for affairs, keeping
entire, so much as is possible, the time of recreation, not only dear to
every man by nature, but specially necessary unto those that with many toiles
are ouer-wearied. But if the affair be extraordinary and of import, he may
securely change the course, and alter the appointed hours, withal (so the
matter be not of such weight, that it is needful of the Princes instant
knowledge) we must give due space to those occasions, which either for healths
sake; or safety of the life are fit to be done, as times of diet, sleep or
physic, to avoid infirmities as well of body as mind, wherein to negotiate is
forbidden.

CHAP. XVII. What is to be observed in the passing of this conference of state.
THe convenient and fit time with special consideration being taken, and the
hour of negotiating being come, the circumspect servant, must either first, or
in the very instant, or so soon as may be, by himself or by some other means
discover the mood and humor, that the Prince is in, for all are not of
Tiberius mind, of whom Tacitus says, Ann. 4.
Negotia pro solatijs accipiebat, that took dispatches for disports: and much
less it may be to find him still in one mind, nor to have the same motion
to the same things. Wherefore discovering an indisposition to the business,
either by some affect of his mind or body, it is expedient to restrain the
conference into as few terms as may be, and to abridge the time, from being
troublesome; for the ill disposition of the subject with whom we are to treat,
is no less contrary to the happy success of the business, then is an
untimely hour. I understand this of affairs which necessarily must pass, and
needs be heard, because in others, whose scope and end are the benefit or
profit of our friends, or else contain some desired favor, we must of
necessity awaight fandi molles aditus, easy entrances of speech, and therefore
reserve them till there be a composed, quiet and settled mind willingly disposed
to give audience, a thing which very seldom falls out with some, who are so
austere and stern, that it is almost impossible ever to find either fit hour
or humor to confer with them. Such are men given to their pleasures and
passetimes, besides the which they think on nothing else: and such are men
choleric by custom or by nature, in whom either age or practice in managing
affairs has not bred a gentler temper. But if the Prince be well disposed,
then must the Courtier endeavor himself that the business whereof he is to
speak (for so much as belongs unto him) be aptly and commendably set down
and handled. For the knowledge whereof he shall understand, that to negotiate
with a Prince, may consist either in laying open or declaring some fact or
service done, to the end he consider thereof as he thinks good; or
manifesting some business, to the end to receive order for the execution and
performance. And herein also is contained the favors or recompenses which
either for himself or others are demanded, and in the one or the other the
opening or concealing his opinion; or finally in declaring the manner of
execution and performance of some action, which is commonly called a Relation.
Wherefore in the relating any thing whatsoever we must first and chiefly have
regard to truth, as well for the integrity, duty and faith due by every
honorable Courtier unto his Prince, as because he may make a more commendable
resolution, knowing that from false principles in good consequence a true
conclusion is never gathered: next there is requisite apparancy, to ease the
understanding of the Prince, and lighten the burden of the business and
breuity: Not to keep him troubled ouerlong having otherwise many diuertions of
importance. Next in receiving directions for the executing of any thing, either
by himself or others, there is required not only a diligent attention of the
mind, rightly and presently to take the same, without necessity of repetition,
because this, besides the trouble, would breed an opinion in the Prince, of
incapacity, and withal a want of memory and retention, to perform the same
answerable to the intent of the commandment.

But of all the rest, there is none of more import, than the charge to give
advice and show his opinion upon any thing: Lib. 1. hist.
Nam suadere principi quod oporteat, multi laboris, says Tacitus, it is a hard
task to persuade a Prince to do that he ought. Whereupon it is necessary to
note not to deal therein but by command, when the bond of your office does not
require it, and howsoever it is fit to use modesty, not to seem too wise, and
by all means possible to avoid obstinacy in your own conceits, especially
against the opinion and judgment of the Prince. There is herein required
wisdom as the mother of all good counsel, and a demonstratiue inclination of
love toward him, to the end that with the more facility, he may receive that
which is propounded for your profit.

Lastly, in declaring things already executed you must use truth, plainness,
and all that good Rhetoritians set down to make a worthy ^^^ation. But to all
these things there are two most important aduertizements yet to be added; the
first is Secrecy, because without that, in vain is the Princes confidence
procured, whose thoughts and intentions, by so much as is possible, must be
kept concealed, as well for the inconveniences which may grow thereby, as for
your own reputation, which will be so much the greater, as these shall be the
more occult and secret. The other is, not to use too great curiosity, in diuing
deeper into the Princes thoughts, then is convenient, or he thinks fit to
reveal, remembering that, abditos principis sensus, and si quid occultius
parat, exquirere, illicitum anceps: To be busy in quest of Princes secret
thoghts, or what unlawful drifts they have in hand, is both dangerous and
doubtful. And for certain many have erred heerin, whereof have followed
contrary effects to their desires, because seeking by this means to lincke and
inward themselves more strictly, they have oftentimes as too nice and curious
been excluded all weighty affairs. And this is as much as I think fit to
speak concerning Conference of State; now follows that of Entertainment.

CHAP. XVIII. How to induce conference of Entertainment.
BY how much these conferences seem least necessary, by so much the skill and
art to profit by them is the more laborious, the which notwithstanding must be
exactly kept and put in practice for the benefit which follows thereof,
because happily these open more the way to Confidence, than those of State. The
reason is, because these being induced and brought in by choice and for
pleasure, bring forth many times by their continuance, such delight and
sweetness to the Prince, that willingly he riterates the same, and by little
and little, laiing aside Princely severity, begins by this familiarity to
proportionate the Courtiers condition nearer to that of his state, and in time
breeds a disposition to participate and impart unto him many things, and so
successively does enable him to take knowledge of his most secret thoughts;
either hid from others, or only known by reason of their offices, not by free
election of good liking, and therefore it may be not so fully imparted.

Wherefore occasion of such conference with the Prince may rise, either of his
own nature, who will daine the familiarity of his servants, respectively in
terms and degrees to the one and other convenient, or by some incident
occasion, as time and place affoordeth many, or by the Courtiers qualities. And
surely if the Prince be of nature conuersable with his servants, the way to
discourse and talk with him will be plain and needs no art at all: since
either himself by demanding, recounting or propounding will offer occasion of
entertainment. In these accidental conferences there can no rule be given; and
that which in them is to be aduertized, shall be noted in speaking of the
occasions which the quality of the Courtier may offer, whereof we will now
begin to treat.

Since then these speeches are brought in for the pleasure and entertainment of
the Prince, it is clear, that willingly he would pass them with civil and
well speaking persons, full of novelties and pleasant devices to amplify and
prolong a discourse. To be Iouial and conceited is a gift of nature, which
receives little help by art, howbeit many have attempted to give precepts of
vrbanity and merriment. The disposition also and ability of speaking well, is
brought likewise from the mothers womb, but herein without all doubt Art has
a special share, since that if by a glibbe tongue and a hot temperature of the
brain well fraught with natural conceits, there be adjoined a knowledge of
many things: the art of apt and proper speech joined with that which more
imports and helps judgment and discretion, without all difficulty he will
prove commendable and excellent in discourse.

Novelties are gotten by curiosity, and though with a learned Prince, doctrine
and reading be great helpers heerunto, he must not for all this, neglect the
knowledge of such things as daily do occur, as well within as without his
dominions, so that the matter of these discourses may be sufficiently ready at
hand; because the disburdened Prince, allured by such like qualities will take
occasion to discourse with him for the time he shall stand free from greater
cares. But for that it is no less necessary to offer meat unto the queasie and
weak stomachs for natures sustenance, than to the hunger-starued mawe, and by
device of artificial smells and exquisite delicacies, provoke their appetites:
the provident Courtier, at hours most fit and time convenient, be it either
after meals, when not to hinder true concoction by withdrawing the vital
spirits from the stomach, it is ouerruled by Physic, that for a while our
minds have leave to play, or at some other time when he shall spy the Prince
at leisure (to which purpose diligent attendance in the presence much
imports) he must insinuate and move some of those things which he shall
find most apt to please his taste and give delight, which if he once perceive
(by vacancy of greater thoughts) he take well, then may he go on safely and
with dexterity glide from one thing to another as commonly is used in long
talk. But if there shall be no disposition, as quickly a nimble eied Courtier
will perceive, noting his actions, bowed down with weighty thoughts, or silent
not willing to answer, or using breuity to what is proposed, or else (in sum) to
chop off occasion, cut off multiplicity of words, then, hushed, he must retire,
and look for better opportunity, or more befitting humor in the Prince, or
seek some accident which oftentimes falls out, either by some flying news, or
chances happening in the city, court or other countries, which either by their
own nature, or some interest which he may have in them may give him taste or
move him lend an ear to understand what is discoursed or variably thought
abroad.

CHAP. XIX. The order that must be kept in conferences of entertainment.
IT follows that howsoever there be an induction of these conferences, to
advertise the Courtier what he is to observe therein, to make profit by the
same: wherefore we say, that the scope of these speeches is to please the
Prince, the action is talk, he must then by means of words and reasoning
endeavor to entertain and delight his Prince: and to speak generally, it is
notorious, that pleasantness and jesting commonly are delightsome, though it
be true, that in this course there be danger of slipping into scurrilitie
spurd forward by that unbridled desire of ambition, to see the Prince rest
satisfied without delights; which pernicious block by all means must be
removed, by those whose aim is honor and reputation, because the profession
of a Iester brings with it too base and ignoble estimation; wherefore it is
necessary with great discretion to limit bounds unto this merriment. Besides
the report of news and occurrences which neither molest the mind, nor breed
any trouble for any interessed affection, there are other subjects very
delightsome in these discourses and conferences, whereof the pleasure which
they yield gives testimony: which is not alone out of histories, but out of
Poets and well digested fictions, which we see hearkened unto and read with
greediness. But because the condition of humane nature is such, that we are
not all of one relish, or at all times in one mood (as we have oftentimes
said) it imports very much to know the Princes inclination, and more
particularly his humor then predominant, when we are to speak with him: to
the knowledge whereof the accidents of that day, the matters handled, or the
reports made unto him, help very much, because it will be very easy to
accommodate our talk unto his taste, knowing that lovers willingly talk of
their love (but this with a caution, that there be no circumstance of
diffidence or distrust which may remove his mind from entrance into like
discourse) soldiers of wars, the learned of letters, and the wrathful of
revenge and injury, and so of the like natural or incidentall qualities and
humors in the Prince, because that doing thus, (but so that the cunning be
covert) himself will minister matter of discourse and be delighted to enlarge
the same: yet must you understand that these observations are meet in cases of
recreation and pleasure, because in those of grief and sorrow (besides that
these were serviceable for introduction) the mind afflicted would afford more
ease; for sorrow seems to be succored by breathing forth her woes. But you
must herein devise with judgment and dexterous regard, either how to divert
and turn these troubled thoughts of the Prince some other way, by application
of things more pleasing, if at least you see him not willing to persist
therein, or else to give him some show that you condole and have a feeling of
his sufferance, or by continuing it, if you see the Prince be so pleased,
because the power and will to prosecute, cut off, or change a speech upon every
subject and in every case, is properly the Princes due, the Courtier being
bound to second him and follow where his will in conference shall lead the way;
for otherwise there would follow contrary effects to his desires, it being very
well known, that the mind does no less abhor to reason of these things
whereunto the will does not incline, than to work or execute any thing forced
and against the will.

CHAP. XX. Of praise and flattery.
AMongst all the things that can be observed to be plesing unto any man with
whom we shall confer, there is none of more efficacy or greater force than
Commendation or Praise, whereof an excellent Greek gives good testimony, who
being demanded what communication of al other best pleased him, auerred with
an asseueration, That which contained his commendations, whereof the Courtier
must take notice to observe the same even till he come to the confines of
Flattery, framing to himself this maxim and assured rule, that Commendations,
or in defect thereof as wanting matter praiseworthy, an easy flattery is
necessary to whomsoever serves. And although in Tacitus, Lib. 15. Ann.
Seneca says, Non sibi promptum in adulationes ingenium, idque nulli magis
gnarum quam Neroni, qui saepius libertatem Senecae, quam seruitium expertus
esset: He had no ready wit for flattery, which no man better knew than Nero,
who had had oftener trial of Senecaes liberty than of his servitude in
speech, it is but the testimony of no good Courtier, neither in reason may we
take it for authority, his end making it very manifest, that happily he had
not so great knowledge in matters of philosophy, as he wanted skill in the
Courtiers art. I mean not now that by an abject and base flattery he should
insinuate himself into the Princes favor, since he must have his eye always
fixed on the mark he aims at, which is credit, and honorable reputation,
which never join in company with flattery, Lib. 1. hist.
wherein faith Tacitus, turpe crimen seruitutis inest, there is the foul sin
of servitude. But it is necessary to walk upon such paths, as hardly will be
found by him who takes not for his guide before he enters in, a grounded
judgment to discourse on them. Wherefore I think it worth the while, and not
superfluous to speak some thing of this matter for the full instructions of
our Courtier; yet because we can discourse of nothing, nor give rules, if first
we know not what our subject is, we hold it fit to begin upon this ground,
saying, that Adulation generally is an honor, which either deservedly or
undeservedly is given by the inferior unto the superior, to the end to please
him for his own benefit or interest. And this for the present shall be the
definition, the which we leave to examine as not proper to this place, and
only tie the consideration to our purpose: we say also that commendations or
praise is an honor done with words, and under this kind flattery is
contained, whereof we must speak in this place, supposing it to be a false
praise amplified, to the end aforesaid, the which because it is little to
purpose in this our treatise, we will here serve our turns only with the
first part, wherein the most inward and essential nature thereof is contained,
that is, that it is a Commendation: then will we examine the differences,
which are false or amplified.

Insomuch then as it is Praise or Commendation, it is necessary that it fall
upon some good part in the Prince, since the object of praise is good parts.
The good parts (because it is now no time to play the Philosopher) we say are
of three sorts, of the mind, the body, and the external. The good parts of
the mind are virtue and the natural powers and faculties, because we do not
only praise temperance, fortitude, liberality, etc. but a pregnant and quick
understanding, a vigilant and provident mind; and because these are sometimes
the efficient cause, or cause conseruant of the outward parts, it follows
that praising the external parts we commend also the causes of them. But to
conclude, the principal commendations and most of all to be desired, is that
of the virtues of the mind: true it is that these are not of all men alike
prised and esteemed, there being many who had rather be commended for wealth,
power and honor, than for wisdom, magnanimity and beneficence; nay there be
some so blind of understanding, that had rather be accounted fair, comely,
agile and gallant of body, than more or as learned as Aristotle, or eloquent as
Cicero; and who doubts but that it was more grateful and pleasing to Nero
the praise of his singing than whatsoever other commendation either of
temperance, modesty or justice? And questionless if any man should take upon
him to add unto the female sex, all those commendations and applauses, that
pleasing eloquence could figure or paint out, but would abate their beauty out
of it, I think there is none but knows, how welcome and how grateful such
honor should be to any woman. Wherefore though the true and real commendations
is principally to be attributed to the above named good parts, it is
notwithstanding very necessary, if the courtier will commend with profit and to
be pleasing, that he praise that whereunto he sees the Prince most inclined and
best to satisfy himself, urging this as a thing of most special importance,
aiding himself, with the knowledge of his nature, custom and inclination.

There is yet an other advertisement of great consequence, for the better
understanding whereof we say thus, that it is clear, praise and commendation
is naturally desired of every man, the reason is, because there is in all men
an innated desire of perfection, the which not alone in it self is most
acceptable and grateful, but with a particular pleasure makes those things to
be received which give testimony thereof, no otherwise, tha^ as we see, that
the coming to pass of such things which we have longingly desired, not only
to be pleasing unto us, but withal, even the messenger of such news is very
acceptable, and oftentimes munificently rewarded for his tidings: and therefore
by the same reason whosoever commends us, as a witness of our perfection, is
beloved of us. But as in all ratifications false testimonies are by us greatly
hated, in like manner are untrue commendours, who once known for such, do
highly displease us, because we seem not to receive commendations or testimony
of any perfection, which we know to be far from us, but rather an vpbraiding
that we are not such as they would make us seem to be; besides the deformity
of the falsehood which is discovered in them, whereupon we gather the small
confidence that we may give unto them in any other thing, as false and
mendacious, besides the disgrace they fall into, as base and vulgar persons. Of
all this thus much may be gathered, that we must not only be considerate in
commending, not to incur suspicion of falsehood, but withal that it is not
always true that Galba is reported to say in Tacitus, Lib. 1. hist.
that, adulatio erga Principem quemcumque sine affectu peragitur. Flattery or
assentation to what Prince soever, is done without affect. Wherefore we say,
that the commendations being to be credited, it is necessary to ground the
same upon some virtue or good part really and in truth existing in the Prince,
or at least in opinion thought to be in him, and what commendable parts are in
the prince he may easily know, who has that notice of him, as we suppose the
Courtier should have: but of which of them the Prince makes most esteem, must
by observance be learned, noting, that for the most part we think our selves
best endued with those things whereof we make profession; the musician, of
singing well, the Philosopher of the perfect knowledge of natural causes, the
Soldier of the art of war; wherein being praised we easily believe it, and
willingly accept it. Those which are proper to a Prince, are, wisdom,
justice, magnificence, riches, power, glory, and such like virtues, and
qualities belonging to a person of so high degree, from whence grows an
affect, which we call veneration, which does meet or encounter his perfection,
and is as a testimony (as we have said of praise, and should say of all
honor) of the good parts which we esteem to be in him; the which testimony by
how much it is given in greatness, by so much is it thought his abilities and
qualities do exceed. Of this kind is that of Seianus, Lib. 4. Ann.
when he says, Se ita insueuisse, vt spes, votaque sua non prius ad Deos quam
ad principum aures conferret: The great signs and expectation of Tiberius, had
framed such a custom in him, that he would not sooner offer up his hopes and
vows to the gods, than unto the ears of Princes, the which adulation could
not with more cunning have been set down, because he does not only compare,
but preferres his Prince before the gods in a thing easily to be credited: and
so showing that which is too common in experience, that there be some so
affectionate and deuote in their Princes service, that forgetting their due
recourse to God, lay the whole burden of their hopes upon the favor of their
Lord.

But because what has been said hitherto, consists in the credit and
testimony that the person of the Prince and his virtues or good parts do yield,
we must no less consider how to draw some belief and trust from the person of
the Courtier: and surely there is faith given to such whom we take to be of a
free and open nature and who make show of that in speech which is within the
enclosure of their heart. This opinion is particularly gotten by reprehending,
for whosoeeuer falsely commends, does it (as we have said) for his own
profit; but who freely reprooueth, shows he has no mind of other respect or
interest, neither will by curring favor give place a jot from his true
meaning. Wherefore an ingenuous and free reprehension is always accompanied
with credit and authority. It Is true that in this particular we must remember
this maxim, Tac. lib. 4. hist.
which says, Quando pessimis Imperatoribus sire fine dominationem, ita quamu
is egregijs modum libertatis placere. As an everlasting rule is pleasing even
to the woorst Emperors, so does a modest kind of liberty in reprehension
please the greatest, because if the Courtier pass those bounds in reproouing,
he may easily conjecture, what effects would follow a serious speech that
biteth. Lib. 15. Ann.
Si facetiae vbi multum ex vero traxere, acrem sui memoriam relinquunt: If
jests when they carry much truth with them do leave a bitter memory. He must
therefore dispraise in a supportable manner, and that may seem rather a kind of
praise, than a judicious censure: which thing worthy of special observation
is done, not in reproving vices, but the excess of some virtue, yet with this
aduertizement, not to express or name the excess, by those extremes which
otherwise indeed are vices, and prejudicial to others, but by those terms
only which are damageable to the agent, with the profit of others. As for
example, it is a virtue to be accessible and willing to give audience, and not
easily wearied in dispatches; if then one should say unto the Prince, that
through too vehement a desire to satisfy others, he ouerchargeth himself both
in mind and body to the prejudice of his health where of he has no due respect;
he should reprove him with a kind of flattery. Sobriety and temperate
abstinence is commendable; who now would show that he offends in being too
strict in dangering his health, should smoothingly admonish him, and work two
notable effects, one, that by the reproof he gains credit, the other that he
discouers an affection and interest in the Princes health: But these
observations cannot be put in practice but by a witty, provident and wise
Courtier, who if sometimes with an expression or show of grief, or a light
anger he ioin these admonishments it will greatly increase his credit, because
such affections of freedom and plainness would wholly remove and extinguish
all suspicion of dissimulation, whereunto also will add very much the avoiding
of all affectation, and shunning this decorum and seeming-wise-grauitie, in
your reprehensions. But above all, the most assured way to settle and gain
credit, is always and in all your actions to show your self such as you
pretend, that the Prince may have this conceit of you, that you are an
ingenuous, free, and plain man. And this is so much as I hold may be observed
in praise and flattery, adding this as a note, that true praise when there is
matter and subject for it, is to be preferred, and in defect or want thereof, to
have immediate recourse to adulation or flattery, the which consists in a
little amplifying or enlarging, and is not altogether disioyned from perfect
commendations: But when there is no matter at all to work on, it is lawful to
help your self with that kind which makes an attribute of some good parts
where none are, yet with that caution and circumspection which we before have
signified.

CHAP. XXI. Of the soundings and trials which Princes sometimes use with their
Courtiers.
SVch is the manner then to praise, and such the rule to temper your conference
unto the Princes taste, the which by often giving occasion thereof, opens the
passage to make a large progress into his favor, for that the speech being a
special testimony of our other virtues and abilities, if happily he take a
pleasure in talking with his Courtier, and find sufficiency and aptness in
him of performance of such things which do concern him near, it is not
unlikely but he may employ him in the same, whereby he may obtain some
extraordinary grace, because some time such services are committed, which
cause a full possession of an entire confidence; and such particularly are the
excesses or extremes of some affections: As of ambition in procuring some high
degree of honor; or of covetousness, gaping after gain, or of wrath,
thirsting for immoderate revenge, or of love, longing impatiently for the
fruition thereof: And these I note but for the present, as principal
affections and passions, in the which who is employed may without great
difficulty ouerrule and triumph in the favor of his Prince. But this false out
most commonly in some amorous motion, that is, because this affection straying
farther then any other, from the pathway of reason, of necessity there rises
more exorbitant accidents, either because they are more potent in disturbing,
whereby with a greater ardencie the object is desired: or because seldom it
falls out, that the pleasure and possession of the party beloved, can be
obtained without some actions, which disrobing the Prince of decency and
decorum, make him fashion himself to the condition of the Courtier, in such
sort that there follows a familiarity as between equals. And true it is,
that these performances not falling under the bond of servitude, and there
following necessarily an election or choice, they are not slightly committed
as the other services which are ordinary and of duty, but with a careful
regard and a precedent knowledge of the intention, which the Courtier has to
perform and execute the same: whereupon the circumspect Prince finding him an
apt instrument for his desire, resolving to lay the burden of the business on
his confidence, will prove and feel by conference, if he commanding shall
find him ready and obsequious: and this is done by some with more, by some
with less aduisednesse, according to the judgment and dexterity of the
agent, whereupon it follows, that having these emploiments, it is a most
easy, and an assued entry into the possession of desired grace: It is also
very necessary iudiciously to enable your self to understand his very signs
and beckes (things which art cannot instruct without a natural perceuerance)
and those conceived, to make that profit of them that belongs. But because
Princes many times speak not that sincerely nor from within, which outwardly in
talk they make a show of, but rather to sound and undermine the nature and
quality of their servants, make their trial by several means; it is a thing
of special note therefore, to be herein well advised, and able to perceive
when the Prince reasons sincerely, and when covertly, for the better
knowledge whereof I hold the discourse following not unprofitable.

CHAP. XXII. Means how to distinguish and come to the knowledge of these
trials.
IF these assaies shall be made by Princes of small experience, it will be no
great labor for the Courtier to discover them, but because we have
presupposed he is to deal with a person circumspect and caurelous, we say,
that the first difficulty is, to have a feeling that he is felt, or rather to
understand and peize the full weight and meaning of every word the Prince shall
speak, it being clear, that discourses to this end, will pass veiled under
figurative and ambiguous speeches, not much unlike to Oracles, concluding with
such obscurity and cloudiness, that the disciphering and conceit of them will
be very difficil to him whom nature has not given a wit more pregnant, sharp
and provident, than to the ordinary. Wherefore this first point falls out
within the compass of our art, because to be heedy and watchful, is not a
thing that precepts can afford, if nature list not to be bountiful. But
understanding the force of the words, and perceiving this treaty is but to
tempt, Art herein may yield great help, in discovery between a true and fained
trial, that is, which of them the Prince does to the end to use the Courtiers
help therein, if happily he accept the charge, and which of them, but for
discovery of his inclinations and affections.

First therefore when the Prince purposes but to feel or undermine, his desire
is only the knowledge of the Courtiers intentions, whereupon because he has
the greater interest, he does it with the more regard and less fear, but
having a mind actually to command and impose some charge from which the
Courtier may perchance retire himself, he tries him then more bashfully and
more warily: hereof it follows that these Soundings are made with more
circumspection and more obscurity, so that not finding the foord pasable, it
shall be in the Princes power to step back without danger of discovery. The
other Underminings which are undertaken by distimulation, and falsely, are only
done to win the knowledge of the Courtiers nature, albeit they are no less
by a wise Prince to be handled with great dexterity and art; yet because the
impulsive cause binds not so much, they are done somewhat more plainly. This
is then a probable sign how to distinguish of like soundings or trials.

But who would do it yet more exactly, it is necessary he consider four
things, that is, the nature and inclination of the Prince, the quality of the
thing, whereof the taste is given, the present occasion in respect of the
Prince, and the actions by himself committed in that Court. How to come to the
Princes nature and inclination (unless I be deceived) has sufficiently in his
place been declared before. To understand the quality of the thing, cannot
be of that difficulty, that there should need many precepts, and less does
it belong to this art to set them down, but thus much may be said, that the
nature and quality of the thing being perfectly known, we must confer the
same with the propensity and inclination of the Prince, meditating whether any
such disposition may in any likelihood, engender in him such a cogitation or
desire of the same or such like thing. For example, who knowing the nature of
the Prince to be stern, severe, temperatly given to his affairs, abhorring
and detesting lascivious pleasures, should find him make a trial in motion,
of amorous thoughts and passions of love; might well suspect this motion to be
false, for that comparing the cause with the nature of the Prince, he should
not find that sympathy or correspondence that belongs. Howbeit to this
consideration, it were fit to join that of accidents or occasions, because
many times a natural disposition by some event or other chance, may be so
changed, that who has not special regard thereunto shall often be deceived:
as if to a Prince of a quiet pleasing nature, forgetful of wrongs, there were
some notable injury offered whereby he should be much engaged or stained in
reputation, if he should not by his best endeavors procure revenge, or were it
for some other special cause he must put on revenge; he should be mightily
deceived, who either not knowing, or not aduertising such accidents should
ground his judgment only in co^paring of the thing, that is, revenge, with the
nature of the Prince: Wherefore the knowledge of occasions and of accidents
which intercur, is very necessary for distinction of these feeling motions. And
this may be obtained by a curious observation, the which (leaving as
impertinent to search the secrets of his Prince) as a most profitable quality
is highly to be commended in the Courtier, for by knowing many things; he
shall with the more facility take the better resolutions in many cases. And
therefore we may not let slip in his fit place to set down the means how with
ease to come to the knowledge of all that is done and said in Court.

The consideration of the Courtiers proper actions, is also no less needful
in this distinction, for that either they are such, as easily discover his
inward affections and natural inclinations, and are taken as open and free, or
else such as give a show of dissimulation, and seem not of themselves
sufficient to discover his intentions. Who then has showed himself free and
plain, has no reason to suspect that he is felt or undermined, for his mind
or dispositions sake already presupposed to be known by his actions; but
rather to find how he is inclined in the acceptance or refusal of the
execution of that charge which may be imposed upon him. On the other side, who
has carried himself circumspectly, has more reason to believe that the
Prince does sound him, to find the depth of his conceits and humor; yet here
we may not let to say, but that these plain and open Courtiers may be tasted
too, either in things wherein they are already known as inclining and disposed,
or in their contraries. In those then wherein their diisposition is already
known, it is most true, these trials cannot be for their discovery, but it may
well fall out in that which is the contrary, because though it seem very
probable, that the contrary disposition takes away all confidence to receive
any benefit by their service, notwithstanding, who is in a longing desire,
uses by all circumstances to give his hope an easy passage not to find a
contradiction; and to conclude, in the self same things may false alarmes and
trials be made. For our mind being so full of lurking corners, a man can never
so well assure himself of another outward thoughts, that some scruple or
ambiguitie will not still remain. But here we must make a distinction, because
things openly professed, are either commendable or wicked: if they be bad, it is
plain, that for such we must take the disposition of the courtier that
professes them, as his actions show for; for he should be too great an
ignorant, who having a virtuous bent and disposition, would mask it with a
show of vice and wickedness, neither does civil custom suffer it, as our
Moralists report, who make it lawful to the Artizans and Mechanists to do
their work by art or without art. But the Artificer of manners (if we may
term it so) must never choose to do any thing contrary to virtue; for
otherwise he should never commendably be fashioned. Wherefore who openly makes
show to be inclined well, shall never falsely be attempted in his own
profession: yet those which do but give a taste thereof (as has been said) may
look for trial now or then.

CHAP: XXIII. What the Courtier is to do, knowing and perceiving these
soundings or trials.
AFter the wary Courtier shall have conceived that the Princes conference was
only induced but to feel his pulse, or bring him to the crucible of his
trial; and next, whether this proof be really made to make some use of him,
or but to see of what mettle he is made: it rests to set down how he is to
govern himself fruitfully to make profit of such occasion offered. We say
then, that by what already has been said, it is well known to what actions
the Courtiers duty binds him, what actions are not contained within the same,
and what are directly contrary unto his duty. Wherefore joining heereunto
another distinction, that is, of false or true trials, we may say, that if
these trials be known for false, falling upon things contrary unto duty in that
kind which may distaine his honor, there is no doubt but resolutely and
without fear of offense he may give the repulse, denying that which with his
honor he can not grant unto, and which he knows not if seriously motioned
or desired, or rather it should be much to the purpose, to show a mind
abhorring all such thoughts. But this is when you know you are to deal with a
Prince virtuously addicted: for if otherwise, you might put in practice the
rule before set down, of fitting your self unto the Princes humor, showing
your self either artificially or truly to be like unto him. And this may you
do in all things when these attempts shall be made for discovery of your
fashions only; since there growing no effect or action thereupon, there will be
no danger of impeachment in honor: and besides, you shall notably gain the
benevolence and favor of the Prince by this conformity of thoughts and
inclination. But here rises a difficulty, whereunto necessarily
consideration must be had, for discovering a disposition like unto that of the
Prince, even in matters of small commendations, if it shall give an occasion of
hope, that the Prince resolving to use the help of the Courtier, he might
easily obtain the same, a thing which following, in effect blotteth and
staineth the author of the work, and denying it moves a disdain in the
Commander; and so much the greater, perceiving himself deceived by the
Courtiers false dissembling speech. On the other side, to show himself far
from the humor of the Prince, is not answerable to that discretion which has
been said, must be used therein, for the better obteining of his favor:
wherefore it seems best to keep the middle path, neither to discover too
great a wonder, or too great a niceness of those thoughts which we shall know
in the Prince, either by natural inclination or by accident; and no less
altogether to seem so pliable and conformable (particularly in those which are
awaited on with little credit) as to give him hope to find the Courtier at his
pleasure, to be his instrument in them, although in some things which are
repugnant to his proper benefit, or not comprised in the service belonging to a
Courtier, he must show himself most ready, and more desirous of the Princes
satisfaction, than whatsoever profit of his own. But if the feeling motion be
sincerely made to use the Courtier as a minister in some thing, wherein he is
not compelled to discover his own nature and inclination, but only his will and
agreement to the command, he must in this also distinguish the matter and the
subject; for if the command light on commendable actions, although they be not
within the limits of his duty, but merely contrary unto his profit, he must
offer himself most prone and willing, remembering that by how much his dudutie
extends but unto petty things, by so much the more shall be oblige the Prince
to be answerable in love and affection, since bounden-duties pass but for
payment, but services not due, have place of benefit, of the which, all men
know which is more acceptable. But all the difficulty consists in the
resolution of that which ought to be done, when these soundings are in
dishonorable things, or periudiciall to the mark or scope the Courtier
chieflly aims at, in which case there is more lost by the performance, than
can be got by honest service of long time, and who pulles back his aid and
help herein loses the confidence and favor of the Prince, it being clear,
Lib. 14. Ann. 4.
that grauiorum scelerum, non modo ministri, as Tacitus says, sed etiam
conscij, tanquam exprobrantes aspiciuntur: Not only the actors of great
wickednesses, but such as were but made acquainted therewithal, are looked on
as vpbraiders of the same, and that especially when they shall deny their
help, in the execution whereof we may say herein, that if there be not an
error in the election of the Prince at first, this difficulty will not happen,
because serving of a virtuous lord there is no cause to fear commandments
leaning to dishonesty. But yet when either by the foresaid error, or by other
accident, you shall find your self in so doubtful a case of counsel; then
must the honorable Courtier by force of the obstinate anchor of virtuous
purposes, resist the blasts of his Princes bad persuasions or commands,
considering, that, by obeying him, his assured loss should far exceed the
estimate of any gain, which he might look for by his grace: yet will I not
leave to give aduertisment here, that in this judgment of the actions which
may seem contrary to his purpose, or hurtful, or of small reputation, the
Courtier must not with too severe a censure or a piercing eye examine or behold
the same, since many things are permitted and sufferable under the necessity of
service, so that they are not tainted with that turpitude or ill, being not
performed by a free and willing choice, or at least, not with more then easily
may be washed away, by the greatness of the benefits, which by the Princes
favor are many times obtained: whereby it is clear, these scrupulous and nice
Courtiers can never procure confidence, since he merits no favor, that is so
much friend to his own commodity, that he will not at least break a little of
the stock, but after a most miserable rate, will spend no more then mere
necessity constrains him to. To conclude, I must say that all sins are not
mortal, and that to the duty of service so much is pardonable, as may for the
pleasure and service of his Prince be done in some things, if not honorable,
at least without such note of infamy, as in a person at full liberty could not
be born out without passing censure or incurring blame. Which these are, cannot
particularly be pointed at, but the judicious Courtier by himself may well
conceive them, and chiefly since the worthiness and weight of all actions
consists in the verdict and opinion of men. So that by what is commonly
blamed in other which do serve, either for denying with too great severity, or
too too gently granting and assenting to the prince he may easily know what
arts of service are truly to be denied, and wherein securely he may please and
give satisfaction to his Lord. But when they are unbeseeming and unfit to be
put in practice, whosoever does more esteem his honor and reputation, (before
the which (virtue excepted) there is nothing amongst men more estimable) than
his Princes favor, ought, at least, if not stoutly and boldly, yet reserving
terms of modesty and regard due between parties of vnequality, deny to be
actor or minister therein, annexing to this denial notwithstandding all
obsequious and humble duty that words can afford for just excuse, to smooth and
sweeten as much as may be, the bitterness which commonly does follow such
repulses, resolving firmly in his mind, that for what soever hope of benefit,
to stand immovable in his commendable purpose, to do or act nothing that may
be prejudicial or stain to his reputation, hoping rather that this might
find such force in the Princes mind, of a well inclined nature, a magnanimous
and generous spirit, that even inamoured with the approved goodness of his
Courtier, he will fashion him unto his love, and that which should have been
a cause of hate may be the beginning of good will and favor; a thing which
though rarely happening, yet is it possible, and sometimes comes to pass. Yet
if this repulse take his true and usual course, so that the Prince indeed
conceive a hatred against the courtier, either because he found him not
resolute and prompt in that service, as he expected, or for knowing of it
better then himself, and so by consequence more worthy of his fortunes or his
place, or else as has been said before, because grauiorum facinorum non solum
ministri, sed etiam conscij quasi exprobrantes aspiciuntur. Then, he perceiving
the Princes slight regard and little favor, it should be fit to take such
course for remedy, as we hereafter in such cases shall set down.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the subsidiary aids and means to obtain the Princes favor.
HItherto has been declared, as I suppose, so much as a provident, careful
and wise Courtier may work of himself, to the end to obtain his Princes
favor. And surely, if he shall observe these precepts, seasoned with that
discretion which the effecting of an enterprise (for many respects) so
difficult and laborious does require, it should be much and very strange, if he
procure not what he has proposed, since this alone and none other seems the
beaten way, which most securely will lead us to the possession of another
favor, the which yet if it should be thought impregnable and invincible by our
proper forces, it is necessary to call in aid unto this assault, some
voluntary succors, seeking to procure that victory by others means, which
by our own labor hardly we could have purchased, to the end we let slip no
means, or leave any thing unattempted which may seem profitable any ways
unto our purpose. Who therefore by himself can not attain his Princes favor,
let him procure it by some other aids: but it is requisite that these stand
graced with the Prince. Wherefore there are three sorts of persons who seem
apt unto this use; the Princes kindred, his friends, his favored servants. Of
all these we must distinctlie speak apart, to the end the profit may be
known, that may be drawn from them, and what aduertisements are fit to be
observed, that his labor may fruitfully be employed, and bring forth that
effect which is desired, it being notorious, that all things (save virtue only)
may be either well or ill used; wherefore it is needful to be skillful in the
art and use of every one, so that they may be used conformable to that our
chiefest scope does most require. It must not therefore be thought superfluous
to entreat of these means or helps, because in the practice there do occur
many things worthy special consideration, which being unknown, their aid
should be to small profit, or greater detriment of the Courtier which shall use
them: And because the instrument of greatest force and efficacy, in all
reason, is that of the kindred, as most near unto the Prince both by the law
of God and Nature; in the second place is that of friends, and in the last, the
Courtiers or favored servants: in the same rank we will treat of them,
beginning with the kindred first.

CHAP. XXV. Of the help which may be drawn from the Princes kindred for
procurement of his favor.
IT is a work of nature not only to love those unto whom by neerenesse of blood
she has conioned us, but those withal who are by them beloved; wherefore if
the Prince by this disposition be not induced to entertain the Courtier into
his service, at least the favor of these kindred may give occasision thereof,
who using him in affairs which happily they have in common with the Prince,
may by little and little insinuate and promote him into his service, or finally
they may prefer him by intercession and mediation, which justly may be held of
so much efficacy as the condition of the party requiring the same is thought
of worth, whereby the Courtier oftentimes in very short space attaines to that
which by a long course of service by himself he should hardly procure: besides
to be sheltred under the favor of the kindred is a cause of his special
reputation in the Court, through the ability he may have by means of them to
hurt his enemies, and help his friends and confidents. This then is profit,
which by the favor of the Princes kindred, may with great likelihood be
expected. But because so it has pleased God almost in all things to make an
intermixture of the good with the badde, and of profit with his contrary, that
he might be the more commendable, who with discretion can make a difference,
or wisely make his choice, we must herein consider some things, the which
either neglected or not aduerted may turn to the great prejudice of the
Courtier. We say then that the Princes kindred are either men or women, and
both the one and the other are either young or of competent age: As for the
women if they be of tender and fresh years, by familiarity with them first
grows suspicion, which of it self were cause sufficient of the Courtiers
overthrow, and chiefly by the occasion, which is offered to the envious to
misinterpret actions in so perilous a matter, and by suggestions still to give
greater cause of doubt. Besides this (howbeit, I presuppose the Courtier of
honorable carriage, and friend to right, and therefore well resolved in
himself) if we must abstain from other men's wives or women, it is much more
required toward those who are naturally conioined to the Prince in blood; yet
for all this, experience makes it too plain, that even the most austerely
minded, and most firm and strongly settled in their purposes, have oftentimes
given place to the enticements of alluring occasions: and surely he who knows
not how much the practices of a beauteous Dame may entender and mollify the
hardened mind of a man not yet surcharged with maturitie, gives sign of
little knowledge in the worlds affairs, chiefly adding to natural
inclination, a little spur of ambitious vanity, seeing also that a man may
easily be enticed by the occasion that fortune gives, so nearly to
intrinsecate himself with persons so far above the reach of his condition,
to strengthen and unite the hopes which happily by such like means they may
conceive; as we see in Seianus, who by the entry and opportunity which the
familiarity of Drusus wife gave him, grew so confident to plot the death of
the innocent husband, how to obtain her to his wife, and to be successor in in
the Empire of Rome, things which most easily, though most wickedly, fall in
imagination, but most special where the woman may be the instrument, whose
honor once obtained, all things else are easily entreated; Lib. 4. Ann.
for Tacitus says well, Foemina amissa pudicitia alia non abnuerit. But on the
other side, albeit men should have their minds well fortified with
continency, so that in themselves, as of their proper motion there were no
fear, (though they as armed with such weapons, may lawfully presume some thing
of their valor) the occasions which by the women themselves are offered, and
the necessity which many times they do impose are specially to be considered;
the examples are infinite, but that of Siluius in Tacitus, who was so far
beyond all bonds compeld by the unbridled and headstrong lust of Messalina,
that in the end he was enforced to take her to wife, almost under the nose of
her husband Claudius the Emperor, may serve as manifest enough in my conceit
for a sufficient document and warning unto others. But if through age there
shall be such a ripeness, so that there be no cause of fear in that behalf,
their favor then in reason is much to be esteemed, considering how profitable
unto infinite the protection and authority of Liuia was, with Augustus and
Tiberius both.

Now as concerning the menkinde; if they be of young years, and subject to the
errors which the heat of youth and vnexperiency of many things does bring with
it, it is not amiss to abstain from conuersing with them, or at least not
overmuch; for if they perform any thing iudiciously and praise worthy, it is
attributed to the good disposition of their nature, and every one (a common
accident to those of high degree, and Fortunes favorites) applaud and give the
praise alone to them: but if they chance to slip awrie or err in any thing,
stepping aside, as young men are accustomed, presently the blame is laid either
on the badde example or corrupt counsel of such as were most near to them in
conversation and familiarity: and this is the damage and the danger both. The
profit on the other side is of no great consequence, because, through want of
years they neither have knowledge, and less authority, to do any favor, or
rather they dare not, especially in matters of any moment, naturally a kind of
bashfulnesse ouer-ruling youth, with a reverence unto their elders and to their
betters, that in their presence scarsely they will move their lips, or find
their tongue: and this we see in practice amongst young nephews and yoonger
brethren, but chiefly with the children themselves, and most of all, if the
Prince their father be by nature severe and stern.

Wherefore it follows, that the grace of the male kindred of riper years is
truly profitable, because these by their love (which is presupposed) joined
with their age, know how; and by their authority can be beneficial and
fruitful in their favor to the Courtier: howbeit, envy no less attending on
their favor, than it awaiteth the Princes grace, it shall be necessary to
consider how this may either be eschewed, or else what arms the Courtier must
put on to confront the same, that it prove not an impediment to his desseignes.
But this hereafter in his fit place shall be largely handled.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the help which may be drawn from the Princes friends.
THe like profit and use may be hoped for and expected from the Princes
friends, as from his kindred, the reasons serving almost both alike, though
these in some things may be thought to be preferred in others, yet they come
behind, for touching affection it is most clear that those in favor and
beloved of the kindred, especially nearest in blud, are more respected then the
fauourits of a friend, because they incline more, and desire the good rather of
those then these. Wherefore to have familiarity, to be used kindly and held
in trust and confidence with the kindred, does much more easily lay open the
entrance to the Princes favor. But on the other side, the friends come nearer
in equality, than the kindred do, especially than those of vnderage, whereof
it follows, that they speak more confidently, and with less security are
their requests and favors denied, the which is often done without any great
difficulty unto the kindred. Wherefore the friends in these performances are to
be preferred, as daring more, and less used to denials or repulse. Whereupon,
their aid chiefly consists in intercession to obtain some favor, or to
prefer into service. But in this particular you must observe and beware, that
these friends be not the Princes equals, or in any thing, (but principally in
quality of state,) Concurrents or Competitors, because in this case such
protection would cause the Courtier to be suspected and mistrusted of his
Prince: the example is at hand, that no man who by the mediation of a Cardinal
is received into the service of any other of them, and continues the
dependancie and protection of his preferrer, shall ever be in perfect
confidence with his Lord. The reason hereof is grounded on the conformity or
equality of their interests in the Papacy, which make them live more heedily
and full of jealousy, so that the service of any man, dependant upon an other
cannot satisfy them, nor but breed great suspicion; the like may be understood
of other Princes with whom the favor done for their sake who are either their
concurrents or like in estate, will never be profitable to the Courtier.
Wherefore these friends must be of a degree inferior, that is, subjects or
seruitors (but not domestical or assigned of his family) because these have
authority by his friendship and depending on him as on their superior, are his
confidents clear of suspicion.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the help that may be drawn from the Princes servants.
THe testimony that a beloved servant may make (for of such an one we speak)
of the conueniency and aptness the Courtier has in service, may be of
special help for his induction, and thus much is common to him with the
friends and kindred of the Prince. But a favored servant has yet one commodity
more, which is, that there being many things (as it is presupposed) belonging
to the Prince, committed to his charge, he may in some of them substitute the
Courtier, or use his help in them, who^ he purposes to advance, and so by
little and little lift him up and set him forwards in the degrees of the Court,
and by insinuation bring him into favor, so that by the relation of his
ability in service, and by making him partaker in his own office and charge, I
say the servant in grace may greatly aid the new Courtier.

But to know how to compass, deserve and obtain the help and protection of
these fauourits, there is use of a most exact providence and great discretion:
because their desire to continue still in the first rank breeds in them a
kind of jealousy and suspicion, that for the most part they had rather do
contrary offices fearing lest others should supplant and degrade them from
their first honors, whereupon it comes seldom to pass, that like succors
are offered by any, but such as are well assured to be firmly established in
their Princes favor: howbeit even these (who well considers it) cannot so
quietly repose themselves, but there will still remain a lurking corner for
timidity. Wherefore they have great reason to go well advised, and discreetly
to work in the preferment of any one, and our wariness and skill must be no
less how to avoid and ward this doubt, by assuring them, that in their
favoring us, they need not fear any prejudice to themselves; the which may be
thus, first by all means possible to cover and keep close, the quickness and
viuacity of the mind and spirit, for a wise man principally has regard and
fears that, as being apt to take occasions, and by himself although but
weakly helped, may set up a scaling ladder with his qualities to greater
matters. Next, to make profession of eternal gratitude and dependancy on them,
and by effects full of obsequious shows openly to testify as much. Then not
to show so much courage as to dare adventure further then they shall lead you
by the hand, or set your course by their prescription; until the time your
favor gotten with the Prince be such, as may assure you of your proper force,
the which I wish you ponder well before you come unto the proof thereof:
because if any man before his time shall go about to separate or withdraw
himself from under safe protection, and like a bird not flush shall take his
flight, his downfall and his ruin will easily follow, for the other
perceiving that he has fostred a Corriual, happily by the authority which he
yet reteineth with the Prince may frustrate all the hopes you have of further
advancement in that service; wherefore it is necessary that this progress be
gnomon-shadow like, invisible in his motion, and that the growth may then be
seen, when it is fully grown, and of himself he may defend and vndershore
the same, and so endeavor not to make his first experience, but as it were upon
occasion, by joint commission with an other man, which oftentimes make offer of
themselves to those which wisely watch their times, knowing how easy a thing
it is to fall into disgrace with Princes whom, you shall never so sincerely
serve, but either by themselves, or by the malice of some other, you shall
incur displeasure or dislike in mind, which easily may be recovered, by him
who knows to take the benefit of opportunities.

CHAP. XXVIII. How to keep in favor once obtained.
HItherto (in my opinion) we have sufficiently declared unto the Courtier the
way and means how to compass and obtain the Princes favor: whereof at
length, supposing he has gotten full possession, it rests now to give
instructions, how he may preserve and keep it, since he shall gain no less
commodity, and be as much commended for the well preserving it, then he was by
the happy procuring thereof, the obtaining many times depending upon accident
and chance, but the maintenance of it upon judgment and discretion, the which
is so rarely found amongst men, that infinite is the number of those who having
lived sometime in grace as favorites and Priuados to their Prince, in the end
come tumbling topsie turuy down from so high a type of honor, whereof Seianus
does sufficiently give testimony, who for long time not minion, but master over
Tiberius, at last closed up the period of his service with a most unhappy end.
Crispus Salustius a deereling also to Tiberius, Tac. ann. lib. 3.
Aetate prouecta, speciem magis in amicitia principis quam vim tenuit; idque
Moecenati acciderat: Grown in years held rather a show then any substance in
the Princes favor; the like happened to Mecenas, who of all others was most
dear to Augustus, whereof Tacitus rendering a reason, Ann. 3.
fato, inquit, potentiae raro sempiternae, says it is by fate decreeed, that
great favors are seldom of long continuance, and hereof gives the cause. An
satias capit, aut illos, cum omnia tribuerunt; aut hos, cum nihil reliquum est
quod cupiant; whether both as it were at a nonplus, either the Princes having
given all they can, or the Courtiers, when there is nothing left, that they may
beg.

Now herein were many things to be considered of: as first, if handling
things which are within our choice, we should refer the cause thereof to
fate; or granting that, if it were convenient, to assign a reason, as if from
fate cause were given, and chiefly an elective cause, depending upon man's
arbitrament. But because these should be too far from the matter now in hand,
it shall suffice to say, That the reasons by him set down, seem to be of no
truth, or to be the least part of those which might be brought, that is, causes
of the least part of those effects which commonly happen in this particular, as
shall be declared, because first in my opinion, none would suffer himself to
be persuaded, that Princes use to banish from their favor a favored servant,
because of the abundance of benefits bestowed on him, knowing, as the
Moralists do teach us, that the benefactour loves him most, to whom he has
been most bountiful, not recompensed by equality of love; so that it is not
only false, that there should grow a hatred in the giver because of his great
benefits bestowed, but the contrary is most true, that by this action there
springs an especial benevolence in the benefactor toward the favorite, as
his creature, and (as it were) work of his hands, and as his testimony of the
practice of a virtuous action or deed. For if Nature herself brought not forth
the effect of this love for the reason alleged, election and free choice
doubtless would produce the same, because who does not perceive how simple he
should be, who by many benefits having obliged one unto him, would voluntarily
make choice to lose him? Wherefore it is not true, that Satias capiat
Principem, quod omnia tribuerit: the Prince is at a stand, having given as much
as he can.

Neither is it true also, that the Courtier having received so many benefits of
his Prince, that there is no more place of further expectation, should be a
cause on the Courtiers part, to make, that potentiae sint raro sempiternae;
great favors should be seldom everlasting. Lib. 4. Ann.
For albeit Tacitus in another place says. beneficia eousque gratae sunt dum
videntur exolui posse, vbi multum anteuenere, pro gratia odium redditur: good
turns are so far acceptable, as there is possibility of requital; when they
grow greater, in stead of thanks, hatred is returned. Yet it proves false in
true nobility and grateful minds, in whom love and regard to benefactors
grows in true counterpoise with the grace and benefits received, or rather
does surpass it: for he who can not with effects be correspondent to the
favor done, must yet at least devise to make some show of an inward gratuitie,
and as wrath is not contented to manifest the wrong in that measure it
receives it, but in desire of revenge reteineth a far greater scope; in like
sort, that faculty wherein thankfulness and gratitude reside, does not desire
by nature (which makes us ever strive to be more than other men) only to give
equal recompense with the benefit, but much more then what has been
received, supplying want of outward means, with abundance of inward good will:
so that in love he answers not alone in just proportion to his duty, but by
the foresaid reason endeavors to outstrip the same. Thus much is said to show
the falsehood of that reason, the which though it should be granted, the cause
would easily appear; whereby servants sometimes even voluntarily deprive
themselves of that favor which they retain with Princes. But there rests
yet a doubt, how it comes to pass, that so often times the favorites fall in
dsgrace with their Lords: and this is that which for the most part is common,
whereof the examples of Seianus, of Crispus Salustius, and Moecenas, set down
by Tacitus, give evident testimony. Whereupon it appears, that in reason we
can not rest our selves upon these causes, and that therefore it were necessary
we see if there be any others yet more true and of greater consideration, which
we will endeavor to discover in the process of our discourse, saying in the
mean time, that the original of the foresaid loss may grow either from the
Prince or from the Courtiers, comprehending under the same name as well the
kindred as the Priences friends; the reasons, as it shall appear, serving all
alike: and therefore we must aduert both what must be observed with the Prince,
and what likewise with the Courtiers, peaceably and without danger to keep
that favor, which with so great pains and industry has been procured.

CHAP. XXIX. What is to be observed with the Prince for the continuing in his
favor.
THere are three things which seem necessary to be observed with the
Prince; the first is, that the favor being obtained by diligence and
satisfaction given in service, he persevere and go forward in the same with
the same terms. The which thing not only by those of mean capacity, but by
great Courtiers many times to their greater detriment is neglected. Tacitus
says of Seianus, that nimia fortuna socors factus est: ouer-great fortune had
made him negligent, a thing for two reasons very dangerous; first, the heat of
your service relenting, the Princes love cannot but grow lukewarm; next
because by this means you give occasion to some other more diligent and
careful to make his entry; wherefore it follows necessarily, in no case to
leave off any usual obseruances, nor at any time to make show of less
feruencie in service: which is very requisite, because if the hope of favor be
the cause of a diligent and commendable service, by how much more ought the
secure possession of the same, cause the continuance therein? The second
advertisement is, no more to show, then to be in deed, an upright and honorable
man, I mean for no private respect to be enticed to abuse the favor of his
lord, either by making sale thereof, by unjust oppressions, or offering
violence to please the unbridled appetites of other men and such like, to the
damage and prejudice of any man, because such like actions can by no means be
pleasing to the Prince, as well for the discovery of an evil quality in him
that performs them, of whom it is to be coniectured he cannot in reason be
assured: as for the wound that by so bad a friend he receaueth in his
reputation, whereof how much Princes make account, or at least ought to esteem
Tacitus teaches saying, Ann. l. 4.
Caetera principibus statim adesse, vnum insatiabiliter parandum prosperam sui
memoriam: Princes are in possession of all other things at their will, but one
thing they must insatiablie seek after (that is) to leave a happy memory
behind them. And more plainly in an other place; Caeteris mortalibus in eo
stare consilia, quid sibi conducere putent: Principum diuersam esse sortem,
quibus praecipua rerum ad famam dirigenda: other men's consultations only tend
to their profit, but it falls out otherwise with Princes, whose actions
chiefly are to be directed to fame and reputation. The third and last
observation in this point is, not one jot to diminish the reverence and duty
toward the Prince, nor because of special confidence to presume to use
familiarity. And for certain, I have been advertised by a most inward
favorite of a great Prince in Italy, that by this one observation he profited
much, and that the same Prince used publicly to say, that in so many
occasions of familiarity, he seemed still more fresh, and like one but newly
entered into his service: the reason hereof is, because obsequious reverence is
at all times pleasing, as witnessing a superiority in the person to whom it is
used. And as affectation is to be eschewed, so to arrogate or attribute too
much, can by no means be pleasing to the Prince; for as before upon other
occasion we have alleged: Tacit. hist. li. 4.
Quemadmodum pessimis principibus sine fine dominatio, ita quamuis egregijs
modus libertatis placet: As a continual rule is pleasing even to the woorst
Emperors; so no less pleasing is a modest kind of plainness, even to the
greatest men: wherefore the Courtier must bound himself within the limits of
his own condition, which he shall easily do if he often call to mind, that
the entrance into familiarity with his Prince is granted him as a favor, not
as a due, and to the end he may use it, not that he should use it; and that in
many things the appearance and reputation to be able to do or perform them,
is better, then willingly to come to the actual execution of them.

CHAP. XXX. What is to be observed with other Courtiers, and the manner how to
make them his friends.
THat part which comprehends his office or carriage toward other courtiers,
is far more hard; wherefore it is fit we discourse thereof more at large.
First it is necessary, if it be possible, to make them our friends and
confidents, or at least not to be our enemies; the reason is, because either
directly or indirectly they may do some things, whereby our favor with the
Prince may be diminished, yea, and happily wholly diuerted as well through the
inconstancy of the minds of men, as because no man lives so void of error,
that may not in some thing give disgust unto his lord, who many times with too
great an impression receives that which maliciously is suggested in an others
disgrace. The obtaining them to friend, is wrought, either through benefit or
hope. The Courtiers may diversely be pleasured by a favored servant, as by the
ascribing much unto them, by the preferring them into service, by promotion, or
by the procureme^t of some favor for them. The chiefest way of winning these
men's love, is to prefer them to be of the Princes household, because by this
means he makes them his Creatures and dependants, of whom he may make
special use in his occurrences as men greatly bound unto him, of whom we will
treat in his place, showing what profit is drawn from such kind of friends.
But it is good to note, not to prefer men of too great parts, for these
grounding their fortunes upon their own deserts easily forget that bond. And
such are the perfect and true Noble men, the rich, and those excellent in any
special science, art or honorable quality. Wherefore he must prefer such as
are of the mean, in birth, faculty and quality, because the falling into the
other extreme is as vicious, the reason is, for that many times there are some
persons favored, who do small credit, or rather disgrace their preferrour:
howbeit, there be some that hold it for a good rule, to receive into their
service the most vnaptest people, as men neither of bounty nor valor, that by
this touch, their own worthiness may be the better known, imitating in this
point Augustus of whom it is said: Tacit. li. 1. Ann.
Tiberium ab eo non caritate, aut reipub. cura successorem adscitum, sed
quoniam arrogantiam saeuitiamque eius introspexisset, comparatione deterrima
sibi gloriam acquaesiuisse: Tiberius was not chosen successor to the state by
him either for affection to him, or care of the Commonwealth, but perceiving
in him arrogancy and cruelty, he would by so bad and unequal comparison, be
thought the more glorious afterward: but this is not befitting in the Princes
service, and for the reason alleged were dangerous. The same care must he have
in the promoting into any great charge, those who already are preferred into
the household either by others, or by himself, or by the Princes own choice,
and above all things, that he beware of men that have spirit and life in them;
for these no less watchful than ready may at one time or other by their
diligent observation watch their opportunity so well, that they may degrade
him from his first honors: and doubtless of all the rest this quality is
most to be feared, because it seems not, that a Princes favor by any better
means is obtained, than by this alacrity and liveliness, which are true
signs of valor and ability to perform many things which to others would
seem impossible; whereupon it is justly said of these, that excitantur ad
meliora magnitudine rerum: they are encouraged to greater matters by great
imploiments: whereas for the most part hebescunt alij, others grow blunt and
dull. Wherefore the Courtier must have special care to beware of such like
rocks, that he may anchor free and void of danger in possession of the favor
already obtained; aduerting further, that in his advancement of others he be
not so prodigal in their commendations, that it be prejudicial to his own
commodity. But hereof more at large hereafter.

The last means how to benefit the Courtiers, consists in obteining either
for them or their friends some favors or suits, which he must often procure,
that he may the more entirely bind them unto him: finally al these
aduertisements do presuppose an ability in the Courtier to receive these
favors and benefits of his Prince; in which case for that some are found (as
has been said) somewhat hard and intractable toward their servants, it is not
unnecessary to consider how the Courtier may draw from the Prince, though
unwilling, those favors he desires either for himself or his friends.

CHAP. XXXI. The means how to obtain of the Prince those favors and grace,
which are desired.
THe procuring of favors from the Prince is both profitable and honorable unto
the Courtier: profitable, by the benefit which follows either to himself or
to those for whom he obteineth them, who by this means he makes much
beholding unto him. Honorable, because he is accounted a favorite, who has his
Princes will at his dispose, and can compass those favors which he please
either for himself or his friends and dependents. Wherefore when the nature of
the Prince is of that kind which is found in some with great commendations,
though yet but seldom; that is, inclined to beneficence, he shall have no
great need either of precepts or of art, more then only in showing a modesty
in his requests, that in no sort he do manifest the least pretention of
expectation, as of duty from the Prince, as also not to be too frequent in
these offices, and not to desire things so impertinent, that woorthely they may
receive the repulse. But when the Prince is near or hard in granting favors,
either because he will not exceed the limits in doing good unto his servants,
as doubting they should abandon him, or to keep them in awe that they grow not
over confident, or for the small esteem he makes of them, or finally for
fear they should sell his favors to some other; in these cases art is
necessary. Wherefore if the hand be closed, fearing to be forsaken, it shall
help much to show a retentiue memory and gratitude for benefits, with a
greater desire to be serviceable after a reward then before. And certes it
seems just and true, that in a mind well borne and of good education and
quality, a present reward works greater effects than a future hope. To
conclude, to profess to run one and the same fortune with his Prince, and to
die in the service of him and his house, seems to be a convenient and
proportionate remedy against this evil. To the second, the same modesty
continued from his first entrance, even to that degree wherein the Courtier
shall be found, helps much, not showing any alteration at all, or diminution
of duty or reverence, as before has been noted. But if the Prince be strict
and drie-fisted in his favors, for the small respect which naturally he has of
his servants, the Courtier has but a weak hope, where there is such an humor.
Wherefore it is necessary either to endeavor that the Master change copy and
style in leting him see qualities of worth, at least for the affect and
aptness to his service, worthy to be regarded, or else, this not succeeding,
to answer him proportionally with the same terms of light esteem or respect
of him; yet so, if it be as doubting lest his favors should be sold, you must
observe that rule above set down, which (in fine) consists in setting the
honor and reputation of the Prince before your eyes, and not to abuse the free
liberty you have obtained to dispose thereof.

But that hardness which grows by nature, not inclined to liberality or
beneficence, is hardest of all the rest to be ouerruled: and truly it is
evident, that there be some from whom it is impossible directly to derive any
favor; wherefore it is fit to use art, and wisely to insinuate occasions and
reasons for the favors he desires, and to attend opportunities, which are
easily found by him who continually or for the most part is in presence of his
Prince, faining sometime when need shall be, to have no affect, motion or
desire of the contrary, and discreetly to use himself in this sinistrous
course, chiefly when to this natural niggardliness, there is any suspicion of
the Courtiers fidelity adjoined. True it is, that hereof it comes to pass,
that benefits are not obtained from such Masters but by length of time, and
pining expectation, that there is great patience required in the servant, who
in requital hereof owes him small duty, being more beholding to his own
artificial cunning and dexterity, then to the good will of the Prince;
howbeit, it is necessary so much as may be, to conceal this affect or motion,
and to conclude all speeches with him, with a gracious conge and giving thanks;
hic est enim finis omnium, cum dominante sermonum, 14. ann.
says Tacitus: for such must be the conclusion of all speeches with Princes.
Hereof also it follows that even the Princes oftentimes receive
proportional acknowledgments; for nature herself will not suffer that any man
should serve, either not allured by hope, or forced by gratuities; and who
believes otherwise, must not marvel if many times there be occasions to
complain of servants, since without all doubt, the Master is the rule and
pattern of the quality of the service to those that follow him: whereupon the
measure falling out scarce and couetously-short on his side, unjustly should he
pretend a large abundance or heaped up liberality from his servants. But all
these difficulties are supposed not in possession of favor, but in slight
regard, because if any one be found interessed in his Princes love, he cannot
fall into any of the foresaid conceits, but disposes of his favors as it
pleases him, yet regularly and with that modesty and wisdom, which is
required of him who is to deal with a person of that quality as we presuppose
the Prince to be.

But here we must not leave to show, that the Courtier may also in many other
things by an other way without being over combersome unto the Prince, be a
means for others of many favors; and this consists in using the help of
principal officers and ministers who are able in their charge or may easily
find the occasion to obtain many favors, or by themselves make many
resolutions, whereof the provident Courtier may make some use, either for his
own or his friends profit and commodity, for that these officers whereof we
speak being for the most part none of the Princes family, or howsoever if they
were thereof, being desirous to have any special protection from him, they
will willingly endeavor to deserve the good will of him whom they know to be
most favored and most dear; and this course of procuring favor without
trouble unto the Prince, is very commendable, being convenient to reserve his
favor and help for things of greater importance: Besides this going thus
retiredly and using the means of others in their proper charges, is not only
profitable, for the above alleged reasons, but are as testimony of modesty
and reverence toward his Prince: As though one could never arrogate so much in
desert by service, that confidently he might charge him with expectation of
favors or rewards. But on the other side, it is necessary to fly the other
extreme; for that those who fearing to be fastidious or troublesome unto their
Prince, never desire any favor of him, incur two great errors; the first is,
they lose the occasions to win to themselves assured friends and dependents;
the other is, that by these means they never get the reputation which is
incident to those Courtiers, who make themselves known to be beloved and
favored of the Prince whom they serve.

CHAP. XXXII. What must be observed not to have the Courtiers his enemies, and
to avoid ill turns and bad offices.
ALthough many are by nature so austere, that neither by benefits or other
merits it is possible to make them tractable or beneuolent, yet are not all men
of this disposition or quality; wherefore toward those which are of more
civility and humanity, the Courtier is to abstain and beware of two things,
that is, to offend them or give occasion of envy. Let us first speak of the
offenses, as the most efficient cause of hatred, and then secondly of envy.

Howbeit therefore that many are the means whereby the Courtier may give
offense, yet that of detraction and passing bad offices with the Prince to
another man's detriment, seems to be most proper unto him as a Courtier. This
was a cunning or art much used by Seianus, of whom Cornelius Tacitus having
said, Ann. 4. lib. 4.
that fuit audax, sui obtegens, he was bold and a concealor of his own
desseignes: he ioineth therewithal, in alios criminator, a calumniator or
finde-fault of others. And Antonius Primus purposed as much, and in effect
performed no less against Mutianus, who notwithstanding with the same weapon,
fortunately defended himself, insomuch that through the great and manifold good
turns which Antonius had deserved of Vespasian, he easily blotted out the
memory thereof. And truly since it is so, that no more then one at once, can
well possess the chiefest place in the Princes favor, it is necessary so
much as may be, to keep others a loofe off, from entering in, which chiefly is
performed by attenuating other men's merits, and provoking either the Princes
neglect or hatred against those in particular, who for the neerenesse they are
in the Princes favor, are more dangerously left in that degree, without some
molestation. Howsoever, yet this seems very absurd, that any whose scope is
honorable reputation, should take so crooked and sinistrous a course, there
being no so apparent a sign of any man's abject baseness, nor any thing that
more distaineth civility it self, then Vnde alijs infamiam pariat, inde
gloriam quemquam sibi recipere: whence others get disgrace, thence any man to
ground his glory or advancement, and that which more imports, seeming to
conquer in this camp, in stead of virtue and commendable valor, he procures
for his reward malice, hatred, and envy; besides, it is very probable, that a
wise and generous Prince ought not to receive into any degree of favor, a
Courtier who should be known to be apt and prone by nature and badde
inclination to slander or speak evil to an others prejudice, because, Si
proditores, etiam ijs quos anteponunt inuist sunt; if once traitors, then are
they hateful even to those who make use of them; how much more should
calumniators or slanderers be odious! from whom the Prince (as such kind of
men) receaueth no service at all, but rather a cause of disgust or dislike
toward those, by whom happily he might be better served, then by these
detractors; and gives him occasion also to doubt, lest they should arm
themselves in like terms against himself, with their malignant toongs, in
offense of his honor and reputation. And certainly though it be fit the Prince
should omnia scire, Tac. in vit. Cor. Agri.
and that also in his own family; that he might the better govern the same,
there is no doubt, but the informers thereof are not very grateful unto him,
and hateful unto all others of the Court, either for some offense received, or
suspecting or fearing to receive some, as in all likelihood they may justly
fear of persons so wickedly inclined. Wherefore this course is not only not
honorable, but very dangerous, and exposed to many hurts, which grow many times
to that pitch, that alone they degrade not the Courtier from the Princes grace,
but irrecouerablie cause his utter ruin, and that chiefly because if he begin
but once to falter, his own friends conforming themselves to the rest, become
his persecutors, and then with his own overthrow, he shall know how true it
is, that nihil rerum mortalium tam instabile ac fluxum est, Tac. lib. 13. ann.
quam fama potentiae, non sua vi nixae; there is no mortal thing so instable
and fickle as the same of greatness not supported by it own force or
strength; and that he ought to have imprinted in his memory that other saying,
quanto quis plus adeptus est, tante se magis in lubrico existimet; how much the
more a man has heaped up, in so much the greater instabilitie and icey-footing
let him suppose himself. These in my opinion may well be called bad offices:
from the which the wise and honorable Courtier for the reasons above alleged,
ought wholly to abstain.

CHAP. XXXIII. How the Courtier is to carry himself with his enemies and
persecutors.
But because it is a natural thing to defend our selves and to devise how to
preserve and mainetaine us in that state of happiness which with great labor
we have procured, and that oftentimes it may fall out that one may be
maligned, or at least may have some other accidents so near at hand, that
danger shall be imminent to him that with some art or skill does not defend
himself; it shall be fit to discourse how the Courtier is to govern him,
between these two so dangerous rocks, the one of slanderous backebiting and
persecution, the other of concurrency and emulation.

First of persecution, against the which he must first make his defense with
rewards and benefits, the which are apt not only to extinguish this malignity,
and to surcease that dangerous prosecution, but to change and convert the
imagination of hurt and wrong, into a more beneuolent and friendly mind. This
shall be a most profitable gain, and so much the more commendable, the less
it shall be used, saving to persons in whom virtue in his highest degree, has
won the regiment of a most perfect habit, it being naturally very absurd to
be beneficial to those who are known to be of a perverse and ill affected
mind: but because many times, such is the malignitie of men, that it cannot be
appeased or overcome by any benefit, it is necessary to take some other course,
that is, with a resolute mind to make proof who shall in the end prevail,
devising how to extinguish or supplant his adversary, not by death, but by
expulsion, either out of Court or wholly out of favor. And this will succeed
very securely, and without any great labor, to him who shall be in such favor
as we now presuppose him, because he shall not only have easy access unto the
Princes ear, whereby he may have discourse at his pleasure, and take occasion
to do bad offices against his persecuters, but he shall possess a great
faction of friends amongst the Courtiers, who may serve his turn by giving
out, and sowing in the Court, yea and with the Prince himself, the like seed
of report, whereby the traducers in the end shall reap the fruits answerable
to their deserts. But the Courtier for his own part must endeavor to keep
himself in the good opinion of him against whom he minds to revenge
himself, not giving the least occasion or sign of bad satisfaction, and keep
himself the most wary and retired in his speech in all places and at all times
that may be. And in sted hereof he must have his ministers ready, by whose
means he may compass his desseigned purpose; as most easily he shall do, if
besides this, upon occasions with the Prince, either excusing or denying the
accusations spread of his adversary, he shall so much the more confirm them,
by how much he shall show himself the less interessed or malicious against
him. But here we must note, that if the persecutions on the other side be open
and manifest, and such as can not be concealed, and done as it were in
disgrace; it is then necessary, openly, and not by close conueiance, to resist
them, for the manifestation and notice that thereof may be taken, both of his
authority and power to defend himself and offend others, when he is so
resolved: whereby follows both a fear and hope in others, which affects are
the beginnings, though diversely, of friendship and confidence, because fear
enforces to confidence for the more assurance, and hope induces friendship to
win profit and commodity thereby: yet howsoever, many had rather use
dissimulation and close stratagems against their enemies, either for their
reputation in making slight regard of wrongs, or the commendations which they
procure in pardoning injuries, or at least because by this means they make
their enemy the less heedfull, whereby with the more ease they suppress him;
and quo incautior deciperetur, Lib. 1. hist.
palam laudatum, says Tacitus: and to the end he might more unwarily be
deceived, praised him openly. I know not to what purpose, but for certain,
this was the only art and sleight of Tiberius, which in particular he used
against his nephew Germanicus, and against Seianus his favorite, who living in
the favor of Tiberius, did also practice it to the ruin and overthrow of many:
and Mutianus by the self same oppressed his Concurrent Antonius Primus. These
then are the two means to resist our enemies and persecuters in the Court. But
if one be but of little authority or favor with the Prince, and
notwithstanding maligned in the obteining thereof, there are two remedies; the
first is, to humble himself to the detractours, seeking all the means to
procure them to be his friends, and to make them believe he pretends not any
thing more than themselves. The other is, to be an adherent or dependent to the
most potent of the court, under whose protection he may live; or at least to be
of the contrary faction to them, if there shall be any, as it is most usual
and common among the Courtiers. To conclude, to shun or take away the occasion,
by insinuating into their favor, or by living under the shelter of some other,
or else to resist them by the succor and force of the contrary faction.

CHAP. XXXIIII. How he may keep back his Concurrents and Corriuals.
But if the danger of being removed from possession of this favor grow from
another well deserving, whereby the Concurrents endeavor themselves to be
advanced and preferred into the love and grace of the Prince, it should be
then necessary to take another way.

And truly, howbeit it falls out very seldom, that any Master who has bound
and found a servant confident unto him, can greatly love any other, since one
and the same kind of love can hardly be branched and severed into diverse
subjects: notwithstanding because it may fall out, and often times it has been
seen come to pass, that Courtiers who for a time were favorites and priuados,
have been expulsed and lost their grace, it is necessary in such case to show
the means how to preserve the same. The first precept therefore is, that he
endeavor by diligent service to out strip his Concurrents in good deserts, this
being the most real and honorable way, succeeds also more securely, tending
wholly and ending in the profit and commodity of the Prince, from whom, as we
have often said, proportionable favor must be attended, and expected according
to the actual service done. But when this course is not thought sufficient, it
is necessary as much as is possible to thrust off, and keep back, such
Concurrents from the Princes service: using means that either very seldom or
never there be occasion given, for them to insinuate, either by service or
familiarity into the pleasure of his Lord or Prince: this will easily fall out,
if at the first he be vigilant in not permitting any man to thrust himself too
forwards, because out of this time, the remedy will be both hard and
dangerous. But to the performance hereof since one alone cannot with effect
supply all charges and offices, it is necessary to bring in others dependents
on him, and qualified in such sort as before has been declared, so that the
Prince being served and satisfied by these, have no cause to long after, or
desire the service of the others, whose practice might happily breed matter
both of fear and jealousy. But this not succeeding, I will not speak of badde
offices: since these as inhumane and not fitting any worthy or honorable man,
and also as not being very secure* ought to be banished the very thoughts of
every good and Christian Courtier.

CHAP. XXXV. The means how to avoid envy.
LEt us now come to that other part which is the cause that Princes favorites
are seldom seen or looked on with a favorable eye by the rest of the
Courtiers: and that is, Envy, the which, who shall well consider things
anciently past, shall find it to have been the cause of the ruin of so many,
that the testimony of examples to so manifest a knowledge were mere
superfluous: and therefore with diverse sleights and arts by the wisest
Courtiers, has ever been avoided: the which we think fit in this place only
with breuity to point at.

First therefore with the Envious we must hold the same course and rule, as
with our persecutors, in endeavoring to appease them and make them our friends
with benefits and rewards; since so being made our well willers, they will not
grieve at an other man's profit, as at their own damage, the good of one friend
being common to all friends. Next, for that the cause of Envy is an others good
and profit in possession, it shall be wisdom to conceal it, or at least to
make as slender esteem thereof in appearance as may be, not showing himself
arrogant or proud thereof by any means, but rather, as not caring for it, or
desirous to leave it, or to make it common to some other: Seianus, great Master
in the Courtiers art, considering how prejudicial unto him the concourse of
the people, and courting of him, was resolved with himself, Tac. lib. ^. an^.
minuere sibi inuidiam, adempta salutantium turba, sublatisque inanibus; To
diminish the envy borne him, by abandoning the idle salutations of the
multitude, and remoouing vain shadows. Words of great consideration, but
little observed, vera potentia augere, to increase true power and authority;
and herein consists the true essential judgment and worth of the Courtier.
True it is that afterward he considering, assiduos in domum coetus arcendo,
infringere potentiam, that driving away or neglecting the continual concourse
of multitudes that came unto his house, he should weaken his authority, no
less then on the other side, receptando, facultatem criminantibus exhibere;
enterteining them, he should minister matter unto envious find-faults: lastly,
thus straightned in this difficult counsel; Huc flexit, vt Tiberium ad vitam
procul Romam amonis locis degendam impelleret; he thus resolved, that he would
persuade Tiberius to lead his life in some pleasant places same from Rome. And
truly as this is a most considerable point, so is it exceeding hard to find
the true square or root thereof, because that either not respecting or
refusing some apparances, he may greatly crase his credit and reputation, which
indeed is no other then opinion; and this opinion grows of the appearance and
show, and not alone of being a favorite, but of the knowledge that is taken
thereof by others: and on the other side, from these ostentations rises envy,
whose follower many times is the ruin of the Courtier; wherefore it is
necessary to walk with infinite wariness and discretion between these two
extremes: with this particular advertisement, not to grow too great or
familiar with the Courtiers, Lib. 2. hist.
since that, Insita mortalibus natura, says Tacitus, it is natural unto every
man, recentem aliorum foelicitatem aegris oculis introspicere, modumque
fortunae anullis magis exigere, quam quos in aequo videre: to behold other men's
fresh happiness with envious eyes, and to wish an indifferent or mean fortune,
to none so much, as to those whom they have known their equals. Wherefore
Seneca aduising himself, though all too late, how much envy increased upon him
after the death of Burrhus; Lib. 14. ^nn.
Tacitus reporting, that his envious persecutors, Varijs cum criminantibus
adorti sunt, tanquam ingentes, and priuatum modum euectas opes adhuc augeret,
quodque, studia ciuium in severteret, hortorum quoque amoenitate, and villarum
magnificentia quasi Principem supergrediretur: vpbraided him with sundry
calumniations, as that he continually heaped up wealth in excess, and beyond
the compass of a private man, that he won the hearts of the people, and that
for pleasant gardens and magnificent stately buildings, he almost exceeded the
Prince; colors, only for shadow and couerture of envy: purposed to make a
resignation of all his fortunes and wealth, or the greater part unto Nero
again; but this imagination having no success, Instituta prioris potentiae
commutat, prohibet coetus salutantium, vitat comitantes, rarus per vrbem, quasi
valetudine infensa, aut sapientiae studijs domi attineretur; He changed the
course of his first greatness, forbidding the multitudes which came to perform
complements of courtesy, discharged his followers, showed himself seldom in
the city, as though he kept home, either fearing his health, or busy at his
book and studies.

Besides all this, it serves much to the purpose to make a show that this
favor and grace is rather voluntarily granted than ambitiously procured,
using the same, as has been said, not only without offense to others, but
rather to the benefit of others, and keeping the decorum of his degree and
place, not with a proud disdainfulness, but with a sweet and grave modesty,
some thing inclining to popularity. Finally, because Envy swaieth amongst
equals, or persons at least that so think themselves, if any man shall
endeavor himself so much to exceed in virtue, or otherwise by long and
honorable service, should take occasion to pretend equality; without all
question envy would either cease, or rather, to speak better, would never
begin.

But when these observations shall not free or sufficiently defend the Courtier
from this contagion, whose companion for the most part is malicious detraction,
if she once show her self so apparently that offenses do grow, we must then
use the same art against the Envious, as against the maleuolent and wicked
slanderer; devising; if it be possible, to remove him from the Court, or
wholly out of service; and to perform the same with the more ease, he shall
do well to remember that which a little before has been said, that is,
howbeit the Courtier be not by himself to perform any badde offices, he may
pass them notwithstanding by means of his adherents, in case necessity bind
him to maintain his place; and therefore, not only for this purpose, but for
many other causes, it is necessary that he be well furnished of good store of
friends and confidents of all sorts, that is, to the end to be informed of all
that is done or said in the Court, and that for diverse reasons. As first to
understand what opinion is held of him amongst the other Courtiers, and which
of his actions are either praised or reproved, making use of such advice by
the way of correction. Next to distinguish of faithful from fained friends,
because every man shows himself loving and kind to him whom they know
favored of the Prince, though it may be, really and indeed, they are the
contrary; a thing by means of these confidents easily discovered: since they
are conversant, he understand and observe all that passes in the Court,
chiefly entertaining some who shall carry small appearance of being inward with
him; for that unto such, as not esteemed of any great credit, or partialists to
the favored Courtier, they will easily unmask, and reveal the very inwards
of their hearts: or else themselves being dextrous and cunning in this kind as
men of good understanding, can by an inckling easily conjecture the rest. And
lastly, to know what is done, yea or thought by these malicious enuiers even in
their private living, because none lives without sin, it will be easy to
find matter to reprove their bold malicious slanders with the knowledge of
their own actions; and being willing to hurt them that shall go about to
offend or wrong him, he may easily by these means effect and bring it to
pass.

CHAP. XXXVI. What the Courtier is to do who shall find himself slenderly
respected of his Prince or Lord.
THus much, in my opinion, may be said for the Courtiers good advertisement: if
any other imagine he can more aptly and with better method, and in conclusion
with more commendations handle this art, he should do great wrong to civil
society, and to the duty which every man owes, (to labor what in him is for
the common benefit) to defraud the world from participating of his so good
thoughts and abilities. In the mean time, if any man happily guided by the
rules and precepts here set down, lanching forth into the dangerous maine and
current of the Court, shall rather suffer shipwreck, than safely furdle up his
sails in the desired haven. Me thinks without sinistrously judging of this
doctrine learned by him, he should call to mind, that among arts, there are
some which are called Coniecturall; and the reason is, because albeit their
teaching or instructing part proposes a certain known end or scope, from the
which there may demonstratiuely be deduced certain conclusions, the which will
make the context of the doctrine both apparent and necessary, so far forth as
the nature of things to be acted will give leave or suffer; wherein the wisest
are of opinion, that it is not possible to frame perfect demonstrations.
Notwithstanding, the active part does never of necessity perform the purposed
end, although it perform all the actions so much as can be desired,
proportional and correspondent to the same. For so we see an excellent and
famous Captain, who in every part has performed the duty of his proper
charge, yet his hope of victory may fail him, and not sort as he desired. So
likewise without error of art, the most expert Mariner many times loses
himself and the ship he sails in. Nor less unlucky some times the
Physician ministers his drugges to the sick patient without hope of help.
Nor many times can the aptest and most artificial Rhetoritian remove a settled
mind from a purposed resolution. To leave to speak of many such like arts,
the which not by necessity, but contingently, and as it were by fortune or
chance, obtain their desired ends, the Courtiers art being amongst them, the
precepts thereof may work no less erroneously than those of other arts called
Coniecturall. Wherefore, if after the observance of the above noted
aduertisements, that favor or grace shall not be obtained, or that which is
much worse, if by any accident it should be lost so that assuredly there were
discovered small satisfaction in the Prince; it rests, that for the full
accomplishment and perfecting of this work, we should set down in this case
what we think considerable and necessary therein for the Courtiers benefit.

And questionless there cannot be a greater torment to the heart of him that
serves, then to see himself slightly regarded or beloved of his Lord, and
this accident particularly works greatest effects in those who have not their
minds armed with natural magnanimity, or virtuous education, but are rather
of a disdainefull spirit, not able to endure the conforming of their
affections, to the prescript rule or square of an other man's opinion, will or
direction, especially in the manner of his living either in peaceable
quietness, or unquiet business: whereupon it follows many times, the
resolutions of such men in these cases are very strange and inconsiderate.

Wherefore in this so doubtful a passage to conduct him forth by the guidance
of wise and fruitful counsel, we first say, that as in bodily sicknesses, the
cause known, remedies for the cure thereof are easily applied: so must the
Courtier, so much as in him is, diligently seek out the occasion that moves
his Prince or Lord to be angry or not well disposed toward him, to the end
either by himself, or by means of some other to move him therein: yet so,
that it fall not within the prejudice of his principal designs, as before has
been handled, because then it should be better to leave the service, by
craving license to depart. But because it is a saying. Che piaga, per allentar
d'arco non sana; That the vnbending of the bow is no healing of the wound: so
is it not enough many times to remove the cause of this displeasure, for the
mind notwithstanding remains still exulcerate and grieved. It is necessary
therefore not only to remove the cause of this anger, but to proceed in the
observance of those aduertisements which the Rhetoritians teach for the
lenefying and appeasing of minds once moved, as humiliation, acknowledging of
the error, accusing himself, craving pardon, offering himself ready to all
satisfaction: and continuing with all patience in these courses, he may make
it apparent how much he valueth the favor and love of his Prince, with the
sorrow he sustaineth for his displeasure: for this anger growing of an
offense, which contains a neglect by these foresaid demonstrations, such a
counterpoise may be made in opinion to be thought despised and disgraced, that
in the end it may bring the Prince to put on a more gentle and pacified mind
toward the Courtier: so that this offense and cause of badde satisfaction,
have not taken such root, that it prove rather a hatred then a dislike;
because that in such case as to a more grievous malady, a more potent medicine
is necessary; the which many times the Courtier by no means of obsequious
diligence shall be able to find; whereupon he must have recourse to the help
of intercession and mediation by some others, as the Princes kindred, his
friends, and other Courtiers in greatest favor.

But if none of these courses can stay the wrath nor appease the same, so that
the hope of recovery of favor be wholly extinct, the End and Scope of his
service being taken away: it necessarily follows, that the society also
between the Prince and the Courtier should be dissolved by his abandoning and
leaving of the service. This resolution must be taken but upon urgent
necessity, for that otherwise it would come seldom to pass, but that the
Courtier should incur great detriment, either by opinion of some special want
in him, and chiefly in those that have lived in greatest favor; or of some
rash presumption, as supposing nothing can coequall his deserts; or of an
inconstancy of nature which will never continue long in one course; or
finally, by the loss of a Princes protection, besides his time, and it may be,
the flower of his age vainly spent, and to small purpose; things all of them
of special regard and estimation. But when the case is desperate, it shall be
better to bestow the remnant of his life, in some other service or imploiment,
then unfruitfully to serve, where he may sooner expect a sudden discharge, than
hope to compass any of those Ends, which whosoever serves in Court does aim
at and propound. *

FINIS.

