THE MUSES ELIZIVM, Lately discovered, BY A NEW WAY OVER PARNASSVS.

The passages therein, being the subject of ten sundry Nymphalls, Leading three
Divine Poemes,

NOAH'S Flood.

MOSES, his Birth and Miracles.

DAVID and GOLIA.

By MICHAEL DRAYTON Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for John Waterson, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, EDWARD Earl of DORSET, Knight of the Noble Order of
the Garter, of his Majesty's Privy Counsel, and Lord Chamberlayne to her
Majesty.
My most honored Lord,
I Have ever found that constancy in your Favors, since your first
acknowledging of me, that their durablenesse have now made me one of your
family, and I am become happy in the title to be called Yours: That for
Retribution, could I have found a fitter way to publish your Bounties, my
thankefulnes before this, might have found it out; I crave of your Lordship the
patronage of my ELIZIVM, which if the Muse fail me not, shall not be
altogether unworthy of your protection; I have often adventured upon desperate
untrodden ways, which has drawn some severe censures, upon many of my
Labors, but that neither has, nor can ever trouble me; The divine Poemes in
this small volume inserted, I consecrate to your Religious Countess, my most
worthy Lady. And so I rest

The honorer of you, and your noble Family, MICHAEL DRAYTON.

To the Reader:
DIscreet and judicious Reader, (if my Friend, whosoever) let me ingeniously
intreal thee, that in reading these Poemes, thou will be pleased patiently to
correct some faults, that partly by reason of the raggedness of the written
Copy, and partly by our over sight have escaped in the Press, which if thou
shall do, the Muses themselves, as they are courteous and well educated
virgins, shall in their thankfulness inspire thee with some Poeticke rapture,
that thou shall read them with more delight, then otherwise thou should in
being over Critical. Some of which faults (I dare not say all) I have
heereunder set down.

Errata.
PAge 6. line 1. for, that the one the other was, read, that the one of them the
other was. p. 9. 1. 8. for, she would not outstrip a Roe, read, she would
outstrip a Roe. p. 10. l. 17. for we, read were. p. 34. l. 21. for that, read
thou. p. 125. l. 36. for, and l'st must, read, and l'st must die. p. 137. l.
25. for through, read though. p. 172. l. 14. for made them to prepare, read,
their deserved fare.

But this last fault is not through all the Impression.

I only show you these few, for breuity sake, that in your Reading you may
correct the like, which I am afraid are many more then these.

THE DESCRIPTION of ELIZIVM.
A Paradise on earth is found,
Though far from vulgar sight,
Which with those pleasures does abound
That it Elysium hight.
Where, in Delights that never fade,
The Muses lulled be,
And sit at pleasure in the shade
Of many a stately tree,
Which no rough Tempest makes to reele
Nor their straight bodies bows,
Their lofty tops do never feel
The weight of winters snowes;
In Groves that evermore are green,
No falling leaf is there,
But Philomel (of birds the Queen)
In Music spends the year.
The Merle upon her mertle Perch,
There to the Mavis sings,
Who from the top of some curld Berch
Those notes redoubled rings;
There Daysyes damask every place
Nor once their beauties lose,
That when proud Phoebui hides his face
Themselves they scorn to close.
The Pansy and the Violet here,
As seeming to descend,
Both from one Root, a very pair,
For sweetness yet contend,
And pointing to a Pinke to tell
Which bears it, it is loath,
To judge it; but replies, for smell
That it excels them both,
Wherewith displeasde they hang their heads
So angry soon they grow
And from their odoriferous beds
Their sweets at it they throw.
The winter here a Summer is,
No waste is made by time,
Nor does the Autumn ever miss
The blossoms of the Prime.
The flower that July forth does bring
In April here is seen,
The Primrose that puts on the Spring
In July decks each Green.
The sweets for sovereignty contend
And so abundant be,
That to the very Earth they lend
And Bark of every Tree:
Rills rising out of every Banck,
In wild Meanders strain,
And playing many a wanton pranck
Upon the speckled plain,
In Gambols and lascivious Gyres
Their time they still bestow
Nor to their Fountains none retyres,
Nor on their course will go
Those Brooks with Lillies bravely decked,
So proud and wanton made,
That they their courses quite neglect:
And seem as though they stayde,
Fair Flora in her state to view
Which through those Lillies looks,
Or as those Lillies leand to show
Their beauties to the brooks.
That Phoebus in his losty race,
Often lays aside his beams
And comes to cool his glowing face
In these delicious streams;
Often spreading Vines clime up the Cleeues,
Whose ripned clusters there,
Their liquid purple drop, which drives
A Vintage through thee year.
Those Cleeues whose craggy sides are clad
With Trees of sundry suits,
Which make continual summer glad,
Even bending with their fruits,
Some ripening, ready some to fall,
Some blossomed, some to bloome,
Like gorgeous hangings on the wall
Of some rich princely Room:
Pomegranates, Lymons, Cytrons, so
Their laded branches bow,
Their leaves in number that outgoe
Nor roomth will them allow.
There in perpetual Summers shade,
Apolloes Prophets sit
Among the flowers that never fade,
But flowrish like their wit;
To whom the Nymphs upon their Lyres,
Tune many a curious lay,
And with their most melodious Quires
Make short the longest day.
The thrice three Virgins heavenly Clear,
Their trembling Timbrels sound,
Whilst the three comely Graces there
Dance many a dainty Round,
Decay nor Age there nothing knows,
There is continual Youth,
As Time on plant or creatures grows,
So still their strength renewth.
The Poets Paradise this is,
To which but few can come;
The Muses only bower of bliss
Their Dear Elysium.
Here happy souls, (their blessed bowers,
Free from the rude resort
Of beastly people) spend the hours,
In harmless mirth and sport,
Then on to the Elizian plains
Apollo does invite you
Where he prouides with pastoral strains,
In Nimphals to delight you
The first Nimphall.
RODOPE and DORIDA:
This Nimphall of delights does treat,
Choice beauties, and proportions neat,
Of curious shapes, and dainty features
Describd in two most perfect creatures.
WHen Phoebus with a face of mirth,
Had flong a broad his beams,
To blanch the bosom of the earth,
And glaze the gliding streams.
within a goodly Mertle grove.
Upon that hallowed day
The Nymphs to the bright Queen of love
Their vows were used to pay.
Fair Rodope and Dorida
Met in those sacred shades,
Then whom the Sun in all his way,
Nere saw two daintier Maids.
And through the thickets thrild his fires,
Supposing to have seen
The sovereign Goddess of desires,
Or loves Emperious Queen:
Both of so wondrous beauties were,
In shape both so excel,
That to be paraleld else where,
No judging eye could tell.
And their affections so surpass,
As well it might be deemd,
That the one the other was,
And but themselves they seemed.
And whilst the Nymphs that near this place,
Disposed were to play
At Barly-breake and Prison-base,
Do pass the time away:
This peerlesse pair together set,
The other at their sport,
None near their free discourse to let,
Each other thus they court,
Dorida. My sweet, my sovereign Rodope,
My dear delight, my love,
That Lock of hair thou sentst to me,
I to this Bracelet woue;
Which brighter every day does grow
The longer it is worn,
As its delicious fellows do,
Thy Temples that adorn.

Rodope. Nay had I thine my Dorida,
I would them so bestow,
As that the wind upon my way,
Might backward make them flow,
So should it in its greatst excess,
Turn to becalmed (...)
And quite forget all boistrousnesse
To play with every hair.

Dorida. To me like thine had nature given,
A Brow, so Archt, so clear,
A Front, wherein so much of heaven
Does to each eye appear,
The world should see, I would strike dead
The Milky way that is now,
And say that Nectar Hebe shed
Fell all upon my Brow.

Rodope. O had I eyes like Doriddes,
I would inchant the day,
And make the Sun to stand at gaze,
Till he forgot his way:
And cause his Sister Queen of Streams,
When so I list by night;
By her much blushing at my Beams
TO eclipse her borrowed light.

Dorida. Had I a Cheek like Rodopes,
In midst of which does stand,
A Grove of Roses, such as these,
In such a snowy land:
I would make the Lilly which we now
So much for whiteness name,
As drooping down the head to bow,
And die for very shame.

Rodope. Had I a bosom like to thine,
When it I pleased to show,
TO what part of the Sky I would incline
I would make the Etheriall bow;
My swannish Breast brancht all with blew,
In bravery like the spring:
In Winter to the general view
Full Summer forth should bring.

Dorida. Had I a body like my dear,
Were I so straight so tall,
O, if so broad my shoulders were,
Had I a waste so small;
I would challenge the proud Queen of love
To yield to me for shape,
And I should fearo that Mars or (...)
Would venture for my rape.

Rodope. Had I a hand like thee my (...)
(This hand O let me kiss)
These Ivory Arrows pyl'd with pearl,
Had I a hand like this;
I would not doubt at all to make,
Each finger of my hand
To task swift Mercury to take
With his enchanting wand.

Dorida. Had I a Theigh like Rodopes;
Which it was my chance to veiwe,
When lying on you banck at (...)
The wind thy skirt up blew,
I would say it were a column wrought
To some intent Divine,
And for our chaste Diana sought,
A pillar for her shryne.

Rodope. Had I a Leg but like to thine
That were so neat, so clean,
A swelling Calse, a Small so fine,
An Ankle, round and lean,
I would tell nature she does miss
Her old skill; and maintain,
She showed her master piece in this,
Not to be done again.

Dorida. Had I that Foot hid in those shoos,
(Proportioned to my height)
Short Heel, thin Instep, even Toes,
A Sole so'wondrous straight,
The Forresters and Nymphs at this
Amazed all should stand,
And kneeling down, should meekely kiss
The Print left in the sand.

BY this the Nymphs came from their sport,
All pleased wondrous well,
And to these May dens make report
What lately them befell:
One said the dainty Lelipa
Did all the rest out gee,
Another would a wager lay
She would not outstrip a Roe;
Says one, how like ye Florimel
There is your dainty face:
A fourth replide, she liked that well,
Yet better liked her grace,
She Is counted, I confess, quoth she,
To be our only Pearl,
Yet have I heard her often to be
A melancholy Gerle.
Another said she quite mistoke,
That only was her art,
When melancholy had her look
Then mirth was in her heart;
And has she then that pretty trick
Another does reply,
I thought no Nymph could have bin sick
Of that disease but I;
I know you can dissemble well
Quoth one to give you due,
But here be some (who I Will not tell)
Can do it as well as you,
Who thus replies, I know that too,
We have it from our Mother,
Yet there be some this thing can do
More cunningly then other:
If Maidens but dissembse can
Their sorrow and their joy,
Their pore dissimulation than,
Is but a very toy.
The second Nimphall.
LALVS CLEON and LIROPE.
The Muse new Courtship does devise,
By Natures strange Varieties,
Whose Rarieties she here relates,
And gives you Pastoral Delicates.
LAlus a Jolly youthful Lad,
With Cleon, no less crowned
With virtues; both their beings had
On the Elizian ground.
Both having parts so excellent,
That it a question was,
Which should be the most eminent,
Or did in ought surpass:
This Cleon was a Mountaineer,
And of the wilder kind,
And from his birth had many a (...)
Bin nursed up by a Hind:
And as the sequel well did show,
It very well might be;
For never Heart, nor Hare, nor Roe,
We half so switft as he.
But Lalus in the Vale was bred,
Amongst the Sheep and Neat,
And by those Nymphs there choicly fed,
With Honey, Milk, and Wheat;
Of Stature goodly, fair of speech,
And of behavior mylde,
Like those there in the Valley rich,
That bred him of a child.
Of Falconry they had the skill,
Their Halkes to seed and fly,
No better Hunters ere clome Hill,
Nor hollowed to a Cry:
In Dingles deep, and Mountains hoar,
Often with the bearded Spear
They cumbated the tusky Boar,
And slew the angry Bear.
In Music they were wondrous quaint,
Fine Aers they could devise;
They very curiously could Paint,
And neatly Poetize;
That wagers many time were laid
On Questions that arose,
Which Song the witty Lalus made,
Which Cleon should compose.
The stately Steed they managed well,
Of Fence the art they knew,
For Dansing they did all excel
The Gerles that to them drew;
To throw the Sledge, to pitch the Bar,
To wrestle and to Run,
They all the Youth excelled so far,
That still the Prize they won.
These sprightly Gallants loved a Less,
Called Lirope the bright,
In the whole world there scarcely was
So delicate a Wight,
There was no Beauty so divine
That ever Nymph did grace,
But it beyond it self did shine
In her more heavenly face:
What form she pleased each thing would take
That ere she did behold,
Of Pebbles she could Diamonds make,
Gross Iron turn to Gold:
Such power there with her presence came
Stern Tempests she alayd,
The cruel Tigar she could tame,
She raging Torrents staid,
She chid, she cherisht, she gave life,
Again she made to dye,
She raisd a war, apeasd a Strife,
With turning of her eye.
Some said a God did her beget,
But much deceived were they,
Her Father was a Riuelet,
Her Mother was a Fay.
Her Lineaments so fine that were,
She from the Fayrie took,
Her Beauties and Complexion clear,
By nature from the Brook.
These Ryualls waiting for the hour
(The weather calm and fair)
When as she used to leave her Bower
To take the pleasant air.
Acosting her; their complement
To her their Goddess done;
By gifts they tempt her to consent,
When Lalus thus begun.
Lalus. Sweet Lirope I have a Lamb
Newly wayned from the Damme,
Of the right kind, it is Without bornes.
notted,
Naturally with purple spotted,
Into laughter it will put you,
To see how prettily 'twill But you;
When on sporting it is set,
It will beat you a Corvet,
And at every nimble bound
Turn it self above the ground;
When it is hungry it will bleate,
From your hand to have its meat,
And when it has fully fed,
It will fetch Iumpes above your head,
As innocently to express
Its silly sheepish thankfulness,
When you bid it, it will play,
Be it either night or day,
This Lirope I have for thee,
So thou alone wilt live with me.

Cleon. From him O turn thine care away,
And hear me my loved Lirope,
I have a Kid as white as milk,
His skin as soft as Naples silk,
His horns in length are wondrous even,
And curiously by nature writhen;
It is of The Arcadian kind,
There Is not the like twixt either Inde;
If you walk, 'twill walk you by,
If you sit down, it down will lie,
It with gesture will you woo,
And counterfeit those things you do;
Ore each Hillock it will vault,
And nimbly do the Summer-sault,
Upon the hinder Legs'twill go,
And follow you a furlong so,
And if by chance a Tune you roate,
'Twill foot it finely to your note,
Seek the world and you may miss
To find out such a thing as this;
This my love I have for thee
So thou wilt leave him and go with me.

Lirope. Believe me Youths your gifts are rare,
And you offer wondrous fair;
Lalus for Lamb, Cleon for Kyd,
It Is hard to judge which most does bid,
And have you two such things in store,
And I never knew of them before?
Well yet I dare a Wager lay
That Brag my little Dog shall play,
As dainty tricks when I shall bid,
As Lalus Lamb, or Cleons Kid.
But t'may fall out that I may need them
Till when ye may do well to feed them;
Your Goat and Mutton pretty be
But Youths these are noe bayts for me,
Alas good men, in vain ye woo,
It Is not your Lamb nor Kid will do.

Lalus. I have two Sparrowes white as Snow,
Whose pretty eyes like sparks do show;
In her Bosom Venus hatched them
Where her little Cupid watched them,
Till they too fledge their Nests forsook
Themselves and to the Fields betook,
Where by chance a Fowler caught them
Of whom I full dearly bought them;
They Will fetch you Conserve from the The red fruit of the sinooth Bramble.
Hip,
And lay it softly on your Lip,
Through their nibling bills they will Chirup
And flutering feed you with the Sirup,
And if thence you put them by
They to your white neck will fly,
And if you expulse them there
They Will hang upon your braded Hair;
You so long shall see them prattle
Till at length they will fall to battle,
And when they have fought their fill,
You will smile to see them bill
These Birds my Lirope's shall be
So thou'llt leave him and go with me.

Cleon. His Sparrowes are not worth a rush
I Will find as good in every bush,
Of Doves I have a dainty pair
Which when you please to take the Aier,
About your head shall gently houer
Your Clear browe from the Sun to cover,
And with their nimble wings shall san you,
That neither Cold nor Heat shall tan you,
And like Vmbrellas with their feathers
Sheeld you in all sorts of weathers:
They be most dainty Colored things,
They have Damask backs and Chequerd wings,
Their necks more Various Colors show
Then there be mixed in the Bow;
Venus saw the lesser Dove
And therewith was far in Love,
Offering for it her goulden Ball
for her Son to play withal;
These my Liropes shall be
So she will leave him and go with me.

Lirope. Then for Sparrowes, and for Doves
I am fitted twixt my Loves,
But Lalus, I take noe delight
In Sparowes, for they will scratch and bite
And though joined, they are ever wooing
Always billing if not doing,
Twixt Venus breasts if they have lain
I much fear they will infect mine;
Cleon your Doves are very dainty,
Tame Pigeons else you know are plenty,
These may win some of your Marrowes
I am not caught with Doves, nor Sparrowes,
I thank ye kindly for your Cost,
Yet your labor is but lost.

Lalus. With full-leau'd Lillies I will stick
Thy braded hair all o'r so thick,
That from it a Light shall throw
Like the Suns upon the Snow.
Thy Mantle shall be Violet Leaves,
With the fin'st the Silkeworme weaues
As finly Wouen; whose rich smell
The Air about thee so shall swell
That it shall have no power to move.
A Ruff of Pinkes thy Robe above
About thy neck so neatly set
that Art it cannot counterfeit,
Which still shall look so Fresh and new,
As if upon their Roots they grew:
And for thy head I Will have a Tyer
Of netting, made of Stawbery wire,
And in each knot that does compose
A Mesh, shall stick a half blown Rose,
Red, damask, white, in order set
About the sides, shall run a Fret
Of Primroses, the Tyer throughout
With Thrist and Daysyes frindgd about;
All this fair Nymph I Will do for thee,
So thou wilt leave him and go with me.

Cleon. These be but weeds and Trash he brings,
I Will give thee solid, costly things,
His will whither and be gone
Before thou well can put them on;
With Currall I will have thee Crowned,
Whose Branches intricatly wound
Shall girt thy Temples every way;
And on the top of every Spray
Shall stick a Pearl orient and great,
Which so the wandering Birds shall cheat,
That some shall stoop to look for Cheries,
As other sor tralucent Berries.
And wondering, caught ever they be ware
In the curld Tramels of thy hair:
And for thy neck a Crystal Chain
Whose lincks shapt like to drops of Rain,
Upon thy panting Breast depending,
Shall seem as they were still descending,
And as thy breath does comeand go,
So seeming still to ebb and flow:
With Amber Bracelets cut like Bees,
Whose strange transparancy who sees,
With Silk small as the Spiders Twist
Doubled so often about thy Wrist,
Would surely think alive they were,
From Lillies gathering honey there.
Thy Buskins Ivory, carved like Shells
Of Scallope, which as litlte Bells
Made hollow, with the Air shall Chime,
And to thy steps shall keep the time:
Leave Lalus, Lirope for me
And these shall thy rich dowry be.

Lirope. Lalus for Flowers (...) for Iemmes,
For Garlands and for Diadems
I shall be sped, why this is brave,
What Nymph can choicer Presents have,
With dressing, brading, frowncing, flowring,
All your lewels on me pouring,
In this bravery being dressed,
To the ground I shall be pressed,
That I doubt the Nymphs will fear me,
Nor will venture to come near me;
Never Lady of the May,
To this hour was half so gay;
All in flowers, all so sweet,
From the Grown, beneath the Feet,
Amber, Currall, Ivory, Pearl,
If this cannot win a Gerle,
There Is nothing can, and (...) ye woo me,
Give me your hands and trust ye to me,
(Yet to tell ye I am loath)
That I Will have neither of you both;

Lalus. When thou shall please to stem the flood.
(As thou art of the watery brood)
I Will have twelve Swannes more white then Snow,
Yokd for the purpose two and two,
To (...) thy Barge wrought of fine Reed
So well that it naught else shall need,
The Traces by which they shall hayle
Thy Barge; shall be the winding trayle
Of woodbynd; whose brave Tasseld Flowers
(The Sweetness of the Woodnimphs Bowres)
Shall be the Trappings to adorn,
The Swannes, by which thy Barge is borne,
Of flowred Flags I Will rob the bank
Of water-Cans and King-cups rank
To be the Covering of thy Boat,
And on the Stream as thou do Floate,
The Naiades that haunt the deep,
Themselves about thy Barge shall keep,
Recording most delightful Lays,
By Sea Gods written in thy praise.
And in what place thou hapst to land,
There the gentle Siluery sand,
Shall soften, curled with the Aier
As sensible of thy rep ire:
This my dear love I Will do for thee,
So Thou Wilt leave him and go with me.

Cleon. Tush Nimphe his Swannes will prove but Geese,
His Barge drink water like a Fleece;
A Boat is base, I Will thee provide,
A Chariot, wherein love may ride;
In which when bravely thou art borne,
Thou shall look like the glorious morn
Vshering the Sun, and such a one
As to this day was never none,
Of the Rarest Indian Gummes,
More precious then your Balsamummes
Which I by Art have made so hard,
That they with Tools may well be Carved
To make a Coach of: which shall be
Materyalls of this one for thee,
And of thy Chariot each small piece
Shall inlayd be with Amber Greece,
And gilded with the Yellow ore
Produced from Tagus wealthy shore;
In which along the pleasant Lawne,
With twelve white Stags thou shall be drawn,
Whose brancht palms of a stately height,
With several nosegayes shall be dight;
And as thou ryd'st, thy Coach about,
For thy strong guard shall run a Rout,
Of Estriges; whose Curled plumes,
Sen'sd with thy Chariots rich perfumes,
The scent into the Aier shall throw;
Whose naked Thyes shall grace the show;
Whilst the Woodnimphs and those bred
Upon the mountayns, or thy head
Shall bear a Canopy of flowers,
Tinseld with drops of April showers,
Which shall make more glorious shows
Then spangles, or your silver Oas;
This brightnimph I Will do for thee
So thou wilt leave him and go with me.

Lirope. Vie and reuie, like Chapmen profer'd,
Would't be received what you have offered;
Ye greater honor cannot do me,
If not building Altars to me:
Both by Water and by Land,
Bardge and Chariot (...) command;
Swans upon the Stream to tawe me,
Stags upon the Land to draw me,
In all this Pomp should I be seen,
What a pore thing were a Queen:
All delights in such excess,
As but ye, who can express:
Thus mounted should the Nymphs me see,
All the troop would follow me,
Thinking by this state that I
Would asume a Deity.
There be some in love have bin,
And I may commit that sin,
And if ever I be in love,
With one of you I fear twill prove,
But with which I cannot tell,
So my gallant Youths farewell.

The third Nimphall.
DORON NAIIS CLORIS CLAIA DORILVS CLOE MERTILLA FLORIMEL. With Nymphs and
Forresters.
Poetic Raptures, sacred fires,
With which, Apollo his inspires,
This Nimphall gives you; and withal
Observes the Muses Festival.
AMongst th Elizians many mirthfull Feasts,
At which the Muses are the certain guests,
Th'obserue one Day with most Imperial state,
To wise Apollo which they dedicate,
The Poets God, and to his Alters bring
Th'enaml'd Bravery of the beauteous spring,
And strew their Bowers with every precious sweet,
Which still wax fresh, most trod on with their feet;
With most choice flowers each Nymph does brade her hair,
And not the mean but bauldrick wife does wear
Some goodly Garland, and the most renowned
With curious Roseat Anadems are crowned.
These being come into the place where they
Yearly observe the Orgies to that day,
The Muses from their Heliconian spring
Their brimfull Mazers to the feasting bring:
When with deep Draughts out of those plenteous Bowls,
The iocond Youth have swild their thirsty souls,
They sall enraged with a sacred heat,
And when their brains do once begin to sweat
They into brave and Stately numbers break,
And not a word that any one does speak
But it is Prophetic, and so strangely far
In their high fury they transported are,
As there is not one, on any thing can strain,
But by another answred is again
In the same Rapture, which all sit to hear;
When as two Youths that soundly liquord were,
Dorilus and Doron, two as noble swayns
As ever kept on the Elizian playns,
First by their signs attention having woonne,
Thus they the Revels frolikly begun.
Doron. Come Dorilus, let us be brave,
Inlofty numbers let us rave,
With Rymes I will enrich thee.

Dorilus. Content say I, then bid the base,
Our wits shall run the Wildgoose chase,
Spur up, or I will swich thee.

Doron. The Sun out of the East does peep,
And now the day begins to creep,
Upon the world at leisure.

Dorilus. The Air enamored of the (...)
The West wind strokes the velvit leaves
And kisses them at pleasure.

Doron. The Spinners webs twixt spray and spray,
The too of every bush make gay,
By filmy coards there dangling.

Dorilus. For now the last days evening dew
Even to the full it self does show,
Each bough with Pearl bespangling.

Doron. O Boy how thy abundant vain
Even like a Flood breaks from thy brain,
Nor can thy Muse be gaged.

Dorilus. Why nature forth did never bring
A man that like to me can sing,
If once I be enraged.

Doron. Why Dorilus I in my skill
Can make the swiftest Stream stand still,
Nay bear back to his springing.

Dorilus. And I into a Trance most deep
Can cast the Birds that they shall sleep
When fain'st they would be singing.

Doron. Why Dorilus thou make me mad,
And now my wits begin to gad,
But sure I know not whither.

Dorilus. O Doron let me hug thee then,
There never was two madder men,
Then let us on together.

Doron. Hermes the winged Horse bestrid,
And through thick and thin he rid,
And floundred throw the Fountain.

Dorilus. He (...) the Tit until he bled,
So that at last he ran his head
Against the sorked Mountain,

Doron. How say thou, but pyde Iris got;
Into great Iunos Chariot,
I spoke with one that saw her.

Dorilus. And there the pert and saucy Elfd
Behan'd her as twere Juno's self,
And made the Peacoks draw her.

Doron. He borrow Phoebus fiery lades,
With which about the world he trades,
And put them in my Plow.

Dorilus. O thou most perfect frantique man,
Yet let thy rage be what it can,
I Will be as mad as thou.

Doron. I Will to great love, hap good, hap ill,
Though he with Thunder threat to kill,
And beg of him abooue.

Dorilus. To swerue up one of Cynthias (...)
And there to bath thee in the streams,
Discouerdin the Moon.

Doron. Come frohck Youth and follow me,
My frantique boy, and I Will show thee
The Country of the Fayries,

Dorilus. The fleshy Mandrake where is does grew
In noonshade of the Mistletow,
And where the Phoenix Aryes.

Doron. Nay more, the Swallowet winter (...)
The Caverns where the Winds are bred,
Since thus thou talkst of showing.

Dorilus. And to those Indraughts I Will theebring.
That wondrous and eternal spring
Whence The Ocean has its flowing.

Doron. We'll down to the dark house of sleep,
Where snoring Morpheus does keep,
And wake the drowsy Groom.

Dorilus. Down shall the Doors and Windows go,
The Stools upon the Floare we'll throw,
And roar about the Room.

The Muses here commanded them to stay,
Commending much the caridge of their Lay
As greatly pleased at this their madding Bout,
To hear how bravely they had borne it out
From first to the last, of which they were right glad,
By this they found that Helicon still had
That virtue it did anciently retain
When Orpheus Lynus and th'Aserean Swain
Took lusty Rowses, which has made their Rimes,
To last so long to all succeeding times.
And now amongst this beauteous Beauie here,
Two wanton Nymphs, though dainty ones they were,
Naijs and Clot in their female fits
Longing to show the sharpness of their wits,
Of the nine Sisters special leave do crave
That the next Bout they two might freely have,
Who having got the suffrages of all,
Thus to their Rimeing instantly they fall.
Naijs. Amongst you all let us see
Who is it opposes me,
Come on the proudest she
To answer my dittye.

Cloe. Why Naijs, that am I,
Who dares thy pride defy?
And that we soon shall try
Though thou be witly.

Naijs. Cloe I scorn my Rhyme
Should observe feet or time,
Now I fall, then I clime,
What is it I dare not.

Cloe. Give thy Invention wing,
And let her flert and fling,
Till down the Rocks she ding,
For that I care not.

Naijs. This presence delights me,
My freedom inuites me,
The Season excytes me,
In Rhyme to be merry.

Cloe. And I beyond measure,
Am ravished with pleasure,
To answer each Ceasure,
Until thou beist weary.

Naijs. Behold the Rosye Dawne,
Rises in Tinsild Lawne,
And smiling seems to fawn,
Upon the mountains.

Cloe. Awaked from her Dreams,
Shooting forth goulden Beams
Dansing upon the Streams
Courting the Fountains.

Naijs. These more then sweet Showrets,
Entice up these Flowrets,
To trim up our Bowrets,
Perfuming our Coats.

Cloe. Whilst the Birds billing
Each one with his Dilling
The thickets still filling
With Amorous Noets.

Naijs. The Bees up in honey rould,
More then their thighs can hold,
Lapt in their liquid gould,
Their Treasure us bringing.

Cloe. To these Rilletspurling
Upon the stones Curling,
And often about wherling,
Dance tow'ard their springing.

Naijs. The Wood. Nymphs sit singing,
Each Grove with notes ringing
Whilst fresh Ver is flinging,
Her Bounties abroad.

Cloe. So much as the Turtle,
Upon the low Mertle,
To the meads fertle,
Her Cares does unload.

Naijs. Nay it is a world to see,
In every bush and Tree,
The Birds with mirth and glee,
Wooed as they woe.

Cloe. The Robin and the Wren,
Every Cock with his Hen,
Why should not we and men,
Do as they do.

Naijs. The Faires are hopping,
The small Flowers cropping,
And with dew dropping,
Skip through the Greaues.

Cloe. At Barly-breake they play
Merrily all the day,
At night themselves they lay
Upon the soft leaves

Naijs. The gentle winds sally
Upon every Valley,
And many times dally
And wantonly sport.

Cloe. About the fields tracing,
Each other in chasing,
And often embracing,
In amorous sort.

Naijs. And Echo often does tell
Wondrous things from her Cell,
As her what chance befell,
Learning to prattle.

Cloe. And now she sits and mocks
The Shepherds and their flocks,
And the Herds from the Rocks
Keeping their Cattle.

WHen to these Maids the Muses silence cry,
For it was the opinion of the Company,
That were not these two taken of, that they
Would in their Conflict wholly spend they day.
When as the Turn to Florimel next came,
A Nymph for Beauty of especial name,
Yet was she not so Jolly as the rest:
And though she were by her companions pressed,
Yet she by no entreaty would be wrought
To sing, as by th'Elizian Laws she ought:
When two bright Nymphs that her companions were,
And of all other only held her dear,
Mild Cloris and Mertilla, with fair speech
Their most beloved Florimel beseech,
T'obserue the Muses, and the more to woo her,
They take their turns, and thus they sing unto her.
Cloris. Sing Florimel, O sing, and (...)
Our whole wealth will give to thee,
We'llroh the brim of every Fountain,
Strip the sweets from every Mountain,
We will sweep the curled valleys,
Brush the bancks that mound our allies,
We will muster natures dainties
When she wallowes in her plentyes,
The lushyous smell of every flower
New washed by an April shower,
The Mistress of her store we'll make thee
That she for her self shall take thee;
Can there be a dainty thing,
That Is not thine if thou will sing.

Mertilla. When the dew in May distilleth,
And the Earths rich bosom fills,
And with Pearl embrouds each Meadow,
We will make them like a widow,
And in alltheir Beauties dress thee,
And of all their spoils possess thee,
With all the bounties Zephyre brings,
Breathing on the yearly springs,
The gaudy bloomes of every Tree
In their most Beauty when they be,
What is here that may delight thee,
Or to pleasure may excite thee,
Can there be a dainty thing
That Is not thine if thou will sing.

But Florimel still fullenly replies
I will not sing at all, let that suffice:
When as a Nymph one of the merry ging
Seeing she no way could be won to sing;
Come, come, quoth she, ye utterly undo her
With your entreaties, and your reverence to her;
For praise nor prayers, she cares not a pin;
They that our froward Florimel would win,
Must work another way, let me come to her,
Either I Will make her sing, or I Will undo her.
Claia. Florimel I thus conjure thee,
Since their gifts cannot alure thee;
By stamped Garlic, that does stink
Worse then common Sewer, or Sink.
By Henbane, Dogshane, Woolfsbane, sweet
As any Clownes or Carriers feet,
By stinging Nettles, pricking Teasels
Raising blisters like the measels,
By the rough Burbreeding docks,
Rancker then the oldest Fox,
By filthy Hemblock, poysning more
Then any vleer or old sore,
By the Cockle in the corn
That smells far worse then does burnt (...)
By Hemp in water that has layne,
By whose stench the Fish are slain,
By Toadflax which your Nose may taste,
If you have a mind to cast,
May all filthy stinking Weeds
That ever bore leaf, or ever had seeds,
Florimel be given to thee,
If (...) not sing as well as we.

AT which the Nimphs to open laughter fell,
Amongst the rest the beauteous Florimel,
(Pleased with the spell from Claia that came,
A mirthfull Gerle and given to sport and game)
As gamesome grows as any of them all,
And to this ditty instantly does fall.
Florimel. How in my thoughts should I contriue
The Image I am framing,
Which is so far superlatiue,
As it is beyond all naming;
I would love of my counsel make,
And have his judgment in it,
But that I doubt he would mistake
How rightly to begin it:
It must be builded in the Air,
And it is my thoughts must do it,
And only they must be the stayre
From earth to mount me to it,
For of my Sex I frame my Lay.
Each hour, our selves for saking,
How should I then find out the way
To this my undertaking,
When our weak Fancies working still,
Yet changing every minnit,
Will show that it requires some skill,
Such difficulty's in it.
We would things, yet we know not what,
And let our will be granted,
Yet instantly we find in that
Something unthought of wanted:
Our joys and hopes such shadows are,
As with our motions varry,
Which when we often have fetched from far,
With us they never tarry:
Some worldly cross does still attend,
What long we have bin spinning,
Ande'r we fully get the end
We lose of our beginning.
Our policies so peevish are,
That with themselves they wrangle,
And many times become the snare
That soonest us entangle;
For that the Love we bear our Friends
Though nere so strongly grounded,
Has in it certain oblique ends,
If to the bottom sounded:
Our own well wishing making it,
A pardonable Treason;
For that it is deriud from wit,
And underpropped with reason.
For our Dear selves beloved sake
(Even in the depth of passion)
Our Center though our selves we make,
Yet is not that our station;
For whilst our Brows ambitious be
And youth at hand awayts us,
It is a pretty thing to see
How finely Beauty cheats us
And whylst with time we tryfling stand
To practice Antique graces
Age with a pale and witherd hand
Draws Furowes in our faces.

WHen they which so desirous were before
To hear her sing; desirous are far more
To have her cease; and call to have her stayed
For she to much already had bewrayed.
And as the thrice three Sisters thus had graced
Their Celebration, and themselves had placed
Upon a Violet banck, in order all
Where they at will might view the Festifall
The Nimphs and all the lusty youth that were
At this brave Nimphall, by them honored there,
To Gratify the heavenly Gerles again
Lastly prepare in state to entertain
Those sacred Sisters, fairly and confer,
On each of them, their praise particular
And thus the Nymphs to the nine Muses sung.
When as the Youth and Forresters among
That well prepared for this business were,
Become the Chorus, and thus sung they there.
Nymphs. Clio thou first of those Celestial nine
That daily offer to the sacred shryne,
Of wise Apollo; Queen of Stories,
Thou that vindicat'st the glories
Of passed ages, and renewst
Their acts which every day thou viewst,
And from a lethargy do keep
Old nodding time, else prone to sleep.

Chorus. Clio O crave of Phoebus to inspire
Us, for his Altars with his holiest fire,
And let his glorious euer-shining Rays
Give life and growth to our Elizian Bays.

Nymphs. Melpomine thou melancholy Maid
Next, to wise Phoebus we inuoke thy aid,
In Buskins that do stride the Stage,
And in thy deep distracted rage,
In bloodshed that do take delight,
Thy object the most fearful sight,
That love the sighs, the shreekes, and sounds
Of horrors, that arise from wounds.

Chorus. Sad Muse, O crave of Phoebus to inspire
Us for his Altars, with his holiest fire,
And let his glorious euer-shining Rays
Give life and growth to our Elizian Bays.

Nymphs. Comic Thalia then we come to thee,
Thou mirthfull Maiden, only that in glee
And in loves deceits, thy pleasure take,
Of which thy varying Scene that make
And in thy nimble Sock do stir
Loud laughter through the Theater,
That with the Peasant make thee sport,
As well as with the better sort.

Chorus. Thalia crave of Phoebus to inspire,
Us for his Alters with his holiest fire;
And let his glorious ever shining Rays
Give life, and growth to our Elizian Bays.

Nymphs. Euterpe next to thee we will proceed,
That first found'st out the Music on the Reed,
With breath and fingers giving life,
To the shrill Cornet and the Fyfe,
Teaching every stop and kaye,
To those upon the Pipe that play,
Those which Wind-Instruments we call
Or soft, or loud, or great, or small.

Chorus. Euterpe ask of Phoebus to inspire,
Us for his Alters with his holiest fire
And let his glorious euer-shining Rays
Give life and growth to our Elizian Bays.

Nymphs. Terpsichore that of the Lute and Lyre,
And Instruments that sound with Cords and Wyere,
That art the Mistres, to command
The touch of the most Curious hand,
When every Quauer does Embrace
His like, in a true Diapase,
And every string his sound does fill
Touched with the Finger or the Quill.

Chorus. Terpsichore, crave Phoebus to inspire
Us for his Alters with his holiest fire
And let his glorious euer-shining Rays
Give life and growth to our Elizian Bays.

Nymphs. Then Erato wise muse on thee we call
In Lines to us that do demonstrate all,
Which neatly with thy Staff and Bow,
Do measure, and proportion show;
Motion and Gesture that do teach
That every height and depth can reach,
And d o'st demonstrate by thy Art
What nature else would not Impart.

Chorus. Dear Erato crave Phoebus to inspire
Us for his Alters with his holiest fire,
And let his glorious euer-shining Rays,
Give life and growth to our Elizian Bays.

Nymphs. To thee then brave Caliope we come
Thou that maintain'st, the Trumpet, and the Drum;
The neighing Steed that love to hear,
Clashing of Arms does please thine ear,
In lofty Lines that do rehearse
Things worthy of a thundering verse,
And at no time art heard to strain,
On ought, that suits a Common vain.

Chorus. Caliope, crave Phoebus to inspire,
Us for his Alters, with his holiest fire,
And let his glorious euer-shining Rays,
Give life and growth to our Elizian Bays.

Nymphs. Then Polyhymnia most delicious Maid,
In Rhetoricks Flowers that art arayd,
In Tropes and Figures, richly dressed,
The Fyled Phrase that love best,
That art all Elocution, and
The first that gave to understand
The force of words in order placed
And with a sweet delivery graced

Chorus. Sweet Muse persuade our Phoebus to inspire
Us for his Altars, with his holiest fire,
And let his glorious ever shining Rays
Give life and growth to our Elizian Bays.

Nymphs. Lofty Urania then we call to thee,
To whom the Heavens for ever opened be,
Thou the Aserismes by name do call,
And shewst when they do rise and fall,
Each Planets force, and do divine
His working, seated in his Sign,
And how the starry Frame still (...)
Betwixt the fixed steadfast Poles.

Chorus. Urania ask of Phoebus to inspire
Us for his Altars with his holiest fire,
And let his glorious euer-shining Rays
Give life and growth to our Elizian Bays.

The fourth Nimphall.
CLORIS and MERTILLA.
Chaste Cloris does disclose the shames
Of the Felician frantique Dames,
Mertilla strives t'apease her woe,
To golden wishes then they go.
Mertilla. WHy how now Cloris, what, thy head
Bound with forsaken Willow?
Is the cold ground become thy bed?
The grass become thy pillow?
O let not those life-lightning eyes
In this sad veil be shrouded,
Which into mourning puts the Skies,
To see them over clowded.

Cloris. O my Mertilla do not praise
These Lamps so dimly burning,
Such sad and sullen lights as these
Were only made for mourning:
Their objects are the barren Rocks
With aged Moss o'r shaded;
Now whilst the Spring lays forth her Locks
With blossoms bravely braded.

Mertilla. O Cloris, Can there be a Spring,
O my dear Nymph, they may not,
Wanting thine eyes it forth to bring,
Without which Nature cannot:
Say what it is that troubles thee
Encreast by thy concealing,
Speak; sorrows many times we see
Are lesned by revealing.

Cloris. Being of late too vainly bent
And but at two much leisure;
Not with our Groves and Downs content,
But surfeiting in pleasure;
Felicia's Fields I would go see,
Where fame to me reported,
The choice Nymphs of the world to be
From meaner beauties sorted;
Hoping that I from them might draw
Some graces to delight me,
But there such monstrous shapes I saw,
That to this hour affright me.
Throw the thick Hair, that thatched their Brows
Their eyes upon me stared,
Like to those raging frantique Froes
For Bacchus Feasts prepared:
Their Bodies, although straight by kind,
Yet they so monstrous make them,
That for huge Bags blown up with wind,
You very well may take them.
Their Bowels in their Elbowes are,
Whereon depend their Panches,
And their deformed Arms by far
Made larger then their Hanches:
For their behavior and their grace,
Which likewise should have prized them,
Their manners were as beastly base
As th'rags that so disguisd them;
All Anticks, all so impudent,
So fashon'd out of fashion,
As black Cocytus up had sent
Her Fry into this nation,
Whose monstrousness does so perplex,
Of Reason and depriues me,
That for their sakes I loath my sex,
Which to this sadness drives me.

Mertilla. O my dear Cloris be not sad,
Nor with these Furies danted,
But let these semale fools be mad,
With Hellsh pride enchanted;
Let not thy noble thoughts descend
So low as their affections;
Whom neither counsel can amend,
Nor yet the Gods corrections:
Such mad folks never let us bemoane,
But rather scorn their folly,
And since we two are here alone,
To banish melancholy,
Leave we this lowly creeping vain
Not worthy admiration,
And in a brave and lofty strain,
Lets exercise our passion,
With wishes of each others good,
From our abundant treasures,
And in this iocond sprightly mood
Thus alter we our measurcs.

Mertilla. O I could wish this place were strewed with Roses,
And that this Banck were thickly thrumd with Grass
As soft as Sleaue, or Sarcenet ever was,
Whereon my Cloris her sweet self reposes.

Cloris. O that these Dewes Rose water were for thee,
These Mists Perfumes that hang upon these thicks,
And that the Winds were All Aromaticks,
Which if my wish could make them, they should be.

Mertilla. O that my Bottle one whole Diamond were,
So filled with Nectar that a Fly might sup,
And at one draught that thou might drink it up,
Yet a Carouse not good enough I sear.

Clork. That all the Pearl, the Seas, or Indias have
Were well dissolved, and there of made a Lake,
Thou there in bathing, and I by to take
Pleasure to see thee cleerer then the Wave.

Mertilla. O that the horns of all the Herds we see
Were of fine gold, or else that every horno
Were like to that one of the Unicorn,
And of all these, not one but were thy Fee.

Cloris. O that their Hooues were Iuory, or some thing,
Then the pur'st Iuory far more Christalline,
Filled with the food wherewith the Gods do dine,
To keep thy Youth in a continual Spring.

Mertilla. O that the sweets of all the Flowers that grow,
The laboring air would gather into one,
In Gardens, Fields, nor Meadows leaving none,
And all their Sweetness upon thee would throw.

Cloris. Nay that those sweet harmonious strains we hear,
Amongst the lively Birds melodious Lays,
As they recording sit upon the Sprayes,
Were houering still for Music at thine care.

Mertilla. O that thy name were carved on every Tree,
That as these plants, still great, and greater grow,
Thy name dear Nymph might be enlarged so,
That every Grove and Goppis might speak thee.

Cloris. Nay would thy name upon their Rynds were set,
And by the Nymphs so often and lowdly spoken,
As that the Echoes to that language broken
Thy happy name might hourly counterset.

Mertilla. O let the Spring still put stern winter by,
And in rich Damask let her Revel still,
As it should do if I might have my will,
That thou might still walk on her Tapistry;
And thus since Fate no longer time alowes
Under this broad and shady Sicamore,
Where now we sit, as we have often before,
Those yet unborn shall offer up their Vows.

The fifth Nimphall.
CLAIA LELIPA CLARINAX a Hermit.
Of Garlands, Anadems, and Wreathes
This Nimphall naught but sweetness breathes,
Presents you with delicious Posies,
And with powerful Simples closes.
Claia. SEE where old Clarinax is set,
His sundry Simples sorting,
From whose experience we may get
What worthy is reporting.
Then Lelipa let us draw near,
Whilst he his weeds is weathering,
I see some powerful Simples there
That he has late bin gathering.
Hail gentle Hermit, love thee speed,
And have thee in his keeping,
And ever help thee at thy need,
Be thou awake or sleeping.

Clarinax. Ye pair of most Celestial lights,
O Beauties three times burnisht,
Who could expect such heavenly wights
With Angels features furnished;
What God does guide you to this place,
To bless my homely Bower?
It cannot be but this high grace
Proceeds from some high power;
The hours like hand maids still attend,
Disposed at your pleasure,
Ordained to noe other end
But to awaite your leisure;
The Deawes drawn up into the Aer,
And by your breathes perfumed,
In little Clouds do houer there
As loath to be consumed:
The Aer moves not but as you please,
So much sweet Nymphs it owes you,
The winds do cast them to their ease,
And amorously enclose you.

Lelipa. Be not too lavish of thy praise,
Thou good Elizian Hermit,
Lest some to hear such words as these,
Perhaps may flattery term it;
But of your Simples something say,
Which may discourse affoords us,
We know your knowledge lies that way,
With subjects you have stored us.

Claia. We know for Physic yours you get,
Which thus you here are sorting,
And upon Garlands we are set,
With Wreathes and Posyes sporting:
Each Garden great abundance yields,
Whose Flowers inuit us thither;
But you abroad in Groves and Fields
Your Medc'nall Simples gather.

Lelipa. The Chaplet and the Anadem,
The curled Tresses crowning,
We looser Nymphs delight in them,
Not in your Wreathes renowning.

Clarinax. The Garland long ago was worn,
As Time pleased to bestow it,
The Laurel only to adorn
The Conqueror and the Poet.
The Palm his due, who uncontrolled,
On danger looking gravely,
When Fate had done the worst it could,
Who bore his Fortunes bravely.
Most worthy of the Oken Wreath
The Ancients him esteemed,
Who in a Battle had from death
Some man of worth redeemed.
About his Temples Grass they tie,
Himself that so behaved
In some strong Seedge by The Enemy,
A City that has saved.
A Wreath of Vervaine Herhauts wear,
Amongst our Garlands named,
Being sent that dreadsull news to bear,
Offensive war proclaimed.
The Sign of Peace who first displayes,
The Olive Wreath possesses:
The Lover with the Myrtle Sprayes
Adornes his crisped Tresses:
In Love the sad forsaken wight
The Willow Garland wears:
The Funeral man befitting night,
The balefull Cipresse bears.
To Pan we dedicate the Pine,
Whose slips the Shepherd graceth:
Again the Ivy and the Vine
On his, swollen Bacchus places.

Cloia. The Boughs and Sprayes, of which you tell,
By you are rightly named,
But we with those of precious smell
And colors, are enflamed;
The noble Ancients to excite
Men to do things worth crowning,
Not unperformed left a Rite,
To heighten their renowning:
But they that those rewards devised,
And those brave wights that wore them
By these base times, though poorly prized,
Yet Hermit we adore them.
The store of every fruitful Field
We Nymphs at will possessing,
From the variety they yield
Get Flowers for every dressing:
Of Which a Garland I Will compose,
Then busily attend me,
These Flowers I for that purpose chose,
But where I miss amend me.

Clarinax. Well Cloia on with your intent,
Lets see how you will weaue it,
Which done, here for a monument
I hope with me, you will leave it.

Cloia. Here Damask Roses, white and red,
Out of my lap first take I,
Which still shall run along the thread,
My chiefest Flower this make I:
Amongst these Roses in a row,
Next place I Pinks in plenty,
These double Daysyes then for show,
And will not this be dainty.
The pretty Pansy then Iletye
Like Stones some chain inchasing,
And next to them their near Alye,
The purple Violet placing.
The curious choice, Clove Iuly-flower
Whose kinds height the Carnation
For sweetness of most sovereign power
Shall help my Wreath to fashion.
Whose sundry cullers of one kind
First from one Root derived,
Them in their several suits I Will bind,
My Garland so contrived;
A course of Cowslips then I Will stick,
And here and there though sparely
The pleasant Primrose down I Will prick
Like Pearls, which will show rarely:
Then with these Marygolds I Will make
My Garland somewhat swelling,
These Honysuckles then I Will take,
Whose sweets shall help their smelling:
The Lilly and the Flower-delice,
For color much contenting,
For that, I them do only prize,
They are but pore in senting:
The Daffadill most dainty is
To match with these in meetnesse;
The Columbyne compared to this,
All much alike for sweetness.
These in their natures only are
Fit to embosse the border,
Therefore I Will take especial care
To place them in their order:
Sweet-Williams, Campions, Sops-in-wine
One by another neatly:
Thus have I made this Wreath of mine,
And finished it featly.

Lelipa. Your Garland thus you finished have,
Then as we have attended
Your leisure, likewise let me crave
I may the like be friended.
Those gaudy garish Flowers you choose,
In which our Nymphs are flaunting,
Which they at Feasts and Brydals use,
The sight and smell enchanting:
A Chaplet me of Herbs I Will make,
Then which though yours be brauer,
Yet this of mine I Will undertake
Shall not be short in savor.
With Basil then I will begin,
Whose scent is wondrous pleasing,
This Eglantine I Will next put in,
The sense with sweetness seasing.
Then in my Lauender I Will lay,
Muscado put among it,
And here and there a leaf of Bay,
Which still shall run along it.
Germander, Marieram, and Time
Which used are for strewing,
With Hisop as an herb most pryme
Here in my wreath bestowing.
Then Balm and Mynt helps to make up
My Chaplet, and for Trial,
Costmary that so likes the Cup,
And next it Penieryall
Then Burnet shall bear up with this
Whose leaf I greatly fansy,
Some Camomile does not amiss
With Sauory and some Tansy,
Then here and there I Will put a sprig
Of Rosemary into it
Thus not too little nor too big
It Is done if I can do it.

Clarinax. Claia your Garland is most gaye,
Composed of curious Flowers,
And so most lovely Lelipa,
This Chaplet is of yours,
In goodly Gardens yours you get
Where you your laps have laded;
My symples are by Nature set,
In Groves and Fields vntraded.
Your Flowers most curiously you twyne,
Each one his place supplying.
But these rough harsher Herbs of mine,
About me rudely lying,
Of which some dwat fish Weeds there be,
Some of a larger stature,
Some by experience as we see,
Whose names express their nature,
Here is my Moly of much fame,
In Magicks often used,
Mugwort and Nightshade for the same,
But not by me abused;
Here Henbane, Popy, Hemblock here,
Procuring Deadly sleeping,
Which I do minister with Fear,
Not fit for each man's keeping.
Here holy Veruayne, and here Dill,
Against witchcraft much auailing,
Here Horound against the Mad dogs ill
By biting, never failing
Here Mandrake that procures love,
In poysning Philters mixed,
And makes the Barren fruitful prove.
The Root about them fixed,
Inchaunting Lunary here lies
In Sorceries excelling,
And this is Dictam, which we prize
Shot shafts and Darts expelling,
Here Saxifrage against the stone
That Powerful is approved,
Here Dodder by whose help alone,
Old Agues are removed
Here Mercury, here Helibore,
Old Ulcers mundifying,
And Shepheards-purse the Flux most sore,
That helps by the Applying;
Here wholesome Plantane, that the pain
Of Eyes and Ears appeases;
Here cooling Sorrel that again
We use in hot diseases:
The medcinable Mallow here,
Asswaging sudaine Tumors,
The iagged Polypodium there,
To purge old rotten humors,
Next these here Egremony is,
That helps the Serpents biting,
The blessed Betony by this,
Whose cures deseruen writing:
This All-heale, and so named of right,
New wounds so quickly healing,
A thousand more I could recyte,
Most worthy of Revealing,
But that I hindered am by Fate,
And busnesse does prevent me,
To cure a mad man, which of late
Is from Felicia sent me.

Claia. Nay then thou have enough to do,
We pity thy enduring,
For they are there infected so,
That they are past thy curing.

The sixth Nimphall.
SILVIVS HALCIVS. MELANTHVS.
A Woodman, Fisher, and a Swain
This Nimphall through with mirth maintain,
Whose pleadings so the Nymphs do please,
That presenily they give them Bays.
Clear had the day bin from the dawne,
All chequerd was the Sky,
Thin Clouds like Scarfs of Cobweb Lawne
Vayld Heauen's most glorious eye.
The Wind had no more strength then this,
That leasurely it blew,
To make one leaf the next to kiss,
That closly by it grew.
The Rils that on the Pebbles played,
Might now be heard at will;
This world they only Music made,
Else every thing was still.
The Flowers like brave embraudred Gerles,
Looked as they much desired,
To see whose head with orient Pearls,
Most curiously was tired;
And to it self the subtle Air,
Such souerainty assumes,
That it received too large a share
From natures rich perfumes.
When the Elizian Youth were met,
That were of most account,
And to disport themselves were set
Upon an easy Mount:
Near which, of stately Fur and Pine
There grew abundant store,
The Tree that weepeth Turpentine,
And shady Sicamore.
Amongst this merry youthful train
A Forrester they had,
A Fisher, and a Shepherds swayne
A lively Country Lad:
Betwixt which three a question grew,
Who should the worthiest be,
Which violently they pursue,
Nor stickled would they be.
That it the Company does please
This civil strife to stay,
Freely to hear what each of these
For his brave self could say:
When first this Forrester (of all)
That Silvins had to name,
To whom the Lot being cast does fall,
Does thus begin the Game,
Silvius. For my profession then, and for the life I lead
All others to excel, thus for my self I plead;
I am the Prince of sports, the Forest is my Fee,
He Is not upon the Earth for pleasure lives like me;
The Morn no sooner puts her Rosye Mantle on,
But from my quiet Lodge I instantly am gone,
When the melodious Birds from every Bush and Bryer
Of the wild spacious Wastes, make a continual quire;
The motlied Meadows then, new vernisht with the Sun
Shute up their spicy sweets upon the winds that run,
In easly ambling Gales, and softly seem to pace,
That it the longer might their lushiousnesse embrace:
I am cladin youthful Green, I other colors scorn,
My silken Bauldrick bears my Beugle, or my Horn,
Which setting to my Lips, I wind so loud and shrill,
As makes the Echoes showte from every neighboring Hill:
My Doghooke at my Belt, to which my Lyam's tide,
My Sheafe of Arrows by, my Woodknife at my Side,
My Crosse-bow in my Hand, my Gaffle or my Rack
To bend it when I please, or it I list to slack,
My Hound then in my Lyam, I by the Woodmans art
Forecast, where I may lodge the goodly Hie-palm'd Heart,
To view the grazing Herds, so sundry times I use,
Where by the loftiest Head I know my Dear to choose,
And to unheard him then, I gallop o'r the ground
Upon my wel-breath'd Nag, to cheer my earning Hound.
Sometime I pitch my Toils the Dear alive to take,
Sometime I like the Cry, the deepe-mouth'd Kennell make,
Then underneath my Horse, I staulke my game to strike,
And with a single Dog to hunt him hurt, I like.
The Siluians are to me true subjects, I their King,
The stately Heart, his Hind does to my presence bring,
The Buck his loved Do, the Roe his tripping Mate,
Before me to my Bower, whereas I sit in State.
The Dryads, Hamadryads, the Satyrs and the Fawnes
Often play at Hyde and Seek before me on the Lawnes,
The frisking Fayry often when horned Cinthia shines
Before me as I walk dance wanton Matachynes,
The numerous feathered flocks that the wild Forests haunt
Their Siluan songs to me, in cheerful dittyes chaunte,
The shades like ample Sheelds, defend me from the Sun,
Through which me to refresh the gentle Riuelets run,
No little bubling Brook from any Spring that falls
But on the Pebbles plays me pretty Madrigals.
In The morn I clime the Hills, where wholesome winds do blow
At Noone-tyde to the Vales, and shady Groves below,
Toward Evening I again the Crystal Floods frequent,
In pleasure thus my life continually is spent.
As Princes and great Lords have Palaces, so I
Have in the Forests here, my Hall and Gallery
The tall and stately Woods; which underneath are Plain,
The Groves my Gardens are, the Heath and Downs again
My wide and spacious walks, then say all what ye can,
The Forester is still your only gallant man.
He of his speech scarce made an end,
But him they load with praise,
The Nymphs most highly him commend,
And vow to give him Bays:
He Is now cryde up of every one,
And who but only he,
The Forrester's the man alone,
The worthyest of the three.
When some then the other far more stayed,
Wil'd them a while to pause,
For there was more yet to be said,
That might deserve applause,
When Haleius his turn next plyes,
And silence having won,
Room for the fisher man he cries,
And thus his Plea begun.

Halcius. No Forrester, it so must not be borne away,
But hear what for himself the Fisher first can say,
The Crystal current Streams continually I keep,
Where every Pearle-pau'd Foard, and every Blew-eyd deep
With me familiar are; when in my Boat being set,
My Oar I take in hand, my Angle and my Net
About me; like a Prince my self in state I steer,
Now up, now down the Stream, now am I here, now there,
The Pilot and the Fraught my self; and at my eafe
Can land me when I list, or in what place I please,
The Siluer-scaled Sholes, about me in the Streams,
As thick as ye discern the Atoms in the Beams,
Near to the shady Banck where slender Sallowes grow,
And Willows their shag'd tops down toward the waters bow
I shove in with my Boat to sheeld me from the heat,
Where choosing from my Bag, some proved especial bayt,
The goodly well grown Trout I with my Angle strike,
And with my bearded Wire I take the ravenous Pike,
Of whom when I have hold, he seldom breakesaway
Though at my Lines full length, so long I let him play
Till by my hand I find he well-nere wearyed be,
When softly by degrees I draw him up to me.
The lusty Samon to, I often with Angling take,
Which me above the rest most Lordly sport does make,
Who feeling he is caught, such Frisks and bounds does fetch,
And by his very strength my Line so far does stretch,
As draws my floating Corcke down to the very ground,
And wresting of my Rod, does make my Boat turn round.
I never idle am, some time I bayt my Weeles,
With which by night I take the dainty silver Eeles,
And with my Draughtnet then, I sweep the streaming Flood,
And to my Tramell next, and Cast-net from the Mud,
I beat the Scaly brood, noe hour I idely spend,
But wearied with my work I bring the day to end:
The Naijdes and Nymphs that in the Rivers keep,
Which take into their care, the store of every deep,
Amongst the Flowery flags, the Bullrushes and Reed,
That of the Spawne have charge (abundantly to breed)
Well mounted upon Swans, their naked bodies lend
To my discerning eye, and on my Boat attend,
And dance upon the Waves, before me (for my sake)
To th'Musick the soft wynd upon the Reeds does make.
And for my pleasure more, the rougher Gods of Seas
From Neptunes Court send in the blew Neriades,
Which from his bracky Realm upon the Billows ride
And bear the Rivers back with every streaming Tide,
Those Billows against my Boat, borne with delightful Gales
Often seeming as I row to tell me pretty tales,
Whilst Ropes of liquid Pearl still load my laboring Oars,
As streacht upon the Stream they stryke me to the Shores:
The silent meadows seem delighted with my Lays,
As sitting in my Boat I sing my Lasses praise,
Then let them that like, the Forrester up cry,
Your noble Fisher is your only man say I.
This Speech of Halcius turned the Tide,
And brought it so about,
That all upon the Fisher cryde,
That he would bear it out;
Him for the speech he made, to clap
Who lent him not a hand,
And saidt' would be the Waters hap,
Quite to put down the Land.
This while Melanthus silent sits,
(For so the Shepherd hight)
And having heard these dainty wits,
Each pleading for his right;
To hearethem honored in this wise,
His patience does provoke,
When for a Shepherd room he cries,
And for himself thus spoke.

Melanthus. Well Fisher you have done, and Forrester for you
Your Tale is neatly told, s'are both' to give you due,
And now my turn comes next, then hear a Shepherd speak:
My watchfulness and care gives day scarce leave to break,
But to the Fields I haste, my folded flock to see,
Where when I find, nor Woolfe, nor Fox, has injured me,
I to my Bottle straight, and soundly baste my Throat,
Which done, some Country Song or Roundelay I roate
So merrily; that to the music that I make,
I Force the Lark to sing ere she be well awake;
Then Baull my cut-tayld Curre and I begin to play,
He o'r my Shephooke leapes, now the one, now the other way,
Then on his hinder feet he does himself advance,
I tune, and to my note, my lively Dog does dance,
Then whistle in my Fist, my fellow Swaynes to call,
Down go our Hooks and Scrips, and we to Nine-holes fall,
At Dust-point, or at Quoyts, else are we at it hard,
All false and cheating Games, we Shepherds are debard;
Survaying of my sheep if Ewe or Wether look
As though it were amiss, or with my Curre, or Crook
I take it, and when once I find what it does ayle,
It hardly has that hurt, but that my skill can heal;
And when my careful eye, I cast upon my sheep
I sort them in my Pens, and sorted so I keep:
Those that are bigst of Boane, I still reserve for breed,
My Cullings I put off, or for the Chapman feed
When the Evening does approach I to my Bagpipe take,
And to my Grazing flocks such Music then I make,
That they forbear to feed; then me a King you see,
I playing go before, my Subjects follow me,
My Bell-weather most brave, before the rest does stalk,
The Father of the flock, and after him does walk
My writhen headed Ram, with Posyes crowned in pride
Fast to his crooked horns with Rybands neatly tied
And at our Shepherds Board that is cut out of the ground,
My fellow Swaynes and I together at it round,
With Greencheese, clouted Cream, with Flawns, and Custards,
Whig, Sider, and with Whey, I domineer a Lord, (stord,
When shering time is come I to the River drive,
My goodly well-fleec'd Flocks: (by pleasure thus I thrive)
Which being washed at will; upon the shering day,
My wool I forth in Loaks, fit for the wynder lay,
Which upon lusty heaps into my Coat I heave,
That in the Handling fecles as soft as any Sleaue,
When every Ewe two Lambs, that yeaned has that year,
About her new shorn neck a Chaplet then does wear;
My Tarboxe, and my Scrip, my Bagpipe, at my back,
My sheephooke in my hand, what can I say I lack;
He that a Scepter swayd, a sheephooke in his hand,
Has not disdaind to have; for Shepherds then I stand;
Then Forester and you my Fisher cease your strife
I say your Shepherd leads your only merry life,
They had not cried the Forester,
And Fisher up before,
So much: but now the Nymphs prefer,
The Shephard ten times more,
And all the Ging goes on his side,
Their Minion him they make,
To him themselves they all apply,
And all his party take;
Till some in their discretion cast,
Since first the strife begun
In all that from them there had past
None absolutely won:
That equal honor they should share:
And their deserts to show,
For each a Garland they prepare,
Which they on them bestow,
Ofall the choicest flowers that wear,
Which purposly they gather,
With which they Crown them, parting there.
As they came first together:

The Seventh Nimphall.
FLORIMEL LELIPA NAIIS CODRVS a Feriman.
The Nymphs, the Queen of love pursue,
Which often does hide her from their view:
But lastly from the Elizian Nation,
She banished is by Proclamation.
Florimel. Dear Lelipa, where have thou bin so long,
Was It not enough for thee to do me wrong,
To rob me of thy self, but with more spite
To take my Naijs from me, my delight?
Ye lazy Girls, your heads where have ye laid,
Whilst Venus here her anticke prankes has played?

Lelipa. Nay Florimel, we should of you enquire,
The only Maiden, whom we all admire
For Beauty, Wit, and Chastity, that you
Amongst the rest of all our Virgin crew,
In quest of her, that you so slack should be,
And leave the charge to Naijs and to me.

Florimel. You Are much mistaken Lelipa, 'twas I,
Of all the Nymphs, that first did her descry,
At our great Hunting, when as in the Chase
Amongst the rest, me thought I saw one face
So exceeding fair, and curious, yet unknown
That I that face not possibly could own,
And in the course, so Goddess like a gate,
Each step so full of majesty and state;
That with my self, I thus resolved that she
Less then a Goddess (surely) could not be:
Thus as Idalia, steadfastly I eyed,
A little Nimphe that kept close by her side
I noted, as unknown as was the other,
Which Cupid was disguised so by his mother.
The little purblinde Rogue, if you had seen,
You would have thought he verily had been
One of Diana's votaries, so clad,
He every thing so like a Huntresse had:
And she had put false eyes into his head,
That very well he might us all have sped.
And still they kept together in the Rear,
But as the Boy should have shot at the Dear,
He shot amongst the Nymphs, which when I saw,
Closer up to them I began to draw;
And fell to hearken, when they naught suspecting,
Because I seemed them vttorly neglecting,
I heard her say, my little Cupid to it,
Now Boy or never, at the Beuie shoot.
Have at them Venus, quoth the Boy anon,
I Will pierce the proud'st, had she a heart of stone:
With that I cryde out, Treason, Treason, when
The Nymphs that were before, turning again
To understand the meaning of this cry,
They out of sight were vanished presently.
Thus but for me, the Mother and the Son,
Here in Elysium, had us all undone.

Naijs. Believe me gentle Maid, 'twas very well,
But now hear me my beauteous Florimel.
Great Mars his Lemman being cry de'out here,
She to Felicia goes, still to be near
The Elizian Nymphs, for at us is her aim,
The fond Felicians are her common game.
I upon (...) idly wandering thither,
Something worth laughter from those fools to gather,
Found her, who thus had lately been surpised;
Fearing the like, had her fair self disguised
Like an old Witch, and gave out to have skill
In telling Fortunes either good or ill;
And that more nearly she with them might close,
She cut the Corns, of dainty Ladies Toes:
She gave them Physic, either to cool or move them,
And powders too to make their sweet Hearts love them:
And her son Cupid, as her Zany went,
Carrying her boxes, whom she often sent
To know of her fair Patients how they slept.
By which means she, and the blind Archer crept
Into their favors, who would often Toy,
And took delight in sporting with the Boy;
Which many times amongst his waggish tricks,
These wanton Wenches in the bosom pricks;
That they before which had some frantic fits,
Were by his Witchcraft quite out of their wits.
Watching this Wisard, my mind gave me still
She some Impostor was, and that this skill
Was counterfeit, and had some other end.
For which discovery, as I did attend,
Her wrinckled vizard being very thin,
My piercing eye perceived her clecrer skin
Through the thick Riuels perfectly to shine;
When I perceived a beauty so divine,
As that so clouded, I began to pry
A little nearer, when I chanced to spy
That pretty Mole upon her Cheek, which when
I saw; suruaying every part again,
Upon her left hand, I perceived the skarre
Which she received in the Trojan war;
Which when I found, I could not choose but smile,
She, who again had noted me the while.
And by my carriage, sound I had descried her,
Slipped out of sight, and presently does bide her.

Lelipa. Nay then my dainty Girls, I make no doubt
But I my self as strangely found her out
As either of you both; in Field and Town,
When like a Pedlar she wentvp and down:
For she had got a pretty handsome Pack,
Which she had fardled neatly at her back:
And opening it, she had the perfect cry,
Come my fair Girls, let us see, what will you buy?
Here be fine night Maskes, plastred well within,
To supple wrinckles, and to smooth the skin:
Here Is Crystal, Coral, Bugle, let, in Beads,
Cornelian Bracelets, for my dainty Maids:
Then Periwigs and Searcloth-Gloues does show,
To make their hands as white as Swan or Snow:
Then takes she forth a curious gilded box,
Which was not opened but by double locks;
Takes them aside, and does a Paper spread,
In which was painting both for white and red:
And next a piece of Silk, wherein there lies
For the decayed, false Breasts, false Teeth, false Eyes:
And all the while she is opening of her Pack,
Cupid with his wings bound close down to his back:
Playing the Tumbler on a Table gets,
And shows the Ladies many pretty feats.
I seeing behind him that he had such things,
For well I knew no boy but he had wings,
I viewed his Mothers beauty, which to me
Less then a Goddess said, she could not be:
With that quoth I to her, this other day,
As youdoe now, so one that came this way,
Showed me a neat piece, with the needle wrought,
How Mars and Venus were together caught
By polt-foot Uulcan in an Iron net;
It grieved me after that I chanced to let,
It to go from me: whereat waxing red,
Into her Hamper she hung down her head,
As she had stoup't some novelty to seek,
But 'twas indeed to hide her blushing Cheek:
When she her Trinkets trusseth up anon,
Ever we were 'ware, and instantly was gone.

Florimel. But hark you Nymphs, amongst our idle prate,
It Is current news through the Elizian State,
That Venus and her Son were lately seen
Here in Elysium, whence they often have been
Banished by our Edict, and yet still merry,
Were here in public rowed o'r at the Ferry,
Where as it is said, the Ferryman and she
Had much discourse, she was so full of glee,
Codrus much wondering at the blind Boys Bow.

Naijs. And what it was, that easly you may know,
Codrus himself comes rowing here at hand.

Lelipa. Codrus Come hither, let your Whirry stand,
I hope upon you, ye will take no state
Because two Gods have graced your Boat of late;
Good Ferry-man I pray thee let us hear
What talk ye had, aboard thee whilst they were:

Codrus. Why thus fair Nymphs.
As I a Fare had lately past,
And thought that side to ply,
I heard one as it were in haste;
A Boat, a Boat, to cry,
Which as I was about to bring,
And came to view my Fraught,
Thought I, what more then heavenly thing,
Has fortune hither brought.
She seeing mine eyes still on her were,
Soon, smilingly, quoth she;
Sir, look to your Roother there,
Why lookst thou thus at me?
And nimbly stepped into my Boat,
With her a little Lad
Naked and blind, yet did I note,
That Bow and Shafts he had,
And two Wings to his Shoulders fixed,
Which stood like little Sails,
With far more various colors mixed,
Then be your Peacocks Tails;
I seeing this little dapper Elfe,
Such Arms as these to bear,
Quoth I thus softly to my self,
What strange thing have we here,
I never saw the like thought I:
It Is more then strange to me,
To have a child have wings to fly,
And yet want eyes to see;
Sure this is some devised toy,
Or it transformed has bin,
For such a thing, half Bird, half Boy,
I think was never seen;
And in my Boat I turned about,
And wistly viewd the Lad,
And clearly saw his eyes were out,
Though Bow and Shafts he had.
As wistly she did me behold,
How likst thou him quoth she,
Why well, quoth I; and better should,
Had he but eyes to see.
How say thou honest friend, quoth she,
Will thou a Prentice take,
I think in time, though blind he be,
A Ferry-man he will make;
To guide my passage Boat quoth I,
His fine hands were not made,
He has been bred too wantonly
To undertake my trade;
Why help him to a Master then,
Quoth she, such Youths be scant,
It cannot be but there be men
That such a Boy do want.
Quoth I, when you your best have done,
No better way you will find,
Then to a Harper bind your Son,
Since most of them are blind.
The lovely Mother and the Boy,
Laughed heartily thereat,
As at some nimble jest or toy,
To hear my homely Chat.
Quoth I, I pray you let me know,
Came he thus first to light,
Or by some sickness, hurt, or blow,
Depryued of his sight;
Nay sure, quoth she, he thus was borne,
It Is strange borne blind, quoth I,
I fear you put this as a scorn
On my simplicity;
Quoth she, thus blind I did him bear,
Quoth I, if it be no lie,
Then he is the first blind man I Will swear,
Ere practisd Archery,
A man, quoth she, nay there you miss,
He Is still a Boy as now,
Nor to be elder then he is,
The Gods will him allow;
To be no elder then he is,
Then sure he is some sprite
(...) straight replide, again at this,
The Goddess laughed out right;
It is a mystery to me,
An Archer and yet blind;
Quoth I again, how can it be,
That he his mark should find;
The Gods, quoth she, whose will it was
That he should want his sight,
That he in something should surpass,
To recompense their spite,
Gave him this gift, though at his Game
He still shot in the dark,
That he should have so certain aim,
As not to miss his mark.
By this time we were come a shore,
When me my Fare she paid,
But not a word she uttered more,
Nor had I her bewrayd,
Of Venus nor of Cupid I
Before did never hear,
But that a Fisher coming by
Then, told me who they were.

Florimel. Well: against them then proceed
As before we have decreed,
That the Goddess and her Child,
Be for ever hence exild,
Which Lelipa you shall proclaim
In our wise Apollo's name.

Lelipa. To all th'Elizian Nimphish Nation,
Thus we make our Proclamation,
Against Venus and her Son
For the mischief they have done,
After the next last of May,
The fixed and peremtory day,
If she or Cupid shall be found
Upon our Elizian ground,
Our Edict, mere Rogues shall make them,
And as such, who ere shall take them,
Them shall into prison put,
Cupids wings shall then be cut,
His Bow broken, and his Arrows
Given to Boys to shoot at Sparrowes,
And this Vagabund be sent,
Having had due punishment
To mount Cytheron, which first fed him:
Where his wanton Mother bred him,
And there out of her protection
Daily to receive correction;
Then her Pasport shall be made,
And to Cyprus Isle conuayd,
And at Paphos in her Shryne,
Where she has been held divine,
For her offenses found contrite,
There to live an Anchorite.

The eight Nimphall.
MERTILLA CLAIA CLORIS.
A Nymph is married to a Fay,
Great preparations for the Day,
All Rites of Nuptials they recite you
To the Brydall and inuit you.
Mertilla. But will our Tita wed this Fay?

Claia. Yea, and to morrow is the day.

Mertilla. But why should she bestow her self
Upon this dwarfish Fayry Else?

Claia. Why by her smalnesse you may find,
That she is of the Fayry kind,
And therefore apt to choose her make
Whence she did her beginning take:
Besides he is deft and wondrous Ayrye,
And of the noblest of the Fayry,
Chief of the Crickets of much fame,
In Fayry a most ancient name.
But to be brief, it is clearly done,
The pretty wench is wooed and won.

Cloris. If this be so, let us provide
The Ornaments to fit our Bryde,
For they knowing she does come
From us in Elysium,
Queen Mab will look she should be dressed
In those attyres we think our best,
Therefore some curious things lets give her,
Ever to her Spouse we her deliver.

Mertilla. I Will have a lewell for her care,
(Which for my sake I Will have her wear)
T shall be a Dewdrop, and therein
Of Cupids I will have a twinne,
Which struggling, with their wings shall break
The Bubble, out of which shall leak
So sweet a liquor as shall move
Each thing that smells, to be in love.

Claia. Believe me Gerle, this will be fine,
And to this Pendant, then take mine;
A Cup in fashion of a Fly,
Of the Linxes piercing eye,
Wherein there sticks a Sunny Ray
Shot in through the cleerest day,
Whose brightness Uenus self did move,
Therein to put her drink of Love,
Which for more strength she did distill,
The Limbeck was a Phoenix quill,
At this Cups delicious brinke,
A Fly approaching but to drink,
Like Amber or some precious Gum
It transparant does become.

Cloris. For Jewels for her ears she is sped,
But for a dressing for her head
I think for her I have a Tyer,
That all Fayryes shall admyre,
The yellowes in the full-blowne Rose,
Which in the Top it does enclose
Like drops of gold Oar shall be hung,
Upon her Tresses, and among
Those scattered seeds (the eye to please)
The wings of the Cantharides:
With some of the Rainbow that does rail
Those Moons in, in the Peacocks tail
Whose dainty colors being mixed
With the other beauties, and so fixed,
Her lovely Tresses shall appear,
As though upon a flame they were.
And to be sure she shall be gay,
We Will take those feathers from the Iay;
About her eyes in Circlets set,
To be our Tita's Coroner.

Mertilla. Then dainty Girls I make no doubt,
But we shall neatly send her out:
But let us amongst our selves agree,
Of what her wedding Gown shall be.

Claia. Of Pansie, Pincke, and Primrose leaves,
Most curiously laid on in Threaues:
And all embroydery to supply,
Powthred with flowers of Rosemary:
A trayle about the skirt shall run,
The Silke-wormes finest, newly spunne;
And every Seame the Nimphs shall sew
With th 'smallest of the Spinners Clue:
And having done their work, again
These to the Church shall bear her Train:
Which for our Tita we will make
Of the cast slough of a Snake,
Which quiuering as the wind does blow,
The Sun shall it like Tinsell show.

Cloris. And being led to meet her mate,
To make sure that she want no state,
Moons from the Peacockes tail we will shred,
With feathers from the Pheasants head:
Mixd with the plume of (so high price,)
The precious bird of Paradise.
Which to make up, our Nymphs shall ply
Into a curious Canopy.
Borne over her head (by our enquiry)
By Elfes, the fittest of the Faery.

Mertilla. But all this while we have (...)
Her Buskins, neighbors, have we not?

Claia. We had, for those I Will fit her now,
They shall be of the Lady-Cow:
The dainty shell upon her back
Of Crimson strewn with spots of black;
Which as she holds a stately pace,
Her Leg will wonderfully grace.

Cloris. But then for music of the best,
This must be thought on for the Feast.

Mertilla. The Nightingale of birds most choice,
To do her best shall strain her voice;
And to this bird to make a Set,
The Mauis, Merle, and Robinet;
The Lark, the Lennet, and the Thrush,
That make a Quier of every Bush.
But for still music, we will keep
The Wren, and Titmouse, which to sleep
Shall sing the Bride, when she is alone
The rest into their chambers gone.
And like those upon Ropes that walk
On Gossimer, from staulke to staulke,
The tripping Fayry tricks shall play
The evening of the wedding day.

Claia. But for the Bride-bed, what were fit,
That has not been talked of yet.

Cloris. Of leaves of Roses white and red,
Shall be the Covering of her bed:
The Curtains, Valence, Tester, all,
Shall be the flower Imperial,
And for the Fringe, it all along
With azure Harebels shall be hung:
Of Lillies shall the Pillowes be,
With down stuffed of the Butter flee.

Mertilla. Thus sarre we handsomely have gone,
Now for our Prothalamion
Or Marriage song of all the rest,
A thing that much must grace our feast.
Let us practice then to sing it,
Ere we before the assembly bring it:
We in Dialogues must do it,
Then my dainty Girls set to it.

Claia. This day must Tita married be,
Come Nimphs this nuptial let us see.

Mertilla. But is it certain that ye say,
Will she wed the noble Faye?

Cloris. Sprinckle the dainty flowers with dewes,
Such as the Gods at Banquets use:
Let Herbs and Weeds turn all to Roses,
And make proud the posts with posies:
Shute your sweets into the air,
Charge the morning to be fair.

Claia. and Mertilla. For our Tita is this day,
To be married to a Faye.

Claia. By whom then shall our Bride be led
To the Temple to be wed.

Mertilla. Only by your self and I,
Who that roomth should else supply?

Cloris. Come bright Girls, come altogether,
And bring all your offerings hither,
Ye most brave and Buxome Beuye,
All your goodly graces Leuye,
Come in Masestie and state
Our Brydal here to celebrate.

Mertilla. and Claia. For our Tita is this day,
Married to a noble Faye.

Claia. Whose lot wilt be the way to strew,
On which to Church our Bride must go?

Mertilla. That I think as fit'st of all,
To lively Lelipa will fall.

Cloris. Summon all the sweets that are,
To this nuptial to repair;
Till with their throngs themselves they smother,
Strongly styfling one another;
And at last they all consume,
And vanish in one rich perfume.

Mertilla: and Claia. For our Tita is this day,
Married to a noble Faye.

Mertilla. By whom must Tita married be,
It Is fit we all to that should see?

Claia. The Priest he purposely does come,
The Arch Flamyne of Elysium.

Cloris. With Tapers let the Temples shine,
Sing to Himen, Hymns divine:
Load the Altars till there rise
Clouds from the burnt sacrifice;
With your Sensors sling aloof
Their smells, till they ascend the Roof.

Mertilla. and Claia. For our Tita is this day,
Married to a noble Fay.

Mertilla. But coming back when she is wed,
Who breaks the Cake above her head.

Claia. That shall Mertilla, for she is tallest,
And our Tita is the smallest.

Cloris. Violins, strike up aloud,
Fly the Gitterne, scowre the Crowd,
Let the nimble hand belabour
The whisteling Pipe, and drumbling Taber:
To the full the Bagpiperacke,
Till the swelling leather crack.

Mertilla. and Claia. For our Tita is this day,
Married to a noble Fay.

Claia. But when to dyne she takes her seats
What shall be our Tita's meat?

Mertilla. The Gods this Feast, as to begin,
Have (...) of their Ambrosia in.

Cloris. Then serve we up the strawes rich berry,
The Respas, and Elizian Cherry:
The virgin honey from the flowers
In Hibla, wrought in Flora's Bowers:
Full Bowls of Nectar, and no Girl
Carouse but in dissolved Pearl.

Mertilla: and Claia. For our Tita is this day,
Married to a noble Fay.

Claia. But when night comes and she must go
To Bed, dear Nymphs what must we do?

Mertilla. In the Posset must be brought,
And Points be from the Bridegroom caught.

Cloris. In Maskes, in Dances, and delight,
And rear Banquets spend the night:
Then about the Room we ramble,
Scatter Nuts, and for them scamble:
Over Stools, and Tables tumble,
Never think of noise nor rumble.

Mertilla. and Claia. For our Tita is this day,
Married to a noble Fay.

The ninth Nimphall.
MUSES and NIMPHS.
The Muses spend their lofty lays,
Upon Apollo and his praise;
The Nimphs with Gems his Alter build,
This Nimphall is with Phoebus filled.
A Temple of exceeding state.
The Nymphs and Muses rearing,
Which they to Phoebus dedicate,
Elysium ever cheering:
These Muses, and these Nymphs contend
This Phane to Phoebus offering,
Which side the other should transcend,
These praise, those prizes proffering,
And at this long appointed day,
Each one their largess bringing,
Those nine fair Sisters led the way
Thus to Apollo singing.
The Muses. Thou youthful God that guid'st the hours,
The Muses thus implore thee,
By all those Names due to thy powers,
By which we still adore thee.
Sol, Tytan, Delius, Cynthius, styles,
Much reverence that have won thee,
Derived from Mountains as from Isles
Where worship first was done thee.
Rich Delos brought thee forth divine,
Thy Mother thither driven,
At Delphos thy most sacred shrine,
Thy Oracles were given.
In thy swift course from East to West,
They minutes miss to find thee,
That bear the morning on thy breass,
And leau'st the night behind these.
Up to Olimpus top so steep,
Thy startling Coursers currying;
Thence down to Neptunes vasly deep,
Thy flaming Chariot hurrying.
Eos, Ethon, Phlegon, Pirois, proud, The horses drawing the Chariot of the
Sun.

Their lightning Maynes advancing:
Breathing forth fire on every cloud
Upon their Journey prancing.
Whose sparkling hoofes, with gold for speed
Are shod, to escape all dangers,
Where they upon Ambrosia feed,
In their celestial Mangers.
Bright Colatina, that of hills The Mountains first saluting the Sun at his
rising.

Is Goddess, and has keeping
Her Nymphs, the clear Oreades wills
Tattend theefrom thy sleeping.
Great Supposed the God of earth. One of the Judges of hell.
Demogorgon feels thy might,
His Mines about him heating:
Who through his bosom dart'st thy light,
Within the Center sweating.
If thou but touch thy golden Lyre,
Thou Minos mou'st to hear thee:
The Rocks feel in themselves a fire,
And rise up to come near thee.
It Is thou that Physic did devise
Herbs by their natures calling:
Of which some opening at thy Rise,
And closing at thy falling.
Fair Hyacinth thy most loved Lad,
That with the sledge thou sluest;
Has in a flower the life he had,
Whose root thou still renewest,
Thy Daphne thy beloved Tree,
That scorns thy Fathers Thunder,
And thy dear Clitia yet we see, A Nymph loved of Apollo, and by him changed
into a flower.

Not time from thee can sunder;
From thy bright Bow that Arrow flew
(Snatched from thy golden Quiver)
Which that fell Serpent Python slew,
Renowning thee for ever.
The Actian and the Pythian Games Plays or Games in honor of Apollo.

Devised were to praise thee,
With all the Apolinary names
That the Ancients thought could raise thee.
A Shryne upon this Mountain his,
To thee we'll have erected,
Which thou the God of Poesy
Must care to have proteoted:
With thy loved Cinthus that shall share,
With all his shady Bowers,
Nor Licia's Cragus shall compare
With this, for thee, of ours.
Thus having sung, the Nimphish Crew
Thrust in amongst them thronging,
Desiring they might have the due
That was to them belonging.
Quoth they, ye Muses, as divine,
Are in his glories graced,
But it is we must build the Shryne
Wherein they must be placed;
Which of those precious Gemmes we'll make
That Nature can afford us,
Which from that plenty we will take,
Wherewith we here have stored us:
O glorious (...) most divine,
Thine Altars then we hallow.
And with those stones we build a Shryne
To thee our wise Apollo.
The Nymphs. No Gem, from Rocks, Seas, running streams,
(Their numbers let us muster)
But has from thy most powerful beams
The Virtue and the Luster;
The Diamond, the king of Gemmes,
The first is to be placed,
That glory is of Diadems,
Them gracing, by them graced:
In whom thy power the most is seen,
The raging fire refelling:
The Enerauld then, most deeply green,
For beauty most excelling,
Resisting poison often proved
By those about that bear it.
The cheerful Ruby then, much loved,
That does revive the spirit,
Whose kind to large extensure grown
The color so enflamed,
Is that admired mighty stone
The Carbunckle that is named,
Which from it such a flaming light
And radiency eiecteth,
That in the very dark'st of night
The eye to it directs.
The yellow Iacynth, strengthening Sense,
Of which who has the keeping,
No Thunder hurts nor Pestilence,
And much provoke sleeping:
The Chrisolite, that does resist
Thirst, proved, never failing,
The purple colored Amatist,
Against strength of wine prevailing;
The verdant gay green Smaragdus,
Most sovereign over passion;
The Sardonix, approved by us
To master Incantation.
Then that celestial colored stone
The Saphyre, heavenly wholly,
Which worn, there weariness is none,
And cures melancholy:
The Lazulus, whose pleasant blew
With golden veins is graced;
The laspis, of so various how,
Amongst our other placed;
The Onix, from the Ancients brought,
Of wondrous Estimation,
Shall in amongst the rest be wrought
Our sacred Shryne to fashion;
The Topas well stick here and there,
And sea-greene colored Berill,
And Turkesse, which who haps to bear
Is often kept from peril.
The Solenite, of Cynthia's light,
So (...) with her still ranging,
Which as she wanes or waxes bright
Its colors so are changing.
With Opalls, more then any one,
We'll deck thine Altar fuller,
For that of every precious stone,
It does retain some color.
With bunches of Pearl Paragon
Thine Altar underpropping,
Whose base is the Cornelian,
Strong bleeding often stopping
With the Agot, very often that is
Cut strangely in the Quarry,
As Nature meant to show in this,
How she her self can varry:
With worlds of Gems from Mines and Seas
Elysium well might store us,
But we content our selves with these
That readiest lie before us:
And thus O Phoebus most divine
Thine Altars still we hallow,
And to thy Godhead rear this Shryne,
Our only wise Apollo.
The tenth Nimphall.
NAIIS CLAIA CORBILVS SATYR.
A Satyr on Elysium lights,
Whose ugly shape the Nymphs affrights,
Yet when they hear his inst complaint,
They make him an Elizian Saint.
Corbilus. WHat, breathles Nimphs? bright Virgins let me know
What sudden cause constraines ye to this haste?
What have ye seen that should affright ye so?
What might it be from which ye fly so fast?
I see your faces full of pallid fear,
As though some peril followed on your flight;
Take breath a while, and quickly let me hear
Into what danger ye have lately light.

Naijs. Never were poor distressed Gerles so glad,
As when kind, loved Corbilus we saw,
When our much haste us so much weakened had,
That scarcely we our wearied breathes could draw.
In this next Grove under an aged Tree,
So fell a monster lying there we found,
As till this day, our eyes did never see,
Nor ever came on the Elizian ground.
Half man, half (...) he seemed to us in show,
His upper parts our humane shape does bear,
But he is a very perfect Goat below,
His crooked Cambrils armed with hoose and hair.

Claia. Through his lean Chops a chattering he does make
Which stirs his staring beastly driueld Beard,
And his sharp horns he seemed at us to shake,
Can thou then blame us though we were afeard.

Corbilus. Surely it seems some Satyr this should be,
Come and go back and guide me to the place,
Be not afraid, ye are safe enough with me,
Silly and harmless be their Siluan Race.

Claia. How Corbilus; a Satyr do you say?
How should he over high (...) hit?
Since to these Fields there is none can find the way,
But only those the Muses will permit.

Corbilus. It Is true; but often, the sacred Sisters (...)
The silly Satyr, by whose plainness, they
Are taught the worlds enormities to trace,
By beastly men's abominable way;
Beside he may be banished his own home
By this base time, or be so much distressed,
That he the craggy by-clift Hill has clome
To find out these more pleasant Fields of rest.

Naijs. Yonder he sits, and (...) himself to how
At our approach, what does our (...)him?
Me thinks he seems not half sovgly now,
As at the first, when I and Claia saw him.

Corbilus. It Is an old Satyr, Nymph, I no (...)
Sadly he sits, as he were sick or lame,
His looks would say, that we may easly learn
How, and from whence, he to (...) came,
Satyr, these Fields, how came thou first to find?
What Fate first showed thee this most happy shore?
When never any of thy Siluan kind
Set foot on the Elizian earth before?

Satyr. O never ask, how I came to this place,
What cannot strong necessity find out?
Rather bemoane my miserable case,
Constrained to wander the wide world about.
With wild Silvanus and his woody crew,
In Forests I, at liberty and free,
Lived in such pleasure as the world ne't knew,
Nor anyrightly can conceive but we.
This iocond life we many (...) day enjoyed,
Till this last age, those beastly men forth brought,
That all those great and goodly Woods destroyed,
Whose growth their Grandsyres, with such sufferance sought,
That fair Felicia which was but of late,
Earth's Paradise, that never had her Peer,
Stands now in that most lamentable state,
That not a Siluan will inhabit there;
Where in the sost and most delicious shade,
In heat of Summer we were wont to play,
When the long day too short for us we made,
The slyding hours so slyly stole away;
By Cynthia's light, and on the pleasant Lawne,
The wanton Fayry we were wont to chase,
Which to the nimble clouen-footed Fawn,
Upon the plain durst boldly bid the base.
The sportiue Nymphs, with shouts and laughter shook
The Hills and Valleys in their wanton play,
Waking the Echoes, their last words that took,
Till at the last, they Iowder were then they.
The lofty hie Wood, and the lower spring,
Sheltring the Dear, in many a sudden shower;
Where Quires of Birds, often wonted were to sing,
The flaming Furnace wholly does devour;
Once fair Felicia, but now quite desae'd,
Those Braueries gone wherein she did abound
With dainty Groves, when she was highly grao'd
With goodly Oak, Ash, Elm, and Beeches croun'd:
But that from heaven their judgment blinded is,
In humane Reason it could never be,
But that they might have clearly seen by this,
Those plagues their next posterity shall see.
The little Infant on the mothers Lap
For want of fire shall be so sore distressed,
That whilst it draws the lanke and empty Pap,
The tender lips shall freese unto the breast;
The quaking Cattle which their Warmstall want,
And with bleake winters Northern wind oppressed,
Their Browse and Stouer waxing thin and scant,
The hungry Crows shall with their Caryon feast.
Men wanting Timber wherewith they should build,
And not a Forest in Felicia found,
Shall be enforced upon the open Field,
To dig them Caves for houses in the ground:
The Land thus robbed, of all her rich Attire,
Naked and bare her self to heaven does show,
Begging from thence that love would dart his fire
Upon those wretches that disrobed her so;
This beastly Brood by no means may abide
The name of their brave Ancestors to hear,
By whom their sordid slavery is descried,
So unlike them as though not theirs they were,
Nor yet they sense, nor understanding have,
Of those brave Muses that their Country song,
But with false Lips ignobly do deprave
The right and honor that to them belong;
This cruel kind thus Viper-like devour
That fruitful soil which them too fully fed;
The earth does curse the Age, and every hour
Again, that it these viprous monsters bred.
I seeing the plagues that shortly are to come.
Upon this people clearly them forsook,
And thus am light into Elysium,
To whose strait search I wholly me betook.

Nays. Poor silly creature, come along with us,
Thou shall be free of the Elizian fields:
Be not dismayed, nor inly grieved thus,
This place content in all abundance yields.
We to the cheerful presence will thee bring,
Of Jove's dear Daughters, where in shades they sit,
Where thou shall hear those sacred Sisters sing,
Most heavenly Hymns, the strength and life of wit.

Claia. Where to the Delphion God upon their Lyres
His Priests seem ravished in his height of praise:
Whilst he is crowning his harmonious Quiers,
With circling Garlands of immortal Bays.

Corbilus. Here live in bliss, till thou shall see those slaves,
Who thus set virtue and desert at naught:
Some sacrificed upon their Grandsires graves,
And some like beastsin markets sold and bought.
Of fools and madmen leave thou then the care,
That have no understanding of their state:
For whom high heaven does so just plagues prepare,
That they to pity shall convert thy hate.
And to Elysium be thou welcome then,
Until those base Felicians thou shall hear,
By that vile nation captiued again,
That many a glorious age their captives were.

TO the Right Noble, Religious, and truly virtuous Lady, Mary, Countess of
Dorset; worthy of all Titles and Attributes, that were ever given to the most
Renowned of her Sex: and of me most deservedly to be honored. To her Fame and
Memory I consecrate these my divine Poems, with all the wishes of a grateful
heart; for the preservation of her, and her Children, the Succeeding Hopes of
the Ancient and Noble Family of the Sackuiles.

Her Servant, MICHAEL DRAYTON.

NOAH'S FLOVD.
ETemall and all-working God, which wast
Before the world, whose frame by thee was cast,
And beautified with beamefull lamps above,
By thy great wisdom set how they should move
To guide the seasons, equally to all,
Which come and go as they do rise and fall.
My mighty Maker, O do thou infuse
Such life and spirit into my laboring Muse,
That I may sing (what but from Noah thou hid'st)
The greatest thing that ever yet thou did
Since the Creation; that the world may see
The Muse is heavenly, and derived from thee.
O let thy glorious Angel which since kept A love Musa.

That gorgeous Eden, where once Adam slept;
When tempting Eve was taken from his side,
Let him great God not only be my guide,
But with his fiery Faucheon still be nie,
To keep affliction far from me, that I
With a free soul thy wondrous works may show,
Then like that Deluge shall my numbers flow,
Telling the state wherein the earth then stood,
The Giant race, the universal flood.
The fruitful earth being lusty then and strong,
Like to a Woman, fit for love, and young,
Brought forth her creatures mighty, not a thing
Issued from her, but a continual spring
Had to increase it, and to make it flourish,
For in her self she had that power to nourish
Her Procreation, that her children then
Were at the instant of their birth, half men.
Men then begot so soon, and got so long,
That scarcely one a thousand men among,
But he ten thousand in his time might see,
That from his loins derived their Pedigree.
The full-womb'd Women, very hardly went
Out their nine months, abundant nature lent
Their fruit such thriuing, as that once waxt quick,
The large-limb'd mother, neither faint nor sick,
Hasted her hour by her abundant health,
Nature so played the vnthrist with her wealth,
So prodigally lauishing her store
Upon the teeming earth, then wasting more
Then it had need of: not the smallest weed The fruitfulness and bravery of
the earth before the Flood.

Known in that first age, but the natural seed
Made it a Plant, to these now since the Flood,
So that each Garden looked then like a Wood:
Beside, in Med'cen, simples had that power,
That none need then the Planetary hour
To help their working, they so iuycefull were.
The Winter and the Spring time of the year
Seemed all one season: that most stately tree
Of Libanus, which many times we see
Mentioned for talenesse in the holy Writ,
Whose tops the clouds ost in their wandering hit,
Were shrubs to those then on the earth that grew;
Nor the most sturdy storm that ever blew
Their big-growne bodies, to the earth ere shook,
Their mighty Roots, so certain fastening took;
Covered with grass, more soft then any silk,
The Trees dropped honey, and the Springs gusht milk:
The Flower-fleec't Meadow, and the gorgeous grove,
Which should smell sweetest in their bravery, strove;
No little shrub, but it some Gum let fall,
To make the clear Air aromaticall:
Whilst to the little Birds melodious strains,
The trembling Rivers tript along the Plains.
Shades served for houses, neither Heat nor Cold
Troubled the young, nor yet annoyed the old:
The batning earth all plenty did afford,
And without tilling (of her own accord)
That living idly without taking pain
(Like to the first) made every man a Caine.
Seven hundred years, a man's age scarcely then,
Of mighty size so were these long-liu'd men:
The flesh of Lions, and of Bulls they tore,
Whose skins those Giants for their garments wore.
Yet not termed Giants only, for that they
Excelled men since, in bigness every way:
Nor that they were so puissant of their hand,
But that the Race wherewith the earth was manned,
So wrathful, proud, and tyranous were then,
Not dreading God, nor yet respecting men; Josepbus.

For they knew neither Magistrate, nor law,
Nor could conceive ought that their wills could awe;
For which waxt proud, and haughty in their thought,
They set the eternal living God at naught:
Mankind increasing greatly every day,
Their sins increase in numbers more then they;
Seven Ages had past Adam, when men prone
To tyranny, and no man knew his own:
His sensual will then followed, and his lust,
His only law, in those times to be just
Was to be wicked; God so quite forgot,
As what was damned, that in that age was not.
With one another flesh themselves they filled,
And drunk the blood of those whom they had killed.
They dared to do, what none should dare to name,
They never heard of such a thing as shame.
Man mixed with man, and Daughter, Sister, Mother, Berosus cited by Pirerius:

Were to these wicked men as any other.
To rip their women's wombes, they would not stick,
When they perceived once they were (...) quick.
Feeding on that, from their own loins that sprung,
Such wickedness these Monsters was among:
That they used Beasts, digressing from all kind:
That the Almighty pondring in his mind
Their beastliness, (from his intent) began
T'repent himself that he created man.
Their sins ascending the Almighties seat,
The Eternal Throane with horror seem to threat.
Still daring God, a war with them to make,
And of his power, no knowledge seemed to take.
So that he vowed, the world he would destroy,
Which he revealed only to just Noy.
For but that man, none worthy was to know,
Nor he the manner to none else would show.
For since with stars, he first high heaven enchast,
And Adam first in Paradise had placed.
Amongst all those inhabiting the ground,
He not a man so just as Noe had found.
For which he gave him charge an Arc to build,
And by those workmen which were deepliest skild
In Architecture, to begin the frame,
And thus The Almighty taught just Noe the same.
Three hundred cubits the full length to be, The structure of the Arc.

Fifty the breadth, the height (least of the three)
Full thirty cubits: only with one light,
A cubit broad, and just so much in hight:
And in three Stories bad him to divide
The inner Room, and in the Vessels side
To place a door; commanding Noe to take
Great care thereof: and this his Arc to make
Of Gopher wood, which some will needsly have
To be the Pine Tree, and commandment gave
That the large plancks whereof it was composed,
When they by art should curiously be closed;
Should with Bitumen both within and out
Be deeply pitched, the Vessel round about,
So strong a Glue as could not off be worn,
The rage of Winds, and Waters that does scorn;
Like to a Chest or Coffer it was framed,
For which an Arc most fitly it was named;
Not like a Ship, for that a Ship below,
Is ridg'd and narrow, upward but does grow
Wider and wider: but this mighty Barque,
Built by just Noah, this universal Arc,
Held one true breadth 'ith'bottome as above,
That when this Frame upon the Flood should move,
On the fallen waters it should float secure,
As it did first the falling shower endure;
And close above, so to bear out the weather
For forty days when it should rain together.
A hundred years the Arc in building was,
So long the time ere he could bring to pass
This work intended; all which time just Noy
Cried, that The Almighty would the world destroy,
And as this good man used many a day
To walk abroad, his building to survay,
These cruel Giants coming in to see,
(In their thoughts wondering what this work should be)
He with erected hands to them does cry,
Either repent ye, or ye all must dye, Noah thretning Gods vengeance upon the
world: with his sermon of repentance:

Who else to mercy, wholly is inclinde.
From Seth which God to Eva gave in law
Of her son Abel whom his brother slew,
That cursed Cain, how has the Almighty blessed,
The seed of Adam though be sotransgrest,
In Enos by whose godliness men came,
At first to call on the Almighties name,
And Enoch, whose integrity was such,
In whom the Lord delighted was so much,
As in his years he suffered no decay,
But God to Heaven took bodyly away;
With long life blessing all that goodly Stem,
From the first man down to Mathusalem,
Now from the loins of Lamech sends me,
(Unworthy his Ambassador to be)
To tell ye yet, if ye at last repent,
He will lay by his wrathful punishment,
That God who was so merciful before,
To our forfathers, likewise has in store,
Mercy for us their Nephues, if we fall
With tears before him, and he will recall,
His wrath sent out already, therefore fly
To him for mercy, yet the threatening Sky
Pauses, ereit the (...) down will pour,
For every tear you shed, he will stop a shower,
Yet of th Almighty mercy you may win,
He Will leave to punish, if you leave to sin,
That God eternal, which old Adam cast
Out of the earthly heaven where he had placed,
That first-made man, for his forbidden deed,
From thence for ever banishing his seed,
For us his sinful children does provide,
And with abundance has us still supplyd,
And can his blessings who respects you thus,
Make you most wicked, most rebellious:
Still is your stubborn obstinacy such?
Have ye no mercy, and your God so much?
Your God, said I, O wherefore said I so?
Your words deny him, and your works say (...)
O see the day, does but too fast approach,
Wherein heavens maker means to set abroach
That world of water, which shall ouer-flow
Those mighty Mountains whereon now you go,
The Dropsied Clouds, see, your destruction threat,
The Sun and Moon both in their course are set
To war by water, and do all'they can
To bring destruction upon sinful man,
And every thing shall suffer for your sake,
For the whole earth shall be but one whole Lake;
Oh cry for mercy, leave your wicked ways,
And God from time shall separate those days
Of vengeance coming, and he shall disperse
These Clouds now threatening the whole universe,
And save the world, which else he will destroy.
But this good man, this terror-preaching Noy,
The Bears, and Tigers, might have taught as well,
They laughed to hear this godly man to tell
That God would drown the world, they thought him mad,
For their great maker they forgotten had,
They knew none such, The Almighty God say they,
What might he be? and when shall be the day
Thou talk of to us? can thou think that we
Can but suppose that such a thing can be?
What can he do that we cannot defeat?
Whose Brawny Fists, to very dust can beat
The solid'st Rock, and with our breasts can bear
The strong'st Stream backward, do thou think to fear
Us with these Dreams of Deluges? to make
Us our own ways and courses to forsake?
Let us but see that God that dares to stand
To what thou speak, that with his furious hand,
Dare say he will drown us, and we will desye
Him to his teeth: and if he keep the Sky,
We'll dare him thence, and if he then come down,
And challenge us that he the world will drown,
We'll follow him until his threats he stints,
Or we will batter his blew house with flynts.
The Arc is finished, and the Lord is wrath,
To aid just Noah, and he provided has
His blessed Angels, bidding them to bring.
The Male and Female, of each living thing
Into the Arc, by whom he had decreed
(...) the world, and by their fruitful seed
To fill it as before, and is precise
For food for men, and for his sacrifice,
That seven just payres, of Birds, and Beasts that were
Made clean by him, should happily repair
To the great Arc, the other made vncleant,
Of male and female only should cometwaine:
Which by the Angels every where were sought,
And thither by their ministry were brought.
When Noah lets open the Arc and does begin
To take his Fraught, his mighty. Lading in
And now the Beasts are walking from the wood,
A swell of Ravine, as that chew the Cud,
The King of Beasts his sury does suppress,
And to the Arc leads down the Lioness,
The Bull for his beloved mate does low,
And to the Arc brings on the fair eyed Cow;
The stately Courser for his Mare does nay,
And toward the new Arc guides her the way;
The wreath'd-horn'd Ram his safety does pursue,
And to the Arc vshers his gentle Ewe;
The bristy Boar, who with his snowt up plowed
The spacious Plains, and with his grunting loud,
Raised rattling Echoes all the Woods about,
Leaves his dark Den, and having sented out
Noah's new-built Arc, in with his Sow does come,
And stye themseluesvp in a little room:
The Heart with his dear Hind, the Buck and Do,
Leaving their wildness, bring the tripping Roe
Along with them: and from the Mountain steep,
The clambring Goat, and Cony, used to keep
Amongst the Cleeues, together get, and they
To this great Arc find out the ready way;
Th'vnweildy Elke, whose skin is of much proof,
Throngs with the rest t'attaine this wooden roof;
The Unicorn leaves off his pride, and closse
There sets him down by the Rhinoceros:
The Elephant there coming to imbarque,
And as he softly gets up the Ark,
Feeling by his great weight, his body sunck,
Holds by his huge Tooth, and his nervy Trunck;
The croock-backt Camel climing to the deck,
Draws up himself with his long sinewy neck;
The spotted Panther whose delicious scent,
Ost causes beasts his harbor to frequent,
But having got them once into his power,
Sucketh their blood, and does their flesh devour,
His (...) has quickly castaside,
And waxing courteous, does become their guide.
And brings into this universal Shop
The Ounce, the Tigar, and the Antilop,
By the grim Woolfe, the poor Sheep safely lay,
And was his care, which lately was his pray;
The Ass upon the Lion leant his head,
And to the Cat the Mouse for succor fled;
The silly Hare does cast aside her fear,
And forms her self fast by the ugly Bear,
At whom the watchful Dog did never bark,
When he espyde him clambring up the Arc:
The Fox got in, his subtilties has lest,
And as ashamed of his former thest,
Sadly sits there, as though he did repent,
And in the Arc became an innocent:
The fine-furd Ermin, Martern, and the Cat
That voydeth Ciuet, there together sat
By the shrewd Muncky, Babian, and the Ape,
With the Hienna, much their like in shape,
Which by their kind, are ever doing ill,
Yet in the Arc, sit ciuilly and still;
The skipping Squerrill of the Forest free,
That leapt so nimbly betwixt tree and tree,
It self into the Arc then nimbly cast,
As'twere a Ship-boy come to clime the Mast.
The Porcupine into the Arc does make,
Nor his sharp quils though angry once does shake;
The sharpe-fang'd Beauer, whose wide gaping law
Cutteth down Plants at it were with a Saw,
Whose body poysed, wayeth such a mass,
As though his Bowels were of Lead or Brass,
His cruel Chaps though breathless he does close,
As with the rest into the Arc he goes.
Th'vneuen-leg'd Badger (whose eye-pleasing skin,
The Case to many a curious thing has bin,
Since that great flood) his fortresses forsakes
Wrought in the earth, and though but halting, makes
Up to the Arc; the Otter then that keeps
In the wild Rivers, in their Bancks and Sleeps,
And seeds on Fish, which under water still,
He with his keld seet, and keen teeth does kill;
The other two into the Arc does follow,
Though his ill shape does cause him but to wallow;
The Tortoyse and the Hedghog both so slow,
As in their motion scarce discerned to go,
Good footmen grown, contrary to their kind,
Lest from the rest they should be left behind;
The rooting Mole as to foretell the flood,
Comes out of the earth, and clambers up the wood;
The little Dormouse leaves her leaden sleep,
And with the Mole up to the Arc does creep,
With many other, which were common then,
Their kind decayed, but now unknown to men,
For there was none, that Adam ere did name,
But to the Arc from every quarter came;
By two and two the male and female beast,
From th'swifts to th'slowest, from greatest to the least,
And as within the strong pale of a Park,
So were they altogether in the Arc.
And as our God the Beasts had given in charge
To take the Arc, themselves so to imbardge,
He bids the Foul, the Eagle in his flight,
Cleaving the thin Air, on the deck does light;
Nor are his eyes so plercing to control
His lowly subjects the sarre lesser Foul,
But the Almighty who all Creatures framed,
And them by Adam in the Garden named,
Had given courage, fast by him to sit,
Nor at his sharp sight are amazed one whit;
The Swanne by his great maker taught this good,
T'auoyd the fury of the falling flood,
His Boat-like breast, his wings raised for his sail,
And Ore-like foet, him nothing to avayle
Against the Rain which likely was to fall,
Each drop so great, that like a ponderous Mall,
Might sink him under water, and might drown
Him in the Deluge, with the Crane comes down,
Whose voice the Trumper is, that throw the Air
Does summon all the other to repair
To the new Arc: when with his mooned train,
The strutting Peacock yawling against the rain,
Flutters into the Arc, by his shrill cry,
Telling the rest the Tempest to be ny;
The Iron-eating Estridge, whose bare Thyes
Resembling man's, searing the lowering Skies,
Walks to the great Boat; when the crowned Cock,
That to the Village lately was the Clock,
Comes to rooste by him, with his Hen, foreshewing
The shower should quickly fall, that then was brewing;
The swift winged Swallow feeding as it flies,
With the fleet Martlet thrilling throw the Skies,
As at their pastime sportiuly they were,
Feeling th'vnusuall moisture of the Aer,
Their feathers flag, into the Arc they come,
As to some Rock or building, their own home;
The ayry Lark his Haleluiah sung,
Finding a slacknesse seize upon his tongue,
By the much moisture, and the Welkin dark,
Drops with his female down into the Arc;
The soaring Kyte there scantled his large wings,
And to the Arc the houering Castrill brings;
The Raven comes, and croking, in does call
The caryon Crow, and she again does brall,
Foretelling rain; by these there likewise sat The Storke used to build upon
houses, leaves ever one (...) him for the owner.

The caresull Storke, since Adam wondered at
For thankfulness, to those where he does breed,
That his aged Parents naturally does feed,
In filial duty as instructing man:
By them there sat the loving Pelican,
Whose young ones poysned by the Serpents sting,
With her own blood to life again does bring:
The constant Turtle up her lodging took
By these good Birds; and in a little nooke
The Nightingale with her melodious tongue
Sadly there sits, as she had never sung;
The Merle and Mauis on the highest spray,
Who with their music, wak't the early day,
From the proud Cedars, to the Arc come down,
As though forewarned, that God the world would drown;
The prating Parret comes to them aboard,
And is not heard to counterfeit a word;
The Falcon and the Dove sit there together,
And the one of them does prune the others feather;
The Goshalke and the Feasant there do twin,
And in the Arc are pearcht upon one pin;
The Partridge on the Sparhalk there does tend,
Who entertaines her as a loving friend;
The ravenous Vulture feels the small Birds sit
Upon his back, and is not moved a whit;
Amongst the thickest of these several foul
With open eyes still sat the broad sac'd Owl;
And not a small bird as they wonted were.
Either pursude or wondered at her there
No waylesse desert, Heath, nor Fen, nor More,
But in by couples, sent some of their store;
The Ospray, and the Cormoraut forbear
To fish, and thither with the rest repair:
The Hearon leaves watching at the Rivers brim,
And brings the Snyte and Plouer in with him.
There came the Halcyon, whom the Sea obeyes,
When she her nest upon the water lays:
The Goose which does for watchfulness excel,
Came for the rest, to be the Sentinel.
The charitable Robinet in came,
Whose nature taught the others to be tame:
All feathered things yet ever known to men,
From the huge Rucke, unto the little Wren;
From Forests, Fields, from Rivers, and from Pons, The mighty Indian Bird.

All that have webs, or clouen-footed ones;
To the Grand Arc, together friendly came,
Whose seueroll species were too long to name:
The Beasts and Birds thus by the Angels brought,
Noe found his Arc not fully yet was sraught,
To shut it up for as he did begin, Creeping things in the sixth of (...) the
(...)

He still saw Serpents, and their like come in;
The Salamander to the Arc retyers,
To fly the Flood, it does forsake the fires:
The strange Camelion, comes t'augment the crew,
Yet in the Arc does never change her hue:
To these poor silly few of harmless things,
So were there Serpents, with their teeth and stings
Hurtful to man, yet will The Almighty have,
That Noe their seed upon the earth should save:
The watchful Dragon comes the Arc to keep,
But lul'd with murmr, gently falls to sleep:
The cruel Scorpion comes to clime the pylo,
And meeting with the greedy Crocodyle,
Into the Arc together meekely go,
And like kind mates themselves they there bestow:
The Dart and Dipsas, to the Arc com'n in,
Infold each other as they were a twinne.
The Cockatrice there kills not with his sight,
But in his object joys, and in the Light; The Aspick has a kell of skin
which covers his teeth until it be angry.

The deadly killing Aspicke when he sees,
This world of creatures, sheaths his poisoned teeth,
And with the Adder, and the speckled Snake,
Them to a corner harmlesty betake.
The Lisard shuts up his sharpe-sighted eyes,
Amongst these Serpents, and there sadly lies.
The small-ey'd slowe-worme held of many blind,
Yet this great Arc it quickly out could find,
And as the Arc it was about to clime,
Out of its teeth shutes the inuenom'd slime.
Theseviler Creatures on the earth that creep,
And with their bellies the cold dewes do (...)
All these base groueling, and ground-licking suit,
From the large A Serpent of an incredible bigness.
Boas, to the little Neute;
As well as Birds, or the foure-footed beasts,
Came to the Arc their Hostry as Noes guests.
Thus fully furnished, Noe need not to carke
For stowidge, for provision for the Arc:
For that wise God, who first direction gave,
How he the structure of the Arc would have:
And for his servant could provide this fraught,
Which thither he miraculously brought:
And did the food for every thing puruaye,
Taught him on losts it orderly to lay:
On flesh some feed, as others fish do eat,
Various the kind, so various was the meat:
Some on fine grass, as some on grosser weeds,
As some on fruits, so other some on seeds,
To serve for food for one whole year for all,
Until the Flood, which presently should fall
On the whole world, his hand again should drayne,
Which under water should that while remain.
The Almighty measured the proportion such,
As should not be too little, nor too much:
For he that breath to every thing did give,
Could not that God them likewise make to live,
But with a little; and therewith to thrive,
Who at his pleasure all things can contriue.
Now some there be, too curious at this day,
That from their reason dare not stick to say,
The Flood a thing fictitious is, and vain,
Nor that the Arc could possibly contain
Those sundry creatures, from whose being came
All living things man possibly could name.
I say it was not, and I thus oppose
Them by my reason, strong enough for those,
My instance is a mighty Argosie,
That in it bears, beside the Artillery,
Of fourscore pieces of a mighty Boar,
A thousand soldiers (many times and more)
Besides the sails, and arms for every one,
Cordage, and Anchors, and provision:
The large-spred Sails, the Masts both big and tall,
Of all which Noah's Arc had no need at all:
Within the same eight persons only were,
If such a ship, can such a burden bear:
What might the Arc do, which does so excel
That Ship, as that ship does a Cockle shell;
Being so capacious for this mighty load,
So long, so high, and every where so broad;
Beside three lofts just of one perfect strength,
And bearing out proportionably in length:
So fitly built, that being thus employed,
There was not one ynch in the Arc was void,
Beside I Will charge their reason to allow
The Cubits doubled to what they are now,
We are but Pigmeyes, (even our tallest men)
To the huge Giants that were living then:
For but the Almighty, which (to this intent,)
Ordained the Arc, knew it sufficient,
He in his wisdom (had he thought it meet)
Could have bid Noah to have built a Fleet,
And many Creatures on the earth since grown
Before the flood that were to Noah unknown:
For though the Mule begotten on the Mare,
By the dull Ass (is said) does never pair;
Yet sundry others, naturally have mixed, The opinions of the best naturalists
that have written.

And those that have been gotten them betwixt
Others begot, on others from their kind.
In sundry Clymats, sundry beasts we find,
That what they were, are nothing now the same,
From one self strain, though at the first they came:
But by the soil they often altered be,
In shape and color as we daily see.
Now Noah's three sons all busy that had bin
To place these creatures as they still came in:
Sem, Ham, and Iapheth, with their The names of the women were Tita, Pandora,
No. ella and Noegla: as some of the most ancient write, but Epiphanius will
have Noes Wifes name to be Baraehenon.
Wifes assigned,
To be the Parents of all humane kind:
Seeing the Arc thus plentifully stored:
The wondrous work of the Almighty Lord,
Behold their father looking every hour,
For this all drowning earth-destroying shower,
When Noe their faith thus lastly to awake,
To his loved Wife, and their six children spoke.
The mighty hand of God do you not see,
In these his creatures, that so well agree:
Which were they not, thus mastred by his power,
Us silly eight would greedily devour:
And with their hoofes and paws, to splintersrend
This only Arc, in which God does intend
We from the Flood that remnant shall remain,
T'restore the world, in aged Adams strain:
Ye seven, with sad astonishment then seo
The wondrous things the Lord has wrought for me.
What have I done, so gracious in his sight,
Frail wretched man, but that I justly might
Have with the earths abominable brood,
Bin ouer-whelm'd, and buried in the Flood:
But in his judgment, that he has decreed,
That from my loins by your successful seed,
The earth shall be replenished again,
And the Almighty be at peace with men.
A hundred years aro past (as well you know)
Since the Almighty God, his power to show
Taught me the Model of this mighty frame,
And it the Arks commanded me to name.
Be strong in faith, for now the time is nigh,
That from the conducts of the lofty sky,
The Flood shall fall, that in short time shall bear
This Arc we are in up into the air,
Where it shall floate, and further in the end,
Shall fifteen cubits the highest hills transcend.
Then bid the goodly fruitful earth adue,
For the next time it shall be seen of you,
It with an ill complexion shall appear,
The weight of waters shall have changed her cheer:
Be not affrighted, when ye hear the rore
Of the wide Waters when they charge the shore,
Nor be dismad at all, when you shall feel
The unweeldy Arc from wave to wave to reele:
Nor at the (...) of those that swimming by
On Trees and Rafters, shall for succor cry,
O ye most loved of God, O take us (...)
For we are guilty, and confess our sin.
Thus whilst he spoke, the skies grew thick and dark,
And a black cloud hung houering over the Arc.
Verus and Mars, God puts this work upon God makes the Stars his instruments
to punish the wicked.

Jupiter and Saturn in conjunction
In The tail of Cancer, inundations thret.
Luna disposed generally to wet,
The Hiades and Pliades put too
Their helps; Orion does what he can do.
No star so small, but some one drop let down.
And all conspire the wicked world to drown:
On the wide heaven there was not any sign,
To watery Pisces but it does incline.
Now some will ask, when the Almighty God, (but Noy
And his) by waters did the world destroy;
Wherher those seven then in Arc were good,
And just as he, (reserved from the Flood)
Or that the Almighty for his only sake,
Did on the other such compassion take:
It Is doubtless Noe, being one so clearly just,
Tha God did with his secret judgments trust
From the whole world; one that so long had known
That living Lord, would likewise teach his own
To know him too, who by this mean might be,
As well within the Covenant as he.
By this the Sun had sucked up the vaste deep,
And in gross clouds like Cesternes did it keep:
The (...) and signs by Gods great wisdom set, A description of the Tempest,
at the falling of the Deluge.

By their conjunctions waters to beget,
Had wrought their utmost; and even now began
The Almighties justice upon sinful man:
From every several quarter of theskye,
The Thunder rores, and the fierce Lightnings fly
One at another, and together dash,
Volue on volue, flash comes after flash:
Heavens lights look sad, as they would melt away,
The night is com'n in the morning of the day:
The Card'nall Winds he makes at once to blow,
Whose blasts to buffets with such sury go,
That they themselves into the Center shot
Into the bowels of the earth and got,
Being condensed and strongly stifned there,
In such strange manner multiplied the air,
Which turned to water, and increast the springs Water is but air condensed.

To that abundance, that the earth forth brings
Water to drown her self, should heaven deny,
With one small drop the Deluge to supply,
That through her pores, the soft and spungy earth,
As in a dropsy, or unkindly birth,
A Woman, swollen, sends from her fluxiue womb
Her woosie springs, that there was scarcely room
For the waste waters which came in so fast,
As though the earth her entrails up would cast.
But these seemed yet, but easily let go,
And from some Sluice came softly in, and slow,
Till Gods great hand so squees'd the boisterous clouds,
That from the spouts of heavens embatteld shrouds,
Even like a Floud-gate plucked up by the height,
Came the wild rain, with such a pondrous weight,
As that the fierceness of the hurrying flood,
Removed huge Rocks, and ram'd them into mud:
Pressing the ground, with that impetuous power,
As that the first shocke of this drowning shower,
Furrowed the earths late plumpe and cheerful face
Like an old Woman, that in little space
With ryueld cheeks, and with bleard blubberd eyes,
She wistly looked upon the troubled skies.
Up to some Mountain as the people make,
Driving their Cattle till the shower should slake;
The Flood oretakes them, and away does sweep
Great herds of Neat, and mighty flocks of Sheep.
Down through a valley as one stream does come,
Whose roaring strikes the neighboring Echo dumb:
Another meets it, and whilst there they strive,
Which of them two the other back should drive;
Their dreadful currents they together dash,
So that their waves like furious Tides do wash
The head of some near hill, which falls down
For very fear, as it, it self would drown.
Some back their Beasts, so hoping to swim out,
But by the Flood, encompassed about
Are ouerwhelm'd, some clamber up to Towers,
But these and them, the deluge soon deuoures:
Some to the top of Pynes and Cedars get,
Thinking themselves they safely there should set:
But the rude Flood that over all does sway,
Quickly comes up, and carries them away.
The Roes much swistnesse, does no more avail, The Roe Dear the swiftest
Beast (...)

Nor help him now, then if he were a Snayle:
The swift-wing'd Swallow, and the slow-wing'd Owl,
The fleetest Bird, and the most flagging Foul,
Are at one pass, the Flood so high has gone,
There was no ground to set a foot upon:
Those Foul that followed moystnesse, now it fly,
And leave the wet Land, to find out the dry:
But by the mighty tempest beaten down,
On the blancke water they do lie and drown:
The strong-built Tower is quickly ouerborne,
The o're-growne Oak out of the earth is torn:
The subtle shower the earth has softened so,
And with the waves, the trees tossed to and fro;
That the roots loosen, and the tops down sway,
So that whole Forests quickly swim away.
The offended heaven had shut up all her lights,
The Sun nor Moon make neither days nor nights:
The waters so exceedingly abound
That in short time the Sea it self is drowned.
That by the freshness of the falling rain,
Neptune no more his saltness does retain:
So that those scaly creatures used to keep,
The mighty wastes of the immeasured deep:
Finding the general and their natural bracke,
The taste and color every were to lack;
Forsake those Seas wherein they swamme before,
Strangely oppressed with their (...) store.
The crooked Dolphin on those Mountains plays,
Whereas before that time, not many days
The Goat was grazing; and the mighty Whale,
Upon a Rock out of his way does fall:
From whence before one easily might have seen,
The wandering clouds far under to have been.
The Grampus, and the Whirlpoole, as they roue,
Lighting by chance upon a lofty Grove
Under this world of waters, are so much
Pleased with their wombes each tender branch to touch,
That they leave slyme upon the curled Sprayes,
On which the Birds sung their harmonious Lays.
As huge as Hills still waves are wallowing in,
Which from the world so wondrously do win,
That the tall Mountains which on tipto stood.
As though they scorned the force of any flood,
No eye os heaven of their proud tops could see
One foot, from this great inundation free.
As in the Chaos ere the frame was fixed A simily of the (...) of the Deluge.

The Air and water were so strongly mixed,
And such a Bulk of Grosenesse do compose,
As in those thick Clouds which the Globe enclose,
Th'all-working Spirit were yet again to wade,
And heaven and earth again were to be made.
Mean while this great and universal Arc,
Like one by night were groping in the dark,
Now by one Billow, then another rockt,
Within whose boards all living things were locked;
Yet Noah his safety not at all does fear,
For still the Angels his blessed Barge do (...)
But now the Shower continued had so long,
The inundation waxt so wondrous strong,
That fifteen Cubits caused the Arc to move
The highest part of any Hill above:
And the gross earth so violently binds,
That in their Coasts it had enclosed the winds;
So that the whole wide sursace of the flood,
As in the full height of the tide it stood,
Was then as sleeke and even as the Seas
In the most still and calmest Halcyon days:
The Birds, the Beasts and Serpents safe on board,
With admiration look upon their Lord,
The righteous Noah: and with submissiue fear,
Tremble his grave and awful voice to hear,
When to his Household (during their abode)
He preached the power of the Almighty God.
Dear wife and children, quoththis godly Noy, Noah preaching faith to his
family.

Since the Almighty vowed he would destroy
The wicked world a hundred years are past,
And see, he has performed it at last;
In us poor few, the world consists alone,
And besides us, there not remains one,
But from our seed, the emptied earth again,
Must be repeopled with the race of men;
Then since thus far his covenant is true
Build ye your faith, on that which shall ensue:
Such is our God, who thus did us imbarque
(As his select) to save us by the Arc,
And only he whose Angels guard our Boat,
Knows over what strange Region now we float,
Or we from hence that very place can sound,
From which the Arc was lifted first from ground:
He that can span the world, and with a grip,
Out of the bowels of the clouds could rip
This mass of waters, whose abundant birth;
Almost to heaven thus drowneth up the earth;
He canremoue this Round of he shall please,
And with these waters cansup up the Seas,
Can cause the Stars out of their Spears to fall,
And on the winds can toss this earthy Ball,
He can wrest drops from the Suns radient beams,
And can force fire from the most liquid streams,
He curles the waves with whirlwinds, and does make
The solid Center fearfully to shake,
He can stir up the Elements to warros,
And at his pleasure can compose their Iarres,
The Sands serve not his wondrous works to count,
Yet does his mercy all his works surmount,
His Rule and Power eternally endures,
He was your Fathers God, he is mine, ho's yours,
In him dedre wife and children put your trust,
He only is Almighty, only just.
But on the earth the waters were so strong,
And now the flood continued had so long,
That the let year foreslow'd about to bring
The Summer, Autumn, Winter, and the Spring,
The Gyring Planets with their starry train, The revolution of the year by a
short (...)

Down to the South had sunck, and rose again
Up toward the North, whilst the terrestrial Globe
Had bin involued in this watery Robe,
During which season every winckling light
In their still motion, at this monstrous sight,
By their complexion a distraction showed,
Looking like Embers that through ashes glowed.
When righteous Noah remembers at the last,
The time prefixed to be approaching fast,
After a hundred fifty days were gone,
Which to their period then were drawing on,
The flood should somewhat slack, God promised so,
On which relying, the just godly Noe,
To try if then but one poor foot of ground,
Free from the flood might any where be found,
Lets forth a Raven, which straight cuts the Sky,
And wondrous proud his restyed wings to try,
In a large circle girdeth in the Air,
First to the East, then to the South, does bear,
Follows the Sun, then toward his going forth,
And then runs up into the rising North,
Thence climes the clouds to prove if his sharp eye
From that proud pitch could possibly desory
Of some tall Rock crowned Mountain, a small stone
A minutes space to set his foot upon,
But finding his long labor but in vain,
Returns wearied to the Arc again,
By which Noah knew he longer yet must stay,
For the whole earth still under water lay.
Seven days he rests, but yet he would not cease,
(For that he knew the flood must needs decreasc)
But as the Raven late, he next send (...) out
The damask colored Dove, his nimble Scout,
Which thrils the thin Air, and his pyneons plyes,
That like to lightning, glyding through the Skies,
His sundry colored feathers by the Sun,
As his swist shadow on the Lake does run,
Causes a twinkling both at hand and far,
Like that we call the shooting of a Star;
But finding yet that labor lost had bin,
Comes back to Noah, who gently takes him in,
Noah rests a while, but meaning still to proud
A second search, again sends out the Dove,
After other seven, some better news to bring,
Which by the strength of his unwearied wing
Finds out atlast, a place for his abode,
When the glad Bird stays all the day abroad,
And wondrous proud that he a place had found,
Who of a longtime had not touched the ground,
Draws in his head, and thrusts out his breast,
Spreads his tail, and swells up his crest,
And turning round and round with Cuttry cooe,
As when the female Pigeon and he woo;
Bathing himself, which long he had not done,
And dryes his feathers in the welcome Sun,
Piuning his plumage, clensing every quill,
And going back, he bears in his bill
An Olive leaf, by which Noah understood
The great decrease and waning of the flood:
For that on Mountains Olives seldom grow,
But in flat Valleys and in places low;
Never such comfort came to mortal man,
Never such joy was since the world began,
As in the Arc, when Noah and his behold
The Olive leaf, which certainly them told,
The flood decreased, and they such comfort take,
That with their mirth, the Birds and Beasts they make
Sportrue, which send forth such a hollow noise
As said they were partakers of their joys.
The Lion roares, but quickly does for bear,
Lest he thereby the lesser Beasts should fear,
The Bull does bellow, (...) the Horse does nay,
The Stag, the Buck, and (...) Goat do bray,
The Boar does grunt, the Woolfe does howl, the Ram
Does bleate, which yet so faintly from him came.
As though for very joy he seemed to weep,
The Ape and Muncky such a chattering keep
With their thin lips, which they so well express.
As they would say, we hope to be releast;
The silly Ass set open such a throat,
That all the Arc resounded with the note;
The watchful Dog does play, and skip, and bark,
And leaps upon his Masters in the Arc,
The Raven crokes, the caryon Crow does squall,
The Pie does chatter, and the (...) call,
The iocund Cock crows (...) he claps his wings,
The Merle does whistle, and the (...) strigs,
The Nightingale strains her melodious throat,
Which ofthe small Birds being heard to roar,
They soon set to her, each a part does take,
As by their music up a Quire to make,
The Parrat lately sad, then (...) an (...)
And (...) every sound he hears,
The purblind Owl which hears all this do,
To Express her gladness, cries Too whit too whoo.
No Beastnor Bird was in the Arc with Noy,
But in their kind (...) some sign of joy;
When that just man who did himself apply
Still, to his dear and godly family,
Thus to them spoke (and with erected hands
The like obedience from the rest demands)
The worlds foundation is not half so sure
As is Gods promise, nor is heaven so pure
As is his word, to me most sinful man;
To take the Arc who when I first began
Said on the hundred and the fiftiath day.
I should perceive the Delugeto decay,
And'tis most certains, as you well may know
Which this poor Pidgeon by this leaf does show.
He that so long could make the (...) stand
Above the earth, see how his powerful hand
Thrusts them before it, and so fast does drive
The Big swollen Billows, that they seems to strive.
Which shall fly fastest on that secret path,
Whence first they came, to execute his wrath,
The Sun which melted every Cloud to Raime,
He makes it now to sup it up again:
The wind by which he brought it on before
In their declining (...) it or and or,
The tongs of Angels serve not to express,
Neither his mercy, nor his mightiness,
Be joyful then in our great God (says he)
For we the Parents of Mankind shall be
From us poor few, (his pleasure that attend)
Shall all the Nations of the earth descend;
When righteous Noy desirous still to hear,
In what estate th'unweeldy waters were,
Sends forth the Dove as he had done before,
But it found dry land and came back no more,
Whereby this man precisely understood,
The great decrease of this world-drowning flood:
Thus as the Arc is floating on the main,
As when the flood rose, in the fall again,
With Currents still encountered every where ^

Forward and backward which it still do bear,
As the stream straytneth, by the rising Cleeues
Of the tall Mountains, 'twixt which often it drives,
Until at length by Gods Almighty hand,
It on the hillsof * Ararat does land.
When those within it felt the Arc to strike,
On the firm ground, was ever comfort like
To theirs, which felt it fixed there to stay.
And found the waters went so fast away;
That Noah set up the covering of the Arc,
That those which long had sitten in the dark,
Might be saluted with the cheerful light,
(O since the world, was ever such a sightl)
That creeping things as well as Bird or Beast,
Their several comforts sundry ways expressed
His wife and children then a scend to see
What place it was so happy that should be
Forth Arc to rest on; where they saw a Plain,
A Mountains top which seemed to contain,
On which they might discern within their ken,
The carcasses of Birds, of Beasts, and men,
Choked by the Deluge, when Noah spoke them thus,
(...) Almighties (...) showed to us,
That through the (...) our way not only wrought,
But to these Mountains safely has (...) brought,
Whose daynty tops all earthly (...)
And one the Green (...) sets us (...) down.
Had our most (...) God not been our guide
The Arc had fallne upon some Mountain side,
And with (...) of our freight
Might well have turned it backward with the weight
Or by these (...) over borne
Or on some Rock (...) might have (...) torn.
But see except these beer, each living thing
That crept, or went, or kept the (...) with wing,
Lie here before us to manure the Land,
Such is the power of Gods all workeing hand.
In thesixhundred year of that just man
The second month, the seventeenth day began, In May according to the
Expofiters.

That horrid Deluge when Heavens windows were
At once all opened, then did first appear
The Allmightys wrath, when for full forty days
There raynd from Heaven not showers but mighty seas,
A hundred fifty days that so prevayld,
Above the Mountains till the great Arc (...)
In the seventh month, upon the seventeenth day, part of September and part
of October.

Like a Ship fallen into a quiet Bay,
It on the Hills of Ararat does light:
But Noah denied yet to discharge the Freight,
For that the Mountains clearly were not seen,
Till the first day of the tenth mon'th, when Green
Smyld on the blew Skies, when the earth began
To look up cheerly, yet the waters ran
Still throw the Valleys, till the mon'th again In the same month the flood
began, it ceast: which made up the year.

In which before it first began to rain;
Of which, the seven and twentieth day expyr'd,
Quite from the earth the waters were retired:
When the almighty God had Noah to see
Open the Arc, at liberty to let
The Beasts, the Birds, and creeping things, which came
Like as when first they went into the same,
Each male comes down, his (...) by his side,
As 'twere the Bridgroome bringing out his Bride,
Till th'Arke was emptied, and that mighty load,
For a whole year that there had bin bestowed,
(Since first that forty-dayes still-falling rain
That drowned the world, was then dried vpagaine)
Which with much gladness do salute the ground,
The lighter sort some caper, and some bound,
The heavier creatures tumble them; as glad
That they such ease by their enlargement had,
The creeping things together fall to play,
Joyed beyond measure, for this happy day,
The Birds let from this Cage, do mount the Sky,
To show, they yet had not forgot to fly,
And sporting them upon the ayry plain,
Yet to their master Noah they stoop again,
To leave his presence, and do still forbear,
Till they from him of their release might hear,
The Beasts each other woo, the Birds they (...)
As they would say to Noe, they meant to fill
The roomthy earth, then altogether void,
And make, what late the deluge had destroyed.
When Righteous Noye, who ever had regard
To serve his God, immediately prepared
To sacrifice, and of the cleanest Beast
That in the Arc this while had bin his guests,
He seaseth, (yet obedient to his will)
And of them, he for sacrifice does kill.
Which he and his religiously attend,
And with the smoke their vows and thanks ascend,
Which pleased the Almighty, that he promised then,
Never by flood to drown the world again.
And that man kind his covenant might know,
He in the clouds left the celestial Bow.
When to these living things quoth (...) Noe,
Now take you all free liberty to (...)
And every way do you your selves disperse,
Till you have filled (...)
With your (...) let every (...) be yours,
He that has san'd ye, faithfully assures
Your propagation and dear wife quoth be,
And you ^
In your proseruer, and on him rely,
Whose promise is that we shall (...)
Till ^
From us poor few in the Arc that lately were.
To make a new world, thus work every one,
The Deluge (...) and the old is gone.
To this Poem.
SEe how ingrate forgetfulness
Circles us round with dangers, (bless,
That all the Saints whom God does highly
To, us are strangers.
Now Heaun into our souls inspires
No true celestial motions:
Lusts ardent flame has dimmed the holy flres
Of our devotions.
While against blasphemers (...) sight
Our painful Author strives,
And happy spirits which (...) in heavenly light
On earth reuiueth.
Thou Patriarch great; who with mild looks
His laboring Muse beholdest: (books
Reach him those leauos where thou in sacred
All truth vnfoldest:
And guide (like Israel) Poets hands
From Egypt, from vain Stories,
Only to sing of the fair promised lands,
And all their glories.
JOHN BEAVMONT.

Ad Michalem Draytonem.
DVm reluctantem Pharium IEHOVAE
Drayton, and fractum canis, and rubentes
Diuidis fluctus, equites reductaet
obruis vnda:
Instruis quanto monumenta nisu?
Quam sacra nomen tibi crescit aede?
Pyramid cedit peritura: cedit
totaque Memphis.
Cedit, and quicquid posuere reges
Molibus fisi nimium superbis.
O sacer vatis laber! a rapaci
tempore tutus.
BEALE SAPPERTON.

To M. Michael Drayton.
THy noble Muse already has been spread (climes,
Through Europe and the Sun-scorch'd Southern
That I Will where Saturnes royal Son was bred,
Has been enricht with thy immortal rimes:
Even to the burnt line have thy poems flowne,
And gained high same in the declining West,
And over that cold Sea shall thy name be blown,
That Icie mountains rowleth on her breast:
Her soaring hence so far made me admire,
Whether at length thy worthy Muse would fly,
Borne through the tender air with wings of fire,
Able to lift her to the starrie sky:
This work resolved my doubts, when the earths (...)
With her fair fruit, in Heaven she will take her seat.
THOMAS ANDREW. Ex arduis aeternitas.

MOSES HIS BIRTH AND MIRACLES.
THE FIRST BOOK.
The Argument.
This Canto our attracted Muse
The Prophets glorious birth pursues,
The various changes of his fate,
From humbleness to high estate,
His beauty, more than mortal shape,
From Egypt how be does escape,
By his fair bearing in his flight;
Obtaines the lovely Midianite,
Where God unto the Hebrew spoke,
Appearing from the burning brake,
And back does him to Egypt send,
That mighty things does there intend.
GIrt in bright flames, rapt from celestial fire,
That our unwearied faculties refine,
By zeal transported boldly we aspire
To sing a subject gloriously divine:
Him that of (...) only had the grace,
(On whom the Spirit did in such power descend)
To talk with God face, opposite to face,
Even as a man with his familiar friend.
(...) (...) the utmost of thy might,
That with an armed and auspitious wing,
Thou be obsequious in his doubtless right
Against the (...) Atheists vituperious sting:
Where thou that (...) industriously may flic,
Which Nature (...) but fainedly to go,
Borne by a power so eminent and hie,
As in his course leaves reason far below,
To show how Poesy (simply has her praise)
That from full Jove taken her celestial birth,
And quick as fire, her glorious self can raise
Above this base abominable earth:
O if that Time have happily reserved,
(Besides that sacred and canonicke writ,
What once in Slates and Barks of trees was keru'd)
Things that our Muses gravity may fit,
Unclasp the worlds great Register to me,
That smoakie rust has very near defaced,
That I in those dim Characters may see,
From common eyes that has aside been cast,
And thou Translator of that faithful Muse
This ALLS creation that divinely song,
From Courtly French (no travail (...) refuse)
To make him Master of thy Genuin cong,
Salust to thee and (...) thy friend,
Comes my high (...) and chaste,
Your hallowed labors humbly to attend
That wrackfull Time shall not have power to waste.
A gallant Hebrew (in the height of life)
(...) a Leuis honorably bred,
Of the same offspring wan a (...) wise,
And no less virtuous, goodly (...)
So fitly paired that (without all ostent)
Even of the wise it hardly could be said
Which of the two was most preheminent,
Or he more honored, or she more obayd,
In both was found that liueliehood and meetnes,
By which affection any way was moved:
In him that shape, in her there was that sweetness,
Might make him liked or her to be beloved:
As this commixtion, so their married mind
Their good corrected, or their ill releeu'd,
As truly loving as discreetly kind,
Mutuallie joyed, as mutuallie grieved:
Their nuptial bed by abstinence maintained,
Yet still gave fuel to Loves sacred fire,
And when fruition plentifulli'st gained,
Yet were they chaste in fulness of desire.
Now grieved Israel many a wofullday.
That at their vile seruilitie repined,
Pressed with the burdens of rude boisterous clay,
By stern Egyptian tyranny asfign'd:
Yet still the more the (...) are oppressed
Like to Frim seed they fructify the more
That by the eternal providence fore-blest,
Goshen gives roomth but scantly to their store.
And the wise Midwiues in their natural need,
That the fair males immediately should kill,
Hating sabhord, and Hethenish a deed,
Check his harsh brutenes and rebellious will.
That small effect perceiving by the same,
Bids the men-children (greatly that abound)
After that day into the world that came,
Upon their birth should instantly be drowned:
And now the time came had bin long foretold,
He should be borne unto the Hebrews joy,
Whose puissant hand such fatal power should hold,
As in short time all Egypt should destroy.
The execution which more strongly forced,
And every where so generally done,
As in small time unnaturally diuorc'd,
Many a dear Mother, and as dear a Son.
Though her chaste bosom that fair Altar were,
Where Loves pure vows he dutifully paid,
His Arms to her a Sanctuary dear,
Yet they so much his tyranny obay'd,
By free consent to separate their bed,
Better at all no Children yet to have,
Then their dear love should procreate the dead,
Untimely issue for a timelesse grave.
When in a vision whilst he slept by night,
God bids him so not lacobed to leave,
The man that Egypt did so much affright,
Her pregnant womb should happily conceive. Joseph.

Soon after finding that she was with child,
The same conceales by all the means she can,
Left by th'apparance she might be beguild,
If in the birth it proved to be a man.
The time she goes till her account was nie,
Her swelling belly no conception shows,
Nor at the time of her delivery,
As other women panged in her throws.
When lo the fair fruit of that prospering womb
Wounds the kind parents in their prime of joy.
Whose birth pronounces his too timelesse doombe
Accused by Nature, forming it a boy:
Yet it is so sweet, so amiably fair,
That their pleased cies with rapture it behold,
The glad sad parents full of joy and care
Feign would reserve their Insant if they could,
And still they tempt the sundry varying hours,
Hopes and despaires together strangely mixed,
Distasting sweets with many cordial sowers,
Opposed interchangeably betwixt.
If ought it ayl'd or hapleslie it cride,
Unheard of any that she might it keep,
With one short breath she did entreat and chide,
And in a moment she did sing and weep.
Three laboring months them flatterer-like beguilde,
And danger still redoubling as it lasts,
Suspecting most the safety of the Child,
Thus the kind Mother carefully forecasts:
(For at three months a scrutinie was held,
And searchers then sent every where about,
That in that time if any were concealed,
They should make proof and straightly bring them out:)
To Pharoes will she awfully must bow,
And therefore hastens to abridge these fears,
And to the flood determines it shall go,
Yet ere it went she will drown it with her tears.
This afternoon Love bids a little stay,
And yet these pauses do but lengthen sorrow,
But for one night although she make delay,
She vows to go unto his death tomorrow.
The morning comes, it is too early yet,
The day so fast not hastening on his date,
The gloomy Evening murder best does fit,
The Evening come, and then it is too late.
Her pretty Infant lying on her lap
With his sweet eyes her threatening rage beguiles,
For yet he plays, and dallyes with his pap,
To mock her sorrows with his amorous smiles,
And laughed, and chuck'd: and spread the pretty hands,
When her full heart was at the point to break,
(This little Creature yet not understands
The woeful language mothers tears did speak.)
Wherewith surpised, and with a parents love,
From his fair eyes she does fresh couragetake,
And Natures laws allowing, does reprove
The frail Edicts that mortal Princes make.
It shall not die, she will keep her child unknown,
And come the worst in spite of Pharoes rage,
As it is hers, she will dispose her own,
And if it must, it'st die at riper age.
And thus reuoluing of her frailties care,
A thousand strange (...) throng her troubled mind,
Sounding the dangers (...) what they are,
Betwixt the laws of cruelty and kind.
But it must die, and better yet to part,
Since preordain'd to this (...) fate,
His want will sit the nearer to the heart
In riper and more flourishing estate,
The perfect husband whose (...) soul,
Took true proportion of each (...) throw,
Yet had such power his passion to control,
As not the same immedintely to show,
With carriage full of comeliness and grace,
As grief not felt nor sorrow seemed to lack,
Courage and sear so temp'red in his face,
Thus his beloved Iacobed bespake.
Dear heart be patient, stay these timelesse tears,
Death of thy Son shall never quite (...) thee,
My soul with thine, that equal burden bears,
As what he takes, my Love again shall give thee;
For Isreal's sin if Isreal's seed must suffer,
And we of mere necessity must leave him,
Please yet to grace me with this gentle offer,
Give him to me by whom thou did conceive him.
So though thou with so dear a (...) part,
This yet remains lastly to (...) thee,
Thou have imposed this hindrance on my heart,
Another loss shall need the less to grieve thee,
Nor are we (...) abject by our name,
Though thus in Egypt hatefully despised,
That we that blessing fruitlefly should claim
Once in that holy (...) comprised,
It is not fit Mortality should know
What his eternal providence (...)
That unto Abraham (...) the (...)
In happy Sara and her (...) seed.
Nor shall the wrong to godly (...) one
In his remembranee ever he (...)
By Jacobs sighs for his lost little son
A Captived slave to the Egyptians sold:
Reason sets limmets to the longest grief,
Sorrow scarce past when comfort is returning,
He sends affliction that can lend relief,
Best that is pleased with measure in our mourning.
Lost in her self, her spirits are so distracted,
All hopes dissolved might (...) her further,
Her mind seems now of misery compacted,
That must consent unto so dear a murder.
Of slime and twigs she makes a simple shread
(The poor last duty to her child she owes
This pretty martyr, this yet living dead)
Wherein she does his little corpse enclose:
And means to bear it presently away,
And in some water secretly bestow it,
But yet a while bethinkes her self to stay,
Some little kindness she does further owe it:
Nor will she in this cruelty persevere,
That by her means his timelesse blood be spilt,
If of her own she does her self deliver,
Let others hands be nocent of the guilt:
Yet if she keep it from the ruthlesse flood
That is by Pharo's tyranny (...) it,
What boots that wretched miserable good,
If so disposed where none do come to find it,
For better yet the Homicide should kill it,
Or by some beast in pieces to be rent,
Than lingering famine cruelly should spill it,
That it endure a double languishment:
And neighboring near to the Egyptian Court,
She knows a place that near the river side
Was often frequented by the worthier sort,
For now the spring was newly in her pride.
Thither she hastes but with a (...) speed
The ueerest way she possibly could get,
And by the clear brimme among the flags and reed,
Her little Coffin carefully she set:
Her little Girl (the Mother following near)
As of her Brother that her leave would take,
Which the sad woman vnexpecting there,
Yet it to help her kindly thus bespake:
(Quoth she) sweet Miriam secretly attend,
And for his death see who approaches hither,
That once for all assured of his end,
His days and mine be consummate together,
It is some comfort to a wretch to die
(If there be comfort in the way of death)
To have some friend or kind alliance by,
To be officious at the parting breath:
Thus she departs, often stays, often turns back,
Looking about lest any one espied her,
Feign would she leave, that leaving she does lack,
That in this sort so strangely does divide her.
Unto what Dame (participating kind)
My verse her sad perplexity shall show,
That in a softened and relenting mind
Finds not a true touch of that Mothers woe.
Yet all this while full quietly it slept,
(Poor little Brat incapable of care)
Which by that powerful providence is kept,
Who does this child for better days prepare.
See here an abject utterly forlorn,
Left to destruction as a violent prey,
Whom man might judge accursed to be borne,
To dark oblivion molded up in clay,
That man of might in after times should be
(The bounds of (...) mortality that brake)
Which that Almighty gloriously should see,
When he in thunder on mount Sinai spoke.
Now Pharaoh's Daughter Termuth young and fair,
With such choice Maidens as she favored most,
Needs would abroad to take the gentle air,
Whilst the rich year his braueries seemed to boast:
Softly she walks down to the secret flood,
Through the calm shades most peaceable and quiet,
In the cool streams to check the pampred blood,
Stirred with strong youth and their delicious diet;
Such as the Princess, such the day addressed,
As though provided equally to pair her,
Either in other fortunately blessed
She by the day, the day by her made falrer,
Both in the height and fullness of their pleasure,
As to them both some future good divining,
Holding a steadie and accomplished measure,
This in her perfect clearenesse, that in shining.
The very air to emulate her meekness,
Strove to be bright and peaceable as she,
That it grew jealous of that sudden sleekenesse,
Fearing it ofter otherwise might be:
And if the fleet wind by some rigorous gale
Seern'd to be moved, and patiently to chide her,
It was as angry with her lawnie veil,
That from his sight it enuiously should hide her:
And now approaching to the flow'rie meade
Where the rich Summer curiously had dight her,
Which seemed in all her (...) arayde,
With Natures cost and pleasures to delight her:
See this most blessed, this unusual hap,
She the small basket sooner should epsy,
That the Child waked, and missing of his pap,
As for her succor in stantly did cry;
Forth of the flagges she caused it to be taken,
Calling her Maids this Orphanet to see,
Much did she joy an Innocent forsaken
By her from peril priuiledg'd might be:
This most sweet Princess pitiful and mild,
Soon on her knee vnswathes it as her own,
Found for a man, so beautiful a Child,
Might for an Hebrew easily be known:
Noting the caro in dressing it bestowed,
Each thing that fitted gentleness to wear,
Judged the sad parents this lost Infant owed,
Were as invulgar as their fruit was fair,
(Says she) my mind not any way suggests
An unchaste womb these lineaments has bred,
For thy fair brow apparently contests
The current stamp of a clean nuptial bed:
She named it Moses, which in time might tell
(For names do many mysteries expound)
When it was young the chance that it befell,
How by the water strangely it was found,
Calling Melch women that Egyptians were,
Once to the teat his lips he would not lay,
As though offended with their sullied leare,
Seeming as still to turn his head away.
The little Girl that near at hand did lurk,
(Thinking this while she tarried but too long)
Finding these things so happily to work,
Kindly being crafty, wise as she was young,
Madame (says she) wilt please you I provide
A Nurse to breed the Infant you did find,
There is an Hebrew dwelling here beside,
I know can do it fitly to your mind:
For a right Hebrew if the Infant be,
(As well produce you instances I can,
And by this Child as partly you may see,)
It will not suck ofan Egyptian.
The courteous Princess offered now so fair,
That which before she earnestly desired,
That of her foundling had a special care,
The Girl to fetch her instantly required:
Away the Girl goes, does her Mother tell
What favor God had to her brother shown,
And what else in this accident befell,
That she might now be Nurse unto her own.
Little it boots to bid the Wench to ply her,
Nor the kind Mother hearken to her son,
Nor to provoke her to the place to hie her,
Which seemed not now on earthly feet to run:
Slow to her self yet hasting as she flew,
(So fast affection forward did her bear)
As though (...) with the breath she drew,
Borne by the force of nature and of fear,
Little the time, and little is the way,
And for her business eithers speed does crave,
Yet in her haste (...) her what to say,
And how her self in presence to behave,
Slack she will not seem lest to another trust
Her hopeful charge were happily directed,
Nor yet too forward show her self she must,
Lest her sweet fraud thereby might be suspected,
Com'n she does bow her humbly to the ground,
And every joint incessantly does tremble,
Gladness and fear each other so consound,
So hard a thing for Mothers to dissemble.
Says this sweet Termuth, well I like thy beauty,
Nurse me this Child (if it thy state behooue)
Although a Prince i will not enforce thy duty,
But pay thy labor, and reward thy love:
Though even as Gods is Pharaohs high command,
And as strong Nature so precise and strict,
There rests that power yet in a Princess hand,
To free one Hebrew from this strong edict:
That shall in rich abilliments be dight,
Decked in the Iems that (...) shine,
Wearing our own roabe gracious in our sight,
Free in our Court, and nourished for mine:
Love him dear Hebrew as he were thine own,
Good Nurse be careful of my little Boy,
In this to us thy kindness may be shown,
Some Mothers grief, is now a May dens joy.
This while all mute, the poor astonished Mother,
With admiration as transpeareed stood,
One (...) joy does so confound another,
Passion so powerful in her ravished blood.
Whispering some soft words which delivered were,
As rather seemed her silence to impart,
And being enforced from bashfulnesse and fear,
Came as true tokens of a graceful heart.
Thus she departs her husband to content,
With this dear present back to him she brought,
Making the time short, telling each event,
In all shapes joy presented to her thought.
Yet still his manly modesty was such
(That his affections strongly so controlde,)
As if joy seemed his manly heart to touch,
It was her joy and gladness to behold:
When all reioyc'd unmoved thereat the whiles,
In his grave face such constancy appears,
As now scarce showing comfort in his smiles,
Nor then revealing sorrow in his tears:
Yet often beheld it with that steadfast eye,
Which though itsdain'd the pleasdnesse to confess,
More in his looks in fullness there did lie,
Than all their words could any way express.
In time the Princess playing with the Child, (...) Pet. Comestor.

In whom she seemed her chief delight to take,
With whom she often the weary time beguiled,
That as her own did of this Hebrew make:
It so fell out as (...) was in place,
Seeing his daughter in the Child to joy,
To please the Princess, and to do it grace,
Himself vouchsafes to entertain the Boy:
Whose shape and beauty when he did he hold
With much content his Princely eye that fed,
Giving to please it, any thing it would,
Set his rich Crown upon the Infants head,
Which this weak Child regarding not at all
(As such a Babie carelessly is meet)
Unto the ground the Diadem let fall
Spurning it from him with neglectsull fecte.
Which as the Priests beheld this ominous thing
(That else had past unnoted as a toy.)
As from their skill report unto the King,
This was the man that Egypt should destroy.
Told by the Magi that were learned and wise,
Which might full well the jealous King inflame,
Said by the Egyptian ancient prophecies
That might give credit easlier to the same.
She as discrecte as she was chaste and fair,
With Princely gesture and with countenance mild
By things that hurtful and most dangerous were
Shows to the King the weakness of the Child:
Hot burning coals does to his mouth present,
Which he to handle simply does not stick,
This little fool, this retchlesse Innocent
The burning gleed with his soft tongue does lick:
Which though in Pharaoh her desire it wrought,
His babish imbecilitie to see,
To the Childs speech impediment it brought,
From which he after never could be free.
The Child grew up, when in his manly faco.
Beauty was seen in an unusual cheer,
Such mixtures sweet of comeliness and grace
Likely apparelled in complexion clear.
The part of earth contends with that of heaven,
Both in their proper purity excelling,
To whether more pre-eminence was given,
Which should excel the dweller or the dwelling.
Men's usual stature he did far (...)
And every part proportioned so well,
The more the eye upon his shape did feed,
The more it longed upon the same to dwell:
Each joint such perfect Harmony did (...)
That curious judgment taking any lim
Searching might miss to match it any where,
Nature so failed in parallelling him:
His hair bright yellow, on an arched brow
Sat all the beauties kind could ever frame,
And did them there so orderly bestow,
As such a seat of majesty became,
As time made perfect each exterior part,
So still his honor with his years increased,
That he sat Lord in many a tender heart,
With such high savors his fair youth was blessed.
So fell it out that AEthiop (...) began,
Inuading Egypt with their armed powers,
And taking spoils, the Country ouer-ran
To where as Memphis vaunts her climing Towers
Wherefore they with their Oracles confer
About the event, which do this answer make,
That if they would transport this civil war,
They to their Captain must an Hebrew take.
And for fair Moses happily was grown
Of so great towardness and especial hope,
Him they do choose as absoluiest known
To lead their power against the AEthiope.
Which they of Termuth hardly can obtain,
Though on their Altars by their Gods they vow
Him to deliver safe to her again,
(Once the war ended) safe as he was now.
Who for the way the Army was to pass,
That by the Egyptians only was intended,
Most part by water, more prolixious was
Than present peril any whit commended:
To intercept the AEthiopians wrought
A way far nearer who their Legions led,
Which till that time impassible was thought,
Such store of Serpents in that place was bred:
Devised by Birds this danger to eschew,
Whereof in Egypt (...) exceeding store,
The Storke, and Ibis, which he wisely knew,
All kinds of Serpents naturally abhore.
Which he in Baskets of Egyptian reed,
Borne with his caridge easily does convey,
And wherein campeth sets them forth to feed,
Which drive the Serpents presently away.
Thus them preventing by this subtle course,
That all their succor suddenly bereft,
When AEthiop flies before the Egyptian force.
Shut up in Saba their last refuge left.
Which whilst with strait siedge they beleagred long,
The Kings fair Daughter haps him to behold,
And became fettered with affection strong,
Which in short time could hardly be controlde.
Tarbis that kindled this rebellious rage, Comester.

That they to Egypt tributorie were,
When the old King decrepit now with age,
She in his stead the loueraigntic did bear.
Up to his Tower where she the Camp might see,
To look her new Love every day she went,
And when he happened from the field to be,
She thought her blessed beholding but his Tent,
And oftentimes does modestly inuay
Against him the City walled first about,
That the strong site should churlishly denay
Him to come in, or her for passing out,
Had the gates been but softened as her breast
(That to behold her loved enemy stands)
He had ere this of Saba been possessed,
And therein planted the Egyptian bands:
Ost from a place as secretly she might
(That from her Palace looked unto his Tent)
When he came forth appearing in his sight,
Showing by signs the love to him she meant.
For in what arms it pleased him to be dight,
After the Hebrew or the Egyptian guise:
He was the brauest, the most goodly wight
That ever graced AEthiop with his eyes.
And finding means to parley from a place,
By night, her passion does to him discover,
To yield the City if he would (...).
Her a true Princess, as a faithful Lover.
The feature of so delicate a Dame,
Motives sufficient to his youth had been,
But to be Lord of Kingdoms by the same,
And of so great and absolute a Queen,
Soon gently stole him from himself away.
That does to him such rarities partake,
Offering so rich, so excellent a prey,
Loving the treason for the Traitors sake.
But whilst he lived in this glorious vain,
Israel his conscience oftentimes does move,
That all this while in Egypt did remain
Virtue and grace o'recomming youth and love.
And though God knows unwilling to depart,
From so high Empire wherein now he stood,
And her that sat so near unto his heart,
Such power has Israel in his happy blood,
By skill to quit him sorcibly he wrought,
As he was learned and traded in the stars,
Both by the Hebrews, and the Egyptian: taught,
That were the first, the best Astronomers,
Two sundry figures makes, whereof the one
Cause them that wear it all things past forget, Comester ex Vet. Script.

As the other of all accidents foregone
The memory as eagerly does whet.
Which he insculped in two likely stones,
For rareness of inualuable price,
And cunningly contrived them for the nones
In likely rings of excellent devise:
That of oblivion giving to his Queen,
Which soon made show the violent effect
Forgot him straight as he had never been,
And did her former kindenesses neglect.
The other (that does memory (...))
Him with the love of Israel does inflame,
Departing thence not how the Princess wist.
In peace he leaves her as in war he came.
But all the pleasures of the Egyptian Court,
Had not such power upon his springing years,
As had the sad and tragical report
Of the rude burdens captived Israel bears,
Nor what regards he to be graced of Kings?
Or flatred greatness idely to awaite?
Or what respects he the negotiating
Matters comporting Emperie and State?
The bondage and seruilitie that lay
On buried Israel (sunk in ordurous slime)
His grieved spirit down heavily does way,
That to lean care ost leant the prosperous time
A wreched Hebrew happened to behold
Brus'd with sad burdens without all remorse
By an Egyptian barb'rously controlde,
Spurning his pined and miserable corse
Which he beholding vexed as he stood,
His fair veins swelling with impatient fire,
Pity and rage so wrestled in his blood
To get freepassage to conceived ire,
Rescuing the man the Egyptian does resist:
(Which from his vile hands forcibly he took)
And by a strong blow with his valiant fist,
His hateful breath out of his nostrils struck,
Which through his courage boldly (...) auerre,
In the proud power of his (...) hand.
Yet from high honor deigneth to interre,
The (...) carcass in the smouldring sand.
Which then supposd in secret to be wrought,
Yet still has Envy such (...) lealous eye,
As soorth the same incontinent it sought,
And to the King delivered by and by,
Which soon gave vent to Pharo's covered wrath,
Which till this instant reason did confine,
Opening a strait way, and (...) path
Unto that great and terrible design:
Most for his safety foreing his (...)
When now affliction every day did breed,
And when reuengfull tyranny did (...)
The greatest horror to the Hebrew seed:
To Midian now his Pilgrimage he took,
Midian earthes only Paradise fer pleasures,
Where many a soft Rill, many a sliding Brook,
Through the sweet vallie, trip in wonton measures,
Whereas the curled Groves and the flowrie fields,
To his free soul so peaceable and quiet
More true delight and choice contentment yields,
Than Egipts braueries and luxurious die:
And wandering (...) he happened on a Well,
Which he by paths frequented might epsy,
Bordred with trees where pleasure seemed to dwell,
Where to repose him, easily down does lie:
Where the soft winds did mutually embrace,
In the cool Arbours Nature there had made,
Fanning their sweet breath gently in his face
Through the calm cincture of the amorous shade.
Till now it nigh'd the noone-stead of the day,
When scorching heat the gadding Herds do grieve.
When Shepherds now and Heardsmen every way,
Their thirsting Cattle to the Fountain drive:
Amongst the rest seven Shepheardesses went
Along the way for watring of their Sheep,
Whose eyes him seemed such reflection sent,
As made the Flocks even white that they did keep:
Girls that so goodly and delightful were,
The fields were fresh and fragrant in their view,
Winter was as the Spring time of the year,
The grass so proud that in their footsteps grew:
Daughters they were unto a holy man,
(And worthy too of such a Sire to be)
Iethro the Priest of fertile Midian,
Few found so just, so righteous men as he.
But see the rude Swain, the vntutour'd slave,
Without respect or reu'rence to their kind.
Away their fair flocks from the water drove,
Such is the nature of the barbarous Hind.
The Maids (perce uing where a stranger sat)
Of whom those Clownes so basely did esteem,
Were in his presence discontent thereat,
Whom he perhaps improuident might deem.
Which he perceauing kindly does entreat,
Reproues the Rusticks for that off'red wrong,
Auerring it an injury too great,
To such (ofright) all kindness did belong.
But finding well his Oratorie fail,
His fists about him frankly he (...)
That where persuasion could not late prevail,
He yet compels quickly by his blows.
Entreates the Dam'sels their aboade to make.
(With Courtly semblance and a manly grace,)
At their fair pleasures quietly to take,
What might be had by freedom of the place.
Whose beauty, shape, and courage they admire,
Exceeding these, the honor of his mind,
For what in mortal could their hearts desire,
That in this man they did not richly find?
Returning sooner then their usual hour,
All that had happened to their Fathers told,
That such a man relieved them by his power,
As one all civil courtesy that could:
Who full of bounty hospitably meek
Of his behavior greatly pleased to hear,
Forthwith commands his servants him to seek,
To honor him by whom his honored were:
Gently receives him to his goodly seat,
Feasts him his friends and families among,
And him with all those offices entreat,
That to his place and virtues might belong:
Whilst in the beauty of those goodly Dames,
Wherein wise Nature her own skill admires,
He feeds those secret and impiercing flames,
Nursed in fresh youth, and gotten in desires:
Won with this man this princely Priest to dwell,
For greater hire then bounty could devise,
For her whose praise makes praise it self excel,
Fairer then sairenesse, and as wisdom wise.
In her, her Sisters severally were seen,
Of every one she was the rarest part,
Who in her presence any time had been,
Her Angel eye transpierced not his heart.
For Zipora a Shepherds life he leads,
And in her sight deceiues the subtle hours,
And for her sake often robsthe flowrie meades,
With those sweet spoils to enrich her rural bowres.
Up to mount Horeb with his flock he took,
The flock wise lethro willed him to keep,
Which well he guarded with his Shepherds crook,
Goodly the Shepherd, goodly were the Sheep:
To feed and fold sull warily he knew,
From Fox and Wolf his wandering flocks to free,
The goodli'st flowers that in the meadows grew
Were not more fresh and beautiful than hec.
Gently his fair flocks lessowd he along,
Through the Frim pastures freely at his leisure,
Now on the hills, the valleys then among,
Which seem themfelues to offer to his pleasure.
Whilst featherd Siluans from each blooming spray,
With murmuring waters wistly as they creep,
Make him such music (to abridge the way,)
As fits a Shepherd company to keep.
When lo that great and fearful God of might
To that fair Hebrew strangely does appear,
In a bush burning visible and bright
Yet vnconsuming as no fire there were:
With hair erected and (...) eyes,
Whilst he with great astonishment admires,
Eoe that eternal Rector of the skies,
Thus breathes to (...) from those quickening (...)
Shake off thy Sandals (says the thundering God)
With humbled feet my wondrous power to see.
For that the soil where thou have boldly trod,
Is most select and hallowed unto me:
The righteous Abraham for his God me knew,
Isaac and Jacob trusted in mine Name,
And did believe my Covenant was true,
Which to their seed shall propagate the same:
My folk that long in Egypt (...) heene bard,
Whose cries have entered heavens eternal gate,
Our z alous mercy openly has heard,
Kneeling in tears at our eternal State.
And am come down, them in the Land to see,
Where streams of milk through batiull Valleys flow,
And lushious honey dropping from the tree,
Load the full flowers that in the shadows grow:
By thee my power am purposed to try,
That from rough bondage shall the Hebrews bring,
Bearing that great and fearful Embassy
To that Monarchall and Emperious King.
And on this Mountain (standing in thy sight,)
When thou returnest from that conquered Land,
Thou hallowed Altars unto me shale light,
This for a token certainly shall stand.
O who am I! this wondering man replies,
A wretched mortal that I should be sent,
And stand so clear in thine eternal eyes,
To do a work of such astonishment:
And trembling now with a transfixed heart,
Humbling himself before the Lord (quoth he)
Who shall I tell the Hebrews that thou art,
That give this large commission unto me?
Say (quoth the Spirit from that impetuous flame)
Unto the Hebrews asking thee (...) this,
That 'twas, I A M: which only is my Name,
God of their Fathers, so my (...) is:
Divert thy course to (...) then (...)
And to divulge it constantly be bold,
And their glad ears attractiuely retain,
With what at Sinay Abraham's God has told:
And tell great Pharo, that the Hebrews God
Commands from Egypt that he set you free,
Three iournies thence in Deserts far abroad,
To offer hallowed sacrifice to me.
But he refusing to dismiss you so,
On that proud King I Will execute such force
As never yet came from the Sling, the Bow,
The keen edged Curt'lax, or the puisant Horse;
But if the afflicted miserable sort
To idle incredulity inclined,
Shall not (quoth Moses) credit my report,
That thou to me have so great power assigned.
Cast down (says God) thy Ward unto the ground,
Which he obaying fearfully, behold
The same a Serpent suddenly was found,
It self contorting into many a sold.
With such amazement Moses does surprise
With cold convulsions shrinking every vain,
That his affrighted and vplifted eyes
Even shot with horror, sink into his brain.
But being encouraged by the Lord to take
The ugly tail into his trembling hand,
As from a dream he sudainely does wake,
When at the instant it became a wand.
By the same hand into his bosom shut,
Whose eyes his withered leprosy abhorred,
When forth he drew it secondly being put,
Unto the former puritle restored.
These signs he gives this sad admiring man,
Which he the weak incredulous should show,
When this sraile mortal freshly now began
To forge new causes, why unfit to go?
Egypt accusing to have done him wrong,
Scantling that bounty Nature had bestowed,
Which had welnere deprived him of his tongue,
Which to this office chiefesly had been owed;
When he whose wisdom Nature must obey,
In whose resistance reason weakly fails,
To whom all humane instances give way,
Against whom not subtle Argument (...)
Thus does reprove this idle vain excuse,
Who made the mouth? who (...) or who the care?
Or who depriues those organs of their use?
That thou thy imbecillitie should fear?
Thy brother Aaron comes unto thee.
Which as thy Speaker purposely I bring,
To whom thy self even as a God shall be,
And he interpret to the Egyptian King.
That when he at thy miracles shall wonder,
And wan with fear shall tremble at thy rod,
To feel his power that swayes the dreadful thunder,
That is a jealous and a fearful God.
Then shall mine own self purchase me renown,
And win me honor by my glorious deed
On all the (...) on the Egyptian throne,
That this proud mortal ever shall succeed.
THE SECOND BOOK.
The Argument.
Moses does his message bring,
Acts miracles before the King,
With him the Magi do contend,
Which he does conquer in the end,
When by the extensure of the wand,
He brings ten plagnes upon the Land,
And in despite of Pharo's pride,
From Goshen (...) the Hebrews guide.
WHen now from Midian Moses forward set,
With whom his wife and fair retinew went,
Where on his way him happily has met
His brother Aron to the Lords intent,
And to the Hebrews in the impatient hand,
Of mighty Egypt all his power implies,
And as the Lord expressly did command,
Acts his wonders in their pleased eyes.
Those miracles mortality beholds
With an astonished and distracted look,
The mind that so amazedly enfolds,
That every sense the faculty forsook.
The little Infant with abundant joy,
To man's estate immediately is sprung,
And though the old man could not back turn boy,
Casts half his years so much becoming young,
Whilst mirth in fullness measures every eye,
Each breast is heaped up with excess of pleasure,
Rearing their spread hands to the glorious Sky,
Gladly embracing the Almighties leisure.
These Hebrews entering the Egyptian (...)
Their great Commission (...)
Which there repulsed as a slight report,
Does soon denounce defiance to the same.
Where now these men their miracles commend,
By which their power precisely might be tried,
And Pharo for his Sorcerers does send,
By them the Hebrews only to deride.
Where Heaven must now apparently transcend
The Infernal powers Emperiously to thwart,
And the bright perfect (...) contend
With abstruse Magic and fallacious (...)
Never was so miraculous a strife
Where admiration ever so abounded,
Where wonders were so prodigally rife,
That to behold it Nature stood consounded.
Casting his rod a Serpent that became,
Which he supposed with marvel them might strike,
When every Priest assaying in the same,
By his black skill did instantly the like:
Which Pharo's breast with arrogance does fill,
Above the high Gods to exalt his power,
When by his might (t'amate their weaker skill)
The Hebrews rod does all the rods devour:
Which deed of wonder slightly he rejects,
His froward Spirit (...) elate,
Which after caused those violent effects
That sat on Egypt with the power of Fate.
When he whose wisdom (...) the world did fare,
From whom not counsel can her secrets hide,
Forewarneth Moses early to prepare
T'accost the proud King by the rivers side,
What heavenly rapture does enrich my brain,
And through my blood extrauagantly flows,
That does transport (...) that endless maine,
Whereas the Almighty his high glories shows?
That holy heat into my Spirit infuse,
Wherewith thou (...) thy (...) to (...)
And lend that power to our (...) Muse,
As dwelt in sounds of that sweet Hebruack Lyre.
A task unusual I must now assay,
Striving through peril to support this mass,
No former foot did ever (...) away,
Where I propose unto my self to pass.
When Moses meeting the Egyptian King,
Urges a fresh the Israelites depart,
And him by Aaron stoutly menacing,
To try the temper of his stubborn heart.
When lo the Torrent the fleet hurrying flood The 1. Plague.

So clear and perfect Christalline at hand,
As a black lake or settled marish stood
At th'extensure of the Hebrews wand.
Where Segs, rank Bulrush, and the sharpened Reed
That with the fluxure of the wave is sed,
Might be discerned unnaturally to bleed,
Dying their fresh green to a sullied red:
Like issuing ulcers every little Spring,
That being ripened void the filthy core,
Their loathsome slime and matter vomiting
Into the Rivers they enriched before:
What in her banks has batning Nilus bred,
Serpent, or Fish, or strange deformed thing
That on her bosom she not bears dead,
Where they were borne them lastly burying?
That Bird and Beast incontinenly fly
From the detested and contagious stink,
And rather choose by cruel thirst to dye,
Then once to taste of this contaminate drink,
And useful Cisternes delicatly filled,
With which rich Egypt wondrously abounds,
Looking as Bowls receiving what was spild
From mortal and immedicable wounds.
That the faint earth even poys'ned now remains,
In her own self so grievously dejected,
Horrid pollution travailing her veins,
Desperate of cure so dangerously infected
The spungy soil, that digging deep and long
To soke clear liquor from her plenteous pores,
This bloody issue breaks out among,
As sickly menstrues or inueterate sores:
Seven days continuing in this flux of blood,
Sadly sits Egypt a full week of woe,
Shame taints the brow of every stew and flood,
Blushing, the world her filthiness to show.
Yet sdaines proud Pharo Israel thus to free,
Nor this dire plague his hardened heart can tame,
Which he supposed but fallaces to be,
When his Magitians likewise did the same.
When he again that glorious Rod extends
Against him that Heaven denies thus to dare.
On Egypt soon a second plague that sends,
Which he till now seemed partially to spare
The soil, that late the owner did enrich
Him his fair Herds and goodly flocks to feed,
Lies now a leystall a or common ditch,
Where in their Todder loathly Paddocks breed.
Where as the vp-land montanous and hie
To them that sadly do behold it shows,
As though in labor with this filthy fry,
Stirring with pain in the parturious throws:
People from windows looking to the ground,
At this stupendous spectacle amazed,
See but their sorrow every where abound,
That most abhorring whereon most they gazed.
Their Troughes and Ouens Toadstooles now become,
That Huswifes wont so carefully to keep,
These loathsome creatures taking up the room,
And croking, there continually do creep.
And as great Pharo on his Throne is set,
From thence affrighted with this odious thing,
Which crawling up into the same does get,
And him deposing fitteth as a King.
The wearied man his spirits that to refresti
Gets to his bed to free him from his fear,
Scarce laid but feels them at his naked (...)
So small the succcur that remains there.
No Court so close to which the speckled Toad
By some small cranny creepes not by and by,
No Tower so strong nor natural abode,
To which for safety any one might fly:
Egypt now hates the world her so should call,
Of her own self so grievously ashamed,
And so contemned in the eyes of all,
As but in scorn she scarcely once is named.
When this profane King with a wounded heart
(His Magi though these miracles could do)
Sees in his soul one greater then their Art,
Above all power, that put a hand thereto:
But as these plagues and sad afflictions ceased
At the just prayer of this mild godlike man,
So Pharoes pride and stubbornness increased,
And his lewd course this headstrong Mortal ran.
Which might have surelier settled in his mind,
(At his request which Mosts quickly slew,
Leaving a stench so pestilent behind)
As might preserve old sorrows freshly new.
But stay my Muse in height of all this speed,
Somewhat plucks back to quench this sacred heat,
And many perils does to (...)
In that whereof we seriously entreat.
Lest too concise injuriously we wrong
Things that such state and fearfulness impart,
Or led by zeal irregularly long,
Infringe the curious liberties of Art,
We that calumnious Critic may eschem,
That blasteth all things with his poys'ned breath,
Detracting what laboriously we do,
Only with that which he but idely says.
O be our guide whose lories now we preach,
That above Books must steer us in our Fate,
For never Ethnic to this day did teach,
(In this) whose method we might imitate.
When now these men of miracle proceed,
And by extending of that wondrous wand,
As that resistlesse providence decreed,
Thereby brings Lyce on the distemp'red Land: The 3 Plague.

All struck with Lyce so numberless they lie,
The dust grown quick in every place does creep,
The sands their want do secondly supply,
As they at length would suffocate the Deep:
That the atomi that in the beams appear,
As they the Sun through cranies shining see,
The form of those detested things do bear,
So miserable the Egyptians be:
Who raked the brands the passed Evening burned,
(As is the use the Mornings fire to keep)
To these soul vermin finds the ashes turned,
Covering the Harth. so thick thereon they creep:
Now Prince and pesant equally are dressed,
The costliest silks and coursest rags alike,
The worst goes now companion with the best,
The hand of God so generally does strike.
The Kings Pauillion and the Captives pad
Are now in choice indifferent unto either,
Great, small, fair, soul, rich, poor, the good and bad
Do suffer in this pestilence together,
In vain to cleanse, in vain to purge, and pick,
When every Moath that with the breath does rise,
Forthwith appears venemously quick,
Although so small scarce taken by the eyes.
By which hiswisdome strongly does prevail,
When this selfe-wise, this ouerweening man,
Even in the least, the slightest thing does fail,
The very beggar absolutely can,
When now these Wizards with transfixed hearts
To make his glory by the same the more,
Confess a Godhead (...) through their Arts.
Which by their Magicks they denied before.
Yet this proud Pharo as oppugning fate,
Still does resist that Majesty so hie,
And to himself does yet appropriate
A supreme power his Godhead to deny.
When from his wilful stubbornness does grow
That great amazement to all ears and eyes,
When now the Lord by Aarons Rod will show
His mighty power even in the wretched'st Flies,
Varying his vengeance in as many kinds,
As Pharo does his obstinacies vary,
Suting his plagues so fitly with their minds,
As though their sin his punishments did carry.
In Summer time as in an Evening fair,
The Gnats are heard in a tumultuous sound
On tops of hills, so troubled is the air
To the disturbance of the wondering ground.
The skies are darkened as they yet do houer
In so gross clouds congested in their flight,
That the whole Land with multitudes they cover,
Stopping the streams as generally the light.
O cruel Land, might these not yet thee move?
Art thou alone so destitute of fear?
Or do thou mean thy utmost to approve
How many plagues thou able art to bear?
Three have forethreatned thy destruction sure.
And now the fourth is following on as fast,
Do thou suppose thy pride can still endure?
Or that his vengeance longer cannot last?
These are as weak and worthless as the rest,
Thou much infeebled, and his strength is more,
Fitly prepared thee sadly to infest
Thy sins so many, by their equal store.
This wretched creature man might well suppose
To be the least that he had need to fear,
Amongst the rest is terrified with those
With which before none ever troubled were.
As we behold a swarming cast of Bees
In a swollen cluster to some branch to cleave
Thus do they hang in bunches on the trees,
Pressing each plant, and loading every greaue.
The houses covered with these must'ring Flies,
And the fair windows that for light were made,
Eclipsed with horror, seeming to their eyes
Like the dim twilight, or some ominous shade.
For humane food what Egypt had in store,
The creatures feed on, till they bursting die,
And what in this unhappy Land was more,
Their loathsome bodies lastly purrifie:
O goodly Goshen where the Hebrews roast,
How dear thy children in The Almighty's sight,
That for their sakes thou only should be blessed,
When all (...) on the Egyptians light?
What promised people rested thee within,
To whom no peril ever might aspire,
For whose dear sake some watchful Cherubin
Stood to defend thee armed in glorious (...)
Thou art that holy Sanctuary made,
Where all the afflicted cast aside their fear,
Whose privileges ever to invade,
The Heavens command their horrors to forbear.
But since man's pride and insolence is such,
Nor by these plagues his will to pass could bring,
Now with a sharp and wounding hand will touch
The dearer body of each living thing:
To other ends his courses to direct.
By all great means his glory to advance,
Altreth the cause by altring the effect,
To work by wonder their deliverance.
As Aaron grasping ashes in his hand,
Which scarcely cast into the open air,
But brings a murraine over all the Land,
With scabs and botches such as never were. The 5. Plague

What chewos the cud, or hoof on horn allotted,
Wild in the fields, or tamed by the yoke,
With this contagious pestilence is rotted,
So vniuersall's the Almighties stroke.
The goodly Horse of hot and fiery strain
In his high courage hardly brook'd his food,
That Ditch or Mound not lately could contain,
On the firm ground so scornfully that stood,
Crest-falne hangs down his hardly managed head,
Lies where but late disdainfully he trod,
His quick eye fixed heavily and dead,
Stirs not when pricked with the impulsive goad.
The Swine which Nature secretly does teach,
Only by fasting sicknesses to cure,
Now but in vain is to it self a Leech,
Whose sudden end infallibly is sure.
Where frugall Shepherds reckoning wool (...) lamb,
Or who by Herds hoped happily to win, (...)
Now sees the young-one perish with the damme,
Nor dare his hard hand touch the poys'ned skin.
Those fertile pastures quickly ouer-spread
With their dead Cattle, where the birds of prey
Gorged on the garhidge (woefully bestead)
Pois'ned fall down as they would fly away.
And hungry dogs the tainted flesh refrained,
Whereon their Master gormondiz'd of late,
What Nature for man's appetite ordained,
The creature that is most ravenous does hate.
Thus all that breathes and kindly has increase,
Suffer for him that proudly did offend,
Yet in this manner here it shall not cease, The 6 Plague.

In Beasts begun, in wretched man to end.
To whom it (...) violently can,
Not by The Almighty limited to slake,
As Beast is plagued for rebellious man,
Man in some measure must his pain partake.
Those dainty breasts that opened lately were,
Which with rich veins so curiously did flow,
With Biles and Blaines most loathsome do appear,
Which now the Dam'zell not desires to show,
Features disfigured only now the fair
(All are deformed) mostill-fauour'd be,
Where beauty was most exquisite and rare,
There the least blemish easili'st you might see,
For costly garments fashioned with device
To form each choice part curious eyes to please,
The sick man's Gown is only now in price
To give their bloch'd and blistred bodies case,
It is in vain the Surgeons hand to prove,
Or help of Physic to assuage the smart,
For why the power that rules from above
Crosses all means of industry and Art.
Egypt is now an Hospital forlorn,
Where only Cripples and diseased are,
How many Children to the world are borne,
So many Lazers thither still repair.
When those proud Magi as opposed to Fate,
That durst high Heaven in every thing to dare,
Now in most vile and miserable state
As the mean Caitiue equally do fare.
Thus stands that man so eminent alone,
Armed with his power that governs the sky,
Now when the Wizards lastly overthrown,
Groueling in sores before his (...) do lie.
Not one is found unpunished escapes
So much to do his hungry wrath to feed,
Which still appears in as many shapes
As Pharaoh does in tyrannies proceed.
Even as some grave wise Magistrate to find
Out some vile treason, or some odious crime
That bears every circumstance in mind, A similie of Gods justice.

Of place, of manner, instance, and of time:
That the suspected strongly does arest,
And by all means invention can devise
By hopes or torture out of him to wrest
The ground, the purpose, and consederacies,
Now slacks his pain, now does the same (...)
Yet in his strait hand does contain him still,
Proportioning his allortted punishment
As he is remoou'd or pliant to his will.
But yet has Egypt some what left to vaunt,
What Is now remaining, may her pride repair,
But lest she should perhaps be arrogant,
Till she be humbled he will never spare.
These plagues seem yet but nourished beneath,
And even with man (...) to move,
Now Heaven his fury violently shall breath,
Rebellious Egypt scourging from above.
Winter let loose in his robustious kind The 7. plague.

Wildly runs rauing through the airie plains,
As though his time of liberty assigned
Roughly now shakes off his (...) chains.
The winds spet fire in one another face,
And mingled flames fight furiously together,
Through the mild Heaven that one the other chase,
Now flying thence and then returning thither.
No light but lightning ceaselesly to burn
Swister than thought from place to place to pass,
And being gone does suddenly return
Ere you could say precisely that it was.
In one self moment darkness and the light
Instantly borne, as instantly they die,
And every minute is a day and night
That breaks and sets in twinkling of an eye.
Mountain and valley suffer one self iro,
The stately Tower and lowly coat alike,
The shrub and Cedar this impartial fire
In one like order generally does strike,
On flesh and plant this subtle lightning prays,
As through the pores it passage fitly finds,
In the full womb the tender burden slaies,
Plercing the stiff trunk through the spungie rindes
Throughout this great and (...) Ball
The wrath of Heaven outragiously is thrown,
As the lights quickening and Celestial,
Had put themselves together into one.
This yet continuing the big-bellied clouds,
With heat and moisture in their fullness brake,
And the stern Thunder from the ayrie shrouds
To the sad world in fear and horror spoke.
The black storm bellows and the yerning vaule,
Full charged with fury as some signal given,
Preparing their artillirie t'assault,
Shoot their stern vollies in the face of Heaven.
The bolts new winged with fork'd AEthereall fire,
Through the vast Region every where do roue;
Goring the earth in their impetuousire,
Pierce the proud'st building, rend the thickest Grove.
When the breeme Hail as rising in degrees
Like ruffled arrows through the air does sing,
Beating the leaves and branches from the trees,
Forcing an Autumn earlier than the Spring.
The Birds late shrouded in their safe repair,
Where they were wont from Winters wrath to nest,
Left by the tempest to the open air
Shot with cold bullets through the trembling breast.
Whilst cattle grasing on the batsull ground,
Finding no shelter from the shower to hide
In ponds and ditches willingly are drowned,
That this sharp storm no longer can abide.
Windows are shiuered to forgotten dust,
The slates fall shatt'red from the roof above,
Where any thing finds (...) from this gust,
Now even as death it fears to remove.
The rude and most impenitrable rock
Since the foundation of the world was laid.
Never before stirred with tempestuous shocke,
Melts with this storm as sensibly afraid.
Never yet with so violent a hand,
A brow contracted and so full of fear,
God scourged the pride of a rebellious Land,
Since into Kingdoms Nations gathered were.
But he what Mortal was there ever known,
So many strange affictions did abide
On whom so many miseries were thrown,
Whom Heaven so often and angerly did chide?
Who but relenting Moses does relieve?
Taking off that which often on him does light.
Whom God so often does punish and forgive,
Thereby to prove his mercy and his might.
So that eternal providence could frame
The mean whereby his glory should be tried.
That as he please, miraculously can tame
Man's sensual ways, his transitory pride.
But Pharaoh bent to his rebellious will,
His hate to Israel instantly renues,
Continuing Author of his proper ill,
When now the plague of Grasshoppers ensues.
Long ere they fell, on'th face of Heaven they hong, The 8. Plague.

In so vast clouds as covered all the skies,
Coloring the Sunbeams piercing through their throng,
With strange distraction to beholding eyes.
This idle creature that is said to sing
In wanton Summer, and in Winter poor,
Praising the Emmets painful laboring,
Now eats the labourer and the heaped store.
No blade of grass remains to be seen,
Weed, herb, nor flower, to which the Spring gives birth,
Yet every path even barren hills are green,
With those that eat the greenenesse from the earth.
What is most sweet, what most extremely sour,
The loathsome Hemlock as the verdurous Rose,
These filthy Locusts equally devour,
So do the Heavens of every thing dispose.
The trees all barcklesse nakedly are left
Like people stripped of things that they did wear,
By the enforcement of disastrous theft,
Standing as frighted with erected hair:
Thus does the Lord her nakedness discover,
Thereby to prove her stoutnesse to reclaim,
That when nor fear, nor punishment could move her,
She might at length be tempred with her shame.
Disrobed of all her ornament she stands,
Wherein rich Nature whilome did her dight,
That the sad verges of the neighboring lands
Seem with much sorrow wondering at the sight.
But Egypt is so impudent and vile,
No blush is seen that pity might compel,
That from all eyes to cover her awhile,
The Lord in darkness leaves her to dwell.
Over the great and universal face The 9. (...)

Are drawn the Curtains of the horrid night,
As it would be continually in place,
That from the world had banished the light.
As to the sight, so likewise to the tuch
Th'appropriate object equally is dealt,
Darkness is now so palpable and much,
That as it is seen, as easily is felt.
Who now it hap'd to travel by the way,
Orin the field did chance abroad to rome,
Loosing himself then wandered as a stray,
Nor finds his hostrie, nor returns home.
The Cock the Country horologe that rings,
The cheerful warning to the Suns awake,
Missing the dawning scantles in his wings,
And to his Roost does sadly him betake.
One to his neighbor in the dark does call,
When the thick vapor so the air does smother,
Making the voice so hideous there withal,
That one's afeard to go unto the other.
The little Infant for the Mother shreckes,
Then lies it down astonished with fear,
Who for her Child whilst in the dark she seeks,
Treads on the Babe that she does hold so dear.
Darkness so long upon the Land does dwell,
Whilst men amazed the hours are stolen away,
Erring in time that now there is none can tell,
Which should be night, and which should be the day.
Three doubled nights the proud Egyptian lies
With hunger, thirst, and weariness oppressed,
Only relieved by his miseries,
By fear enforced to forget the rest.
Those lights and fires they labored to defend
With the foul dampe that over all does flow
Such an eclipsed sullidnesse does send,
That darkness far more terrible does show:
When this perplexed and astonished King
'Twixt rage and fear distracted in his mind,
Israel to pass now freely limiting,
Only their cattle to be staid behind.
Commanding Moses to depart his sight,
And from that time to see his face no more,
Which this mild man does willingly aquite
That he well knew would come to pass before.
That for the Droues the Israelites should leave,
Forbid by Pharaoh to be borne away:
Israel shall Egypt of her store (...)
To bear it with her as a violent prey:
So wrought her God in the Egyptians thought,
As he is only provident and wise,
That he to pass for his choice people brought,
More than man's wisdom ever might devise.
Touching their soft breasts with a wounding love
Of those who yet they enuiously admird,
Which does the happy Iacobites behoue,
To compass what they instantly required,
That every Hebrew borrowed of a friend,
Some special Jewel fainedly to use,
Every Egyptian willing is to lend,
Nor being asked can possibly refuse.
Now Closets, Chests, and Cabinets are sought
For the rich lem, the raritie, or thing,
And they the happiest of the rest are thought,
That the highest prized officiously could bring.
Rings, chains, and bracelets, jewels for the care,
The perfect glorious, and most lustrous stone,
The Carcanet so much requested there,
The Pearl most orient, and a Paragon.
What thing so choice that curious Art could frame,
Luxurious Egypt had not for her pride?
And what so rare an Israelite could name,
That he but asking was thereof denide?
When God does now the Passover command,
Whose name that sacred mystery does tell,
That he passed or them with a sparefull hand,
When all the firstborn of the Egyptians fell,
Which should to their posterity be taught,
That might for ever memoriz this deed,
The fearful wonders he in Egypt wrought,
For Abraham's offspring Sarahs promised seed.
A Lamb vnblemish'd, or a spotless Kid,
That from the dam had wained out a year,
Which he without deformity did bid,
Held to himself a sacrifice so dear.
Roasted and eaten with vnleau'ned bread,
And with sour herbs such (...) as became,
Meat for the Eu'ning, that prohibited
The Morn ensuing partner of the same.
Girding their loins, shoes fastened to their feet,
Staves in their hands, and passing it to take,
In manner asto trauailers is meet,
A voyage forth immediately to make.
Whose blood being put upon the utmost posts,
Whereby his chosen Israelites he knew,
That night so dreadful, when the Lord of Hosts
All the first borne of the Egyptians stew.
Darkness inuades the world, when now forth went The (...). Plague.

The spoiling Angel as the Lord did will,
And where the door with blood was not besprent,
There the first borne he cruelly did kill.
Night never saw so tragical a deed,
Thing so repleate with heaviness and sorrow,
Nor shall the day hereafter ever read,
Such a black time as the ensuing morrow.
The dawne now breaking, and with open sight
When every laboring and affrighted eye
Beholds the slaughter of the passed night,
The parting plague protracted misery.
One to his neighbor hasts his heedlesse feet,
To bring him home his heavy chance to see,
And him he goes to by the way does meet,
As grieved and as miserable as he.
Who out of door now hastily does come,
Thinking to howl and bellow forth his woe,
Is for his purpose destitute of room,
Each place with sorrow does so ouerflow.
People awaked with this so daine fright,
Run forth their doors as naked as they be,
Forget the day, and bearing candle light
To help the Sun their miseries to see.
Who lost his first borne ere this plague begun,
Is now most happy in this time of woe,
Who mourned his eld'st a daughter or a son,
Is now exempt from what the rest must do.
To one that faines poor comfort to his friend,
His Child was young and need the less be cared,
Replies if his had lived the others end,
Withal his heart he could him well have spared.
No eye can lend a mourning friend one tear,
So busy is the general heart of moan,
So strange confusion sits in every ear,
As wants power to entertain his own.
Imparted woe (the heavy hearts relief)
When it has done the utmost that it may,
Outright is murth'red with a second grief,
To see one mute tell more than it can say:
The greatest blessing that the heart could give,
The joy of Children in the married state,
To see his curse the parent now does live,
And none be happy but th unfortunate.
Whilst some for burial of their Children stay,
Others pass by with theirs upon the Beer,
Which from the Church meet Mourners by the way,
Others they find that yet are burying there.
Afflicted London, in six bundred three,
When God thy finne so (...) did strike,
And from the infection that did spring from thee,
The spacious I Will was patient the like.
That sickly season, when I undertook
This compositton faintly to supply,
When thy affliction served me for a book,
Whereby to model Egypts misery,
When pallid horror did possess thy street,
Nor knew thy Children refuge where to have,
Death them so soon in every place did meet,
(...) houses to possess the grave.
When wosull Egypt with a wounded heart
So many plagues that suffered for their stay,
Now on their knees entreat them to depart,
And even impatient of their long delay.
Six hundred thousand Israolites depart,
Besides the Nations that they thence released,
And Hebrew Babes the joy of many a heart,
That Sarahs happy promises had blessed.
After sour hundred thirty years expired,
(Measuring by minutes many a wofoll hour)
That day they came they thence again depart,
By his eternal providence and power.
With all the jewels Egypt could afford
With them away that wisely they did bear,
The Egyptians ask not to have back restored,
All then so busy at their burials were:
And Joseph's bones precisely thence convey, Comester in Exodus

Whose Tomb by (...) often Inundations drowned,
(Yet the deceased straightly to obey)
By Moses was miraculously found.
Who did in gold that powerful word ingraue, (...)

By which the Almighty fully is expressed,
Which bare the metal floting on the wave,
Till o'r his Coffin lastly it did rest.
As by a sheep that showed them to the same,
To make them mindful of the reverent dead,
Which Beast thence-forth they called by (...) name,
And when they went from Egypt with them led.
But that he thus did find his burying place,
As we tradition wisely may suspect,
We only this as History embrace.
But else in faith as fabulous neglect.
THE THIRD BOOK.
The Argument.
God drownes the Egyptians in his ire,
Does march before his host in fire,
From the hard rocks strikes (...) springs,
Raines Quails and Manna, conguers Kings,
And searefull plagues on them does try,
For murmuring and idolatry:
Unto the promised Land them brought,
When it they (...) years had fought;
Balaam to bless them he does send,
Their good success, mild Moses end.
THose which at home scorned (...) and his force,
And whose departure he did humbly pray,
He now pursues with his Egyptian horse
And warlike foot to spoil them on the way.
Where his choice people strongly to protect,
The only God of Emperie and might,
Before his host his standard does erect,
A glorious pillar in a field of light,
Which he by day in sable does unfold,
To dare the Son his Ardour to forbear,
By night conuerts it into flaming gold,
Away the coldness of the same to fear.
Not by Philistia he his force will lead,
Though the far nearer and the happier way,
His men of war a glorious march shall tread
On the vast bowels of the bloody Sea.
And sends the winds as Currers forth before
To make them way from Pharaohs power to fly,
And to convey them to a safer shore,
Such is his might that can make Oceans dry.
Which by the stroke of that commanding wand,
Shouldred the rough seas forcibly together,
Raised as Rampires by that glorious hand,
(Twixt which they march) that did conduct them thither.
The surly waves their Rulers will obay'd
By him made up in this confused mass,
Like as an Ambush secretly were laid,
To set on Pharaoh as his power should pass.
Which soon with wombes insatiably wide,
Loosed from their late bounds by the Almighties power,
Come raging in, enclosing every side,
And the Egyptians instantly devour.
The Sling, the stiff (...) and the sharpened Lance,
Floting confusdly on the waters rude,
They which these weapons lately did advance,
Perish in sight of them that they pursude.
Clashing of Armours, and the rumorous sound
Of the stern billows in contention stood,
Which to the shores do every way rebound,
As does affright the Monsters of the flood.
Death is discerned triumphantly in Arms
On the rough Seas his slaughtery to keep,
And his cold self in breath of mortals warmes,
Upon the dimpled bosom of the deep.
There might you see a Checkquer'd Ensign swim
About the body of the enui'd dead,
Serve for a hearse or couerture to him,
Ere while did wast it proudly 'bout his head.
The warlike Chariot turned upon the back
With the dead horses in their oraces tide,
Drags their sat carcass through the fomie bracke
That drew it late undauntedly in pride.
There floats the bard Steed with his Rider drowned,
Whose foot in his caparison is cast,
Who late with sharp spurs did his Courser wound,
Himself now ridden with his strangled beast.
The waters conquer (without help of hand)
For them to take for which they never toil,
And like a Quarrie cast them on the land,
As those they slew they left to them to spoil.
In eighty eight at Dover that had been,
To view that Navy (like a mighty wood)
Whose (...) swept Heaven, might eas'lie there have seen,
How puissant Pharaoh perished in the flood.
What (...) a conquest strictiy they did keep,
Into the channel presently was poured
Castilian riches scattered on the deep,
That Spaines long hopes had (...) devoured.
The afflicted English ranged along the Strand
To waste what would this threatening power betide,
Now when the Lord with a victorious hand
In his high justice scourged the Iberian pride.
Hence three days march to Mara leads them on,
Where Surs wild Deserts as the Army past
Seemed as from their presence to have flowne,
The mountains stood so miserably aghast.
Where for with drought they hardly are bested,
And the soul waters bitter as the gall,
That they should through this wilderness be led
To thanklesse murmuring presently they fall.
God points Moses to a precious tree,
Whose medc'nall branches cast into the lake,
Of that rare virtue he approved to be,
The waters sweet and delicate to make.
Not that his hand stands any way in need
Of mediate means his purposes to bring,
But that in state his wisdom will proceed
To show his power in every little thing.
Nor Metaphysickes fully him confine,
All measuring so immeasurably great,
That does in Nature every cause combine,
This ALL in him so amply has receate.
Which might have learned them in this helpelesse case,
With tribulations willingly to meet,
When men with patience troubles do embrace
How oftentimes it makes affliction sweet.
And his free bounty fully now they found,
As they from Mara for mount Sina made,
Pitching in Elim in that plenteous ground
Of pleasant fountains and delicious shade.
But as at Sur, so they again at Sin,
Before of thirst, of hunger now complain,
Wishing they might in Egypt still have bin,
Where never famine all their time did reign.
When clouds of Quails from the Arabian shore
Upon the Camp immediately are sent,
Which came so long and in such marulous store,
That with their flight they smothered every Tent:
This glads the Eu'ning, each unto his rest,
With souls even sated with these dainty Cates,
And the great goodness of the Lord confessed,
That in like measure each participates.
The morn strewes Manna all about the host
(The meat of Angels) (...) to refresh,
Candying the fresh grass, as the Winters frost,
Never such bread unto so dainty flesh
O Israel pampred with this heavenly food,
Which else to Nations earthly he denies,
To raise thy spirits, to rectify thy Blood
With these so rare celestial purities.
Then the fat fleshpots they so much desire,
Whereon in Egypt gluttoning they fed,
When they came hungry home from carrying mire,
Which only dullness, and gross humors bred.
Yet in the sweetness and the abundant store,
His power not so conclusiuely expressed,
But who took most not capable of more
Then in his Gower he that gathered least.
By night corrupting, each day gathering new,
But for the Sabbath what they did provide,
That day descended not that heavenly dew,
That as that day was only sanctifide.
Thence through those Deserts desolate and dry,
They reach to Raph'dom where as they should pass,
There was not found a fountain far nor nie,
Such want of water every where there was:
Thither the Lord by Moses did them bring,
His force the faithless Israelites might know,
For even in the impossiblest thing,
He most delights his wondrous might to show.
Far worse than Mara is this fruitless soil,
For there were waters (bitter though they were)
But here are none, though sought with never such toil,
That they from murmuring longer not forbear.
Commanding Moses he should take the Rod,
Wherewith in Egypt he such wonders wrought,
For that most wise, that secret-seeing God
Saw there were some thus reasoned in their thought.
The mystery of that miraculous wand
He did to plagues and fearful things imply,
That Aaron yet never took it in his hand,
When work of mercy was atchieu'd thereby.
Therefore bids Moses to this high intent,
The same to use, they visibly might see,
That this which erst had been the instrument
Of justice, so of clemency to be.
Which with a blow, the Cleeues in sunder cracked,
As with an earthquake violently rent,
Whence came so strong and rough a Cataract,
That in the stones wore gutters as it went.
The Springs spout forth such plenty, that withal
Down the slope sides it violently swept,
So diverse ways, so various in the fall,
Through every cranny the clear water crept.
In Pailes, Kits, Dishes, Basins, Pinboukes, Bowls,
Their scorched bosoms merrily they baste,
Until this very hour their thirsty souls
Never touched water of so sweet a taste.
Scarcely susfic'd but in the very neck
Of this, it is bruted by the watchful post,
That the neere-bordring envious Amaleck.
Was marching toward them with a mighty host,
When he forth Joshua from the rest does draw,
A man selected, of courageous spirit,
Which Moses with propheticke eye foresaw,
Should be the man, his room that should inherit
Commanding him to muster out of hand,
And draw his forces presently to head,
Against that proud Amalakite to stand,
Which in the field a puissant Army led.
Whilst on rock Horeb, with erected hand,
Bearing the Rod up to the glorious sky,
Twixt Hur and Aaren, Amrams son does stand,
Whilst both the hosts for victory do try.
When blades are brandished and the fight begun,
Wars thundering horror trumpets do proclaim,
With the reflection of the radiant Sun,
Seems to beholders as a general flame.
Much courage and dexterity that day
On either part sufficiently is shown,
And on the earth full many a Soldier lay,
Thrusting through danger to make good his own.
Here men might see how many a strenuous guide
Strives to make his enemy to (...)
Now the fierce vaward, then the rere ward plide,
As he perceives the Battalians need.
They fight the full day, he the Rod vpheld,
But when his strength by long continuing fails,
Where as before the Israelites had queld,
The (...) proud Amalakite preuailes.
Whilst the two Hebrews provident of harms.
Setting grave Moses down upon a stone,
And by their force support his wearied (...)
Until the foe was lastly overthrown.
Iethro the just to whom report had told,
Th'atchieuement wrought by his renowned son,
That all the world did tributary hold,
By deeds in Egypt God by him had done:
This good old man to consummate their joys
In happy hour his son is come to see,
Bringing his wife and his two little Boys,
Moses sent back in Midian sase to be:
Which by this time two proper Youths are grown,
Bred by their Grandsire with exceeding care,
In all the host there hardly could be shown,
That with those Boys for beauty could compare.
Such mirth and feasting as for them was seen,
For this grave Father and this goodly Dame,
Unto this day in Israel had not been,
Since to kind Joseph righteous Jacob came.
The day mild Moses scarcely can sustice,
To tell this man the troubles they had past,
The wonders God had acted in their eyes,
Since they in Midian kindly parted last.
Iethro that marked the pains that Moses took
In rising early, and in resting late,
That did himself into all causes look,
And in his person censure each debate:
This Princely Priest a man exceeding wise,
And long experienced in this great affair,
(For at that time few States or Monarchies
Whose government he could not well declare)
Reproues good Moses in this zealous deed:
(Quoth he) me thinks thou do not well in this,
The course wherein I see thou do proceed
Trouble to thee and to the people is.
Appoint out Judges, and inferior Courts,
Twixt the Plebeans and thy self to be,
From them receive those matters by report,
Speak thou to God and let them speak to thee,
In things importa t be thou still in place,
In lesser causes leaving them to deal,
So may you both your quietness embrace.
By an exact and perfect Commonweal.
Now when to Sina they approached near,
God calls up Moses to the mount above,
And all the rest commands to forbear,
Nor from the bounds assigned them to remove.
Nor who those limits lonsely did exceed,
(Which were by Moses marked them out beneath)
The Lord had irreuocably decreed
With darts or stones should surely die the death.
Where as the people in a wondrous fright
(With hearts transfixed even with frosen blood)
Beheld their Leader openly in sight
Pass to the Lord, where he in glory stood.
Thunder and Lightning led him down the air,
Trumpets celestial sounding as he came,
Which struck the people with astounding fear,
Himself invested in a splendorous flame.
Sina before him fearfully does shake,
Covered all over in a smouldring smoke,
As ready the foundation to forsake,
On the dread presence of the Lord to look.
Erect your spirits and lend attentive care
To mark at Sina what to you is said,
Weak Moses now you shall not simply hear,
The son of Amram and of lacobed.
But he that Adam imparadise,
And lent him comfort in his proper blood,
And saved Noah, that did the Arc devise,
When the old world else perished in the flood,
To righteous Abraham, Canaan franckly lent.
And brought forth (...) so extremely late,
Jacob so fair and many children sent,
And raised chaste Joseph to so high estate.
He whose just hand plagued Egypt for your sake,
That Pharaohs power so (...) did mock,
Way for his people through the Sea did make,
Gave food from Heaven, and water from the Rock.
Whilst Moses now in this cloud-couered hill,
Full forty days his pure aboade did make,
Whilst that great God in his almighty will,
With him of all his Ordinances brake.
The Decalogue from which Religion took
The being: sin and righteousness began
The different knowledge: and the certain book
Of testimony betwixt God and man.
The Ceremonial as Judicious laws,
From his high wisdom that received their ground,
Not to be altered in the smallest clause,
But as their Maker wondrously profound.
The composition of that sacred phane,
Which as a Symbol curiously did show,
What all his six days workmanship contain,
Whose perfect model his own finger drew.
Whose absence thence gave leisure to their lust,
Oppugning Aaron, Idols them to frame,
And by their power still strengthen this disgust,
In him denouncing the Almighties name.
A gold-made God how durst you ever name.
For him so long had led you from the Sky,
In sight of Sina crowned with a flame,
His glory thence (...) in your eye?
Such things might melt mortality to see,
That even the very Elements did fright,
He that in Egypt had performed for thee,
What made the world amazed at his might.
Thy soul (...) never before thou felt'st,
But like a Quarry't even claue thy breast,
Coming from Sina when as thou breast,
Th'elected Israel kneeling to a Beast,
Him sense for sooke, his (...) strengthlesse are,
He came so much amazed there-withall,
The stony Tables slipped him unaware,
That with their own weight brake them in the fall.
Down this proud lump ambitiously he flung
Into base dust dissoluing it-with fire,
That since they for variety did long,
They should thereby even surfeit their desire.
And sent the mineral through their hateful throats,
(...) late those horrid blasphemies did fly
On bestiall figures when they fell to doat
In prostitution to idolatry.
Now when this potion that they (...) took,
This Chymick medicine (their deserved sare)
Upon their beards, and on their bosom stooke,
He does their slaughter presently prepare.
What Is he himself to Leuis could allie
Before this Calfe not sinfully did fall,
Girds not his broad blade to his sinewie thie,
When he hears Moses unto Arms to call?
Killing not him appointed he should slay,
Though they had slep'd in eythers arms before,
Though in one womb they at one burden lay.
Yea when this dead, though that could be no more?
You whom not Egypts tyranic could wound,
Nor Seas, nor Rocks could any thing deny,
That till this day no terror might astound
On the sharp points of your own swords to die?
When Moses now those Tables to renew
Of that essential Deity does merit,
(Which from his hands he dissolutely threw
In the deep anguish of his grecued spirit.
When forty days without all natural food)
He on mount Sina fixed his abode,
Retayning strength and fervor in his blood,
Raped with the presence of that glorious God.
Who in his high estate whilst he passed by
In the cleft rock that holy man did hide,
Lest he should perish by his radiant eye,
When Moses seeing but his glorious side
Celesliall brightness ceazed on his face,
That did the wondering Israelites amaze,
When he returned from that sovereign place,
His brows encireled with splendidious rays.
That their weak sight beholding of the same,
He after covered from the common eyes,
Lest when for answer unto him they came,
The lusting people should idolatrize.
Might we those mustred Israclites admire
From plains of Sina mighty Moses led,
Or else to view that opulence desire,
To that rich Arc so freely offered.
The marvelous model of that rarest piece
Th'ingrauings, caruings, and embroderies tell,
The cunning work and excellent device
Of neat Aholiah, and Bexaliell.
But we our Moses seriously pursue,
And our strong nerves to his high praise apply,
That through this maze shall guide us as a Clue,
And may his virtues absolutely try.
Whose charge being weary of their mighty Arms,
And much offended they had marched so long,
As often disturbed with their stern Alarmes,
Suppose by Moses to have suffered wrong.
When with the luggage such as lagd behind,
And that were set the Cariages to keep,
Against God and Moses (...) repinde,
Wanting a little sustinance and sleep.
Who with their murmuring moved in his ire,
That they so soon his providence mistrust,
Down from his full hand flung that forcefull fire,
Which in a moment brus'd their bones to dust.
Other the muti'ring (...) among
When now to (...) having come so far
For flesh, fish, sallads, and for fruits do long,
Manna (they say) is not for men of (...)
Their glut'nous stomachs loath that heavenly bread,
That with full Chargers hunger here releeues,
As by the belly when they strongly fed
On hearty Garlic and the flesh of Beeues?
Mild man, what fearful agony thee vexed,
When thou thy God unkindly did upbraid?
How grceuously thy suffering soul perplexed,
When thou repin'st the charge on thee was laid?
With God to reason why he should dispose
On thee that burden heavy to sustain,
As though he did his purposes enclose
Within the limits of man's shallow brain.
To judge so many marching every dav,
That all the flesh of Forest and of flood,
(When the wild Deserts scarcely yield them way)
Should them suffice for competence of food.
That thou should wish that hand so full of dread,
Thy lingering breath should suddenly expire,
Then that the clamorous multitude should spread,
These wicked slanders to incite his ire.
That God to punish whom he still did love,
And in compassion of thy frailties fear,
The spirit he gave thee lastly should remove
To those thy burden that should after bear.
O wondrous man! who paralleled thee ever?
How large a portion did thou inherit?
That unto seventy he should it disseuer,
Yet all be Prophets only with thy Spirit?
When lo a Cloud comes sailing with the wind
Unto these Rebels terrible to see,
That when they now some fearful thing diuin'd,
A flight of Quails perceived it to be.
A full days journey round about the host,
Two Cubits thicknes over all they flow,
That when by Israel he was tempted most,
His glory then most notably to show.
The greedy people with the very sight
Are filled before they come thereof to taste,
That with such surfeit gluts their appetite
Their queasie stomachs ready are to cast.
Those that for Beef in Gluttonic did call
Those the highest God his powerfulnes to try,
Cloyes with the foul that from the Heavens do fall,
Until they stoffe their stomachs by the eye.
But whilst the flesh betwixt their teeth they chew,
And suck the fat so delicately sweet,
(With too much plenty that even fulsome grew
That lies so common trodden with their feet.)
That God impartial and so rightly just,
When he had given them more then they desire,
Duly to punish their insatiate lost,
Powers down his plagues consuming as his fire.
And with a strong hand violently struck
Their blocd, distempred with luxurious diet,
That soon the sores in groynes and arme-pits brake,
Thus could the Lord scourge their rebellious riot.
Aron and Miriam, all too much it were
For grief when Moses ready is to die;
But you whom one womb happily did bear
Against your mild Brother needs must mutiny.
O unkind Aaron when thou fondly fram'dst
That Beast-like Idol bowing Isreal's knee,
He then thee begged, that thou so basely blam'dst,
And did divert the judgment due to thee.
Immodest Miriam when the hand of might
Left thee with loathsome leprosy defild,
Contemned and abject in the vilest sight,
From the great host perpetually exiled:
When thou had spet the vimost of thy spite,
And for thy sin this plague on thee was thrown,
He not forsook thee but in heavy plight
Kneeling to God obtained thee for his own.
His wondrous patience ever was applide
To those on him that causelessly complain,
Who did with comely carelessness deride
What happy men should evermore disdain.
When now the Spials for the promised soil,
For the twelve Tribes that twelve in number went,
Having discovered forty days with toil,
Safely returned as happily they went:
Bringing the Figs, Pomgranates, and the Grapes,
Whose verdurous clusters that with moisture swell,
Seem by the taste and strangeness of the shapes,
The place that bare them faithfully to tell.
That well expressed the nature of the earth,
So full of liquor and so wondrous great.
That from such wished fruitfulness in birth,
Sucked (...) sweet marrow of a plenteous teat.
But whilst they stand attentively to hear
The sundry soyles wherein they late had been,
Telling what Giants did inhabit there,
What Towns of war that walled they had seen.
Of Anacks offspring when they come to tell,
And their huge stature when they let them see,
And of their shapes so terrible and fell,
Which were supposed the Titanois to be.
Their hearts sunck down, and though the fruits they saw
By their rare beauty might allure their eyes,
Yet this report their coward souls did awe,
And so much daunt the forward enterprise,
That they their God do utterly refuse,
Against just Moses openly exclame,
And were in hand a Captain them to choose
To guide them back to Goshen whence they came.
Not all the dread of the Egyptian days,
What by mild Moses he to pass had brought,
Nor seen by him done at the purple Seas,
On their vile minds a higher temper (...)
Whom when of God (...) begged with bloody eyes,
And against Heaven did obstinatly strive,
Obtained so hardly their immunities,
Whose sin seemed greater then he could forgive.
Caleb and Joshua you courageous men,
When bats and stones against your breasts were laid,
Oppose your selves against the other ten,
That expedition basely that dissuade.
Quoth they to conquer as he did before
No more than men, what praise his puisance yields,
But he whose force the very Rocks did gore,
Can with the same hand cleave their brazen sheelds.
He that foresawe that this should be our seat,
And only knew the goodness of the same,
Possessed the place with those that were so great
For us to keep if safely till we came.
For which the Lord did vow that not a man
At Sina mustred where such numbers were,
Should live to come to fruitful Canaan,
Only those two so well themselves that bear.
And for the baseness of those erecreant Spies
Whose melting minds this impious slander bred,
And the vile peoples in credulities,
In that their God so strongly promised.
For forty days discourie of the Land,
They forty years in wildetnes shall wast,
Consumed with plagues from his impetuous hand,
Until that age be absolutely past.
Which scarsly spoke, but quickly took effect,
For those so cold, and cowardly before,
Hearing the censure of their base neglect,
To make his vengeance and their sin the more.
Entering the Land which Moses them denies,
Their desperate will no better can afford,
Offering those lives they did so lightly prize
Unto the vengance of the Heathenish sword.
And in the host new factions daily grew,
When Chores, Dathan, and Abiram rise,
Two hundred men of special note that drew,
Whose strength gave power to their confed'racies.
But the vast earth incontinently claue,
And on the sudden hurried them to hell
With the shrill screame the shrieking people gave,
The fainting Host into a fever fell:
The rest of the Conspirators were left
(From the first's fall enforcing their retire,
Of all the succors of the host berest)
Consumed to ashes with Heavens violentfire:
And those the abettors of this vile attempt
That did mild Moses cruelly pursue,
From the others sin that could not be exempt,
Them with the dreadful pestilence he slew.
That had not Aaron when all hope was fled
With holy Incense their atonement wrought,
Thrusting himself twixt th'liuing and the dead,
All had to ruin utterly been brought.
Where fourteen thousand and seven hundred sanke
Under the burden of their odious sin,
Which now was waxed s'insufferably rank,
It was high time his vengeance should begin.
When after this so terrible a thing,
Now that triumphant and miraculous wand,
Brings forth ripe Almonds, strongly witnessing
In Leuies Tribe the Priesthood still to stand.
With leaves and blossoms bravely it does (...)
Some budding, some as instantly but blown,
As when the same the naturallrynd did nourish,
For Moses sake such Miracles were shown.
Forward to Cadesh they their journey cast,
Where the good Miriam makes her (...) hour,
Miriam the fair, the excellent, the chaste,
Miriam that was of womanhood the flower,
Here bids her Brothers lovingly adue,
Who at her parting kiss her closing eyes,
Whose wondrous loss sufficiently to rue,
More is the grief that tears cannot suffice.
Moist are their eyes, their lips are shrunk with heat,
Their grief within, as outward it appears,
Their want of water in that place as great,
As it to them is plentiful of tears.
They at one instant mutiny and mourn,
Sorrows creep forth confusedly together,
The tears for her incontinent they turn
To words against Moses that did guide them thither:
Who from the rock struck water with the wand,
That man and beast might (...) maintain,
But he from rocks that fountains can command,
Cannot yet stay the fountains of his brain.
Much woe for Miriam these good men did make,
Whilst there weretwo, that might bewail this one,
But two departing for their mutual sake,
Moses remains to mourn himself alone.
Aaron the ancient'st of the Hebrew lino,
Repleate with natural comeliness and grace.
(God-like so far as man might be divine)
Ends his days in this predest'ned place.
Which being forewarned to awaite his end,
And here the fate foretelling him to die,
That the good hour does only now attend,
Willed to ascend the mountain (being nie.)
With Eleazer his dear Child he goes,
Led by mild Moses as the Lord decreed,
To his loved Son his garments to dispose,
Him in the Priesthood pointed to succeed.
When turning back to bid them all adue,
Who looked as fast to bid this Lord farewell,
Fountains of late so fast from rocks never flewe,
As the salt drops down their sad bosoms fell.
Not the obdurat'st, not the stoniest hearts,
That in deep sorrow melting here forbeares,
Those to whom Nature not those drops imparts,
Spent what in sighs, the other did in tears.
Sated with sobs, but hungry with his sight,
Their watery eyes him earnestly pursue,
When to discern him they no longer might
Where their sight ends, their sorrows do renew.
Com'n to the top, to the appointed place.
His Son in all his ornaments invested,
Which the good Aaron meekely does embrace,
And unto him his offices bequested.
When they the time no longer could adiourne,
After embraces and a flood of woes,
(Which when one ceased the other took his turn)
From eithers eyes that on the other flows.
Now at the last point, at the gasp of death.
He whom the whole world has but such another,
Gives up his latest, his most blessed breath,
In the dear arms of his beloved Brother.
So wisely works that eternal Being
By the still changes of their varying state,
(As to the end through the beginging seeing)
To build the frame of vnauoyded Fate.
When those given up to their lascivious wills,
Themselves in Midian wantonness that waste,
Whose fleshly knowledge sip'd those sugared ills,
Twenty four thousand slaughtered at the last.
Of all those that in Sina numbered are,
In The plains of Moab mustered then again,
Wasted by time, fire, pestilence, and war,
Those promised two and Moses did remain.
The time expird that they for Aaron mourned,
New conquest now, new comfort them does bring,
Their former hope successively returned,
That seemed before so sadly languishing.
When they the glorious victory obtai e
The Plains of Horma scattered all with shields,
Where Arad and his Cananites are slain,
Not the least fight of many glorious fields.
With Schon's slaughter seconded again,
And Ogs great fall of a Giganticke strength,
Whose bed of iron fash'on'd to contain
In breadth four Cubits, doubling it in length:
The living temnant of the mighty race,
Of big-bon'd Anack terrible and dred,
Which long time batning in that (...) place,
Grew like the fat soil wherein they were bred.
Not Poets fictions of the Phlagrian fields,
Whereas the Giants up to Heaven would clime,
Heaping on mountains not such wonder yields,
As did the men that lived in that time.
And five proud Kings fell in their recreant flight,
Before armed Israel on the Midian plame,
Zur, Hur, and Eui, men of wondrous might,
Reba and Rikem valiantly slain.
And as his strength crushed mighty Kings to dust,
And cleft the helmes that thunder proof were thought.
That hand that helped them, seourg'd their impious lust,
When his high judgment to pervert they sought.
And sent those Serpents (with their fiery stings,)
With in flammations that their flesh did swell,
Sharply toscourge their trustlesse murmurings,
That still in infidelity did dwell.
Rare in this creature was his wondrous might,
That should effect the nature of the fire,
Yet to recure the sorance by the sight,
Sickness might seem the remedy t'admire.
Only by metal miracles to work,
That Scrpents shape, the Serpents hurt should heal,
To show in him the mysteries that lurk.
And being so strange, as strangely does reveal.
That the forged figure of so vile a thing
Should the disease so presently remove,
Only by the eye a remedy to bring,
Deep searching Magic leaves to approve,
As Balaams beast did (...) have delay,
And the full purpose of the Prophet brake,
When he beheld the Angel by the way,
Burst out from beast, and to his Master spoke:
Whose execration able to astound
The sun, when he his Summers height did boast,
And with a word could instantly confound
The world, were it a congregated host.
He whose wife lips could Oracles compile,
And judgments irreuocable did (...)
Should be confounded by the thing most (...)
By that base creature, the dull worthless Ass,
Ruling his mouth as with a Riders bit,
Bidden by Balaack to denounce their fall:
Does all his dreadful Minaces acquit,
Sounding their blessing and their enemies fall.
When this mild man that only did remain,
Of those from Egypt that the Lord did bring,
Which he in Justice sundry ways had flaine,
For their false worship and their murmuring.
Since he remiss at Meriba was proved,
And there his zeal not ardently expressed,
The Lord did swear (though him he dearly loved)
He should not come to Canaan as the rest.
And now approaching Abaris (the place)
From whence he might that promised Country see,
(So much the Lord good Moses pleased to grace)
But there his days must consummated be.
When this great Prophet (...) had blessed,
Each seu'rall Tribe with a particular good,
Whose parting, them with sorrow so oppressed,
That shedding tears, their eyes shed drops of blood.
To Nebo scared admitably (...)
(The Spirit prepares him safely to retire)
Which thrusts his head into the cloudie (...)
Pisga so proudly thither dare aspire.
Pisga the height of Abaris, and this
The height of Pisga over all does stand,
That as the eye of mighty Abaris
Suruayeth the imparallelled Land.
Where goodly Gilead unto him he shows
As far as ever he could look to Dan,
The length and breadth how every way it goes,
Till her brow kiss the calm Mediteran.
Where the sweet South lays forth her swelling breast,
With a pleased eye he silently suruay'd,
To that fair City whose high Towers do rest
Under the Palmetrees most delicious shade.
When this meek man approaching to his death,
In death even pleased fair Canaan to behold,
Whilst he had use of his expiring breath,
Thus his last farewell mildly does enfolde.
Israel (quoth he) dear Israel, now adue,
Moses no more is, that your Leader was,
Joshua and (...) none but only you,
Of the last age must over Jordan pass.
The Egyptian horrors yet 'twas I did see,
And through those strange calamities did wade,
And Isreal's charge imposed was on me,
When they (but then) had scarcely learned to dade.
Forty two iourneyes have I straightly past
Since first this glorious Pilgrimage begun,
In wrath or mercy where as first or last,
Some wondrous thing has happily been done:
M'immortall Maker that so often have seen
(That God of wonder:) these complaints not boot,
In yonder fields so delicate and green,
That may not set my miserable foot.
Thus leaning back against the rising Clieue,
Raising his saint hands to the hopeful skies,
Meek as the morning never seen to strive,
Great'st of the Prophets the good Moses dies,
An hundred twenty hardly passed years,
His natural vigor no (...) did (...)
His eye as bright his body (...) appears,
As in the height and Summer of his (...)
Who being dissolved the Angels did interre
Near to Bethpeor in the vallied ground,
But yet so secret kept his Sepulcher
That it by mortal never should be found.
Lest that his people (if the place were known)
(Seeing by him the miracles were done,
That ever to Idolatry were prone,)
Unto his bones a worshipping should run.
One that God graced so many sundry ways,
No former age has mentioned to be,
Arrived at the period of his days
The future time in Israel shalll not see.
DAVID AND GOLIATH.
Our sacred Muse, of Isreal's Singer sings,
That heavenly Harper, whose harmonious (...)
Expeld that evil Spirit which Saul possessed,
And of his torments of en him releast;
That Princely Prophet David, whose high Lays,
Immortal God, are Trumpets of thy praise,
Thou Lord of hosts be helping then to me,
To sing of him who has so sung of thee,
What time great Saul after so bloody fights,
Returned a victor of the. Amalakites,
(Two hundred and ten thousand men at arms
Under his conduct) had (...) the harms
Done to Gods chosen people, when as they
Came back from Egypt, troubled on their way:
Saul with their blood had now manured the Plains,
Leading King Agag (as a slave) in chains:
But for that Saul this Agags blood had spared,
And'gainst the will of the Almighty dared
To save that man he should have put to sword,
For disobeying the Almighties word,
Their larded Fatlings keeping for a prey,
Which he commanded to be made a way:
For which the living God displeased, swore
To holy Samuel, Saul should reign no more;
Samuel Gods Prophet, by whose holy hand
The Oil was poured (by his divine command)
Upon the head of comely Saul when he
Was chosen over Israel to be:
But for that place another God had pointed,
Which should by Samuel likewise be anointed:
And this was David his most dear delight,
The son of Ishay the just Bethlemite
Mean while this Youth like a poor Shepherd clad,
(Of whom such care the God of Israel had)
His fathers flock was following day by day
Upon a Desert near at hand that lay;
Whose wealthy fleeces and fat bodies he
From ravenous vermin hourly va'd to free,
His only arms, his Sling and Sheephooke were,
Other then those he had not used to bear,
With these a Woolfe often coming from the wood,
Or subtle Fox, that forrag'd for his food,
He quickly slew; or if a Bear oppressed
With cruel hunger, happened to molest
His feeding flocks, he with such bangs him plyde,
That with the prey even in his teeth he did;
Or if a Lion as his fair flock grazed,
Hapt to assail it, he no whit (...)
At his stern roaring, when his clutches caught
At this brave Shepherd, but such blows him raught
Till by the beard that kingly beast he shook,
And from his jaws the trembling Wether took;
And if it chanc'i that sometime from the air
An Eagle stooped a Lamb away to bear,
He with a stone that from his Sling he threw,
Down from the clouds would fetch her as she flew.
His curled Tresses on his shoulders hung,
To which the dewes at Morn and Eve so clung,
To the beholders that they did appear
As nature threded Pearl with every hair:
The Bees, and Waspes, in wildernesses wild
Have with his beauties often bin beguild,
Roses and Lillies thinking they had seen,
But finding there they have deceived been,
Play with his eyes, which them that comfort bring.
That those two Suns would shortly get a spring;
His Lips in their pure Corrall liueries mock
A row of Pales cut from a Crystal Rock,
Which stood within them, all of equal height.
From top to toe each limb so clean and straight,
By every joint of his that one might try,
Or give true laws to perfect Symmetry;
The vermin (often) his Sheep that would surprise
Became so charmed with the splendour of his eyes,
That they forgot their rauine, and have layne
Down by his flocks, as they would glad and feign
Keep them from others, that on them would prey,
Or tend upon them, that they should not stray.
Whether in Cotes he had his flock in hold,
Or for the Fallowes kept them in the fould,
He was not idle, though not taking pains,
Celestial Lyricks singing to the Swains,
And often sitting in the silent shade,
When his fair flock to rest themselves were laid,
On his Lyretuned such harmonious Lays,
That the Birds pearcht upon the tender sprayes,
Mad at his music, strain themselves so much
To imitate th'vnimitable tuch,
Breaking their hearis, that they have dropped to ground,
And died for grief in malicing the sound.
Sometimes a Stag he with his Sling would slay,
Or with his Sheephooke kill a Boar at bay,
Or run a Roe so long (he was so fleet)
Till it lay trembling, breathless, at his feet,
Some times again, he practiced a fight,
That from the Desert, should a Dragon light
Upon his Sheep, the Serpent to assail,
How by clear skill through courage to prevail.
Then with a small stone thrown out of his Sling
To hit a swallow on her height of wing,
And home at night when they their Sheep should drive,
The sluggish Sheepheards lastly to revive,
He took his Harp so excellently strung,
In a broad Bauldrick at his back that hung,
And on the same stroke such mellodious strains,
That from the Couerts as the neighboring Plains,
The Echoes wakt with sweetness of his notes,
Which each to other diligently rotes;
And thus his time the Lords beloved past,
Till God to Samuel calling at the last;
Samuel says he, to Bethlem take thy way,
To Ishays house, and to that old man say,
Out of his loins that I will choose a King,
And when his Sons before thee he shall bring,
Choose out that man that I shall thee appoint,
With sacred Oil and see thou him anoint,
For of them all, he is known to me right well
The fitst to guide my people Israel.
Samuel replies my God, it Saul shall know
Upon what business I to Bethlem go,
Except my blood him nothing will susfice.
Take thou a Heyfer, God again replies,
And give it out thou purposely do go
To sacrifice; as God does counsel, so
The holy Prophet acts, and coming thither,
The noblest of people get together,
Doubring the Lord had angry with them bin,
And had sent Samuel to reprove their sin;
But peace to all the holy Prophet cries,
And then preparing to the sacrifice.
The Rites performed, he bids old Ishay bring
His Sons before him whilst the offering
Smoked on the Altars (and the Elders there
Stood round about with reverence and fear)
For in his household he a King must choose.
Ishay who might not Gods command refuse,
Calls Eliab out for Samuel to see,
Who at the first thought surely this was he,
Till God to Samuel said, do not deceive
Thy self (weak man) but thy election leave,
Thou can not see the scule of man, as I
Who search the heart, and every thought can try.
His second son Abniadab then came,
But this not he that Samuel must name;
Then calls he Shamna his third son, but yet
This was not he The Almighty's turn must fit,
He calls for more till he had counted seven,
To none of these yet must the Oil be given:
Before the Prophet brother stood by brother,
A tweluemonths growth one just before another;
Like seven brave blossomed Plants, that in the spring
Nature prepared forth goodly fruit to bring:
So comely all, that none in them could read
Which one of them should any one exceed,
If he excelled for loveliness of face,
Another for his person and his grace
Matched him at full, as nature meant to show
Her equal bounties how she could bestow.
There he beholds one brother tall and straight,
Another that was wanting of his height,
For his complexion and his curious shape,
Well near out went him, nature let not escape
Ought she could do, in them each limb to fit
To grace the other that was next to it.
When Samuel asks if these were all he had,
Ishay replies, only his youngest Lad
That in the Desert on his flocks does tend,
Samuel commands away for him to send,
For till he came he vowed he would not sit,
Out (...) place nor would he stir a whit.
Before grave Samuel David soon is brought,
Upon the Prophet which most strongly wrought
When he beheld him beautiful and tall,
Of goodly presence, and well shaped withal,
His cheek a mixture of such red and white,
As well with wonder might attract the sight,
A sprightfull aspect, and so clear an eye,
As shot a lightning at the standers by,
His every gesture seen it in to bring
The majesty that might befit a King;
All those rare parts that in his brothers were
Epitomized, at large in him appear;
And (in his ear) God does the Prophet tell,
This David shall be King of Israel.
Whom with the sacred Oil (instead of Saul)
Samuel anointed there before them all:
Which having done, to Rama takes his way,
Lest Saul for him the country should forelay:
When Kingly David of his own accord,
Though he were then th'anointed of the Lord,
And though his Sheephooke might his Scepter be,
This holy Youth so humble is, that he
Will back toth' fields his fathers flock to keep,
And make his subjects, (for a while) his Sheep.
The powerful spirit of God, redoubled grew
Daily in David, and his same now flew
O'r all the Region, how he was beloved
Of Gods high Prophet, and by him approved;
Field, Town, and City, with his name doering,
The tender Virginsto their Timbrels sing
Dirtys of him, and in their rural plays,
The homely Sheepheards in their Roundelayes
Record his acts, (...) build him shady Bowers,
The Maidens make him Anadems of flowers,
And to what sport himself he does apply,
Let Us follow David, all the people cry.
An evil spirit then sent by God possessed
Enraged Saul. so grievously oppressed.
With melancholy, that it crazed his wits,
And falling then into outrageous fits,
With cramps, with stitches and convulsions rackt,
That in his pangs he often was like to act
His rage upon himself, so rauing mad,
And soon again disconsolate and sad;
Then with the throbs of his impatient heart,
His eyes were like out of his head to start,
Fomes at the mouth, and often in his pain
O'r all his Court is heard to roar again;
As the strong spirit does punish or does spare,
Even so his fits or great, or lesser are,
That Israel now does generally lament
Upon their King Gods grievous punishment.
When some which saw this spirit possessing Saul,
Amongst themselves a counsel quickly call,
To search if there might remedy be found
For this possession, each man does propound
His thought of curing, as by Physic some,
Each man speaks what into his mind does come,
But some whose souls were ravished more hie,
Whose composition was all harmony,
Of The Angels nature and did more partake,
By which as Seers prophetickly they spoke;
(Wish holy Magic for some spirits inspired
Which by a clear Divinity are fier'd,
And sharpened so, each depth and hight to try,
That from their reach and visibility
Nature no secrets shuts, and heaven reueales
Those things which else from reason it conceales)
Those men conclude the spirit that thus had harmed
Their sovereign Saul, with Music must be charmed.
And having heard of Isreal's dear delight,
Beloved David the brave Bethlemite,
What wondrous things by Music he had done,
How he fierce Tigars to his hand had won,
Had laid the Lion, and the Bear to sleep,
And put such spirit into his silly sheep
By his high strains, as that they durst oppose
The Woolfe and Fox, their most (...) foes:
Of this Musician they inform the King,
And all assure him, there was no such thing
For him as Music, and this man was he
That his (...) in this kind must be.
When Saul dispaicht his messengers away
To aged I shay, that without delay,
His yong'st son David should to Court be sent:
The speedy Post relating the intent
To the old man: which in his heart was glad,
For at the first he great suspicion had,
That angry Saul might else have bin acquainted,
By Samuels hand his son had bin anointed,
And therefore caused David to be sought,
As of his death he direly had forethought.
The good old man o'r joyed with this good news,
Calls home his darling from his teeming Ewes,
And to the care of Isreal's God commends
His loved boy, and kindly by him sends
Of Bread and Wine a present to the King.
They him no sooner to Saul's presence bring,
But David's beauty so extremely took
The doting King, thatin each glance or look,
He thought he saw high valor mixed with truth,
And near his person takes the lovely Youth,
And who but David then with mighty Saul
His only favorite is, his all in all?
Not long it is ever Saul the spirit does seele
To stir within him, and begins to reele,
And suddenly into a Trance he falls,
And with his hands lies grasping at the walls,
When David takes his well-run'd Harp in hand.
By which the spirit he means to command;
His quauering fingers he does now advance
Above the trembling strings, which gin to dance
At his most clear tuch, and the winged sound
About the spacious Room began to bound,
The Aers flew high, and every dainty strain
Betters the former, which does so detain,
The ears of those stood by, that they hear not
Saul's sad complaints, and suddenly forgot
To list or stir him, and the standers by,
Were so intransed with the melody,
That to a holy madness some it brought,
Others again to Prophecy it wrought.
The Wyery cords now shake so wondrous clear,
As one might think an Angels voice to hear
From every quauer, or some spirit had pent
It self of purpose in the Instrument;
The harmony of the vntuned'st string
Torments the spirit which so torments the King,
Who as he faintly, or he strongly groans,
This brave Musician altreth so his tones,
With sounds so soft, as like themselves to smother,
Then like loud Echoes answering one the other:
Then makes the spirit to shift from place to place,
Still following him with a full Diapase:
Thus day by day as the evil spirit oppressed
Diseased Saul, David himself addressed,
Tawayte the hours, before the King to play,
Until he made th'vnruly fiend obey
The force of Music, more then that to fear
But the least sound of David's Harp to hear.
When now the King by David's cunning cured,
Old Ishais Son who thought he had endured
Restraint too long, gets leave of Saul to go
To Bethlem back (Gods holy will was so)
He rather chose to view his well-shorne Sheep,
His yeaning Ewes, and late-falne Lambs to keep,
Then on a Bed of silk himself repose,
And the delights of the fresh fields to lose.
When now Philistia horribly enragd.
With Gods own people had it self engaged,
With a reuengefull deadly hand to smile
The still-preseru'd oft-troubled Israelite,
Who had in Battle many times before
Upon the earth spilt her unhallowed gore.
Grim-visag'd war, more sternely does awake,
Then it was wont, and furiously does shake
Her lightning sword, intruding with the force
Of men of war both skillful foot and horse.
Two mighty nations are now up in arms,
And to both sides the Soldiers come in swarms:
The fields with Ensigns, ast'were flowers are decked
Which their refulgence every way reflect
Upon the Mountains and the valleys nie
And with their splendour seem to court the sky.
Two mighty Armies on the plain appear,
These Isralites, and those Philistines were;
Their great Commanders, proved men of war:
Their long experience, who had fetched from sarre,
To order fights as they occasion found
To Offend the foe, by fitting with the ground,
Which chosen Isreal's infantry does call
In this defensive war to follow Saul
And aged Isha faithfully to show
The love to Saul, and Israel he does owe,
His eldest three into the Army sent,
That to the field, as well appointed went,
As on their bravery they that bare them most,
Nor was there, in the Israelitish host
Three goodlier men, especially when they
Were in their Arms, the most vnclouded day
That ever shone, took not with such delight
The glad beholders, as the wondering sight
Of these brave Youths, still as they marched by.
Now in the fields the mighty Armieslye
On the wide champaine, each in others sight;
But as the Trumpets showte them out to fight,
From the Philistians host a Giant came,
Whose splendrous Arms shone like a mighty flame
Against the sun; Goliath named of Gath;
The only Champion that Philistia has:
This huge Colossus, then six Cubits height
More by a handful: and his ponderous weight.
Wheresoever he made but any little stay,
Showed that his breadth, it answered every way:
Never such might in mortal man there was,
From head to foot at all points armed with brass,
Five thousand sheckles his proved Curats way'd,
Upon whose temper, wondrous cost was laid:
His Shield and Harness well might load a Teame,
His Lance as big as any Weauers beam;
Whose very Pyle upon the poyse contained
A hundred sheckles, he a less disdained:
His Brows like two steep Penthouses hung down
Over his eyelids, and his angry frown
Was like a cloud, when it like Pitch appears,
And some stern tempest in its bosom bears:
His voice was hoarse, and hollow, yet so strong,
As when you hear the murmuring of a throng
In some vaste arched Hall, or like as when
A Lordly Lion angered in his den,
Grumbles within the earth, such his resembled,
That when he spoke, the affrighted hearers trembled:
His Squire before him marching to the field,
Who for this Champion bare a second shield.
Upon two easy hills the Armies lay
A valley 'twixt them in the middle way:
Into the midst of which, goliath came,
And thus does to the Israelites proclaim,
If there be found in all your host quoth he
A man so valiant, that dare fight with me,
If I shall fall under his mighty sword,
Israel shall then be the Philistinas Lord:
But if I by my puissance shall prevail
Over your Champion (that shall me assail)
Then as our slaves, of you we will dispose;
And use at pleasure, as our conquered foes,
For he that is God of the Philistians, boasts
Himself more powerful then your Lord of hosts.
Which challenge thus, not only troubled Saul,
But bred amazement through the host in all.
For forty days thus used he forth to go,
Offering by combat to decide it so.
Old Ishay now desiring much to hear,
Of his three Sons (in what estate they were)
Doubting lest they some needful things might want,
As in the Army, victuals might grow scant;
Wherefore he calls young David from his sheep,
And to another gives his charge to keep.
My Boy quoth he, haste to the Camp and see
In what estate my Sons your Brothers be:
Bear them parcht corn, and cakes, though homely food,
Yet simple cates may do poor Soldiers good:
And to the General, ten fine Cheeses bear,
Such in the Camp are not found every where.
And if for need to have pawned ought of esteem,
Take money with you, and their Pledge redeem.
David, make haste, for I desive to know
'Twixt the two puissant hosts, how business go.
No marvel David in his heart were glad,
That he such cause to view the Armies had:
From his brave thoughts, and to himself he told,
The wondrous things that he should there behold.
The rare Devices by great Captains worn,
The fiue-fald Plumes their Helmets that adorn.
Armours with stones, and curious studs enricht,
And in what state they their Pauilions pitched,
There should he see their marshalling a war,
The iron-bound Chariot, and the armed Carre:
As where consisted either armies force,
Which had advantage by their foot or horse:
The several weapons either nation bear,
The long Sword, Bow, the Polax and the Spear:
There the Philistian gallantry, and then
His Isreal's bravery answering them again:
And hear them tell the adventures had bin done,
As what brave man had greatest honor won.
David bestirres him presently, and packes
Up his provision, puts it into sackes,
And by his Servant on his Mule does lay,
Then toward Saul's Army takes the ready way.
And his no tediousiourney so contriues,
That in short time he at the Camp ariues:
And at his coming; instantly bestows
His needful prouant, to the charge of those
That tend the Carriage, and of them does learn
(As near as he could make them to discern
By his description) Ishas Sons, who led,
And in the Army where they quartered:
By whose direction he his Brothers sought,
And told them what provision he had brought:
And to all three, their Fathers pleasure showed,
And how the Cheeses he would have bestowed.
As they were talking, suddenly a noise
Ran through the Army, and the general voice,
Was the Philistian, the Philistian see,
(...) comes, ordained our scourge to be.
Who as his used manner was, defies
The host of Israel, and thus loudly cries,
Bring down your Champion, that with me dares fight,
And this our war shall be decided straight:
But Isreal's God, for fear draws back his hand,
Nor is there one against me that dare stand.
Which David hearing, his young blood does rise,
And fire was seen to sparkle from his eyes:
His spirits begin to startle, and his rage
Admits no reason that may it assuage:
No nerve of his, but to it self does take
A double strength, as though his arm could shake
The Iron Lance that great Goliath bears:
And beat his brazen Shield about his ears.
His struggling thoughts now being set a work,
Awake that flame, which lately seemed to lurk
In his meek breast, which into passion breaks,
And to himself thus Princely David speaks.
Despised nation, Israel quoth he,
Where be those valiant men that lived in thee,
What are our souls in lesser moulds now cast,
Then at the first, with time or do they waste?
What slaued people, but we can stand by,
And hear this base Philistian Dog defy
God and his people, must he stand to boast
His strength and valor, and in all the host
No man dare undertake him; might I prove
My Manhood on him, I should so one remove
The worlds opinion, and both hosts should know
He Is but a Dog, on us that raileth so:
And to one standing near him, thus he spoke,
Of this huge Beast, what wonder do ye make:
What shall be done to that one man that shall
Fight with this Giant, and before ye all,
His pride and horrid blasphemies shall quell,
And take this shame away from Israel?
When one that heard him, quickly thus replies,
He by whose hand this huge Goliath dies,
For Wise to him, Saul's Daughter shall be given,
One of the goodliest Creatures under heaven;
And yet this surther, his reward shall be
His Fathers house in Israel shall go free.
With this yet David closes not his ear,
But of some other likewise does enquire
For his reward, the (...) that should slay,
The formers words, which like a lesson say,
None of them thinking, this yet (...) man,
Should strike to death the proud (...)
His Brother Eliab, now which ouer-heard,
Young David's questions, and was much afeard
His ouer-daring spirit might draw him on,
To work their shame, and his consusion:
Thinks with himself, it greatly him behooues,
To check his boldness, and him thus reprooues.
Fond Boy, quoth he, why stand'st thou to enquire
After these things, thy business lies not here:
I would not (sure) but you the Camp should view,
A Sheepe-Coate Sir, would better suit with you:
Who have you left, after your Flock to look,
Your Scrip (no question) or your shepherds Crook.
Sir, my Father sent you not to us,
About the Army to lie loytering thus:
I thinke'tis time to get you on your way,
Our Father thinks that we enforce your stay.
At Eliabs speeches, David somewhat mon'd
To hear himself thus scornefully reprou'd:
Brother quoth he, few words might have sufficed,
Had you but known how lightly they are prized
Of me, these speeches you would have forborne,
Upon some other and have spent your scorn.
I come to view the Camp, you say, it is so,
And I will view it better ere I go.
Why may not I, as well as other men,
I Will go when I shall please, and not till then?
When time may me more liberty allow,
I may bear Arms perhaps as you do now:
Look to your warfare, and what is your own,
Good Brother Eliab, and let me alone:
For of my self I know how to dispose,
And thus away resolved David goes.
And as he went, still as he hears the cry
After Goliath, still more hie and hie,
His spirit is mounted, and his often demand,
What his reward should be, whose valiant hand
Should kill Goliath, through the Army went,
And was the common talk in every Tent,
(But in the most bred sundry doubts and fears.
When as they way'd his tenderness of years)
Until his Fame, by going, getting strength
In Saul's Pauilion is cried up at length:
Who with much speed, sent out to have him sought,
And to his presence caused him to be brought.
Who with a constant and delightful cheer,
Comes to the King, and does to him appear
With such a sprightfull, and maiesticke grace,
As victory were written in his face:
And being by Saul, demanded if 'twere he,
That Isreal's Champion undertook to be;
He with a meek smile, boldly does reply,
I am the man my Sovereign, it is even I:
My Leege quoth he, be not at all dismayed,
Nor let Gods chosen Israel be afraid.
This mighty Monster in the peoples sight,
So terrible, whose shape does so affright
The multitude, I do no more esteem,
Then if a Dwarf, nor he to me does seem
But such a thing, my only enuy's this.
That he is not much greater then he is.
The more his strength, the more his fall will be,
And Isreal's God more glorified in me.
Quoth Saul again, thou art of tender age,
And in respect of him a very Page;
Beside, the other Arms that he does bear,
Thou art not able to lift half his Spear:
If he strike at thee, and thy body miss,
Yet on his side, there this advantage is,
The wind of his huge weapon has the force
To drive the breath out of thy slender Coarse:
And this vaste man, beside his wondrous might,
No man as he, so skillful is in fight;
Expert in all, to Duels that belong,
Trained up in Arms whilst yet he was but young.
The better, answered David, if his skill
Equal his strength, for what is it to kill
A common man? a common thing it were,
Which happens every day, and every where;
But for a Giant such a one as he,
Upon the Field to be subdued by me,
This to all Nations shall be thought a thing
Worthy of Isreal's God, and Isreal's King.
I have slain a Lion and Bear, quoth he,
And what is this vncircumcis'd to me
More then a Beast. That only God of might
By whose great power I conquered these in fight.
In spite of humane strength and greatness, can
Give to my hands this proud Philistian.
When Saul thus sees that there was in his soul
That courage which no danger could control,
A valor so invincible and hie,
As naturally enabled him to fly
Above all thought of peril, and to bear
Him quite away beyond the bounds of fear;
He caused an Armor for him to be brought,
But first of all a garment richly wrought
He puts upon the brave youth and then bad
That in those goodly Arms he should be clad
Which put upon him as to stir he strives,
He thinks him self in (...) and Gives,
Their ponderousness him to the earth does press
These Arms do make his Actiuenesse fare less
For he before had not bin used to these,
Nor him at all their boistrousnesse can please,
His Gorget gauld his Neck, his Ghinne beneath,
And most extremely hindered him to breath.
His Curats sit too close upon his side,
He in no hand his Helmet can abide,
It is so heavy, and his Temples wrings,
His Pouldrons pinch him, and be cumbrous things,
His Gaunlets clumsit, and do wring his Wrists,
And be so stiff he cannot clutch his Fists;
His Guyses they so strong and stubb orne be,
That for his life he cannot bend his knee;
He knew not how to bear his brazen Shield,
Such weapons Sheepheards were not used to weeld,
Their weight and their vnwildinesse was such,
And they restraind his nimblenesse so much,
That he prayed Saul of these he might be freed,
It is not Armor that must do the deed,
Let me alone, says he, and I Will provide
My self of Arms, this quarrel to decide.
When forth he goes, shot for his Sling to look,
And near the Camp he finds a perling Brook,
Whose shallow sides with Pebbles did abound,
Where seeking such as massy were and round,
He picks out five, away with him to bring,
Such as he knew would fit his trusty Sling,
And in his Scrip them closely does bestow,
By which he vows Goliabs overthrow.
When swift report throughout the Army runs,
That youthful David one of Ishaes sons,
A very (...) and the yong'st of eight,
With the Philistian was that day to fight;
That great Goliath which so often had brau'd
Dejected Israel, and the combat craved
With any one she to the field could bring,
Now for it was so pertinent a thing,
As that their freedom or subjection lay
On the success of this unequal Fray,
The Event thereof struck every one with fcare,
But his sad brethren most perplexed were,
And to themselves thus say they: O that we
So long should draw our lothed breath, to see
That by the pride of this accursed Boy,
Despised Israel should no more enjoy
Her ancientglories, but be made a slave
To proud Philistia; and our fathers grave
Slandred by him; his Family and Name
Branded by David with perpetual shame.
Cursed be the time that he was hither sent,
Cursed be the time he came into our Tent.
And now and then they purposed to fly,
Nor would they stay to see their brother dye,
But at the very point to take their way,
Bethink themselves, it better were to stay,
To seek his scattered limbs to pieces hewed,
And see them in some obscure earth (...)
In this sad manner whilst they murmuring were,
David is busied listening still to hear
Of great Goliath: scarce can he refrain
From calling for him; now in every vain
His blood is dancing, and a sprightly fire
Takes up his bosom, which does him inspire
With more then humane courage, nor he can
Conceive a terror to proceed from man,
His nerves and sinews to that vigor grow,
As that his strength assures him he can throw
Through thicker Arms, then mortal yet could weeld.
Upon the sudden, when through all the field
The word was heard, Goliath now appears,
Which David's heart in such strange manner cheeres,
As that he feels it caper in his breast.
When soon that huge uncircumcised beast,
As he was wont, between the hosts does come,
And with his harsh voice, like an vnbrac'd Drum,
Calls to the host of Israel, where is your man
You cowardly Nation, where is your Champian
To undertake me, bring him to the field,
Or to Philistia your subjection yield.
It was full Summer, and the day so clear,
As not a little cloud did once appear;
In view of either Army, the free Sun
That toward the noonsted half his course had run,
On the Philistian darting his clear rays,
His bright resulgent Arms so sundry ways
Reflects the bcames, as that he seems to all
Like that in painting we a Glory call,
And from his Helmet sharpning like a Spyre,
He looked like to a Piramid on fire.
And now before young David should come in,
The host of Israel somewhat does begin
To rouse it self; some climb the nearest Tree,
And some the tops of Tents, whence they might see
How this unarmed Youth himself would bear
Against th'all-armed Giant (which they fear)
Some get up to the fronts of easy hills;
That by their motion a vast murmr fills
The neighboring Valleys, that the enemy thought
Something would by the (...) be wrought
They had not heard of, and they longed to see
What strange or warlike stratagem't should be.
When soon they saw a goodly Youth descend
Himself alone, none after to attend,
That at his need with arms might him supply,
As merely careless of his enemy.
His head uncovered, and his locks of hair
As he came on being played with by the air
Tossed to and fro, did with such pleasuremoue,
As they had been prouocatiues for love:
His sleeves stripped up above his elbowes were,
And in his hand a stiff short staff did bear,
Which by the leather to it, and the string,
They easily might discern to be a Sling;
Suting to these he wore a Sheepheards Scrip,
Which from his side hung down upon his Hip.
Those for a Champion that did him disdain,
Cast with themseues what such a thing should mean,
Some seeing him so wonderously fair,
(As in their eyes he (...) beyond compare)
Their verdict gave that they had sent him sure
As a choice bayte their Champion to alure;
Others again, of judgment more precise,
Said they had sent him for a sacrifice.
And though he seemed thus to be very young,
Yet was he well proportioned and strong,
And with a comely and undaunted grace,
Holding a steady and most even pace,
This way, nor that way, never stood to gaze,
But like a man that death could not amaze,
Came close up to Goliath, and so near
As he might easily reach him with his Spear.
Which when Goliath saw, why Boy quoth he,
Thou despirate Youth, thou take me sure to be
Some Dog (I think) and under thy command,
That thus art come to beat me with a wand:
The Kites and Raucns are not far away,
Nor Beasts of rauin that shall make a ptey
Of a poor corpse, which they from me shall (...)
And their soul bowels shall be all thy (...)
Uncircumcised slave quoth David then,
That for thy shape, the monster art of men:
Thou thus in brass come armed into the field,
And thy huge Spear of brass, of brass thy Shield
I in the name of Isreal's God alone,
That more then mighty, that eternal one,
Am come to meet thee, who bids not to fear,
Nor once respect the Arms that thou do bear.
Slave, mark the earth whereon thou now do stand,
I Will make thy length to measure so much land,
As thou lie groueling and within this hour
The Birds and Beasts thy carcass shall devour.
In mean time David looking in his face,
Between his temples, saw how large a space
He was to hit, steps back a yard or two,
The Giant wondering what the Youth would do,
Whose nimble hand, out of his Scrip does bring
A pebblestone, and puts it in his Sling,
At which the Giant openly does ieere,
And as in scorn, stands leaning on his Spear,
Which gives young David much content to see,
And to himself thus secretly says he.
Stand but one minute still, stand but so fast,
And have at all Philistia at a cast.
When with such slight the shot away he sent,
That from his Sling as't had been Lightning went;
And him so full upon the forehead smit,
Which gave a crack, when his thick scalpe it hit,
As t'had bin thrown against some Rock or Post,
That the shrill clap was heard through either host.
Staggering a while upon his Spear he leant,
Till on a sudden, he began to faint;
When down he came, like an old o'regrowne Oak,
His huge Root hewne up by the Laborers stroke,
That with his very weight, he shook the ground,
His brazen armor gave a iarring sound
Like a cracked Bell, or vessel chanced to fall
From some high place, which did like death apall
The proud Philistians, (hopeless that remain)
To see their Champion great Goliath slain:
When such a shout the host of Israel gave,
As cleft the clouds, and like to men that rave,
(o'rcome with comfort) cry, the Boy, the Boy,
O the brave David, Isreal's only joy:
Gods chosen Champion, O most wondrous thing,
The great Goliath slain with a poor Sling:
Themselves in compass nor can they contain,
Now are they silent, then they shoute again.
Of which no notice, David seems to take,
But toward the Body of the dead does make;
With a fair comely gate, nor does he run,
As though he gloried in what he had done.
But treading on the vncircumei'ed dead,
With his foot, strikes the Helmet from his dead;
Which with the sword, ta'n from the Gyantside,
He from the body quickly does divide.
Now the Philistians at this fearful sight,
Leaving their Arms, betake themselves to flight;
Quitting their Tents, nor dare a minute stay,
Time wants to carry any thing away,
Being strongly rowted with a general fear;
Yet in pursuit, Saul's Army strikes their Rear,
To Ekron walls, and slew them as they fled,
That Sharams plains lay covered with the dead:
And having put the Philistines to foil,
Back to the Tents retire, and take the spoil
Of what they left, and ransacking they cry,
A David, David, and the victory,
When straight ways Saul, his General Abner sent
For valiant David, that incontinent
He should repair to Court, at whose command
He comes along, and bears in his hand
The Giants head, by th'long hair of his crown,
Which by his active knee, hung dangling down.
And through the Army as he comes along,
To gaze upon him, the glad Soldiers throng:
Some do instile him Isreal's only light,
And other some the valiant (...)
With Coniayes all salute him as he past,
And upon him their gracious glances cast.
He was thought base of him that did not boast,
Nothing but David, David, through the host.
The Virgins to their Timbrels frame their lays,
Of him: till Saul grew jealous of his praise:
But for his meed does to his Wise receive
Saul's lovely Daughter, where'tis time I leave.
FINIS.

