Nicetas OR THE TRIVMPH. over INCONTINENCIE

Written in Latin by. F. Hier. Drexelius of the Society of JESUS. AND
Translated into English by R. S. 1633.

NI cast.

NICETAS Du ^ex (...)

I Sancte



THE FRONTISPICE to it is Spectatour.
To find NICETAS virtues in his name,
View me the Frontispice with the Anagramme;
NI Cast: without purity of heart,
There Is no Triumph. We must first break his dart,
Whom Chastity (you see) is trampling down.
Nay more: Five foolish Virgins lost their crown,
For want of oil. Therefore NICETAS says,
I SANCTe; Go; walk on in holy ways.
It Is not enough to keep thy Lilly white;
I SANCTE; Let thy burning Lamp give light.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE OF THE TRANSLATOVR to al Worthy English Catholics.
MY Nicetas could never have opened his most chaste eyes, to this our English
light, under a more propitious star then the protection of you (thrice
renowned constant Catholics of England) nor with a more happy presage or
nobler privilege have taken this peregrination through our Albion then with
your honorable name displayed in the frontispice: Nor could I more mystically
intimate either his end or mine own desire, then by this word Nicetas, which
signifies victory, to correspond both to Albion, which has it is denomination
from Candor, and to Catholic, that is universal; hoping he shall universally
make his way through al your hearts: and should he be so unfortunate as to find
them not so white by purity, yet at least may have the honor to adorn and
embellish them with Chastity most suitable to the immaculate spouse without
stain or blemish; whose faith you so courageously profess and suffer for. To
you therefore the ornament of your Country, the high honor of Catholic
Religion (which with hazard of your lives and daily loss of goods and liberty
you so constantly defend) I dedicate this my little book. To you I present it,
rather as an acknowledgement then payment of the debt I owe you. May Nicetas
the principal subject of this devout book become the object of your imitation
in his admirable Chastity: and though you shead not your blood, yet may you
with him for ever be victorious in this combat here on earth, and crowned in
Heaven. For my recompense (seeing the labor I have here taken may exact no
more, being of small worth) I only desire that like fervent Charity as moved me
to undertake it for the good of you (my dear Countrymen) may induce you to
offer up your zealous prayers; that as I have officiously presented you with
this incomparable example of Nicetas, I may with you efficaciously imitate his
chastity.

The affectionate humble servant of you al. R. S.

TO THE MOST NOBLE SODALITIES OF THE most Blessed Virgin Marie. of INGOLSTADT.
MVNICHEN. DILING. AVSBVRY. RATISBON. INSPRVCH. LVCERNE. FRIBVRG OF THE
SWISSERS: BRVNTRVTE, CONSTANCE. EISTADE, EINSHEIM, NEWSBVRG, FRIBVRG OF BRISCOY.
FROM GOD AND HIS MOTHER THE Blessed Virgin Everlasting felicity.
EVEN til this present, great is my affection toward you (Worthy Company of
the Sodalitie of the Blessed Virgin Marie, Noble in lineage, leatning, and
virtue) nor is there any thing I more desire, then very much to profit you;
seeing I have received very much from you; that al in fine may return to the
self-same fountains from whence it first sprang. Whatsoever in my youth I
gained in learning or Piety I ascribe to the Sodalitie of the most Blessed
Virgin, and this I freely testify to the world. To you I owe and to your
Company, that JESUS Son of the Blessed Virgin, admitted me, altogether
unworthy, into his Society. Ingenuously I confess, had it not been for your
sodalitie. I had perished and many others with me. But hardly can a man perish
amongst you, unless he wholly withdraw his mind from you, and will fully cast
himself into perdition. My opinion is, that no student in the Schools profits
in learning, except by conforming himself with you, he first learn this one
thing; how, and with what sobriety he ought to learn. Virtue is both the
knowledge of other things and her self. Most truly says the Roman wiseman,
and most fitly may it be acco^modated to those of the Sodalitie of the Blessed
Virgin Marie: There is nothing that more inuesteth our minds with honesty, and
reduces those that are wavering and flexible to a right course, then the
conversation of good men: for by little and little it descends into our
breasts and obtayneth the force of a precept, by being often heard, and
presented to our sight Sen. Ep. 94. circa med.
Verily your only Company and aspect inciteth men to the love of virtue; and
even when you are silent a man may reap profit by your presence. Most truly
may I affirm of your Congregations, what the ancient Poet did Ironically
speak of the City of Rome: -- Iuuenal Sat. 2. verse. 167.
Hic fiunt homines
Here men are made:
And unless a man amongst you learn to play the man indeed, and become modest,
wise and chaste, he loses his labor in this life and under the shape of a
man, shrowdeth oftentimes many kinds of brute beasts. He may take his place
and degrees in the schools and Academies; proceed a good Gramarian, an
eloquent Rhetorician, a subtle Philosopher, a learned Physician, or a notable
Lawyer. But to be skilful in all these arts (although it avails for
transitory things) for the purchasing of Heaven it is but lost labor. To
become a good Christian, a man of honest and virtuous conversation, is true
art, and solid wisdom indeed. To obtain this there is but one way, Virtue,
which if a man learn not amongst the Sodalities of the most Bles. Virgin, he
will with facility learn vices, without a Master. Assuredly great variety of
virtue flourishes in the sodalitie: Hic fiunt homines, here men are framed
according to the square of virtue. They that fly these Companies are wickedly
wary to their own hurt. And such as refuse to be enroled amongst those of this
discipline, or having giu^ their names, avoid these public assemblies, no
where less seen the^ amongst them, not obliging the^ so much as by increasing
their number: Such, I say, neglect to have co^merce with virtue, take liberty
to be vicious and estrange themselves from chaste and modest eyes. Of so great
moment is a man's conversation with good men; whereunto I confess, I owe all that I have. And to give testimony hereof to the world, I now of mine own
accord, most willingly offer to your consideration, (my most Worthy Masters
of the Sodalitie) this other treatise as a slender monument of my grateful mind.

The title of this book is Triumphata Incontinentia, The Triumph over
Incontinencie. Let no man here make an evil interpretation, for that it is
dedicated to you, as if any of you were burnt with incontinencie: there is no
such meaning, but to the intent it may not burn you. For as we make a
medicine, that may be a remedy to some, an ease to others, and an antidote to
the rest; so the vices being removed, we must learn by what means to avoid
the^ in time to come. And for that it is very difficult to purge and purify
men's souls tainted with an inueterate disease, it is a point of great
providence, in him who has once received a Medicine, to be no less careful in
recovering health then preserving. To this end does this book so readily
address it self to you, to prevent (for I presume there is no need to take
away) the disease of Incontinency. Now why present I not a book of greater
bulk? a gift more graceful and seemly then this is, I grant. But bear I
beseech you with the slender ability of the giver, and likewise with the vices
of our Age, which if you seriously take a view of, you will not deny there are
many impurities and great corruptions of manners now in every place; you will
freely acknowledged, the world grown sick, and chiefly of incontinencie. We
must not set before a sick man great morsels, or gross meat in large
platters; but rather nurse him up with little pittances of lightest meats and
small messes of potage. The Same must we do in this case. And if we consider
the Genius of this Age, the world can hardly now be otherwise cured.

Volumes and prolixe books this fastidious Age hardly will digest: wherefore
we must now in a manner cursorily intimate those things which are wholesome.
Compendious books and brief discourses although not so polite may with less
difficulty correct those that are forgetful of honesty: But whatsoever others
have said or written, this vice of incontinencie ought to be pursued without
mean or measure; for it is excessive without bound or limit. And because
incontinencie (a pleasing but pestilent venom) infecteth the most part of the
world I could wish that many might partake of this medicinal book, which of
right ought to be short, lest the malady it should cure, by lingering, be rather
more and more increased. Besides if I respect the Sodalitie of the most Blessed
Virgin (for whose honor, and good this little book is written) I ought not to
make tedious exhortations. There is a certain kind of men, so docible, that
they learn those things that are taught them, without any long instruction,
and apprehend good things, so soon as they hear them. These so capable of
virtue, and well desposed of their own accord, are ordinary in the family of
the Most Blessed Virgin.

Wherefore I beseech you, (my most entirely beloved Associates) vouchsafe this
little book of mine, the entertainment of a new guest: it requires not any
exquisite entreatie; but such as you are wont not to deny books of piety. And
for that I make no question, but you are fervently in love with chastity, and
continency, I am confident you will with favorable eyes, and ears accept this
president of Nicetas triumphing over incontinencie. So I most humbly recommend
my self to al your chaste prayers. From Monachium the day of the purification
of the most Blessed Virgin the year of Christ 1624.

The Servant of you al in Christ Hieremie Drexelius of the Society of JESUS.

TO THE WELWISHING READER.
I present unto thee (gentle Reader) an heroical act, admirable to precedent
and succeeding Ages. I present Nicetas an Egyptian, a young man, a singular and
admirable subduer of himself and his own lust, who by a stupendous stratagem
obtained the victory. I am of opinion that in all Christendom there is not the
like found. Verily we may with much more truth affirm of this young man what
was said of Ulysses: He sailed past Scilla and was nor devoured; touched at
Caribdis, and was not swallowed; tasted of Circes cup, and was not transformed;
set foot amongst the Lothophagi, but stayed not, heard the Sirens, but
approached not. Madarren^ de Deo Socr. fine.
I will add more; he was bound, tied, bereft of al weapons, yet could not be
overcome: yea he heard and came nere, or at least was compelled to come nere
the most deceitful Siren, yet was he not drowned. His tongue fought, his tongue
overcame, whereby we are al in a manner vanquished. Yet this did he not by
volubilitie of speech, but by a painful mayming of his tongue. Would thou
know (Reader) the incomparable project of this most generous Nicetas? read this
little book; but let me request thee to read it with repose and recollection
of mind, willing to reap benefit thereby. Our endeavor here is to compose
manners not words, to profit men's souls, not to please their ears. The scope
of my writing is, that which I desire should be likewise thine in reading, to
destroy the extremest of al evils, the most capital of al plagues, the deepest
sourse of al vices (Incontinency) the pregnant mother of al sins, diffusing
herself into al shapes. He that is an enemy to chastity, is in a manner a
friend to al vices. Never was there any man denounced war against chastity
who had not first entered a league with more then one enormitie. Whosoever is
minded compendiously to attain to the knowledge of vices, let him but make
himself a scholar to Lasciuiousnes, and he shall shortly wonder to see
himself of a scoller become a master. No man can live virtuously if he live
not chastely. And (good Reader) deceive not thy self, it is not for young men
only these things are written, not for Virgins, nor those only of the Sodalitie
who are batchlours. This belongs to every state, Sex, age, and degree, for of
necessity must the widow, the wife, the husband and wife keep Chastity each
in their kinds. Hardly shall he keep the laws of wedlock who knows not how
to preserve those of chastity. Yea I dare boldly avouch, that man must have an
exact knowledge of the laws of chastity, who will observe those of wedlock. It
is not lawful for any order of men, of what age soever to go beyond the bounds
of chastity. How can a man agree well with virtue, who is at variance with
modesty, the only feat of virtue? So that these things which are said of
avoiding inco^tinencie are necessary for every one to know. I add more, that
many things are taught in this book auailable for maintaying al manner of
virtue. And to the intent thou may know (my Reader) that I here purpose a
Summary of holy instruction: whatsoever I discoursed of in the year 1621. in
presence of the most excellent Electour Maximilian and his most gracious wife
the Lady Elizabeth, concerning the presence of god in all places, during the
time of the sacred Aduent of our Lord, I have here briefly collected and as it
were drawn forth the quintessence thereof; which I have set down for thy use
in the tenth chapter of the second book. And what I spoke out of Pulpit in the
year 1633. before the most excellent Duke and Duchess of Bauaria and their
Courtlike Attendance, concerning the nynefold torment of infernal Eternity, I
give thee here compendiously touched in the self same latter treatise the
eleauenth chapter. And albeit this book is but little, it was none of those
written in post-hast, or upon the sudden. It is the advice of Horrace, what
thou would expose to light and public view, ought to be nine years
labored. De art poetica^ propius finem.
I have observed it, and that with advantage. The argument and order of my
book is as before I have declared.

Four and twenty chapters in all are assigned to both books. The first
shows in twelve what the allurements and effects of incontinency are. The
second in as many chapters yealdeth Antidotes for the same vice. The original
cause, as likewise the tenor and scope of my writing is Nicetas, that Miracle
of continency and Spectacle worthy of Heaven. My desire was (gentle Reader)
these things might be known to thee, and that thou make the best benifit of
them.

THE FIRST BOOK.
THE ENTRANCE Into the discourse.
CHAP. I. PARTHENIVS and EDESIMVS speak.
PARTHENIVS. I had in my hands the other day S. Hierom, that great Linguist, of
al ancient Writers the most learned, the very Oracle of the world; of whom, not
without cause, it was said: Neminem scisse quod Hieronimus ignorares, No man
knew what Hierom was ignorant of. EDES. You both briefly and copiously commend
that Doctor, a man most worthy of al praise, whose only Epistles if you do
but pervse, you shall find them a great treasure of learning. PARTHEN. Those
very Epistles I read, amongst which in the third book he inserteth the acts of
Paul the first Eremite, and makes mention of an Egyptian young man, whose
heroical virtue I think no Ages can ever parallel or sufficiently admire.
EDESIMVS. This not long since I perused and was astonished: What are we
Parthenius, to those heroical Spirits. PARTHENIVS: Verily much inferior. But I
beseech you, if you please, produce more of this matter: take that stool, and
let us make an end of the discourse we have begun; for I know you are not of
the Sect of the Peripateticks: and it was the ancient opinion of Dion, that as
a bow and harp, so men are stre^gthned and quickened with rest. It is the
saying of Aristotle Aristot. l. 7. Phys.
by sitting still and resting the mind becomes more judicious. EDES. But being
to discource of Chastity, is rest so much to be commended? You know well what is
said of Egisthus the adulterer, desidiosus erat, he was slouthful. PARTHENIVS.
I persuaded repose (my EDESIMVS) not idleness nor sloth. But to come to the
matter, let us a little nearer look into the conflict of our Nicetas. EDES.
Upon this condition that you become my Theseus through the whole Labyrinth of
this exposition. I will take S. Hierom and read him verbatim expecting the
interpretation from you.

. I.
Another flourishing in the youthful vigor of his age was commanded to be
brought into a Garden, there to be thrown upon a delicate downe-bed amongst
fresh lillies and sweet roses; and lest he should depart thence, to be left
bound with silken cords; a stream of water passing by with a gentle murmuring,
and the wind breathing with a soft whispering noise through the leaves of the
trees. To which place, after al were departed, came a beautiful, harlot and
took him about the neck with lascivious embraceings, that by prouokeing his
body to lust, she might obtain a shameless triumph over his soul. What
should this Soldier of Christ do? How should he behave himself? Was it
probable that pleasures should overcome him, whom torments could not? At last
by inspiration from Heaven biting of his tongue, he spit it in her face that
kissed him: So the greatness of the pain that ensued, overcame al sense of
co^cupisce^ce. Hier. in the life of S. Paul the first Er. c. 30. Bar. An 253
Decij Imp. 10.
PARTHENIVS. O fact unheard of in all former Ages, and of al succeeding to be
admired; this is manfully to fight indeed, this to overcome, this to triu^ph.
The selfsame history I have lately taken out of Nicephorus Lib. 7. cap. 30.
in a different langage to exercise my style: do you please to hear it? EDES.
With all my heart though you relate it to me a thousand times over you shall never
satiate these ears of mine. PARTHENIVS. You will me therefore to recite it?
EDES. I both will and command you. PARTHENIVS. Apply then both your mind and
ears.

THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS act of Nicetas related somewhat at large. CHAP. II.
THe ancient Age bosteth the liberty of Anaxarchus, who being bound and
tortured, sheering asunder his tongue with his teeth, spit it in the Tyrants
face. Be not proud Anaxarchus: shall I compare men with thee? Or with thee
Mufius, Aquilius, or Regulus? Our children and women are oftentimes not only
your equals but by far (even in the straightest guiues) surpass you. Witness
Nicetas that Egyptian young man, whose more then heroical liberty and fortitude
non can sufficiently (I will not say) commend, but admire. The Macedonian King
said of Achilles: O happy thou, who have gotten Homer for the Proclaimer of thy
virtue. The same may I more rightly pronounce of this young man: O thrice happy
thou Nicetas, who have S. Hierom for the Panegyrist of thy virtue. See I
beseech you amongst how many deceitful snares, this our most chaste Achilles
professed his liberty: he acted now upon a far more perilous stage then that
Champion did. His bed was softer and more delicate then that of Sardanapalus,
or the boulster of Heliogabalus stuffed with down of swannes: upon this couch
the young man being cast, was bound, not with iron, but with silken cords. Thou
would now have said, there had been no hope to preserve his chastity
amongst so many ambuscadoes. Round about did pleasure cast her alurements, by
reason whereof it was almost impossible for a modest mind not to loose it is
intended chastity. The trees flourished with their green leaves; and besides
their cheerful smells and pleasant shades, with soft motion of their arms, made
a kind of whispering and delightful melody. A purling stream more clear then
cristal, played with it is wandering streams, and with a murmuring noyce glided
amongst the little pible stones, that you would have thought it a kind of
musical harmony. Upon both sides were flowers. Round about blew the mild
western winds. Here from the verdant meadows smilled the siluer-shining
lillies; there the purple roses, here the sanguine and golden Hyacinth; there
snowy and iuory-burnish'd Narcissus, and from every side breathed a most soft
and pleasant gale of wynd. Alas poor Christian Soldier what will thou do? on
every side thou art invited to pleasures, even by the sweet odours and fragrant
flowers thou art allured. How can thou resist, these voluptuous charms, how
can thou dissolve so many fetters? Behold there steals upon thee a woman
with a wanton countenance, who will cast upon thee as many snares as words, and
like a Basiliske kill thee with her only aspect. Alas poor young man! how will thou save thy self harmeles from this viper? No man ever had his liberty so
much captiuated as thine. If thou open thine eyes, thou art ensnared with her
beauty: if close them thy ears lie open to as much poison as she can instill
into them. Thy hands with storkes, thy feet with spurns, can not defend thy
chastity. Alas thy innocence seems lost, thy modesty vanquished with so many
subtle engines. More credible it seems the Roman Patricide (sowed in a sack
with a dog, a serpent, a cock and an Ape) might be preserved from al wounds,
then thou (o distressed young man) to be freed from the plague of lust. Which
way soever thou turnest, thou art entangled; their appears no hope of
evasion. Lascivious Cupid houering over thy head seeks to speed thee with his
poysnous dart. But in vain does Venus triumph before the victory. The
Christian Champion in this deadly combat found out away, whereby his
victorious chastity might triumph over her enemy. Oppressed on al sides, seeing
himself in so great danger; and why, quoth he, o my wronged chastity, do thou
not defend thy self at least with such weapons as thou have? My tongue only is
at liberty: my tongue then shall serve for a weapon: I had rather be dumb, then
not chaste. This said with a generous resolution wounding and biting asunder his
tongue, he spit it al bloody in the forehead of the shameless harlot.

O Nicetas, o thrice-happy and courageous young man! go forward on Gods name,
thou that breakest through so many hellish fetters, and redeemest thy liberty
with thy virgin-modesty, bravely using thy jaws for a quiver and thy tougue
for an arrow.

. I.
EDES. O heavens, o earth and seas! was ever the like found in any history
profane or sacred, old or new, Roman or Greek? Very worthily may we extol
this young man, for this great this admirable this transcendent and astonishing
fact. That was nothing in respect of this, which the Laconian young man did, who
being taken in war, often repeated these words: I will not. And as soon as he
was commanded to execute any base or servile office, he dashed out his own
brains against a wall. What was the burning of M^tius right hand in respect of
this? I admire not the dagger of Lucretia embrued with her own blood. She was
desirous to be chaste, when she had lost her Chastity. PARTHENIVS. Verily the
ancient times had great examples of Chastity. I commend Xenocrates, I applaud
Scipio, I honor in this respect the Macedonian Alexander, I admire Spurina,
and Democles: only at Nicetas, I stand astonished. Xenocrates was said to be of
such modesty, that if he had but in beasts seen accidentally any wantonness,
he would presently with his eyes turned away condemn it. Scipio delivered a
Virgin untouched to her spouse, as he had received her, and so became a
conqueror both of himself and his lust. Alexander would not so much as with
his eyes glance upon the wife and daughters of Darius because they were women
of admirable beauty. Spurina wounded her beautiful face, least it might set
others on fire: Democles to avoid fornication leapt into a boiling chauldro^,
both defenders of their chastity, but neither of them to be compared to our
Nicetas. And seeing we have entered into the listes, if you please, let us
advance our feet, and pace out this as a well as we can. EDESIMVS. We are both
at good leisure, neither is there any reason why I should refuse, especially if
you lead the way. PARTHENIVS: But if I err you shall pardon me. I chanced of
late upon verses, but few in number, and if you regard their words, neither
polished nor smooth, but rich in sense; and I make a question whether you have
ever read any thing more pithy or profitable. They have a triple inscription,
and are but six in all. I will recite them.

Incontinentiae and Libidinis Inuitamenta.
Otia, Mensa, libri, vaga lumina, verba, Sodales,
Haec toll, hanc minne, hos muta, haec claude, haec fuge, vita hos.
The inuitements of incontinency and lust.
Sloth, store of meat, books wandering eyes, words, mates,
Fly, lessen, change, close, shun, and shut the gates.
Incontinentiae and Libidinis effectus.
Corpus, opes, animam, ingenium, famam, virtutes;
Debilitat, perdit, necat impedit, inficit, aufere.
The effects of incontinency and Lust.
Fame, virtue, soul, and body, wit and wealth,
They blast, taint, kill, waste, dull, and take by stealth.
Incontinentiae and Libidinis Antidota.
Lectio flagra, preces, confessio, lympha, labores,
Portarum excubiae, Christ's praesentia, paenae.
The Antidotes against incontinency and Lust.
Books, prayers, stripes, confession, labors, fasting,
Strict watch, Christ's presence, torments everlasting,
EDESIMVS. These were made to help our memory, and they please me well: but for
so much as you are this day my guide, begin my PARTHENIVS and read the riddles
of those your verses, lest you may seem unto some to have spoken Arabicke.
PARTHENIVS. Accept for the present these few verses: I will hereafter add
others of my Nicetas; who had he not understood that the mischief of Luxury was
very great would not so much have detested it, choosing rather with great pain
to become dumb, then unchaste by the fruition of that unlawful pleasure.

IDLENESS THE FIRST Allurement to Incontinency. CHAP. III.
NOthing more then an idle life inclines and makes a man yeald to vice and
abandon virtue. In the school of vice Idleness is the chief Master, and
principal teacher. And that you may not wonder at this; it was enacted by the
law of Draco, that they who were accused of Idleness should be condemned and
put to death. Those things, that most draw us unto Lust, are sloth, store of
meat, books, wandering eyes, words and mates. Behold Idleness here the
ringleader of all the rest. Without question it is the usual boulster of al
vices, and why not of Luxury? Most truly Diogenes in times past publickely
affirmed: Libido est otiosorum negotium, Lust is the business of those that
are idle. Assuredly it is a rare thing to see a man idle and chaste. And as
these vices are nere of kin one to the other, ment^ri and furari, to lie and
steal (for I will presently show you a thief, if you, show me a liar) so these
two are very nere allied nihil agere, and male agere, to do nothing and to do
evil; to loose a man's time and not preserve his chastity, otiari and luxuriari,
to be idle and play the wanton. You know well the old saying of Ovid: Quaeritur
Aegisthus quare sit factus adulter?
In prmptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
How was Aegistus with adulterous stain
Soiled at the first? By sloth: the cause is plain.


From sloth for the most part issue the sparks of lust. Idleness is the fuel
of concupiscence: And I wish al parents and Masters would in this respect be
vigilant to drive away sloth from those that are under their charge. That
father in the Satyrist may be an example: -- At nunc
Post finem autunmi media de nocte supinum,
Clamosus iuuenem pater excitat; accipe ceras,
Scribe puer, vigila, causas age, perlege rubras
Maiorum leges, etc. Iuuenal Sat. 14. verse. 190.

The clamorous father does in winter raise
His Son at midnight; take thy book he says,
Write boy, and watch, read ancient rubric laws,
Or get a Captains place, or plead some cause.


Great Captains when they see their soldiers disobedient, keep them under
with labor, or entertain them with some kind of travail. They that are
engaged in businesses are never at leisure to play the wantons. In very truth
Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contemptaeque iacent, and sine luce faces. Ovid. ep. ^6.

Both Cupids bow and shafts contemned lie,
His fire's put out, if Idleness you fly.
For as the same Master instructs us: Qua^ platanus riuis gaudet, qua^
populus vndae,
Et quam limosa canna palustris humo:
Tam Venus otia amat.
As planes love rivers, reeds the moorish soil,
As poplars lakes, so Venus: sloth, no toil.


He that is idle (as most truly said the Roman wiseman) lives not to himself,
but, which is most abominable, to his belly, sleep, and lust.

I.
I will produce grauer witnesses. That mellifluous Doctor S. Bernard says,
that Sermon. de Sact. Andrea.
as through some small chinke in the pumpe of a ship, the water unawares to the
mariners enters and increases, til the vessel by negligence is wholly sunk:
so by sloth and sluggishnes wicked cogitations and concupiscences are
multiplied, til the ship of our heart giving way unto them, runs into
manifest danger of sin. Know you that S. Bernard was a capital enemy of
idleness: The sink, says he, of al tentations, and evil cogitations is sloth,
the greatest mischief of the mind, the foul channel of al evils, and death of
the soul. Ep. ad frat. de Monte Dei.
And that it might be known how much the lover of chastity should beware of
idleness, he further says: Luxury quickly deceaueth them who are given to
sloth, and burns most outragiously those it finds idle, to industry and
labor it gives place Ser. 51. de modo been viuendi.
. Laurentius Instinianus, a man as holy as learned says, that as water which
wants motion, and lies in pits, is soon putrifyed, so does a man's body,
that is corrupted with the rottenness of sloth, bring forth concupiscence,
and nourish the brutishness of carnal pleasures. Lib. de perfection is grad.
cap. 9. lib. de ligno vita. cap. 5.
Which he confirms in another place: Euenas, says he, by te^per are labor
the hot motions of the flesh are suppressed: so by Idleness they are nourished
and increased. The lasines of Kookes in great men's Kitchins has found out a
compendious way, when their fire grows slack, to provoke it to flame, by
pouring butter into it; the same does the subtilty of the devil in us when he
perceaueth the fire of lust somewhat allayed, he enkindleth it with oil, pitch
and butter. Too much abundance of meat and drink is oil; abscene books,
pitch, foul Idleness is soft butter: by the nourishment of these the flame
does easily break forth. He that is out of love with his chastity, let him fall
in love with idleness.

. II.
Idleness has been the destruction both of Kings and fortunate cities.
Catul. ad Lesb.
Sluggish and languishing sloth only delights in ease and rest, then which
nothing is more loathsome, nothing that more resembles our grave. Idleness
without study or labor is the death and burial of a living man. Se^. ep. 82.
Verily otium and vitium idleness and vice are nere allied to one another:
Multam enim malitiam docuit otiositas, Idleness has been the mistress of
much mischief. Eccl. cap 23. verse. 29.
So that she may rightly be called the mother of vanity, and the stepmother of
al virtue: There never redoundeth any profit from idleness but always great
detriment. Idleness is the (...) enemy to al discipline: Idleness is so far
from getting new virtues, that she wastes those that are gotten and you shall
scarcely find any thing that does open so easy and plain a way to the jaws of
hell as idleness, which even sweetly thrusts forward those into diverse vices,
who are the most endowed with fortitude. Multam malitiam docuit otiositas.

It was excellently well written by Portius Cato: It is a thing of necessity
that every one set down unto himself a certain course of life, which no man
can do, unless he be industrious, and a lover of labor. And certainly it is
requisite for the course of a holy life, that a man go forward and increase:
for by trifling he waxes dull and faints. He that will pass his life
dishonourably, let him follow idleness, and he shall not miss of his purpose.
Idleness is a downright and ready way to al villainy. Will you have the true
description of this monster? Idleness is the most succiuct abridgment and
Epitome of al Vices. The mind that is idle runs into a thousand mad
enormities. Multam malitiam docuit otiositas.

EDES. For the most part, we are al very eloquent in dispraise of idleness,
and often tragically inueigh against it: But in the mean while we ourselves
are very well contented to take our ease, and can sooner reprehend then avoid
it. We see and approve the better and follow the worse. PARTHENIVS. We are so
much the more debawsh'd as we grow more and more in love with this evil the
worst of al others. And therefore Multan malitiam docuit otiofitas. This may
hitherto suffice concerning idleness.

THE SECOND ALLVREMENT to Incontinency, Dainty fare, surfeiting and gluttony.
CHAP. IV.
IT is a thing apparent, and long since confirmed: Sine Cerere and Libero
frigere Venerem: that without meat and wine Venus soon becomes cold. For
whilst the whole habitatio^ of the interior man, environed with meat, and
drowned with wine, labors in the decoction of excrements, to what is it more
subject then to lascivious thoughts. Then the lascivious man does not so much
as seek the least veil to cover his wickedness. He that is shameless
publishes his disease; he that is wanton has no temper at al in his hand: and
although every vice lay itself open in a drunken man, yet Concupiscence most of
al. For when the body is stuffed, and the belly thoroughly pampered, Lust before
al other vices startes up; yea oftentimes that which for the space of many
years remained mortified, or at least qualified and kept under, takes new
strength; specially when they tipple wine in pots engraven with adulteryes: as
though drunkenness of itself were not sufficiently able to instruct them in
Lust (when they desire to be lascivious) unless they carrouse out of
libidinous cups. Nor does the old saying fail herein: Post epulas choreae,
after feasting follows dancing. According to which the holy Scripture says:
Sedit populus manducare, and surrexerunt ludere. Exo. cap. 32. verse. 18.
The people sat down to eat, and rose up again to play: no good play, but
wicked. Therefore carefully does S. Paul admonish us: Ephesians. cap. 5. verse. 18.
Be not made drunk with wine in which is Luxury. And thou know well my
EDESIMVS, we learn by an old and true saying: Hunger never begat adulteryes.
Which the divine Ezechiel most clearly pronounces: Ezech. cap. 16. ver. 40.
This (says he) was the iniquity of Sodem: Pride, fullness of bread and
abundance, and the sloth of her and of her daughters.

. I.
So for the most part, after a plentiful table, after roial suppers, and
sumptuous feasts, we somewhat digress from a man, and sometimes degenerate and
become beasts. My beloved was fatned and kicked against me: Deuteronomy. cap. 32.
verse. 15.
being pampered fatted and ful-fed, he forsook God his maker, and departed
from God his salvation. So certain is the law of vices that under gormandizing
lurketh lasciuiousnes; it is no marvel to find them incontinent with whom you
find a full table. I pray you do but ask your own reason, whether hunger or
full feeding is a greater friend to virginity. I am of opinion, that chastity
with more safety inhabiteth in the cottages of poor folks, then the Courts
and palaces of Kings. You know the pipes make the greatest noise, when they
are most replenished with wind: even so is it with a man's body, then chiefly is
it set on fire by lascuious wantonness, when it is most heated with wine and
feasting. Very well says S. Gregory In libr^ Reg. lib. 5. c. 1.
by that one vice only of gluttony innumerable troops of sins are begotten
to infest the soul. Certes the vice of gluttony is but one, but innumerable
are the stings of lust which follow and attend it as their king, and suggest
those pleasures, which bring us to weeping and eternal lamentations. This in
express words does S. Gregory utter, and albeit he had been silent,
experience itself would have told us no less. Too many have lost their
chastity, because they would not eschew gluttony. Whereupon was the speech of
that chaste Hillarion: I will feed thee with chafe (my ass) not with barley.
Chastity is so great an enemy to full tables, that her greatest hope of victory,
is at such time as she denies al delights to her body as to a brute beast. But
the Age we now live in, is too much estranged from this law. Often do I
reuolue in my mind whether those ancient Ages will return, not the golden, but
the leaden or iron Age of which S. Luke speaks: Luke cap. 17. ver. 27
In the days (says he) of Noe they did eat and drink, they married wives,
and were given over unto marriages til that very day when Noe entered into the
Arc, and the deluge came and destroyed al. Consider this Age of ours, and thou will confess that it is very like that of Noe. We eat and drink every where
plentifully and magnificently. Neither is this sufficient, (saving your regard,
my EDESIMVS) they sport and drink til they vomit out their souls, as Vdo did,
that most unfortunate Bishop of Magdeburge. Frequent nuptials, vain bales, and
dancings are now in every place (do but enter into cities and you will be of
my mind) every place resounds with brideales, wakes, and bridesongs. These
courses I believe will continue in the world not til Noe, but til Christ comes
to pronounce from the Rainebowe (his tribunal seat) a iuridical sentence upon
al mankind.

. II.
Therefore if you will diminish this Venereous flame, take away the superfluity
of your diet; become moderate and sparing in meat and drink. Oftentimes we
seem to fly Luxury, whilst indeed we cherish it. Would thou drive a
troublesome dog from thee, and yet give him bread? Would thou overcome
lust, and yet stuffest thy belly? this is but loss of labor. To what end
do thou look for chastity amongst intemperate feasts and delicacyes, whith
S. Hierome, scarcely found amongst long fastings, stripes and austerities.
Therefore as much as thou can restrain thy body, and enlarge thy mind. We
ought so to behave ourselves, that as far as we are able, we avoid al
prouocations to sin. We must establish our mind and withdraw it far from
voluptuous blandishments. Isaeus an Assyrian, as witnesses Philostratus, being
asked whether he found any sweetness in banquetts? answered, I have given
them over long since. God grant (my EDESIMVS) we may do the like, and neglect
the immoderate cares of the body: it would go the better with our soul. This
must command and govern, that as a servant should be kept in subjection, of
which, be no more confident then you would be of an enemy. S. Hierom, that
bright sun of the wilderness, by weekly fasts kept under this malignant
flame; showers of tears streamed from his eyes elevated and fixed on Heaven,
ready as it were to start out of their hollow caves. Behold how with water and
spare diet he fought against this fire. But let us go forward with the verse
we have begun: Otta, Mensa, Libri, Sloth, Meat, Books. EDESIMVS. You have
your Auditour attentive; go on a Gods-name.

THE THIRD ALLVREMENT to Incontinency Impure and obscene Books. CHAP. V.
Books of this kind are a very plague, an assured poison to the reader. And
which is much worse, you shall meet with it in every place, and find it
lauishly scattered here and there: for such impurityes not only in one but in all languages, have crept into books: they invade us in the German Italian,
French, Spanish, Belgic, Greek Latin and English tongue; in prose and verse:
and for this shameless kind of writing many both ancient and modern are
branded with infamy. Some have composed historyes, others written Satyrs; some
have sung poems, and invented fables, others have entered into another list of
writing, in which as well with true as feyned narrations, historyes and fables
they aim at nothing else, but to poison the minds of the readers with that
plague of Venery, at least to allure them to impure cogitatious, if not to
lascivious discourses and the very acts themselves Against these kind of books
Tully, justly incensed, said: Lib 2. Tusc. ^.
They make our minds effeminate, they break asunder all the sinews of virtue.
In the number of these are for the most part all the ancient poets, fabulists
and Satyrilles, whom I will not nominate least I bring men acquainted with their
writings, which if they be not corrected and purged from their obscene dregs,
are direct poison to the reader? Let no man touch these that loves and tenders
his chastity. Ovid himself for this respect sent by Augustus into banishment,
and not recalled by Tyberius, seriously admonishes us: Eloquar inuitus,
teneros ne tange Poetas.
Submoueo dotes impius ipse meas.
Perforce I Will speak, and mine own gifts recall.
Lascivious Poets do not tonch at al.


Do thou hear? that pestilent Poet himself cries out, touch me not, get
thee gone, depart; he foretells the danger, he denounces and proclaims the
mischief before hand: fly, stand aloof, lest thou be infected. Yet thou
intrudest thy self, and breakest in upon them, and give no ear, neither to
thy friends that recall thee, nor thine enimyes that repel thee: thou touchest
and read them over and over again, more carefully then holy scripture.
Therefore justly is that voice thundered out against thee from Heaven: Eccl. c.
12. verse. 1^.
who will take compassion of the Inchanter stung by the serpent, or of any that
come nere to beasts? Therefore touch not these whosoever you are, that will not
be infected and perish, for these most pernicious books are likened by Origin
to Egyptian frogs; by S. Hierome to acornes and husks, by S. Augustine to
Auernu^ the river of hell, into which the greatest part of mankind does
miserably ingulfe themselves, and sink into eternal perdition.

. I.
But perhaps thou may say: From hence I select phrases, by these I polish my
style, learn eloquence and attain to the knowledge of ancient customs. The
truth is, thou would learn to speak well, and live il, or rather to speak
il and live worse: for cut of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
Matthew. cap. 12. verse. 34.
What need have thou to seek for gold in these puddles? Shall thou benefit thy
self (my youth) and gather so much from this dunghill? as though the Muses had
only lived and died with these venereous companions. Admit it were so, that
learning might not be gotten without these; were it not better to be without
it, then void of modesty? and rather to be less learned, then less chaste?
This is but a cloak and a vain pretext. that no science, no style, no
eloquence, can subsist without these obscene writers.

If I (EDESIMVS) drinking to thee in miskadine powered into a cup of gold or
precious stone should first bruise a foul spider into it, would thou pledge
me! would thou esteem so much of that delicious wine or rare art and
workma^ship of the bowl, that whilst thine eyes denounce certain danger of
death, thou would not credit them, but give way to thy alluring appetite? I
assure my self thou art not so stupid a so^te. The like for all the world is to
be found in these books. The phrase style and elocution, like the Goblet,
flatter the eyes, the cover of the book shining with gold and purple, their
pictures cut in brass, their fair and flourishing words, their fables and
pleasant historyes, their customs of ancient times, like delicious wine an
hundred years old, inuit us to drink and read them greedily. But think what
a rank spider floateth therein? There lasciviousness, concupiscence and luxury
are lurking: death has belched into these cups. A man should rather be
thirsty then drink his own b^ne. Verily dishonest books are more pestilent
and pernicious, then any serpents poison. For an obscene Writer is a perpetual
Pander: there is no time wherein he inuiteth not a man to impure thoughts,
stirs up sensual motious, and finally infecteth with a deadly plague those
that are seruilely led thereby, and curious in searching after their own
destruction. Hence it comes to pass that infinite is the mischeef of these
wanton books and pictures: for as the one ingenuously inuoluing ribauldry
allureth a man to incontinency; so the other laying lime-twigges upon his eyes
deceaues and entangles his chastity. In a word what do those authors? no
less then if they should infect fountains and common wells with poison, and
become thereby guilty of al their deaths that drink thereof

. II.
(...) a certain Captain of the Parthians having slain Erassus with many of
his soldiers and children, found amongst the spoil the Milefian fables of
Aristides, and for that respect most severely treated and insulted over the
Romans. What will the wicked Spirit do at the hour of their deaths (who with
so great industry read lascivious books) when he shall present to their dying
eyes, their O^ids, Amadises, and such like, for which perhaps they easily and
foolishly omitted the service of God. Thou know, my EDESIMVS, how in times
past the Jews cried out before the Roman tribunal ^ Non hunc sed Bar^bbam,
not this man but Barabbas. In like manner do the readers of lascivious books,
with as loud a voice, by their particular daily practice, cry: Not this, not
the book of the imitation of Christ, nor that of the motives of virtues, nor
Claudius Vuxmontius of penance, nor Dominick Cand^l^ of virginity; not Francis
Bruno of Christ or Christ his mother, not Lewis Granada who wrote many books
of piety, not Francis Arias who discourses of the imitatio^ of the Blessed
Virgin, nor Lewis Richeom of the Pilgrim of L^ureto; not these, no; away with
them. We will not have D^dacus de stella of the contempt of the world, nor
Gabriel Inchinus of the last things, nor Martin Delrius his work of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, nor those holy mediatious of Lewis de Ponte; none of
these, but Barabbas, but the french Amadis, that copious and illustrious
Author who wrote above four, and twenty books; give us the Heliodori, the
Arbitri, the Madaurenses, the Fausti; we would have commerce with these, not
with those other peevish writers. Can you so easily renounce Christ and
Christian books, admit Barabbas, seek and cherish these murdering books that
infect and destroy your soul? I said before these books were like the frogs
of Egypt, which hideously croaked in every house, defiled their very tables,
disturbed their rest, and fowled their chambers. So says the holy scripture:
Exodus c. 8. verse. 3.
They shall enter into they house, and thy very bedchamber, and upon thy bed
etc. They may well be said to enter into our beds. For both when we are about
to sleep, and when we are asleep, such like obscene frogs present themselves
unto us. Hence it proceeds (EDESIMVS) that oftentimes, even sleeping we are
not without sin: and our sleep itself proves offensive to God and to us,
because whilst we were awake we were not without offense. And tell me, I beseech
you, how great is this madness of ours? Our next neighbors house is al ready
on fire, and our chimney begins to cast forth flames; and yet we make have to
cast in rosin and oil. What need have we to enkindle lust with these books?
it ^ageth already too much in men's bodies, by that deadly bit their forefather
tasted, Verily it were better even to be without eyes, their make so il use of
them.

. III.
Josephus recounteth Lib. 12. Antiq. In laic. cap. 1.
that Theopompus for having sifted too curiously into the law of God, was for
the space of thirty days distracted in mind, and that Theodecles the Poet
attempting to insert somewhat out of holy scripture into a certain tragedy of
his, had his eyes over shadowed with a kind of dimnesse. Ah EDESIMVS, if this
holy curiosity (as I may call it) be not pardonable, what will become of that
which is impious and abominable? Virginity and curiosity do not consort, nor
make their abo^de in one mansion, especially that which consists in
lascivious books. Nonnus the Poet took a good course, when he tore in pieces
a book of his entitled the Dionysiaca, and addressed his style to piety.
Eneas Siluius (who was afterward Pope Pius the second) published certain
things somewhat wantonly written in the heat of his youth, which himself being
of riper years censured, and very much labored to suppress whatsoever of
that kind, all the days of his life after. Heerupon these were his words and
earnest request: Give more credit to an old man then a young, respect more a
Bishop then a private person, reject Eneas, accept Pius. Ieannes Picus
Mirandula burned certain amorours books of his own composing. I knew a man
who approaching nere to the end of his life, by this verse following condemned
al such like verses tending to leuity: Iternali versus, antinam qui perditis,
it^.
Hence wicked soul destroying verses, hence.
In our Age Laurence Gambara, Peter Bembus; Francis Petrark, T^rquatus Tassus,
Peter Ronsard and many other bitterly bewail whatsoever they had before
lasciuiously written. So that you can never put these books into a safer place
then the fire. But I ask of thee, whosoever thou art that read such like
books, would thou admit into thy house a baude or any other old croane that
exercises that trade? I think thou would answer me, let al such guests be
expelled out of every honest house. But (my youth) obscene books and pictures
are worse then any baude, for they allure us at al hours. An il man is
sometimes the author of good counsel, but out of an il and lascivious book
you shall never learn any honesty. This is of the nature of a venomous beast:
you may destroy it, but you can not change it; always it is the same and like
itself, a pestilent corrupter of minds, an ouerthrower of their candor,
modesty, sanctity and al their virtue; a teacher of lewdness immodesty,
lasciviousness, and al other vices. Dishonest books are more virulent, and
infinitely more hurtful indeed, then any Circes, S^ens, Hid^aes or harpyes are
fained to be. Wherefore with very good cause the Lateran and Tridentine
Councels by a severe law forbid them either to be read or touched by
Christians. For if that most holy man S. Hierome affirms he was scourged
before the tribunal of Christ, because he was a Ciceronian, what do you think
will become of your Catullians, Propertians, Amadisians. EOESIMVS. I am
persuaded by you (PARTMENIVS) and without delay either this day or to morrow I
will survey my little library, and if I find any books of this kind, I will
casheere them. But what is your opinion of those pictures which together with
their garments have stripped themselves of al honesty.

THE FOVRTH ALLVREMENT to incontinency, Dishonest Pictures. CHAP. VI.
PARTMENIVS. Whatsoever I said of obscent books, the same of such like
pictures I constantly affirm. They transfer through the eyes plague and
venom to the heart: when temptation is wanting a picture supplies it is place. In
times past many idol were exposed to be adored, which honest eyes would even
have disdained to look on. The divine wisdom cries out: Sap. 14.12.
The beginning of fornication is the seeking out of idols, and the finding of
them to the corruption of life. Those mad m^n imagined that dishonesty which
their painted Gods and Godesses represented unto them was modesty, and what was
lawful to their Gods, was not forbidden to them. From these fountains spring
such streams. We easily descend from dishonest pictures to dishonest acts.
EDESIMVS. But yet you will not condemn al such pictures to be straight thrown
into the fire. We must sometimes show ourselves favorable to science and art.
Painters and grauers oftentimes represent a naked man that the shape of his
body (a sabrike much to be admired) may the more lively appear PARTMENIVS.
What? do you patronise these? as if art must needs perish if honesty do not.
They were reputed the most famous painters who have been most chaste. Such were
Tutian and Tintoret, venerians; Christopher schawrz of Munchen: most skilful
artizans, even to this day, admire their works: they never painted any wanton
picture. That work of Tintoret in the Court of Venice, where Christ is
crucified by the Roman soldiers, to this very day does silently preach. But
Christopher Schwarz (as he himself confesses) did so employ al whatsoever art,
sense, spirit, affection or comeliness he could devise upon one only picture
of the Blessed Virgin Mary sitting and cherishing her little Son upon her
knees that at last he gave himselfful satisfaction. Which at this day is to be
seen at Munchen in the Scholars hal of the Society of JESUS. And (which is
most to be admired) there has been none ever able to imitate his art. Many
excellent painters have attempted to draw the like, but with unlike success.
This piece doubtless proved far more singular for that the workman employed
al his wit and art not to paint the Goddess of love, but the Mother of God.
Those shameless painters are but the devils huntsmen; they ensnare men's eyes
unawares with such like pictures as with nets. It is an incredible thing how
much mischief is done by these lascivious shapes. Notwithstanding every where
shall you find this kind of eyesore: in chambers, parlers, dyning rooms,
gardens, fountains, porches, lobbeyes, bed-chambers, public passages, yea
also in cups and goblets: they infect learned books: even those of arms and
pedegrees are not free or exempted. And how many eyes and hearts (think you)
have miserably suffered shipwreck against these rocks?

. I.
Caligula at Rome, in a public banque^ caused a servant, for taking from a bed
a little silver plate, to be straight delivered over to the hangman, his hands
to be cut off, and hung about his neck before his breast, with a certain
scrole of paper carried defore him, which declared the cause of his punishment,
and thus to pass through the company of them that were at the banquet.
Sulpitius Galba cut of the hand of a certain banker, Sueton. in Calig. c. 32.
and lib. 7. in Galba.
detected to have played false in the delivery and exchange of moneys, and
fastened it to the table of the general receipt. Painters deserve like
punishment, who are so shameless, that they make other men's eyes as utterly
void of shame as their own. There are many who read not wanton books because
they have them not: but very many behold lascivious pictures though not of
their own; and as silly birds, caught with lime-twigges, the more they
flutter their wings amongst them, the faster they stick unto them: So men's
eyes, the more they are taken with this devilish bird-lime, the more daily they
behold them. Even the idolaters themselves (if there were any wise or honest
among them) did not allow of such pictures, but they al much detested these
impure allurements of their eyes. Aristotle in his Politics says thus: Lib.
7. Polit. c. 17.
And seeing we forbid men to utter any dishonest word, it is most apparent we
also prohibit them the view of al pictures and actions that are dishonest. Let
this therefore be the care of Magistrates that no picture or statua be made to
represent such lascivious things. But (o my good Aristotle) thou art long since
rejected, and thy moral Philosophy banished, we have entertained other
customs. If at this very day (o my Philosopher) thou were permitted to survey
the houses of Christians, and behold the painted tables in them, thou would
conclude that diverse of them had said aside al modesty. Verily Heretics are
now grown so impudent, that they have cast forth of their chambers and
galleries the picture of Christ crucified, and hang upon the walls of their
dining-parlours their Faunes and painted Cupids, their Venuses and
Lady-Fort^es, that they may dine and suppe with their sensualities. But in the
Churches themselves are the pictures of Christ o^ his Saints in more safety?
no; Mr. Caluins mild Spirit has cast them likewise out from thence. Seldom
shall you see any lascivious pictures pulled down; they need not fear their
expulsion out of this or that place, seeing they have larger rooms elsewhere to
entertain them. But the conflict of that most chaste Catharine, the triumphs
of that sincere Vrsula, the victory of that most modest Agnes, the depainted
torments of so many thousand courageous Martyrs are ytterly contemned and cast
out of doors. Contrariwise those Goddesses that professed al manner of
impude^cy, are raked out of hell and their pictures exposed to open view, that
there may be given occasion of sin to all that are willing to perish. It is
most abominable to be spoken, that such hellish monsters are esteemed by
Christians, and the pictures of our Savior, of the Blessed Mother of God, and
other Saints, as if they sauoured of some kind of idolatry, banished from every
corner of men's houses. Most absurd it is that the picture of the most Blessed
Virgin Mary may not be tolerated in any part of their houses, and yet the image
of that filthy harlot Venus have the honor to be hung up in an eminent plate.

. II.
There was one of the Sodality of our Blessed Lady at Ingolstadt, who had a
singular gift in abolishing this mischief. He found dispersed through the
city by some kind of brokers, certain wanton pictures, impudent in
themselves, and dangerous to each modest eye that beheld them. Whereupon
determining to destroy them, he bought and burnt them al, lest their sight
might burn others; protesting he never lost with less detriment, or bought
any thing with more gain. O excellent act and suitable to the laws of modesty!
Let that man tear and burn these pictures, that will not have his mind torn,
inflamed and burnt with venery. Believe me such pictures are often far worse
then impure discourses. A word once spoken is gone, men's words are but wind,
and vanish away: it is a man's writing the remains extant, dishonesty painted
continues, and from one man's eye insinuates itself into another, and another.
Wanton pictures are the altars of the devil, upon which our eyes, our thoughts,
and heart offer sacrifice to this Prince of darkness. There is fearce any one
that can conceive the hurt procured by these pictures, both to their author
and spectatours. A famous printer of late delivered me a Catalogue of such
painters and engrauers as having artificially, yet immodestly painted or
engraued, became distracted, out of their wits, or taken away by untimely
death, and so ended shamefully their lives. Thus no man (you see) without
punishment makes or beholds these prouocations ^o lust. Far of therefore
be from us those infamous labors of Aristides or Pausantas, a^ also those of
Nicophanes, called by Antiquity the whoo^ish painters, who discovered their
corrupt affections in their pictures. Fie upon this Art that sells itself to
men's eyes to rob them of their honesty. EDESIMVS. The painters (my
PARTHENIVS) are nothing beholding to you for pleading their cause. PARTHENIVS.
Yea but they are much obliged: those I mean whose colors serve to express
their art and not teach men to be lascivious. EDESIMVS. I was of your opinion
before you began this discourse of immodest pictures. I think there is not any
one so utterly void of shame but will be constrained to confess that such
pictures as these, are very great enticers to lust. And as for my self, believe
me, if I find any thing immodestly painted, either in my study amongst my
books or other household stuff, instantly it goes to the fire. PARTHENIVS. So
we ought to do: it is better a picture or a paper burn then our soul.
EDESIMVS. But let us go forward to discourse of wandering eyes.

THE FIFTH ALLVREMENT to Incontinency, wandering eyes. CHAP. VII.
PARTHENIVS. Amongst the blandishments of lust, I have put wandering eyes. I will
repeat my verse: Otia, mensa, libri, vaga lumina. This mischief of lust creepes
not through one only door into a man's mind; often it ascends by those open
gates of his ears, but oftener and more peniciously by the double casements of
his eyes. We want no testimony for this; by our own harms we are too well
experienced heerin. Unwary eyes precipitated that holy prophet David into two
most enormious crimes. He saw and was set on fire; only by beholding a woman
in a bath, he became both an adulterer and an homicide. 2. Reg. 11.2.
Therefore Job being wary and fearful of this precipice says: Job. 31.1.
I have made a covenant with mine eyes, that I I would not so much as think of
a Virgin. For what part should God from above have in me, and what wheritance
the Omnipotent from on high? He did very well in making a covenant with his
eyes. Whosoever means to maintain his chastity must bargain with them.
Unless our eyes be bound under a certain law or covenant, we can never have
so firm a purpose of chastity, but it may by deceit or allurements, or at
least through negligence and leuity be quite overthrown. It is the saying of
S. Ephrem: Tom. 2. tract. de Humil.
A broken candu^i loses its waters; and wandering eyes destroy a chaste mind.
Heerupon Christ to suppress the wantonness of our eyes made this severe law:
Matthew. 5.28.
who shall see a woman to covet her has already committed adultery with her in
his bart. By Moses (says S. Gregory) In Job. c. 32.
the act only of luxury, but by the author of purity Christ, even our
disordinate thoughts are condemned. Heerupon were so many admonitions, so many
precepts given to our eyes; look not upon a woman; and, behold not a virgin,
etc. turn away thy face from a trimmed woman etc. Here hence was that no less
prudent then severe punishment which Solomns lawgiuer of the L^cre^se*
inflicted, that an adulterer should have his eyes pulled out, because they are
either the leaders or perswaders to adultery. Lucian said the eye was the first
entrance to love; and according to Plate, the eye is the beginning; to
Philostratus, the seat of love. Si nescis, ocul^ sunt in amore duces. Propert.
l. 2. Eleg. 15.

Know that thine eyes, loves pandertare.


Nazianzen says, that shameless and curious eyes being nimble and busy
instruments are still gazing an unlawful objects. Heerupon was that elegant
saying of S. Basil: Lib. de vera virginitate. Plin. l. 2. c. 105.
With our eyes, as with incorporeal hands, we touch whatsoever we are led unto
by our well.

. I.
Pliny affirms that Naptha (a certain sulphurous kind of bitume^) has so
great affinity with fire, that happening to come nere it, suddenly the fire
leapes into it: the same may we say of those burning torches of our eyes, and
the fire of concupiscence. We must therefore by all possible means restrain
our eyes from beholding women's beauty; for there is a great affinity between
these fires of our eyes, and their faces which they greedily delight to gaze
on. Beauty (says Tertullian) of its own nature allues to luxury. EDESIMVS.
But a handsome man or a modest woman shall never hurt me: PARTHENIVS. O my
EDESIMVS, there are many good and very good things; but not so for thee not me,
nor for this man or that. Susanna was good and holy, but not to the eyes of
those Elders that beheld her. Everily think Bersabee was good and honest, but
not so to the eyes of David. Virtuous and good was that Hebrew Joseph, and yet
he set on fire the eyes of his Mistress. The tree of Paradise was good, and
yet there did our mother Eve lose her eyesight. It were the part of a mad man
to suffer his eyes to be put out, though it were with a golden dagger. The
beauty of a virgin to a curious beholder is a golden dagger * but no less is
his loss that loses his eyes thereby, then if he lost them otherwise. This
only sense of seeing is a great step to concopiscence. For as Cleme^ Alewand^us
wisely admonishes us, whilst our eyes play the wantons, our appetites are set
on fire. Clem. li. 3. Pedag. c. 11.
Therefore the eye is the first fiery dart of fornication, and the sight of a
woman burns us. To many we must sing this, not so elegant as true: Virg. 3.
Georg.
Beware of thy self and thine eyes; be watchful over thy thoughts, a woman
touched is bird-lime, beheld, a Basiliske. EDESIMVS. But in very truth it is a
hard matter for the eyes, those sparkling orbs of our head, to observe always
such severe laws. Nature has placed them there as sentinels in the top of a
living tower, that upon the approach of danger they might forewarne the other
members, and prevent their peril. Therefore of necessity our eyes ought to be
open, because they are the guardians of our body. PARTHENIVS. I grant they are;
but oftentimes may one with Iuuenal demand concerning these keepers: Iuuen.
Sat. 6. verse. 345.
Who shall keep the keepers themselves. Therefore let our eyes perform their
office; let them keep our body, but so, that they betray not our souls, which
they shall better preserve, if they be shut or modestly look downward, then
gazing and wide open. Would they be turned upward? let them behold the heavens.
Would they be cast downward? let them look upon the earth. EDESIMVS. In my
opinion, it is not so seemly for a man to converse with men with his
countenance always dejected, as if he were guilty of theft. PARTHENIVS. Yea
certainly it is most seemly, and there is no garb of modesty more decent, then
to cast down a man's cyes and fix them upon the earth. And know you what kind
of document concerning this, a certain woman gave to that most holy man S.
Ephrems EDESIMVS. I desire to know, declare it unto me.

. II.
PARTHENIVS. S. Ephrem going toward Edessa in the way made his prayer to
Almighty God in this manner: Sozom. l. 3. hist. Eccl. c. 16. ^rcom. 10. febr.
c. r. Metaphrasie.
O my Lord so direct this journey of mine, that at my first entrance into this
city, I may light upon some good man that may religiously discourse with me of
such things as are for the perfection and beautifying of my soul. And when
making have he drew nere to the gate, he began to debate with himself what
questions he should propound unto that man; what first and what last he should
ask him. Whilst he went reuoluing these cogitations, behold a certain light
woman met him at the very gate. S. Ephrem fixing his eyes upon her, stood as it
were in an ex^asy. Questionless this holy man was much troubled at the meeting
of this woman, and grieved that Almighty God had not seconded his desires: So
that he cast pensive and discontented eyes upon her face. And she began no
less steadfastly to eye him standing in that manner. When they had for a good
space thus silently beheld one another, at last S. Ephrem seeking to strike her
with some terror and shame; do thou not blush (said he) thou impudent
creature, to stare thus in a man's face. Alas good man (said she) I am not
ashamed; I suppose it is lawful for me to behold thee in this sort, for I was
taken from thee and out of thy side. But it most befitteth thee not to look
upon women, but upon the earth thy mother, from which thou were framed and into
which thou art finally to return. S. Ephrem listening to her unexpected answer
said secretly to himself: Ephrem be content with this, for now thy wishes are
satisfied. Thou desiredst of God a Master to instruct thee in thy course of
life, and thou have met with one; thou owe this woman both thanks and a
Masters stipend. It is the same God that speaks by the mouth of man or woman.
Thou have enough for this day; thou have as a much as thou can learn and
practice in the space of many years: set a guard upon thine eyes, shut them
against women, open them to the earth, and behold thy grave. Let us in this
manner (my EDESIMVS) eleuate our eyes to heaven, or fix them on the earth, so
shall they be taught both to fly and creep: to fly toward God, and creep
toward our grave. A quiet modest eye is a great treasure

Et castigatae collecta modestia frontis.

And modest recollectio^ of a cleared brow EDESIMVS. Permit me to interrupt you
with a word or two. In the fabric of man's body why do the eyes last of al
receive life? for so they say: and why are they first of al when the hour of
death approaches, deprived thereof. PARTHENIVS. Nature has well ordained it so,
that seeing they are the occasion of great danger, they may have the less time
to work our mischief. And God through his providence has made our eyes the
instruments of weeping, that from the sourse of vices tears might distill to
wash away and cleanse our enormities. For not only exorbitant lust, but also al
sorts of vices through the eyes have free passage to the soul, as Fabius does
rightly affirm: Quintil. de cl^.
by the^ they present her with adultery, show her incest, set before her the
house they would have her unlawfully to covet. The enticers to vice and
ringleaders to wickedness are the eyes; so that blindness is the companion of
innocence, whereby the way to many unlawful desires is cut off. That temperate
Sampson, a man borne through Gods special favor, so soon as he beheld Dalila
perished, but afterward made blind, recovered his strength, which by evil
seeing he had lost. A man given over to sensual appetite carries fetters in
his eyes, wherewith he shackleth glue, wherewith he lays fast hold, hooks,
wherewith he catches, flames wherewith he burns, shafts, wherewith he
transfixeth both his own and the souls of other men: shackled with these
fetters, caught with these hooks, burnt with these flames: transfixed with
these shafts was the Assyrian Holosernes. He saw Judith and lost his life.
Judith. 10.17.
And when she was entered before his face, fort with Holosernes was caught in
his eyes.

. III.
I do not so much admire that Macedonian Alexanders invincible arm, as his
modest and temperate eyes. He would not suffer the wife of Darius, (s;aith
Plutarch) Libel de curiositate.
in regard she was accounted beautiful, to come into his sight; for he
prudently feared to be encrapped with his eyes, which he resolutely prevented:
and so became a greater conqueror in not seeing the wife of Darius then in
ouercoming Darius himself. I will not let pass the Athenian Pericles in this
respect a very laudable Prince. Valor. Mat. l. 4. c. ^.
This man, when Sophoc^s his colleague in his Pretourship, employed with him in
public office, exceedingly commended the beauty of a certain boy that passed
by, taxed him for intemperance; and told him that not only the hands of a
Pretour ought to be kept from lucre of money, but his eyes also from libidinous
aspects. Woe be unto us Christians at the day of the last judgment! As we are
exact in the knowledge of our laws, so are we prone to violate them. Our law
maker Christ cries out: Matthew. c. 18. verse. 9.
If thine eye scandalize thee, pull it out, and cast i^ from thee. It is better
for thee having but one eye to enter into life, then having two eyes to be cast
into hell fire. A serious law, but not reputed so by many that make it but a toy
to fix their gazing eyes like brute beasts upon whatsoever lustful object. We
rarely at this day see any robes that make a covenant with their eyes, not so
much as to think of a virgin. We are rather so many Salomons, and license our
lawless eyes to wander at their pleasures. Al things (says Solomon) Eccles.
c. 2. verse. 10.
that mine eyes desired, I never dented them. And what sanctity of life can you
hope for in him, who thus exhortes his eyes: Go mine eyes wheresoever you
list, and range at liberty: whatsoever stands with your pleasures is lawful
for you: be satiated in seeing according to your desire: I will not deprive you
of the sight of any pleasing object: you have one only law that is liberty.
Where so much freedom is given to the eyes, the soul is in a poor and
lamentable taking. It is an old saying of the Fathers: The sight il governed,
is a sign of a soul il managed. And as a house can never be clean while the
broken windows let in all manner of birds, so that soul shall never be pure,
whose eyes, her casements, stand open to entertain al sorts of hurtful
curiosityes.

. IIII.
If there be so many dangers issuing from the eyes to the soul, David not
without cause carefully prays: Auerte oculos meos, ne videant vanitatem,
Turn away mine eyes that they may not behold vanity. PARTHINIVS. And let us,
if we have any care of our chastity, daily make a covenant with our eyes, daily
insist upon this petition to Almighty God: Auerte oculos meos, ne videant
vanitatem. God is ready to assist those that are willing to be assisted: but
they must be serious in their good desires, and persevere constantly. Thou
know what S. Augustine relates of Alipius his best and most intimate
friend. He had an auersion from al dishonest plays and interludes: yet having
long withstood all the sweet inuitements and entreaties of his friends, at last
was by them with a familiar kind of violence carried away saying: Lib. 6.
Confess. c. 8.
you may draw Alipius in part to the amphitheater; but my mind and eyes shall
not be there: therefore as absent I will be present. He came, sat down. The
business began to grow into some heat: and Alipius, as he had determined,
closed his eyes, diuerted his thoughts, (...) far forth as he could, and
fixed them on other matters. I would he had stopped likewise his ears: he
began well, but did not end so. Upon the sudden there arose a great shout
amongst ^he people. Here my good Alipius overcome with curiosity would no more
be blind, nor was the same man he came thither, but one of that multitude: he
opened his eyes which he had long closed, beheld, cried out, grew inflamed,
carried away with him such a curiosity as provoked him not only to come again
into their company, by whom before he was drawn, but even to prevent them and
incite others: notwithstanding afterward by Gods help and S. Augustines
admonitions he reformed this madness. So that we must never cease to make this
prayer unto God: Auerte oculos meos ne videant vanitatem. Phisicians are wont
when they have any desperate diseases under their cure, to forbid the sick body
not only the eating, but even the very beholding of hurtful meats; lest perhaps
the eyes may betray the mouth, and the patient think that wholesome which he
imagines will be toothsome. In this manner (according to Cassianus) let that
man deal with himself whom the flattering flesh often infesteth; let him
constantly withdraw his eyes from those objects, which though they are
pleasing, prove hurtful unto him. For as S. Augustine testifies, the only
beholding, is the direct way to the deed itself. Our eyes (as says S. Gregory)
that draw us to sin ought to be prevented by the government of reason, and
shutting in time, as it were, their double doors, be restrained from figh^ of
enticing objects.

. V.
S. Ambrose thinks Lots wife was punished and made so unusual an example,
because she looked back and beheld that shameless city and lascivious kind of
people. Sometimes our eye is not only to be pulled out, but likewise to be cast
from us: Erue eum and proijce abste. Matthew. c. 18. verse. 9.
There are some that pull out their eye; when it is somewhat wanton, but do not
cast it from them. Now and then they shun luxury, but avoid not the occasions
thereof. That chaste Joseph did no so, who not con^ent with pulling out his eye
did also cast i^ from him? did not only contemn as well favors as threats of
his Mistress, but deceived he likewise: for she going about to attract him
with most flattering importunityes, he cast of his garment and fled away. How
many chaste men have not only pulled out, but also cast from them their
ouer-curious and betraying eyes, so that they would not so much as abide the
fight of their own mothers or sisters. Pior an Egyptian, had lived in the
wilderness, fifty years, better acquainted with Angels then with men. At last
hardly compelled no otherwise then under obedience, he came forth to the door
of his cave, and suffered his sister, who was then an old woman, to behold him.
There are many may be numbered with this man in respect of their like modesty,
and retireme^t of their eyes: nay there have been some, who upon occasion
dictated severe laws to their eyes written even with their own blood. S. Lucy
that most religious virgin attempted an exploit never heard of in former Ages,
and not much inferior to this of our Nicetas. She understood that a certain
dishonest lover (namely the King of great Britanie) had drawn infectious
flames from her eyes. Whereupon she said: Is the kind of Britanie so much set
on fire with mine eyes? does he take such pleasure in them? well, he shall have
them. Straight way she pulled both these bright stars from their heavenly
spheres; drew forth both her eyes, and sent them for a token to her wooer;
choosing rather her eyes should perish then herself. Did she not with most
courageous sincerity observe the law of our Lord: Matthew. Raderus plura de has
part 3. viridarij SS. c. 9. and Jacob. Bidermanus l. 2. epigram. ep. 28. and
29.
Pull it out and cast it from thee? Did she not pull it out? did she not cast
from her, not one only, but both her eyes: yea though they were guiltless;
not for that they had sinned by seeing, but left by being seen they might
entice others to sin? A true lover of chastity, she punishes her eyes with
holy blindness, will neither see nor be seen.

. VI.
EDESIMVS. Ah how far are we from so resolute and courageous chastity?
PARTHENIVS. But it is not required at our hands, that with a dagger we should
wound or thrust out our eyes: shut them and thou have pulled them out;
restrain them and thou have thrown them from thee. The time will come when it
will be better for thee having but one eye to be received into heaven, then for
having made too liberal use of both, to be condemned to hell. Our Law maker very
clearly proclaims: Matthew. ^. verse. 29.
If thy right eye scandalize thee, pull it out and cast it from thee. For better
it is for thee, that one of thy members perish, then that thy whole body be
cast into hell. But if the fact of S. Lucy be not imitable, we have others that
are. In the acts of S. Carolus Borromeus many things are to be admired. Amongst
the chief of them, I may worthily number this. Upon a certain time this holy
man had his dwelling near the market place, where in respect of the frequent
concourse of people, was always great occasion given of ^u^iosity: but he was
so great an enemy of this vice (which commonly possessed other men) and so
far from spending whole days at the windows (as it is many men's custom)
that he neither bestowed hours nor any parts thereof in gazing about: nay he
was so precise heerin; that he seemed rather to inhabit a desert or some prison
condemned to utter solitude and darkness. This man (my EDESIMVS.) this man we
may well call the Master of his eyes; who, as it manifestly appears, had gotten
a great conquest over himself in all his affections. The weaker Sex are nothing
inferior to men. Sara was an Abbess of holy Nuns in the Scythiotick
monastery, situated in a pleasant place, near to which a very clear river
gently glided, the stream whereof free from al mad crept along, and shined
with christalline waters, through which though deep, every little stone might
be numbered. This mild riuulet was decked with verdant bancks most cheerful to
behold. Whosoever saw, commended this so softly stealing river. Sara often
heard the commendation of this silver stream: and, as many times it comes to
pass, the multitude of commenders begat in her a desire to see it. But she
having power over herself, and being sole Lady and Empress of her own eyes,
imposed this law: There is no necessity (said she) urges thee to see the
streams which pass by this house; thou may without ever seeing them, arrive
to those everlasting fountains above the stars. There are in the world many
things more pleasant, which notwithstanding thine eyes shall never behold: let
this river be one of those. Wherefore I seriously command thee, never open so
much as a window to behold that prospect. She said and performed it; sixty
years she dwelled near this water without ever viewing the same. A long and
difficult conflict, maintained by no potent enemy; a victory most renowned and
wun^e by the continency of her eyes. Let this be the weapon to dig out ours,
which is most religious, when there is most danger of destruction and ruin.

. VII.
Did you never hear what that elegant distick admonishes us to do, when our
eyes are endangered by the alluring beauty of women. Attend, I rehearse it:
Quid facies, facies Veneris, si veneris ante?
Non sedeas, sed eas: ne pereas, per eas.
Sit, stand, and gate when Venus does appear?
No: fly, or perish: fly with wings of fear.


Do thou conceive it? If the beauty of a woman's countenance begin to allure
thee; be going, or else thou perishest. He that is unwilling to go, is willing
to perish. EDESIMVS. But I will shut mine eyes and stay there still. PARTHENIVS.
Thou may close them; but as long as thou remainest there, it is likewise in
thy power to open them. It is good to shut our eyes, but the best and safest
way is to depart. Alipius carried himself warily, but not constantly in the
theater. His sitting there a long time without seeing was commendable; but he
lost all this, when at last he made soil use of his sight. Too often do we play
the part of Alipius: we trust to our eyes, and hope, upon the approach of danger
modestly to retire into some place of protection. We are deceived: these
traitors when they most should, are least faithful. Therefore trust not your
eyes. It is good to seal them up, and persuade them not to see: but it is
better, and much safer to withdraw them, that they may not see, although they
would. S. Bernard before he retired himself to a religious life, upon a time
somewhat too steadfastly beheld a certain woman. Straight way so soon as he
reflected on what he had done, he was so much ashamed of his curiosity, and so
incensed to take speedy revenge of himself, that without any further
deliberation in a great frost, he leaped into a poole of extreme cold water,
where he stood plunged up to the very neck, til growing pale he was almost
frozen; and by this means extinguished al heat of concupiscence.

Thou have here (my Nicetas) a most holy im^tou^ of thy noble act. Though be
sought not with this bloody morsel, notwithstanding he gloriously triumphed
over his lust, and for one only cast of his eyes punished all the members of his
body, and courageously va^quishing himself, got the victory. This is to teach
our eyes how they ought to prevent dangers which happen by gazing on alluring
beauty. But let us descend from the eyes to the mouth.

THE SIXTH ALLVREMENT to Incontinency: Lascivious and dishonest words. CHAP.
VIII.
BE not seduced: evil discourse corrupts good manners. 1. Cor. 15.33.
Ah how many young men have been debaushed by this pestilence! Who perhaps took
in at their ears that venom which they eschewed with their eyes. And as there
is li^le difference in what part of the body thou receauest a wound, If it be
mortal; so it imports not much (if thou perish) whether thou perish by the
eyes, or the ears. The Egyptians being to sacrifice to Harpocrates were wont
to cry: Lingua fortuna, Ling^ Dam^. Pro. 18.21.
The tongue good fortune. The tongue a devil. Life and death are indifferently
in the power of the tongue. And for the most part there sittes upon it either
an angel or a devil. A lascivious tongue is an open sepulcher full of filthy and
odious smells: Psalm. 13.^.
Their throat is an open sepuleher. S. Chrysostom here maruelleth, that
seeing dead carcasses are buried, and lest their putrefaction should annoy us,
the deeper laid in the ground; yet putrified, lascivious and filthy words, are
daily vomited out of men's breasts, and often in the hearing of many uttered
with intent they may perniciously creep further abroad. An unclean mouch is an
open and stinking sepulcher. O my God, how infinite are these in every place?
Do but look into the world, EDESIMVS, survey the corners of each house; you
shall for the most part euerywhere find shameless tongues, such as not only
instill idle, but even power out foul and obscene speeches into modest men's
ears. These snakes are hissing every where: every where shall you hear
speeches that an honest man would be ashamed of. Hieremy in times past
complained thus: I attended (says he) Hier. ^.^.
and hearkened; (...) man speaks that which is good. Even such is this our
Age. So that if a man had no other cause absolutely to forsake this unclean
world, this alone would be sufficient, that he might avoid the hearing of so
many dishonest and shameless discourses. Modest speech has long since been
bannished out of cittyes, nay hardly in it safe within the walls of religious
houses. Although I think in these places there are never such like heard which
go unpunished. But amongst lay persons there is as much ribauldry as liberty,
as much impurity as licentious impunity. You shall hardly find a man in any
place, who either with a modest sigh, or with any the least severe aspect will
vouchsafe to rebuke these fordid kind of speeches.

. I.
EDESIMVS. O my PARTHENIVS, thou can never mould this world into new manners.
These wanton and lascivious words beget not sighs and tears, but laughter
and applause. PARTHENIVS. This is that I grieve at and complain of: Prou. 2.14.
they are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in the height of
wickedness. S. Augustine grievously condemns this in himself, and his
companions. Lib. 2. conf. c. 3. and 9.
They urged one another with mutual exhortations: Let us go and do it, and it
is a shame for us not to be shameless. The scripture of it self otherwise
very sparing of words, for the chastisment of wanton speech displayeth al its
eloquence. The tongue (says the holy writ) Iac. 3.6.
is placed amongst our other members, which defiles the whole body, and
inflameth the wheel of our nativity inflamed by hell. Fo^le dishonest words,
are the sulphurous torches sent from hell which provoke sometimes to impure
fires even the minds which are most modest and chaste.

That mellifluous writer S. Bernard says: Sermon. de 7. spirit.
As there are tongue-lesse and dumb devils, so there are other eloquent and
talkatiue. Amongst these the standard bearer is the lascivious devil; whose
office is to sprinkle men's discourses with ribaldry, and euerywhere to mingle
impudent jests William Perald Bishop of Lions a man excellently learned and
holy, very rightly calls such like speeches the devils spittings. Sermon. in
cant. 24.
Verily the name is aptly accommodated. Al these obscene words are nothing else
but the vomittings and spitting of devils: and a foul speaker is no otherwise
employed, then to make his mouth a kennel for Satan, out of which how can
thou hope for anything either good or modest? A licentious and obscene mouth is
the nursery of al impudency. which redoundeth not only to the damage of the
speaker, but infecteth also with a durty contagion, those that hear it, and by
little and little banisheth al shame. There is but one (says S. Bernard) Ser.
24. in cant.
that speaks and utters but one only word; and yet that one word in a
moment corrupts the ears of many hearers, and kills their fowls. But
perhaps thou will give no ear to any Peralds or Bernards. I will propound unto
thee another, whom it were wickedness to contradict. S. Paul thus severely
commands us: Ad Ephesians. 4.29.
Al naughty speech let it not proceed out of your mouth. And that thou may
know what he does chiefly call evil speech; he says: Ibid. c. 5. verse. 3.
Fornication, and al uncleanness, or avarice, let it not be so much as named
among you, as it becomes Saints: or filthiness, or foolish talk, or scurrility
being to no purpose. Observe: Let it not so much as be named among you. For as
Tully says, very well: Th^se that are modest blush even when they speak of
modesty: and if we ought to hate the thing it self, we should have an auersion
from the very name thereof. For what we speak, we are supposed, not without
cause, both to think of and covet. Phisicians take the chapping of the lips
to be a sign of a fever: and by dishonest words we may give no small
conjecture of an immodest mind. And though al loquacity is an enemy to modesty
(for it serves for a conueyance to curiosity which is the chariot of lust)
notwithstanding that is chiefly, which S. Paul calls uncleanness or
turpitude; and withal requesteth us not to contristate the holy Spirit of God.
A man that has an impure mouth is so odious to the Blessed inhabitants of
heaven, that he would be i^resome even to God himself, the author of al joy,
if he were capable of grief.

. II.
With good reason we detest that impiety of Calvin who melted sacred Chalices
into profane cups, and engraued on them impudent fables out of Ouids
Metamorphosis. Think thou (my EDESIMVS) it is a thing pleasing to God for a
man wantonly to profane his mouth (through which the Blessed Sacrament the
bread of Angels is so often received) with fables, scurrile and venereous
songs, and change the entry of his soul (through which the divine Eucharist
does pass) into the stews and brothel-house of devils? O most abominable
offense! To make that tongue which was ordained for the seat of so heavenly a
banquet, no better then an interpreter to Venus. For these things comes the
anger of God: and too late is it in flames to cry out: Ephesians. 5.6. Luc. 16.24.
vt refrigeret linguam meam, That he may cool my tongue. Nor shall his tongue
be so much tormented for that it took in too much meat in eating, as for
uttering too many words in talking. For (says S. Gregory) one of the
principal faults that waits upon wicked feasters is loquacity, and that for
the most part not of the chastest.

Peter Damian, a man as holy as eloquent, aptly compares a lascivious tougue
to a thrush, which is destroyed by the same thing wherewith it is nourished; for
of that which it eats and voideth is bird-lime made, by which both this and
other birds are taken: so for all the world does the impudent pratler; he
voideth the bird-lime at his own mouth wherewith the bird-catchers of hell lay
fast hold of his soul. Thine own mouth shall condemn thee, says Job, Job.
15.6.
and thy lips shall answer thee. Pliny affirms, Plin. lib. 15. c. 8. and l.
17. c. 24.
that the olive tree waxes barron if a she goat once brouse upon it, or so
much as only lick it. Verily if such be the property of a stinking goat; let a
foul-mouthed man be admitted to speak, he will easily so corrupt the minds of
young men, like so many young olive trees, that whatsoever il they have once
heard, they will to their own prejudice remember all the days of their life.
That which is willingly heard is speedily entertained; and although it be not
mischievous for the present, yet the seede^ remain in the mind, and a growing
mischief always pursues the hearers thereof.

S. Bernardine, a gentleman of the country of Sienna, was so modest from his
very childhood, that as often as he heard any such like unseemly word, he
would change his color as if one had given him a blow on the face. Boys of
the same age such as kept him company, if at any time they had spoken obscenely
when he was in sight, would say, peace, peace, Bernardine comes. O I would to
God we had many of these Bernardines in this our impure Age, that might sharply
reprehend those that babble with such polluted mouths. But (which is much to be
marueled at) t^is was a thing reprehensible even amongst the idolaters
themselves. Epictetus; It is perilous (says he) Enchir. c. 55.
to proceed to impurity of speech. When therefore any such thing shall happen
thou should reprove him that casts forth such kind of speech, or at the
least with silence, or blushing, or some kind of frowning countenance, show
that such discourses are displeasing unto thee. Nil dictu faedum visuque hac
liminae tangat,
Intra quae puer est, procul hinc procul inde puellae,
Lenonum, and cantus pernoctantis parasiti. Iuuenal. sat. 14. verse. 44.

Let no foul word or deed come nigh,
The confines where young boys do lie:
Remove from hence each girl that is light,
And shameless songs of parasite.


Plautus says very truly: I think that man quite lost who has lost his
shame. Shall we therefore, (O good IESV, thou that shall come to judge the
world) shall we be condemned before thy tribunal even by idolaters themselves?
shall thine enemies give sentence against us? We perish, if we be not sensible
of this perishing; destruction is at hand if we walk not circumspect and
cautelous in our words.

. III.
EDESIMVS. You give a rigid censure (my PARTHENIVS) against these pestiferous
tongues, and it seems to you a heinous offense to utter words full of jests
and ribaldry. PARTHINIVS. Not to me only but to the Christian law also. As
though no man could be merry but he must be lascivious. Oftentimes whiles we
affect jests and pleasant conversation, we lay aside out modesty. But in Gods
name let those things be pleasant to us which are honest. I inculcate again
that edict of S. Paul, nay of God himself: 7. Tim. 1.17.
But profane and vain speeches avoid, for they do much grow to impiery. Nor
in this does ribaldrie much differ from the cauils and fallacies of heretics;
their speech creeps like a canker. A canker or gangrene (a horrible and
eating disease) feeds upon live flesh: even so these wanton discourses, tales
and songs spread abroad, and corrupt al modest chastity that comes nere them.
Evil cogitations are an abomination to our Lord, and pure speech most
beautiful. He that speaks unjust things cannot be bid, neither she the
chastising judgment pass by him. Pro. 15.26. Sap. 1.8. E^cl. 24.20.
No word hides itself from him: S^ri^ recounteth how Wallericus an ^n Abbot
made his journey in the winter season, and compelled by the sharpness of the
cold went out of the way into the house of a certain man, who as he thought
was none of the prophanest. But here a much sharper cold entertained this good
man: for he found in that place not so much as one spark of divine love. The
Master of the house, and the Judge of that place, began to break forth not
only into idle, but even obscene discourses. Wallericus said: Surely my
Masters, I suppose you remember that law of the Gospel, that for every idle
word men speak they shall render an account at the day of judgment. But those
shameless men laughed him to scorn that admonished them, spoke more
audaciously, and uttered things more foul and odious. Whereupon Wallericus
replied: My desire was to warm my self here and cherrish my poor afflicted
body, but seeing your tongues pinch me more grievously then any cold they drive
me forth again. Look you to it how you purge your selves of this impure talk
before the judgment seat of Almighty God. But they answered, he might go
when he would, for none of them had sent for him. Another in scoffing manner
said, none of us will tear your cloak with hanging on it, to force your stay;
go get you hence, you have free leave. At this departure they followed him
with taunts and reproaches* God deferred not the revenge, but chastized with
manifest punishment this their obscene wantonness of speech. The Master of the
house was stricken blind, the other plagued with a loathsome disease in his
privy parts. These miserable wretches grew importunate and would willingly have
recalled him with submisse entreaties whom they drove away with their
shameless and insolent tongues: But al in vain, for the Judge roted away
presently with that foul putrefaction: the Master of the house lived longer,
afflicted with a more lingering though not so loathsome punishment of blindness.

. IIII.
Not without cause did Rodulphus Bishop of Eugubium a very holy man command his
younger brother Peter to be whipped, Zachar. lippel^ 26. Iunij de S. Rodulph^.
and for forty days abstain from wine, for that in familiar discourse he had
uttered a lascivious word. Elzearius earl of Arianum a most pious Lord set
down these laws in his house. Idem. 27. September.
1. Every day to hear Mass. 2. To confess themselves of their sins every
week. 3. Every month to Communicate. 4. Either to live chastely or depart his
house. 5. Not to play at dice, or delight themselves in any manner of gaming.
6. To abstain altogether from oaths dishonest words, and ribaldry.


O most excellent laws, and worthy to be fastened at the gates of every house,
whereby both old and young might learn to be wiser and to speak more warily.
Let that man therefore who has a care of his chastity (that most noble and
eminent virtue) co^pose his mind and mouth forthwith to al manner of modesty.
EDESIMVS. But how must we behave ourselves at the table, at feasts, at
meetings, and diverse great assemblyes, when these kind of abominable words
are frequently uttered? PARTHENIVS. Do you know what Ecclesiasticus
persuades? Eccles. 28.28.
Hedge thine ears with thorns, and hear not a wicked tongue. We must shut our
ears against impure speeches, and that at the very first; for they presume
further when they have once gained entrance and are admitted. They that
willingly open their ears to lascivious talk, are like chestnuts (such I mean
as are broken and cast into the fire) which having al ready a rupture in their
rine, discover not themselves, neither by cracking, nor leaping out, which
notwithstanding those do which are sound and entire: Even so they who have
lost that integrity of mind, whom the fire of lust has already scorched, when
they hear lascivious speeches they make no noise, they reprehend it not, they
hold their peace, they smile, and not so much as show a discontented
countenance: and so discover by their wicked silence, how little displeasing
these kind of speeches are unto them. Yet far worse are they, who not only
willingly hear them that speak obscenely, but also applaud them, and add
something of their own; fastening thereby as it were a leacherous skirt to this
garment. Diogenes observing two of his scholars conferring together as they
went on the way asked one of them what discourse he had with the other. Which
when he had declared, Diogenes commanded both of them should be beaten; the one
for speaking, the other for hearing. It was well done: neither ought Christians
to be ignorant heerof, that sometimes he that hears offends as grievously
as he that speaks: for that which may be said of the vice of detractio^ may
very truly be said likewise of impure speech: That as the devil danceth as
much in the ear of him that hears detractio^ as in the mouth of the
detractour: so it is the same offense to utter as to give ear to lascivious
speeches.

O Clitomachus, o thou noble champion, where art thou, who were wont to rise
and leave their company who cast forth wanton and amorous words. Plutarch.
lib. 7. quaest. can. 7.
Do thou so in like manner. If any idle companion bolt forth like shameless
speeches, strike him at least with a severe contracted brow, or like
Clitomachus withdraw thy self from his impure mouth, if thou will be free from
this sin of hearing: Let blushing the ensign of modesty perpetually reside
in thy countenance, which is the forerunner and certain testimony of chastity.
I here present again unto you S. Paul: But now (says he) Ad Col. ^.8.
lay you also away anger, indignation, malice, blasphemy, and filthy talk out
of your mouth. This he names last that he may imprint it most. It is a strange
thing, we strive to keep in our cough when it is breaking forth, yet we
violently hawk up this loathsome spittle, and spout it into every ones ears.
As we ought in every place to have reguard to those al seeing judging eyes of
Almighty God; so we ought still to walk in fear of his like ceasorious ear.
Let us so speak, that our discourse if not for eloquence, at least for modesty
may be safely heard and commended.

THE SEVENTH ALLVREment to Incontinency: Evil Companions. CHAP. IX.
AS a looking-glass though very clear, may be dimmed by ones breath: So a man
otherwise very good and chaste, receaueth blemishes from the society of evil
men. He that communicates with the proud shall put on pride. Eccles. 13.13.
In some diseases of our body there is a great infection, but nothing more
courageous then corrupt manners. These do easily clean unto us; they are
soon learned and transferred from one to another. Evil manners are a most
^nfectious murren: nor does any one more efficaciously persuade, then he that
teaches vices by exemple. Very truly says Seneca: An error delivered from
hand to hand urges and thrusts us headlong, and men easily perish by others
examples: no man retains error only to himself, but is cause and author of
other men's errors. This has been an original mischief. No sooner had Eve
sinned but she made her husband the companion of her transgression. This for
the most part is the nature of al vicious persons; not willing to be alone,
they desire to perish with others for company. Have but once to do with a
wicked person, and thou shall quickly perceive how smoothly he will inuit thee
to follow him. Moses proclaymeth: N^m. 16.26.
Depart from the tabernacles of impious men, and touch not the things that
belong unto them left you be wrapped in their finnes. The same does Isaias
likewise promulgate: Isai. 3.11.
Depart, depart, go out from thence, touch not a polluted thing; go out from
the midst thereof.

That Egyptian Savior Joseph, did so much hate the society of wicked people
that he would not suffer himself, even when he was dead to continue amongst
them. Therefore he bound by oath his heirs being Israelites, that if at any
time they departed by transmigration out of Egypt, they should carry with them
the dead relikes of his body. This great Viceroy of Egypt would not so much as
have his ashes contract any note of disgraceful familiarity with them. And as
he allowed not the Egyptian manners to be imitated, so he thought not so well
of their land, as to be buried therein: he judged the company of evil persons
by all means possible to he avoided Certain it is, He that touches pitch shall
be defiled therewith. Eccl. c. 13. verse. 1.
One only young man of a wicked life may corrupt many thousands: -- Sicut grex
totus magris
Vnius scabie cadit, and porri me porci,
Vuaque conspecta liuorem ducit ab vna. Iuuenal sat. 2. verse. 80.

-- As flocks, or herds of swine,
One scabbed sheep, or taynted hog infects;
Or rotten grape, which on the next reflects.


It is the part of a good shepherd, presently to separate a diseased sheep
from the rest; lest his partiality to one poor sheep be the loss of the whole
flock. It behooves a cautelous man to avoid every friend and fly al such
companions, as may taint his manners with any blemish or spot: for such is the
property of man; when he that is good associates himself with the wicked, they
shall not be improued by virtuous conversation, but rather the vicious will
corrupt and contaminate the good. To be a good man amongst those that are evil,
is to swim against the stream; which I confess happens sometimes, but it is
a thing no less seldom then difficult. Very truly says that wise Roman:
Seneca. l. 3 de ira. c. 8.
Our manners are derived from them with whom we converse, and as certain
diseases of the body are taken by touching, so the mind imparts it is vices unto
the next neighbor. A drunkard draws them that live with him to the love of
wine: a man that is valiant and hardy soon degenerates through the company of
those that are wanton and effeminate: and covetousness to those that converse
with her transferreth her poison. Dum spectant laesos oculi laeduntur and ipsi.
Ovid. li. 2. art.

The eyes grow sore that sore eyes do behold.


Therefore, my EDESIMVS, it is better to have the hatred then the company of
evil men. There is no vicious man but either will commend his vice unto us, make
an impression of it in us, or before we are aware infect us therewith. There
are some vices commended by example, others imprinted by speech, and very many
by conversation inserted in our hearts. It is the safest course to beware of al
those companions and friends that are of a suspected life, and to break with
them as speedily as you can. He that continues nere danger cannot long be
safe; and who loves danger shall perish therein.

. I.
Certain little creatures (as says Phedeon) are not perceived when they bite,
so weak are they and unable to effect what they intended: the swelling only
discovers the malignity of their sting. The same for the most part happens to
al men in their conversation with wicked persons; they find the mischief, but
apprehend not how or when they were damnified. Therefore S. Paul severely
forbidding us, says: Keep not company with fornicatours. I write unto you
that you should not so much as take meat with these kind of people. Therefore
you must be circumspect before hand with whom you eat or drink before you
eat or drink any thing. Know you not (says he) 1. Cor. 5.6.
that a little leaven corrupts the whole batch. It has been so in all Ages;
with him that is perverse thou shall be perverted. Solomon in the person of a
father wisely admonishes us: Prou. 1. verse. 10. 14. 15. 16.
My son if sinners shall entice thee, condescend not unto them: if they shall
say come with us etc. cast in thy lot with us; let there be but one purse to us
al: my son walk not with them, stay thy foot from their paths; for their
feet run to evil. Conversation of itself is as it were a bewitching orator
to instruct us in vice, a sweet and a powerful preswader. The frequent aspect
and mutual discourse has the efficacy of a precept. Thou must of necessity
either imitate or reprove a dissolute companion. It is best for thee to avoid
both, least thou become like him in impiety, or else be reputed an enemy to
many. For thou shall find great store of wicked men every where. Converse
therefore with them that will make thee better then thou art; admit them whom
thou may benefit, or be benefited by. The conversation of men suitable to our
humor is more grateful; but more secure is that of old men and religious. S.
Basil condemns familiarity with women; not because they are evil, but because
their familiarity is dangerous. We must endeavor (says he) Basil. in constit.
men. c. 4.
to avoid al communication with women. Remember always, says S. Hierome, Ad
Nepo^ian.
that a woman cast the first inhabitant of Paradise out of his possession.
Vrcinus cries out: Remove the flax, for the fire is not yet extinguished.
EDESIMVS. May I presume to intorrupt you? This separation betwixt intimate
friends will oftentimes be very difficult. PARTHENIVS. Admit it be, since it is
necessary let it be done a Gods name. It is a grievous remedy if for the saving
of thy life thou must suffer an arm or leg to be cut off; yet thou will not
deny but it is the precept of Christ: Matthew. 18.8.
If thy hand or thy foor scandalize thee, cut it off and cast it from thee.
What is more dear to man then the parts and members of his own body?
notwithstanding oftentimes they must be cut off when they are incurable, lest
the sound part with like contagion become infected and vlcerated: so likewise a
friend (my EDESIMVS) a fellow, or companion, if hurtful unto thee, must be cut
off. What difficulty should we make heerin? It is much better to renounce
familiarity with our friend then with Christ, and rather make shipwreck of
freindiship then our soul.

. II.
O Peter Peter, O thou the Rock of the Church, against whom hell gates shall
never prevail! notwithstanding thou were shaken with one poor word spoken by
a silly maid. Doubtless Peter so long as he was amongst good men was a
steedfast and a solid Rock; yet once gone from them and consorted with the
impious; behold he is no longer a rock, but a reed overthrown with one word,
with one silly question he is cast to the ground, with the voice of a woman is
bereft of his manhood; and though but even now courageous, is turned toward,
denies to have had any knowledge of him, for whom but a little before ^e fully
resolved to dye a thousand deaths; whose blood but a few houre^ before he had
drunk, and whose body he had eaten; denies that ever he knew him whom himself
not long before had defended with his sword; denies him whom that very night
he had suffered to wash and wipe his feet, offering his hands and head to the
same bath; denies that ever he knew him whom solemnly he had promised to
accompany both to prison and to death. Alas this man the most loving and best
known of al others, denies that ever he knew him, denying swears, and
swearing detesteth. O Peter amongst the Apostles, thy Masters most courageous
defendour, amongst the wicked a very coward and fugitive from thy Master.
Certainly one thing is the hal of Caiphas, another the supping place of the
Messiah; one thing his discourse with the Apostles, another his communication
with murderers. Amongst them Christ was acknowledged, denied amongst these. Of
so great moment is the society with good or bad man: that the mistress of
virtue, this of wickedness and vice. Even at this day that saying is most
true; with the elect we are the elect, and with the perverse we are perverted.
Let us fly and carefully avoid men, that are of these naughty conditions. And
namely let us fly from those who fly from sermons in Churches, from exercise of
learning in schools: who neglect the reading of pious books and frequenting
of Sacraments, who haunt tauernes, stews, feasts and drinking matches,
courting of women, dancing and reuelling, not without assured loss both of
their studies and health. And that I may admonish thee in a word, fly most of
al from him that is a lover of idleness. An idle person has no regard either to
reading books of piety, holy sermons, or frequenting of Churches. Instead of
his books, he plies the cards, instead of sermons, wine-tauernes; instead of
Churches, dancing schools: and that he may the sweetlier beguile his time, one
while by sleep he shuts forth sunshine and snorts at noone days,
another while friskes up and down fetching short caprichious walks, sometimes
he chats and prattles with young wenches, and in a word does al things that he
may do nothing. Hic niger est hunc tu Roman caueto,
O Roman of this hel-black child beware.


There is no man idle who is not also vicious. Let us quitte ourselves and
avoid the company of such a person, no otherwise then we would fly from a
neighboring plague.

. III.
And if we respect both our good name and reputation, let us conceive a great
auersion from these infamous campanions, unless we are contented to be
reckoned more vile and contemptible then they. It is now a general received
opinion, that we take a resemblance of life from them with whom we have a
desire to converse. Nor are men deceived in this opinion; they have the
testimony of Solomon: Pro. 13.20.
He that walks with the wise shall be wise; a friend of fools shall be made
like them. And as wine mingled with water changes its color, although it
loses not all the virtue of wine: so whosoever admits companions of such an
ouerwatred honesty loses the color of his reputation and honor. S. Hierome
says: Ad Nepo^ian.
consort thy self with companions by whose fameliarity thou may not be
defamed: Let the^ be adorned with garments, as with ma^ners; their hair not
crisped with curling-irons, but promising modesty in their out ward habit.
Every one shall be reputed such as the party with whom he conuerseth. You know
birds of a feather fly still together. Would you have a sca^tling of a man? do
but observe with whom he is most intimate. Freindship either finds or makes
men like. Therefore let him that is virtuous and honest love and seek the
freindship of the^ that are suitable in piety. He that has no regard to his
fame, and becomes without difference a friend to al, shall shortly have many,
but none of the most commendable titles.

S. Augustine growing and old man complains of his youth. I went headlong,
(said he) S. Aug. lib. 2. Confess. c. 3. 9. and 10.
with so great blindness, that amongst those of mine own age (in regard I
heard them boasting of their villanyes, and glorying so much the more, as they
were more dissolute) I was ashamed to be reputed too honest. We took, a
pleasure in doing evil for praise itself, and not only for love of the fact.
What is worthy of dispraise if vice be not? I to the intent I might not be
dispraised, became more vicious. I fained to have done that which I never did,
lest I might seem too abject by being too innocent; and lest I should be
accounted so much the baser as I seemed chaster. Behold with what companions I
traced through the streats of Babylon, and wallowed in mudde as if it had been
cinnamon and precious ointments. O most vnfreindly freindship! EDESIMVS. They
are not so much to be feared; for if I be not deceived there are but sew of so
professed impiety that at the first sight will s^eme to be branded with
licentious ^normity. PARTHENIVS. Howsoever it he, there are not few of them,
who cover a wolf with a sheep-skin, and the more smoothly they insinuate
themselves into the familiarity of some men at the first, the more perniciously
afterward they incite them to the worst kind of liberty. To these does aptly
agree this saying: One man is a wolf to another. Let us fly (EDESIMVS) let us
fly from these flattering wolves: disgraceful, and for the most part too late
is that song: Il company has undone me. But (say you) we shall be laughed at,
as uncivil and clownish. Let them deride us, so they hurt us not. Let our
chastity and integrity be more dear, then their taunts displeasing unto us,
choosing rather to be the object of their laughter, then the subject of their
tears. He that would avoid mealing himself and whiting his black garments,
does he not forbear going into a mil? He that is afraid of griming his face,
does he not avoid furnaces and smithes forges? The same must we likewise
observe; and the rather, for that vi^ by infection sooner creeps from one to
another.

Appollo^ius Thyaneis is said wisely to have petitioned the Gods, that he might
know the good and shun the evil. Alex. ab Alex. l. 4. c. 7.
An excellent prayer. Let us pray for the same, but to the true God: to know
and imitate the good, and to hate and eschew the evil.

THE FIRST EFFECTS OF incontinency: It weakneth the body, and emptieth the
purse. CHAP. X.
I have finished (my EDESIMVS) those two first verses, which contain the
allurements to incontinency: Otia, mensa, libri, vaga lumina, verba, sodales,
Haec toll, hanc minne, hos muta, haec claude, haec fuge, vita hos.
Meats, wandering eyes, words, mates, books, sloth and ease:
Abate, close, silence, shun, change, fly from these.


Thus I have according to your request explicated the Aenigmaes or riddles of
these verses. And if I must become your Aenigmatist, I will also explane the
other verses: Corpus, opes, animam, ingenium, famam, virtutes,
Debilitat, perdit, necat, impedit, inficit, aufert.
To wit incontinency, which
Does kill, consume, dull, wast, taint and defame,
Soul, body, wit and wealth, virtue, good name.


Do you command me to go forward? EDESIMVS. I pray thee (my PARTHENIVS) omit
al ceremonies. And if thou please to give me leave I command; if that be
disliked, I entreat and beseech thee. And this be assured, thou art neither
irksome nor tedious unto me: I hang wholly on the discourse of thy mouth, and
le^ it be no trouble that thou have but one auditour; we are a theater ample
enough for one another. PARTHENIVS. Let us then continue our speech til noone;
and then having taken our fill of words, let us go to dinner.

The first words of the verses are these? Corpus debilitat. --


This poison of concupiscence does not only affaile the mind, but also weakneth
and corrupts the body it self, depriving it both of strength and health.
Here I must moderate my discourse; for that this belongs to the art of
Physicians, and therefore ought to be confirmed by their testimonies. I will
only produce one witness which may speak for a thousand, and show how great
an enemy the use of venery is to man's health. Hyppolitus Guari^o^us a man even
for his writings very famous amongst Physicians, in the year of Christ. 1610.
published a book, wherein be deploreth the manifold destruction of mankind,
partly in their lives, partly in their manners. This author in his fifth book
before the sixth chapter prefixeth this title: A natural demonstration and
confirmation, that nothing (...) more pestilent then Venery, for the corruption
of man's strength, deflowring his youth, and shortning his life. Before the 62.
chapter of the same book, he has this inscription: The famous and illustrious
testimonies of the principal Naturalists and Physicians, that there is not a
greater mischief in the world then Venery to cause an unseasonable and
sudden death. Of the 63. Chapter in the same fifth book, this is the title:
That continency and chastity is not only the best and most excellent remedy to
preserve long health and life, but also nobler, more agreeable and worthyer of
humane reason, then either the unlawful use of Venery, or lawful marriage. Do
thou hear (my EDESIMVS) what testimony this remakeable and prime Physician
has in times past given in the behalf of a single life, against venereous
dishonesty, even in the titles only of the Chapters before rehearsed? The
weight of his reasons and arguments I omit.

. I.
Unto this man I adioyne S. Chrysostom as a witness; these are his words:
Tom. 5. Hom. Quod ^e^o laeditur. etc.
They that lead their lines in pleasures and luxury, carry about with them
infirm and wasted bodies replenished with infinite infirmityes, they lead
their lives evermore amongst physicians, and medicines; and their very se^es
are dull, heavy, stupid, and as it were already buried alive. A pregnant
witness for the matter we treat of at this present. And contrariwise out of
this most clear fountain of Chastity, proceed not only the inablements of the
mind, but also a life more healthful, an old age not hastened, a flourishing,
comely and vigorous body. So that worthily may continency glory in this manner:
Eccl. 24.23. and 25.
My flowers are fruit of honor and honesty; in me is al grace of life. I ask
of thee (my EDESIMVS) what thou think of so many Anchoretes, who diverse
years prolonged their lives with such spare diet? did they not chiefly attain
to this length of life by chastity?

Si^eon Stilites, that miracle of the world who stood upon his feet both day
and night, through continual fastings arrived to the hundredth and ninth year
of his age; but know this he never had a wife. That great Anthony, to whem the
world served as a book, lived an hundred and five years: but never knew what
belonged to a wife. S. Paul the first Eremite lived an hundred and thirteen
years: but always remained a virgin. S. Hillarion, a poor Monk, one who
never used to take any repast but after sunset, of the age of 84. never had
any wife. Panuplnus, who for many years together lived only upon bread,
arrived to the age of four score etc ten years, never acquainted with
wedlock. Macarius exceeded the ninetieth year of his age, continuing in
perpetual fasts, and never knew what marriage was. Arsenius the master of
Arcadius and Honorius lived to be six score years of age; and none ever sung
his Epithalamium. Romuald by nation an Italian arrived to this age, a man very
austere both in his food and clothing; always honored virginity, and
preferred the candor of his mind far before the inticements of marriage.
Franciscus de Paula refreshed himself once a day with bread and water, but not
before sunset: notwithstanding he exceeded the ninetieth year of his age, and
with entire chastity flourished. Hieronymus Stridonensis drew forth his
laborious old age exhausted with hunger even til the eightieth year of his
age, and was no less entire in keeping the^ copious in praising of chastity.
Beda lived a virgin in religion from the seventh year of his age, til he was
four score and twelve, altogether ignorant of marriage. Remigius continued
Bishop of Rhemes seauenty and four years (a very rare thing, and I cannot tell
whether the like ever happened to any other) whereupon he was called Iubilaeus:
as being of the age of minety six complete, when he died, and never touched
marriage bed all the days of his life. Martinus Tu^ensis lived foure-score and
six years. Vd^ricus Bishop of Padua an hundred and five, Epiphanius an
hundred and fifteen. These most holy men used often fasts, and observed
perpetual virginity.

It were too long to name innumerable others whom chastity, temperance, and
moderation of those things which use to stir up men's appetites, have
preserved and brought to a long and flourishing old age. You shall find even at
this day very many who with good reason ascribe their venerable old age, partly
to abstinence, and partly to chastity. Enter into Monasteryes and religious
houses; you shall find very many who have endured sixty, seauenty, eighty, yea
even ninety winters, having their lives so much the more lengthened as they
were eminent in chastity. Not many years since I went to see a certain Aunt
of mine, a religious woman in a poor monastery and falling into talk with her
I asked how many years she had now served God in that place? She answered
forty. I was astonished there at: and after when I had seriously beheld her I
could not by sight have taken her to have been more then a virgin of twenty
years of age. Therefore said I, be mindful to render humble thanks to God;
for out of Religion you would neither have been so vigorous, nor well colored;
but would either have been dead ere this, or at the next door to it. This is
likewise the reward of continency, that it makes those long lived who preserve
integrity of body. And tell me (my EDESIMVS) what man is there though of iron or
brass, who shackled in the fetters of wedlock, (...) live so sound and
healthy, amongst the daily disco^forts of so many cares, griefs, vexations and
misfortunes, as he the takes no further care but only to serve and please
Almighty God. Those that are married must cloa^h so many bodies food so many
bellies, cure so many diseases, deplore so many calamities, bewail so many
funerals, dye as it were so many deaths as they lose either children or
grandchildren. But let us omit this loss of life and health in wedlock: how
many both young and middle-ag'd men go to wrack both in health and life by this
one accursed gulf of Venery? Tell me from whence does the pox and french
disease, and other innumerable infirmityes rush upon men, as it were out of
ambuschadoes, but from this one den and lurking place of lust.

. II.
It is not requisite for me to add much concerning riches, which a licentious
and libidinous life wastes no otherwise then their strength. It is very true as
the verse faith that incontinency wastes men's riches. It is most apparent that
impure love maruelously euacuateth the purse. Chaste love is without any charge;
it passes gratis between two or more reciprocally: foul and venereous love
is as ready to offer violence to a man's gold as his mind. Heerupon comes the
old saying: Either give or love not. Ah! how many miserable lovers have there
been, who afterward paid for that in poverty, which they took up in Venery.
That prodigal child in the Ghospel, how pleasantly and easily did he spend al
his patrimony, among men of deboyshed life? He had his swinge, al was lauished,
al wasted, not by shipwreck, not by sickness, nor by any finister chance, but
vinend^ luxurios^, by living luxuriously. The devouring gulf Charybdis has
not swallowed up so many ships, nor the Athenian Baratrhum engrossed so many
quilty persons, as such wanton lovers have consumed crowns in this kind of
riot. So that poor young man became the guest of hogs in conclusion, when he
ceased to be a rambler amongst harlots. That which I add now, is a prodigy.
There was in ancient time a young man whose name was Mundus. (a name much
unfitting to his disposition) Mundus in latin signifies clean.
who solicited to dishonesty Paulme a chaste matron; and that he might by gold
ransacke her chastity, he promised her two hundred thousand drachmes, to have
her at his pleasure. God God! what a monstrous thing is this golden
wantonness? Have you not heard what Demost^s did prudently answer to Lais
requiring for one nights lodging ten thousand drachmes: Tanti panitere non
(...), I will not buy repentance ^t so dear a rate. O most renouned orator how
true was this saying of thine, that the inseparable companion of dishonest
pleasure is Repentance. Who ever did Venus but one hours or moments service
that repented him not, and grew ashamed of this impure peace of drudgery.
EDESIMVS. You speak oracles (my PARTHENIVS) and it was even known to those
ancient men, that where honey is there is gal; and that after pleasure follows
pain, PARTHENIVS. And as the fable says; pleasure and grief in times past
falling a^ strife, Jupiter sat as Judge. The one seemed not to give place to
the other in any thing. Unto whom Jupiter spoke in this manner: Very well my
Masters; I will make this agreement between you; that you shall never hereafter
be divided from one another. And so he k^it them together tha^ were at
variance with an adamantine knot, never to be untied: since which time they go
yoked like fugitive servants, and have never been separated. Marvelous
elegantly does that Bishop of Millane S. Ambrose depaint the Lady Pleasure,
speaking in this manner: He is the chiefest man in my favor, who is the
wickedest of al others; he is mine who is none of his own, he that is worst to
himself is most acceptable to me. There is in my hand the golden Babylonian
Chalice that mebriateth the whole world, A Nations have drunk of my cup. And
that Bishop of Hippo S. Augustine speaks very truly. O pleasure (says he)
how easy entertaineme^t do thou find when thou perswadest us: but how bitter
is the conclusion when thou destroyest us? Whilst thou perswadest thou
annointest us; after thou have persuaded thou stingest us to death. We have
therefore now two goodly rewards of lust: a feeble body, a poor, empty, and
exhausted purse.

THE OTHER EFFECTS OF incontinency: It kills our soul and impaires our
judgment. CHAP. XI.
NOr are these the only or greatest mischiefs of venery. It is but a poor
ambition to draine a man's strength or health from his body, or money out of his
purse. It triumphs in far nobler spoils, and richer tropheis. It
overthrows and killes the souls of the impure. This it has common with other
vices, to make the souls liable to eternal death. But yet it is by this more
speedily then by any other, and more easily done. For here only by one impure
thought, and sensual lingering delight (as our Divines call it) we are made
obnoxious to eternal flames. Although the sin be not committed, although we
have not so much as a will to commit the act, notwithstanding that man damneth
himself eternally who with knowledge and willingness takes a permanent and
lingering delight in one only impure thought. You may trust S. Augustine for
this, plainly pronouncing the same: The whole man (says he) Lib. 12. de Trin.
c. 12. 2. Sen^. d. 24.
shall be damned, unless the sins committed only in thought, without will of
putting them in execution (but yet with a will to delight the mind with such
cogitations) be remitted by the sovereign grace of our Mediator. Well might
that most chaste S. Bernard cry out Thieves, Thieves, when he saw a young woman
laying wicked snares to entangle him. Verily each venereous lust is a thief,
and after the manner of thieves lays hold of us to kill us. It faineth a kiss
with Ioab, that it may thrust it is fauchion into Amasa whom it saluteth. And
Seneca admonishes us, saying: Ep. ^1. sen^.
Principally root out al pleasures, and be at utter defiance with them, no
otherwise then you would be with thieves. They embrace us to the end they may
strangle us. Ah! how many have perished by this one only plague. And which is
much to be bewailed, even the strongest, the wisest, and which thou may
marvel at, even the holiest, Sampsons, Salomo^s, David's, have fallen by this
one only veapon. And how shall we be able to stand, who are neither stronger
then Sampson, wiser then Solomon, nor holier then David; especially since for
the most part we are so set upon pleasures, so in love with our own dangers,
that with great importunity we rush headlong into them.

I remember, and as often as I remember I tremble at that which I heard of my
Master, that, put case a hundred young men be adjudged to hell fire, of those
hundred it is probable nynety nine are damned for this sin whereof we speak,
to wit, that of the flesh: and the hundredth man perhaps for some other
grievous offense. EDESIMVS. I easily believe this conjecture. PARTHENIVS.
Verily so do I: There is already pronounced an immutable sentence against
impure persons: Ad Ephesians. c. 5. verse. 5.
for know this, no fornicatour, unclean, or covetous person (which is the
service of ^dol^) has inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and God.

I.
It is likewise most certain that the memory and wit is blasted, and foully
corrupted by this most abominable pestilence. And so Aristotle that Oracle of
philosophers says, Lib. ^. Rhet. c. 24.
that venery is the ringleader to madness. Let us I beseech you peruse the
schools and colleges: show me here but one youth or young man, given both to
venery and study, that is both ingenious, learned, and withal unchaste and
dishonest. This man would seem a monster to me, and like a white crow. Not
without mystery are the Muses fained by the Poets to be virgins. Il does lust
and learning dwell together. The Cornical Poets saying of such Kind of persons
is most true: Neque ins, neque bonum, aut aequum sciunt,
Melius, peius, profit, obsit; nihil vident,
Nisi quod libido fuggerit. Terent. H^. Act. 4. scen. 1.

Nor law, nor good, nor right they know,
Nor better, worse, nor weal, nor woe,
Only what lust suggests they see.


And my Claudian the very darling of the Poets is of the same mind: Luxuries
praedulce malum, quae dedita semper
Corporis arbitrijs, hebetat caligine sensus.
Too sweet a mischief brutish lust we find,
Which soothes the body, and corrupts the mind.


And if you please let us go to the libraries, and make a diligent search, who
have written most books, they that were single men and chaste, or they that
were bound in marriage. Admit he would, how can he that is never so little
singed with the flames of Venus have that tranquillity and serenity of mind,
which is requisite for him that tradeth in books? What sound sense or learned
opinion (with your leave) can you dig out of such an Ajax? You will hardly
keep the gum of the balm tree in an unclean and sordid vessel. And it is
the Oracle of holy Scripture: Sap. c. 1. verse. 4.
Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to
sins. In a muddy and troubled water nothing can clearly and perspicuously be
seen.

THE THIRD EFFECT OF incontinency: It tainteth the fame and extirpateth al
virtues. CHAP. XII.
WE draw toward the end of the two verses formerly propounded, and in like
manner of our fore-noones discourse. Incontinency inuadeth our fame and
virtues: that she tainteth, these she extirpateth. With good cause may I here
use the words of S. Hierom: O Luxury, o thou infernal fire; whose fuel is
gluttony, whose flame pride, whose sparks lewd speeches, whose smoke infamy,
whose ashes uncleanness, whose end damnation and hell. The loss of our fame
(the thing itself speaking) I need not long to discourse of. Assuredly no vice
makes us more blush then this. By good right ought it to be full of shame and
ignominy that has so much madness and turpitude. Nor am I hard to believe
that many men are perfidiously stricken dumb at that time when this should be
discovered in confession; and that the Sacrament of Penance is not oftener
violated by any thing, then by concealing this obscene sin. O ugly sin,
which not only inflictest, as other do, a deadly wound upon the sinner, but
also excludest the medicine, and only endeauourest that he, who has committed
thee, may never be freed from thee. Neither is it sufficient for thee to have
debilitated our body, purloined our money, broken our wit, dulled our memory,
killed our soul; but thou layest violent hands on our fame, and make cruel
havoc of the treasure of our reputation and honesty. Nor is this to be
marueled at in the enemy of al virtues, and the friend of al vices. EDESIMVES.
But as yet (my PARTHENIVS) thou have not fully proved thy last assertion. The
virtues have every one their peculiar enemy: and in like manner the vices their
proper adversary. PARTHENIVS. But I (my EDESIMVS) would have thee make no
difficulty of this. I will not retract that which I have said, but with much
ease make it appear plainly unto thee. Lust so transformeth a man, that he
remains nothing less then a man; but is a very beast, having fowly cast-off
humane nature. Give me but one young man that is a lover of that filthiness,
and see if thou can find in him so much as one solid virtue. Where lust
domineereth, virtues are exiled. Horace in times past speaking of a young men
who had gotten the bridle in his teeth, said he was: Cereus in vitium flecti,
^amitoribus asper.
Like wax to vice, against counsel sharp and stern.


This is most truly said of a man that is polluted with sordid obscenities: he
is as pliant as was not to one vice only, but to al in general. First I think
you will not deny it, if I say they are subject to pride, who desire to become
acceptable to lascivious eyes, and make themselves spruce, neat and beautiful,
merely by painting and slicking; which they chiefly do to please and content
others. But perhaps such men as these see me not to be covetous. Let them also
not be prodigal: but that they always will be, which is also no less vicious
and dishonest. Yea, which thou may very well say is a monstrous thing, they
are often both covetous and prodigal. From some they couetously extort money to
spend it prodigally upon others. They rob their parents to bestow it upon
their harlots. No man is ignorant that venereous love is full of envy. Would you
have me reharse those old catastrophes? The miseries and destrustion of Troy?
Yea the overthrow of diverse cittyes and Kingdoms besides, sufficiently
declares it. I need not speak much of Gluttony. It is apparent that lust is
never without gluttony. And you shall never see more familiar friends, then
concupiscence and idleness, sloth and venery. I conclude with Tully, who in
the person of Cato Mayor recounteth the words of Architas Tarentinus in this
manner: That there is no greater capital plague given unto men by nature then
the pleasure of the body. And not long after he adds: In the Kingdom of
pleasure virtue has no residence. Wherefore nothing is so detestable and so
pestiferous as pleasure: for when it is prolixe and durable, it extinguisheth
all the light of the soul. But thou will give more credit to Solomon then to
Cicero, or rather to Salomons God himself. So soon as lust triumphed over this
man, idolatry (the mother o^ al vices) did foully subject him to her yoke. What
virtue remained in Herod, after he was subdued by the wantonness of Herodias;
whose incest the head of the most innocent S. John Baptist, being cut off, not
with tears, but with gushing streams of blood, did deplore. O Luxury! o thou
the gulf that do gluttonously devour, and gormandize upon all the powers of
the foul and body, yea upon virtue it self. EDESIMVS. You persuade me (my
PARTHENIVS) and draw me, whether I will or no, to be of your opinion.

. I.
PARTHENIVS. My EDESIMVS, I surmise what you would have; you expect an
Epilogue, and that I should make an end of this my discourse. I believe your
teeth water after your dinner. And no marvel, for it is just twelve by the
sun-dial; and the clock of my stomach tells me it is high noone. But I pray
you let both of us exercise our memory and patience before we sit down to the
table, by making a sum and catalogue of what we have spoken of that most
wonderful victory of Nicetas. Unless my memory fail me, we have observed this
order.

The principal subject whereof we treated, was Nicetas, that true conqueror;
whom we can never sufficiently extol. Whatsoever enticements, whatsoever art,
or fraud, what engines soever Incontinency had in store, or concupiscence could
i^uent, were employed to surprise our Nicetas. Wanton Cupid attempted al, chaste
Nicetas overcame al. He discovered al their deceits, arts, subtle plots and
stratagemes, he withstood their open violence, and finally defeated al their
crafts, ambushes and combinations. By a rare and incomparable project, by
singular and admirable fortitude, he vanquished his enemies. Whilst we full of
admiration congratulated this victory of his, our discourse sweetly invited us
to treat of the A^ory of Incontinencie. Here we found weapons of two kinds;
her Allurements and Effects: by those she oppugneth, by these she kills. The
first weapon wherewith* Incontinency: inuades us, is Idleness, a fearful
engine, enemy to al good actions. Her other wapon, dipped in oil that it may
the more easily penetrate, is Gluttony. Concerning this that saying of S.
Ambrose is well knownes Saturity overthrows chastity. Sermon. 40.
Questionless Gluttony kills more the^ the sword, ^ nourisher of many
mischiefs: The third and fourth weapon of Inconiency is Books and lascivious
Pictures: it is a thing very rare to touch them and not to be wounded. The fifth
is Liberty of Eyes. I think I have sufficiently demonstrated, how much venom
we sack into o^r ^oules through our Eyes. Happy is he who being master over
them suffers not himself to be seduced. The sixth speedy provocation to
Incontinency: is lascivious Words. This mischief is manifold, both in respect
of the hearers and speakers. The seventh huge massy weapon of Incontinency is
Wicked company. In ^yng from this time^ bush, no man can be too ca^ love, ^or
too well guarded. By i^ examples and familiarity of others, (...) men peri^h^
who of themselves knew not that precipice of inevitable perdition.

. II.
With all these weapons did concupiscence oppugn Nicetas. The first encounter
in this battle began with ease and idleness in the Garden, when this valorous
young man was brought to that soft bed that he might there sweetly repose at
midday; where the garden had displayed variety of pleasures, and amongst the
rest a table ready furnished with a delicious banquet. No sooner was the young
man thrown upon his back, and tenderly bound on the bed, but that the
smooth-faced wanton harlot (far more pestilent and pernicious then either
books or pictures) impudently presented her self to his most chaste eyes. In
this dangerous plight either to hear or see, to touch or ^e touched, was a
thing extremely perilous. To delude his eyes, her beauty, to provoke his mind,
her flattering words were very powerful and plausible. What danger, I pray,
could be greater then this, where a man al alone is constrained to be in
company of a woman? Notwithstanding al these allurements to incontinency,
Nicetas victoriously triumphs: although bound on a most delicate bed, he was
not idle, but stood at utter defiance resisting those enchanting pleasures; not
curious in beholding a woman more painted then pictures, but blind to al
enticements of his eyes, and deaf against the sugared charms of her words,
showing himself against the venereous assault a valiant, invincible and
victorious adversary. As those encounters of incontinency wherewith she is wont
to oppugn us, were defeated; so likewise were the other wherewith she is wont
to kill us. Do thou remember (my EDESIMVS) how many Effects we set down of
Incontinency? These are her arms wherewith she killes those whom she
vanquisheth. The first Effect of Incontinency is to exhaust and weaken a man's
body; the other to draine his purse; the third to destroy his soul; the fourth
to stupify and dull his wit; the fifth to taint his fame: and lastly the sixth,
to extirpate al virtues. I have handled these, though briefly and somewhat out
of order, yet as the verses suggested.

Now our dinner stays for us upon the table; come along with me, you shall
this day be my guest; but not shot free. I will propound unto you three
questions which will not be much unseasonable for table discourse, nor the
subject we have spoken of. The first shall be. Why bees, those unmarried
creatures, and (as a man may term them virgin-birds* are called the
hand-maides of Ceres? what the the flowers are which they abstain from? what
kind of men they sting not? and what flower they most of al delight in? It is
not impertinent to know also what is virgin-hony, what virgin-paper, and
thirdly what virgin parchment? EDESIMVS. Is this but one question? PARTHENIVS.
But one composed of many parts. The other question: What herb is good both for
eyesight and chastity? and what birds are most chaste as well living as dead; or
which are chaste both of their own nature, and for our eating? Besides, what
should be the reason that religious men for the most part daily feed on
lettices and barley. EDESIMVS. I see you come upon me with a thousand
questions: PARTHENIVS. Doubt not, we will find answers for them al. The last
question is what things are most precious, and what not to be repaired? You will
prevent me and name virginity. Let us go unless you be a Camelion, and live
by air. Of the rest we will speak when we have dined.

A PETITION TO THE Virgin Mother.
O Holy Marie, Mother of God and mercy, Mirror of purity, Pattern of
sanctity, Model of innocence, Example of perfection; obtain for me the
virtue of Chastity and angelical purity, o my dear Advocate: obtain it for
me of our Savior, thy Son JESUS, I beseech thee through thy IMMACVLATE
CONCEPTION. Alas! most Chaste Virgin, shall I always live in the slavery of
this impure flesh of mine? And shall I ever be vexed with these unchaste
cogitations, which so afflict my unwilling soul? Who will deliver me from the
body of this death, this unclean body? Thou, o Potent Virgin, can deliver me
from al impurity. Deliver me o Virgin Mother; that my heart replenished with
unspotted affections may never be refractorie to the love of JESUS; but only
thirst after him, the fountain of al perfection, goodness, beauty, sweetness,
sanctity, purity. O that my heart were once wounded with this chaste love of thy
Son JESUS, o most Pure Virgin; that then I might truly and joyfully sing Sat
est, IESV, vulnerasti,
Sat est, totum penetrasti
Sagittis ardentibus.
Procul, procul hinc libido
Nam Caelestis hic Cupido,
Vincit ignes ignibus.


THE SECOND BOOK.
THAT S. BENEDICT MAY be called the brother of NICETAS, famous for the like
illustrious act. CHAP. I.
PARTHENIVS. Pliny recounteth Lib. 23. Not. hist. c. 8.
that in the cabinet of Mithridates, that great King subdued, Cn. Pompeius
found in a peculiar note under his own hand, the receipt of an antidote, the
ingredients whereof were two dried nuts, as many figs, twenty leaves of Rue
braied together with a grain of sak: and that whosoever took it in the
morning fasting should be preserved that day from poison. In the fore-noone we
made a collection of several poisons: shall we no^ my EDESIMVS) seek for the
anti^ote? EDESIMVS. Your entreaty is nee^. I have already satisfied my self
with your good cheer, but not yet with your discourse. Weaue out the web (my
PARTHENIVS) you have beg^n. You have brought me acquainted with the poison; I
would also learned the Antidote. Be my Mithridates. The same author relates
how the familyes of the Marsi, Ophiogenes, and Psilli, were a terror to
serpents, and that they cured those that were stung by them, even with their
medicinable touching or sucking. Incontinency is a serpent fraught with venom;
and who is there whom she has not wounded with her venomous sting? PARTHENIVS
Show thy self one of that family, and with thy healing-touch help those that
either are or shall be stung therewith. PARTHENIVS. You insinuate so well that
you compel me. Let us therefore go forward in the discourse we began, and now
once again congratulate with Nicetas, in whose behalf there are none but will
with clapping hands say: Nicetas has gotten the victory; let him exult. Let
Nicetas, triumph. What Seneca of his Mutius, I may more truly affirm of our
Nicetas: he accomplished a war without either arms or legs; and with his
tongue bitten off discomfited and put to flight the whole army of Venus.
EDESIMVS. He overcame after an excellent manner, and surpasses the highest
pitch of our praises: and in a word is inimitable. For who dares wish such a
warfare, though he might be paralelled with him in crown and victorious
trophies? There is nothing more dangerous then to encounter in that manner, and
yet on the other side nothing more glorious, then to obtain the like victory.
I think Nicetas has not his equal heerin; his exploit was matchless and
incomparable.

PARTHENIVS. But he may have an equal; others may be compared unto him: this
makes his praise the greater, that his fight was in such manner, that he also
animated others to sight, and taught them by his example how to behave
themselves in such like martial affairs. S. Benedict, the great Patriarch of
that most holy family, next to Nicetas, encountered with good success. He had
no visible enemy that opposed him. He overcame himself, and visibly triumphed
over an invisible Cupid. Will you have a brief narratio^ of this battle
likewise? EDESIMVS. Should you not condescend to this willingly, I would
endeavor in a freindly manner to constrain you. Go forward; the more prolixe
you are, the more attentively will I listen. PARTHENIVS. S. Benedict's combat
was not without bloodshed, and in some respect he almost outstripped Nicetas:
for he did not only embrew his mouth, but his whole body with blood,
courageously rolling himself amongst pricking thorns. And I pray thee give me
leave (my EDESIMVS) to dwell somewhat longer upon the description of this
battle of S. Benedict.

. I.
But before I proceed any further, I think good to satisfye a question which
some may propound. What? (will they say) does so impure a beast insult over a
man so pure and free from al wickedness, and of so upright a life? Was
lascivious Cupid so bold to provoke S. Benedict likewise? This seems not
consonant to his sublime and singular sanctity. I answer. It rather confirms
and warrants his transcendent virtue, which never would have been so great, had
it not been tried by temptations. Marvel not (my good EDESIMVS) and if you are
ignorant, learn thus much even of this ancient writer. Those (says Seneca)
Lib. de Prouidentia.
whom God approues and loves, he hardneth corrects and exercises: he makes
no darling of a good man: but tries, mouldes and shapes him for himself. Why
do you marvel? Good men are stricken that they may be corroborated the more.
There is no well rooted tree, but that which the wind often shakes, that it may
take deeper root, and be consolidated by such tempestuous conuulsions. What
virtue is there but will decay if it be not opposed? Co^trarywise provoked and
stirred up with iniuryes, it gathers forces, and becomes more vigorous: it
is strengthened by invasions, and fortifyed by being fiercely assaulted,
reputing afflictions but exercises and necessary trials. Such a man was S.
Benedict, who was not to be da^dled nor cockered, being elected Captain
General in so important a warfare. Moreover, what power have we to prohibit
these intestine rebellions and insurrections of the flesh? No more certainly
then Menelaus had to defend himself from that shaft of Pandarus, who by
stealth shot at him, lurking covertly amongst his fellows. And so long as the
soul and body are united with a certain kind of harmonious discord; so long
as the fleshly lump, that seeks to be pampered, with delicious viandes (as
Possidonius says) is joined with the spiritual substance, they always are in
co^petition for principality the one with the other. Both parties ambitiously
strive for a Kingdom, and that most, which has least right or title unto it.
Earth endeavors to exalt itself above fire; the terrene part above the
celestial. Hereupon arise those contentions and turmoiles between these Leaders
and Captains Reason and Opinion. The one fights for the soul in the soul;
the other for the body in the body. S. Benedict was subject to these assaults,
as being a man equaly mortal with us. But he only felt them, yealded not unto
them. He was sensible of the commotions in this intestine war, but never
departed from his station, or timorously suffered himself to be vanquished. He
stood his ground, joined foot to foot, hand to hand with his adversary, and
against himself tried his strength, which can never be certainly secured of
its own ability, if many difficultyes do not on every side assault it. This
is the trial, this that touchstone of a resolute mind indeed, that will never
give back or yeald to its enemy. See therefore Benedict fighting against
Benedict; himself against himself: observe the flourish before the combat.

. II.
There presents itself a bird, but a black one, such as are in Plutoes den.
There presents itself from hell a certain Messenger, as it were one of the
skirmishers, to give the alarm and summon to the battle, having been first
instructed by that black Master, who at his departure, gave him a hellish fare
well. I^ performs therefore what it was commanded, and cunningly executes the
office wherabout it was sent: it flies, and in a dallying manner houereth over
the holy man's head, whispereth and suggesteth I know not what kind of
blandishments. We may well call it flattery or rather treachery, seeing
ambuschadoes were laid to bereave him of his life and salvation. Still it
continues flying with short turns about S. Benedicts head. You would have
thought it had been the crow that brought bread to that hungry Elias the
Thes^ite. It ceased not to insinuate itself importunately, so that he might, if
he would, easily have taken it. But he, making the sign of the cross,
constrained it to depart, and betake itself again to the infernal caves. Do
you think the fight is now ended? No, it is not ye^ begun, this was but a
light skirmish, and beginning of the battle. That black cornetter did but only
make a flourish; as yet there was no wound nor violent encounter: This was but
only according to the ancient custom, a tossing of pointlesse spears, a
brandishing of blunt swords in the air. Now presently you shall see the
determinate instruments and weapons for the fight; their passage from blunt to
sharp, from jest to earnest. That hellish blackbird was no sooner flowne away,
but the Prince of Acheron began to strike up alarm, to summon Venus her army,
to animate them against Benedict and inflame them to battle, to exaggerate the
many iniuryes he had offered against them, to boast the force of his
confederates, to extenuate those of Benedict, to arm al with frauds and
deceits; at last to send them away, and assure them of victory. Out rushes this
foul rabble with their torches steeped in hellish sulphur to scale the walls
of this chaste breast, under the conduct of Cupid himself. Ah, Benedict
toward thee these venereous troops are marching, against thee they al
conspire; thou art overcome, unless thou meet and encounter them
courageously. There fly against thee more Cupids then Arcesilaus in times past
engraued about the marble Lunesse: Do thou think this (my EDESIMVS) foam
strain of Poetry, or such like fiction? I have told thee the thing itself,
concerning the manner I am not curious, nor is it different from that which
holy scriptures affirm, that oftentimes many unclean Spirits; what say (...)
yea whole legions were sent into one only man. And verily it seems that
Benedict was not affail'd by single combat, but fought against whole armies of
devils. He so sensibly felt those infernal flames; his breast was so enkindled
with impure fires, that he scarcely thought himself able to withstand them any
longer: hardly could he contain himself being almost persuaded to forsake
those desert places and return to the city.

. III.
But God with his assisting hand was present, who though willing to have S.
Benedict thus assaulted, preserved and suffered (...) no^ to be vanquished: he
was present; supplied him with new forces, and revived his languishing mind for
a new encounter. Forthwith the Saint (having been before as it were in a
fainting fit) recouerd heart and thus spoke to himself: Do yield Benedict?
do thou prefer the shadow of a fleeting pleasure before heaven? before God
himself? have thou no consideration what the end thereof will be? Whither
runnest thou? Was this the promise heertofore made, that thou would not give
place to pleasure, which in a manner fades before it is enjoyed? Do thou
conceive so base by of the reward of heaven? will it be so great a pleasure for
thee to broyle for ever in hell fire? Where is thy strength* where are thy
meditations of so many years? where thine exercises and practi^es of wisdom?
where is that resolute mind of thine which might say: Though the whole frame of
the word be dissolved, I will not fear? And will thou now in one moment loose
the chastity which with long fasting often watching, and much asperity thou
have hitherto preserved? I will not have it so. And thou beast (speaking to his
body) do thou affect these things against reason, against Justice, against
God himself? Do thou cast those dangers upon me, will thou betray me to mine
enemy, thrust me out of heaven, and cast me headlong to that infernal dragon to
be devoured? Doubt not, thou shall have that reward which thou deseruest, thou
shall be cherished: and this day I will see it well performed. Whilst he thus
spoke, he cast his eyes on both sides to find some weapons, wherewith to be
revenged upon his rebellious flesh. And behold, looking round about him, he
espied a cruel thicket of sharp thorns, which without touching would even have
wounded the beholders eyes. It falls out very well (said Benedict) that I am so
fitly provided of a bed for thee, (my flesh) thou shalt-wallow and tumble there
at pleasure. Why should not thy lodging be so soft, seeing thou have so well
deserved it? Questionles the eyes in every combat, are first overcome: and
oftentimes put to flight before the battle begins. But Benedict's eyes,
although at the first sight of this thorny couch, they were terrified, were not
fugitives, or turned away: nor ought delays to take place in those counsels or
actions which can never justly be commended before they be ended. Benedict
after these bitter tants against his own body, piously angry, and saint like
cruel, settling a stout and manlike countenance on the matter, putes of his
clothes, not to expose one side only (as in times past the wrastiers did) but
to cast his whole body amongst the sharp briars, so that no part might be
exempted. Behold how forward he is in this his project, how little he debateth
the matter, how far from being indulgent to his own flesh. It is better,
said he, the flesh suffer, then the spirit; that the body be torn then the
soul. No sooner had he said these words, but he courageously cast his
disarmed and naked body headlong into this horrid covert, and bravely with
cruel sharp thorns invested his holy limbs on every side: streams of blood
ran forth from al parts, wherewith the green thorns were stained, with a
purple dye.

. IIII.
Reflect your eyes on this spectacle^ behold him lying in this bloody couch of
pungent thorns; lend your ears, not to listen to his lamentable or heavy
complaints, but to hear and admire his heroic and generous strains. He lies
amongst these thorny and scorpion-like stings, without either groans or
tears, or so much as fetching the least sigh. But being both his own
tormentour and encourager, cries out to himself, as in times past the Romans
did to their combatants: Repe^eictum, repe^e, R^double, redouble thy stroke;
and seconding his own alarm, he more and more goreth his body, and whilst he
seemed to creep out, inuolu'd and more entangled himself in the thorns which
picreed deeper into al parts of his body inflicting new wounds or dilating the
old. Nor does he with thorns only, but with words likewise stab his tender
body. Now my dear bely-God, (said this valiant Champion) now may thou wallow
and satiate thy self, now spread thy tender arms, embrace these flowers, and
let thy wantonnnes glut her self and take her f^l. At last be cried o^ as the
Romans were wont to do, when they saw the fencer overcome: Hoc habet, let him
rest appa^'d with this: Ah! (Benedict:) but why do I sigh at triumphs? O
great Champion, now may thou freely utter that voice: Vici, I have overcome:
and questionles the conquerours of nations, are but wickedly ambitious. Thou
art that wise man, who, though burned, tormented, and put into Phalaris Bull,
may notwithstanding say: Quam suaue est hoc; quam hoc non curo; beatus sum,
Very sweet is this, little do I care for it; happy am I. These voices have
been heard in the very shop of pleasure itself; why therefore should they not
obtain credit with them that honor virtue? Seneca says very well: although a
body in dowed with a good conscience should perish, yet the fire shall be
pleasing unto it, by which so great confidence shall appear. Laetius est,
quoties magno sibi constat honestum,
And honesty dear bought brings greater joy.


That Christian Doctor S. Ambrose confirms this. A wise man, says he, is
not broken with the griefs of his body, but remains blessed even amongst
miseryes themselves. And so likewise did thou, (o Benedict) nay doubtless
thou had not remained Blessed, if thou had not contemned that beatitude
which the body falsely pretends to uselfe: thou have overcome the sin in
punishing it. O you brambles no man has less cause to be ashamed of you, then
Benedict! You may rather be said to make Venus blush, and be ashamed: it was
she that came to sow brambles, and was overcome in the brambles. She brought
flames from Mount Ida, to Mount Cassmo, but with flames she was driven away.
The mind of Benedict was fired with pleasures, but this fire was quenched with
fire of briars and stinging netties. Better was it for those thorns freely to
ransack his veins, then that lust entering into his bowels, should suck the
very marrow from his bones.

. V.
Theocritus faineth that wanton Cupid stung with a be, returned weeping to his
mother Venus, and often cried out. I am slain mother, I am undone. But more
truly may I say, all the Cupids, how many soever insulted over Benedict,
departed from their conqueror with tears in their eyes deploring their
disastre. And this is called to this day the Bulwark of Thistles, wherein this
holy man disarmed both himself and his enemy, offered a taste of his blood to
this thorny thicket, triumphed over Venus, and quenched the impure fire of
concupiscence. Thus that brave soldier by wounding his body cured his soul,
not so much avoiding as changing his flames, and preserving the spirit,
trampled upon his flesh: for had he been indulgent to the one, he had proved a
tyrant to the other. With wounds he prevented wounds, and with flames
extinguished flames. He exposed his body to be torn by angry briars, that he
might preserve his soul from blasting. And had he not inflicted wounds on his
body, there had been deeper gashes made in his soul; and this he could not
have cured, unless he had first wounded the other. A marvelous kind of healing
by impairing the health, and a new kind of gaining by suffering some loss.
Although truly here was no loss, unless it were of dirt mixed with blood; to
wit of his body.

And can there be any loss of this body, which, as witnesses Solon, when it
is borne, is nothing but putrefaction, whilst it lives a beast in
constitution, and when it dies, no other then worms meat? Can it (I say) be
any loss to punish this, that is no better then a beast, or beasts meats? How
small a thing is this, or rather nothing in respect of the victory obtained
thereby. He ouercometh twice, that ouercometh himself. And I add moreover,
there can not be a more pleasing nor more profitable victory then that a man
obtains over himself. Innumerable men have had Vassals under their dominion,
but very few have held themselves in subjection. Boast not (Sce^ola) the
burning of thy right hand; get thee gone: thou would never have been such an
acto^r, had not thou had such spectatours. Benedict, Nicetas, a thousand
others, in the presence of heaven, in the fight of God alone, desired not, but
abandoned al applause, so much the more worthy of glory, as they less desired
it. Pa^k hence you M^ij, and Lucretiaes, who laid violent hands on yourselues
after you were violated: but these Champions of ours fought courageously to
preserve their chastity. I will not here dispute what right a man has to take
from himself that life he never gave. Benedict, Nicetas, and others preserved
their lives, or to say more truly, mortifyed their members by a living death,
that they might avoid the death of their souls, being so much the more famous
then others, as they were more valiant. They wrastled with themselves making
good use of those thorns and corporal punishments; it seemed to them too much
sloth to purchase that with sweat, which they might atchieue with blood; They
did truly covet -- Pulchram per vulner a worrem,
-- By wounds a seemly death.


A death (I say) not of body, but of impure lust; a death of al vices. They
discovered not to us a pleasant way to heaven, strawed with roses, or such as
might be paced with even footing, but such as was sharp and thorny with briars
and brambles: neither did they only show it us, but went and arrived by this
way to their iourneys end; which most men desire but will not follow them. For
they by cherishing the body suffer it to grow strong, and the soul to starve.
Whereas this is to be cherished, and that restrained. And as the rapier, that is
grown dull and blunt with long use and wearing, is sharpened which a stone: so
our body is oftentimes to be pricked forward whither of itself it desires not
to go. Verily it is a shameful thing for a Princes followers (as Tacitus
says) not to be equal to him in virtue. Do we admire this fact of Benedict or
Nicete? we may likewise imitate it: for no man (as blessed Job affirms) shall
sooner be dismissed from this warfare, then out of this life. That blind God is
an unquiet boy, yea disquiet itself; notwithstanding he strikes those that
are quiet and blind, or at least makes them blind by str^king. His impious
shaft touched Benedict, but killed him not. He suffered an infamous repulse,
and his weapon returned back to him blunted, yea even broken, and instead of
victory he reaped shame and confusion, who would have put the like upon
Benedict. But it is too hard (say thou) to leap into briars and brambles, to
cloth a man's self in thorns, and draw blood. Would thou have easier
remedy? Then hear me; do but warily fly from this enemy, and thou have
vanquished him.

THE BATTLE OF NICETAS and his victory described in heroical verse. CHAP. II.
EDESIMVS. Verily most illustrious was this victory that S. Benedict abtained
over himself; but more admirable is it for a man to overcome who is bound hand
and foot as Nicetas was. S. Benedict, when he began to fight that battle, was
at liberty, not bound. Besides youthful blood was not so hot and boiling in his
veins, neither did any woman lay enticing hands upon him, or with her eyes set
him on fire. There was at that time no impudent Siren to wound his ears. Al
Benedicts enemies laid siege unto his heart. But contrary wise in Nicetas, his
eyes, his ears, his hands, his nostrils, and whatsoever was living in him, was
almost first vanquished with the blandishments of pleasures, before Nicetas
began to look about for weapons. Bound, tied, (I am astonished) environed with
enemies on every side, and destitute, as it were, of al hope of ouercoming,
notwithstanding he overcame; and, I was about to say, was able to do more,
then he was able. I have read of a certain soldier, a Portugese, who shot out
of a gun one of his own teeth against his enemy instead of a leaden bullet:
but I never remember, I have either read or heard of any, who, biting in pieces
his tongue, spit it at his flattering enemy. Who ever made use of his own
blood for a weapon? A marvelous kind of combat, where only to spit at a man's
enemy, was to overcome him: an admirable kind of engine, which a man was able
to conceal in his mouth: a wondrous triumph of chastity, which a little bloody
piece of a man's tongue obtained. PARTHENIVS. Admirable, yea thrice admirable
for the most part are al things heerin; and I know not whether any thing in the
Roman, Greek, Barbarous or Christian historyes may be found comparable to
this. Which invited me, even when I was but a boy to describe this battle of
Nicetas in a Poem. Do you please to hear it? Expect no lofty or polite
verse, for they were written by a scoller not by a Master. EDESIMVS. Read them.

What? are our minds so hardy now become,
To pitch our tents, and beat our warlike drum
O^ others coasts, engaged inforraineiarrs,
Whilst our own bulwarks shake at threatening wars?
Here Venus with Idalian tro^pes cloth post,
There Cupid marches with his fiery host.
Arm arm (ch^st hearts) for Nicet's wars I sing
Which to your hands victorious palms shall bring.
Then on, brave Champions, set upon your foes,
Where God gives strength, your will gives overthrows.
In youthful morn with odoriferous smell
Far did this flower the sweetest rose excel:
Choice Nard exhaleth from his virgin breast,
For in the Christian garden amongst the rest
Of tender plants, his verdant head appears,
Crowned with the ripeness of entirest years,
And his chaste body decked with beautyes rays,
Celestial grace within his heart displayes:
Nature with piety had so combined,
And paralelled his body with his mind.
Thrice happy twumes in virtues track they go,
Til wanton eyes on him were glancing so,
That like the north-east winds they sought to wast
This virgin bud with an impetuous blast.
Al those that saw his beauty did admire
His chaste aspect; and some were set on fire.
Al did applaud; but this he could not brook,
'Cause some were wounded with his harmeles look:
Pleasing to God, but would not be to those;
Desired to be, but not to seem a Rose.
The hellish monsters hereupon conspire,
And fell Megaera with reuengeful ne
Said: Shall this lad thus flourish with renown,
Shall glory thus this yongsters temples crown,
And giantlike shall he break through our tolles
Like spiders webbes, and give us daily foyles?
Shall it be said that Nicete scorns to yeald
His stubborn neck as trophie to our shield?
The prize is ours if we can catch in snares
With loves sweet bait this youth at unawares.
He Is but a child, in wisdoms school wnrain'd,
In strength an infant, ready to be stayn'd
With carnal lust: he is flax, and I the flame,
But touch and take; I will perform the same.
I will suggest, I Will arm the Cyprian bow
With speeding poison, I loves coals will blow;
Then what poor mortal can resist our arms?
What fleshy wight escape our fatal charms?
This said, that Goddess al destraught with rage
Betakes her to the earth where she does wage
Fierce wars against Nicete, sugared ore with guile
Whilst she his chastest soul seeks to defile.
Forthwith her bawdes and Panders falley out,
Intestine warriors, and the Paphian rout
Enuiron him with all the infernd power
To blast with venomed breath this virgin flower.
Decius himself with fury armed goes,
To prostitute chaste Nicete to his foes.
Nicete he chases like the Spartan hound,
With greedy jaws and nostrils on the ground,
Tracing the stately stagge through groans and woods
Ore rocks, ore mountains and through neighboring floods:
S. Decius does pursue with eager pace
Chaste Nicete, and besides does interlace
A thousand snares with men^ces and wiles,
With dreadful frowns he intermixeth smiles.
O Nicete whilst so many foes invade,
Thy fame seems blasled, and thy glories sade.
Forthwith upon a wanton iuory bed
With filken furniture enueloped,
Poor Nicete open on his back is thrown,
And lodged amongst fragra^t roses newly blown.
With silken kn^s are bound his virgin hands,
Which he could wish were cords or iron bands.
Soft was his bed of swanny down, (alas)
Rather he would have lodged on broken glass.
The garden did in beauty and in smell
The Semir^ian gardens far excel.
Delicious place! where arbours over shade,
Where rosy birds were peeping out, that made
A haunt for Nymphs and youths of Venus ^ew*
Here farrest flowers fed both sent and view;
Sweet violets with daffodils disclosed,
Red roses with fresh lillyes interposed.
No flowery beds might ere contest with these,
To ravish eyes, and curious swelling please.
Here Flora's tapestries, enameled beds
With purples, ble^es, carnatious, tawneyes, reds.
Here pregnant buds were sprouting from the slemme,
There a sweet rose, and here a pearle-like g^ome.
Here glittering stars shined in a verdant sky,
And violets with dainty pinkes stood by.
Kissing each other they did sweetly close,
And milk-white lillyes liek'd the ruddy rose.
A neighboring plant infinuates with them,
The fragrant flower of Jerusalem.
Panchaia here sweet odours breathes with pranks
Of red and white; here Hybla on the banks
Inul^es the busy be; beer which is best,
Narcissus and the hyacinth contest:
This shows a purple, that an iuory white
And shak'd with winds a duel seem to fight.
Not far from thence were arbours mounted high
Where wanton winds played with that canopy;
And murmuring to and frosly purling round.
Ambitious tuyes creeping from the ground,
Til to the arbours flanks so strong at binds
It dares encounter with the blustering winds.
On sunny banks the amorous spriteful race
With swolne-vp clusters, neighboring trees embrace.
With haughty crest the lofty Cedar springs,
And makes the olive trees his underlings.
The Almond next with odoriferous shade,
Combining with the rest a place bad made.
Where filuer streams pursued with eager chase
The pibble stones, which never end their race.
Here Zephirus and Eurus revels hold,
And soft Fauoman winds reign vncontrol'd.
Delicious place for Venus Nymphs, but those
Of chaste desires in thee find no repose.
Nicet is hither drawn by force and slights
To be enchanted with unchaste delights:
Here as a captive bound is forced to lie,
Where al conspire to act his misery.
For youthful vigor, which is some misled,
Assaulted in this odoriferous bed,
Began to mutiny against his soul,
And brutish flesh the spirit did control.
Al senseles things against him incensed conspire
With senseles acts to blow his sensual fire.
The whistling winds, the streams from steepy rocks,
Make have to reach poor Nicet murdring knocks.
Inuiron'd round with squadrons of thy foes
Thou can not fly, what arms has't to oppose?
Legions of Cupid's fiery darts let fly
Against thy heart, the fort of Chastity.
Al against one: how can thou al withstand,
Or free thy self from their usurping hand?
Alas, what power have thou to vanquish them?
To break these gives, what wile, what stratagem?
Ah, had thou Sampsons vigor in thine arms,
As thou have courage; no alluring charms
Should filthine ears, nor cords thy hands should bind.
But natures forces malice has confined;
Thou pinioned lie in most distressed state,
Servile to power, and made a slave to hate.
A shameless woman with the rest combined,
A horrid monster fixing in the mind
As many darts, as words, with murdring eyes
Of Basilisks, which one beholding dies:
Hydra of hell, a viper poison darts,
A wanton Siren by lascivious arts,
Chanes in his ears, and with souls persuing breath
(The plague itself) kills by a sudden death.
All this and more with Cupid hell contriues.
And Nicet's liberty's enthralled in gaues;
No place for virtue to resist appears.
Renowned Poets, you that fill men's ears
With empty tales of Sirens, turn your pen,
It Is he can raise you in the mouths of men
It Is Nicet's that m^ces your choicest quil,
To blaze his fame, which far exceeds my skill.
Should he but open once his chastest eyes
He lets in death, that over him houering flies;
To shut them, shuts not forth his restles fears,
For death may enter at his open ears.
Poorer the poor Ulysses his strict bands
Deny his ears the couers of his hands;
Whilst silken cords his hands like setters close,
No hand to strike, no foot to spurn his foes.
The Roman hemicide in darksome night
Within a sack enclosed (where to affright,
A dog, a serpent, ape and cock were thrust)
Eudur'd not half thy pains (though pains most
More enemies thy wronged virtue bears, (just)
More disaduantages, less hopes, more fears.
What ere thou do, their malice frustrate makes
And ore thy head the Ionian Archer shakes
His dreadful bow, his poisned arrow dantes
Thy virgin breast. But Venus vainly vauntes
Of victory, before the conquest wun,
And weaues up triumphs ere the thread be spun.
To make her flagges, she vainly chants out songs
Of wanton love, augmenting Nicet's wrongs:
Whom, thus half vanquished in these doubtful lists,
Propitious power from heaven so well assists,
And quickly does a dexterous means impart
To conquer her and rescue his chaste heart.
Painting with scarlet blush his angels face
He sighed and said: O never do disgrace
Fair virtues colors with so foul a fact,
Let shame and modesty from thee exact
Fit weapons to resist this cursed wrong,
Though I am bound yet so is not my tongue.
Sorrow has arms in store, my tongue's a sword,
This is the weapon chaste desires afford;
With this I Will strike, but not with words or checks
Which often tend unto the speakens wrecks.
Thus having said the quarrel he decides,
For with his teeth he manfully diuides,
And in her face spits forth his bloody tongue,
Less sensible of pain then of the wrong.
IO Nicet; thou as with victorious hands,
Have burst in pieces al those Stigian bands,
As one best knowing how thou might apply
Thy spotles blood to guard thy chastity.
Thy mouth the quiver, lips (which purple dies)
The bow, from whence thy tongue, as the arrow, flies.
Which ends the Paphian war, begins thy praise,
And shall to thee eternal trophyes raise.
EDESIMVS. O Nicetas! O most glorious conqueror! in former times most admired,
in future Ages most worthy to be honored, reverenced, and by uniform consent
of al, highly extolled.

But are these (say you) a scholars verses? I think not good, PARTHENIVS, to
commend thee to thy face, lest I be thought to flatter: but thou have happily
dreamed upon the two-topt Parnassus. PARTHENIVS. Let us omit al dreams, and
return to the matter: There must none of us ever look to act Nicetas part, by
only knowing how others have fought and gotten the victory in these lists,
unless we also learn and endeavor to gain the palm by fighting
courageously. We have hitherto discoursed of the Allurements and Effects of
Incontinency; the Antidotes remain. Do you remember those neat and smooth
verses; but such as Naso or Maro never made? They are these: Lectio, flagra,
preces, confessio, lympha, labores,
Portarum excubiae, Christi praesentia, paenae.
Books, prayer, stripes, confession, labor, fasting,
Strict watch, Christ's presence, torments everlasting.
Now that we may not seem, as you said before, to speak Arabicke let us
express each particular word. There is no remedy against incontinency which is
not contained heerin, as He ^is Iliads were in the compass of a nut. Let us
begin.

THE FIRST REMEDY against Incontinency: Reading of pious books. CHAP III.
IT will but little avail us (my EDESIMVS) to lay aside impure books except we
make choice of better. It is no virtue to forbear reading pernicious
pamphlets, if we contemn or neglect pious and profitable Authors; the reading
whereof is as commodious as necessary. When we pray, we speak to Almighty God;
but when we read, God speaks to us. Aug. in Ps. 65.
A pious book is an apothecaryes shop, from whence we may fetch a peculiar
medicine for every particular vice. Sermons only at set times, and upon
festiual days instruct us: by books, as by silent preachers, we daily may and
should be advised. He shall have but a slender harvest, who every week bringes
but one or two ears of corn to his barn. The piety of a man cannot be
extraordinary, which he learnes out of books, if he ask counsel of them no
more then once or twice in a month. If we read but little at once, it ought to
be the more frequent. We are in this respect not unlike sick persons, who,
lest they should drink too much at one draught, are advised to drink the
oftener: so let not that which we take be too much at a time, but moderate and
frequent. EDESIMVS. I do not sufficiently understand this. PARTHENIVS. I will
presently explicate it more at large. I mean frequent, yea a daily reading of
holy books is most profitable.

Blessed S. Bernard, a Prelate of a singular wit, and admirable learning, wrote
many excellent, and some in a manner divine things: and it is said of him, he
was never taught by any master: but by the only practice of prayer and
reading, he ascended to this height of knowledge. His desire of understanding
invited him to read, his prayer obtained understanding; but the means whereby
he obtained it was sanctity of life. Thus let a man desire, thus pray, thus
live, who desires to profit in this manner. We are altogether or for the most
part beholding to pious reading, for those two Illustrious Patriarchs S.
Dominick and S. Ignatius; of which the former may rightly ascribe the prime
cause and motive of his sanctity to the collations of the Fathers; the later to
the lives and examples of Saints. Both of them were not only changed, but even
made other men by reading of pious books.

That Great Anthony having heard these words read out of the Ghospel: Matthew.
19.21.
Go, sell al thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have a treasure
in heaven: and come follow me; took them as spoken to himself by the
celestial Oracle, and thereupon instantly leaving al transitory things, he
aba^doned the world and all the vanities thereof. Augustine, that miracle of wit,
had never doubtless been S. Augustine, had he not by means of reading begun his
holy course of life; which he thus testifyeth of himself. I thought (says he)
Lib. 8. Conf. c. 12.
I was held by them, (meaning the delights and sins of his former life) and I
uttered lamentable words: How long, how long? to morrow? to morrow? why not
now? why should I not at this very hour give over dishonesty of life? These
things I said and wept with most bitter contrition of heart: And behold I heard
from the next house a voice, as it were of some boy, or girl, I know not
whether, which singing said, and often repeated: Take up and read, Take up and
read. Whereupon without further delay I took up the new Testament, and read
this which did first occur: Not in Chamber-workes and impudicities, not in
contention and emulation: But put on our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and make not
provision for the flesh in concupiscences. Romans c. 13. ^eas. 13.
Hereupon an admirable light was infused into the Readers breast, and the
former Augustine became a new and quite altered man.

O how often must we inculcate this: Take up and read, Take up and read, to
these idle pratlers? Sleepy loyterer take up some pious book, look upon it,
read somewhat; show that thou have not as yet wholly lost thine eyes: why do
thou consume whole days in vain discourses?

. I.
The holy Scripture commends the Treasurer of Candac^ Queen of Ethtopia, for
his industry in reading the Scriptures. And he returned sitting upon his
chari^t and reading the prophet Isaias. Act. 8.28.
Saint Chrysostom, and S. Hierom admire his so pious and diligent endeavor
therein. Behold (say they) Chris. Hom. de Lazaro. Hieron. ep. 103. ad Paulin.
a Barbarous man, a man fraught with cares, environed with negotiations,
overwhelmed with innumerable businesses: notwithstanding he read, and although
he did not understand what he read, nevertheless he read, and that on the way in
his chari^t. If he were so diligent in his journey, what may we think he did
when he was quiet at home? Nor have there wanted Princes, Kings, and Emperors,
who heertofore with their illustrious examples have traced this way. Famous is
that most watchful lamp of the Emperor Theodosius the younger, Niceph. l. 14.
c. 1.
so artificially composed, that moved and poysed by little waights it supplied
itself with oil without man's help, and served it is vigilant Master with
perpetual light for his reading. And so industrious was he in perusing pious
books, that though he were unwilling to break the sleep of any of his
servants, yet oftentimes for a great part of the night he deprived himself
thereof. Alphonsus King of Arragon, no less delighting in pious books, read
over both the Testaments, forty times; Anton. Panor. in vita lib. 1.
yea (I may say) forty times to that: not slightly or in have, but seriously
and with Comments. What do we EDESIMVS, what do we that can compare with
this: We see pious books in Kings and Emperors hands, yet we (negligent
fellows as we are) spend our time (that is so precious) most idlye which might
most profitably be bestowed in reading.

The acts of Great Anthony were written by Athanasius, who for the faith of
Christ became a wandering banished man throughout the whole world. This book S.
Augustine read, and with a high spirit said as follows. Lib 8 confess. c. 8.
What is this? what have thou heard? There rise up unlearned men, and snatch
heaven from us. And we hartles men, with all our learning, behold how we wallow
still in flesh and blood. What? are we ashamed to follow, because they lead us
the way? The same life of that B. Anthony persuaded two of the court of
Theodosius the Emperor to a more holy course of life, with a change as speedy
as admirable. They were determined to spend some hours of the afternoon in
walking. And as they wandered in the open fields, to avoid the heat, retired
themselves into a little monastery, and at leisure viewed the poor furniture
of the house. Here by chance one of them took into his hand that life of B.
Anthony written at large. Curiosity persuaded him at first to open and look
upon it, and devotion afterward (for the better spending of his time) to read
it: First of al he is stricken with admiration: sometimes he makes a pause, and
meditates a little, then begins to be delighted; by degrees he is drawn, and
by little and little inflamed. To conclude, this Courtier was so enkindled by
reading, that casting his eyes upon his fellow, he said: I pray thee, what is
the utmost ambition of al our labors? Al our hope aims no higher, then at the
Emperors favor; and how long will that continue? Through how many dangers do
we travel to a greater danger? We are the world's bondslaues, and oftentimes
become the devils Martyrs, and after we have spent the flower of our youth, our
health and life, upon this vain trifling, what gain we thereby? I will become
the friend of God now whilst I am able. Thus he spoke and began again to read,
seriously pondering in his mind with a hard conflict. At last cried out: I have
broken through, I have now determined. I will begin this very hour, and in this
place serve my God. Then turning to his fellow, he said: May it please you,
Sir, to join with me, and follow my example? At least oppose not; for you shall
find me no changeling. Unto whom the other replied: I will be your inseparable
companion: I will still follow you. They begun well, they perseuered piously, and
ended happily. Both of them had their spouses, who, seeing this admirable
change, were themselves likewise altered, and vowing to God their virginity,
were espoused to the Celestial bridegroom. These things are the more credible
in that they are confirmed by the undoubted testimony of S. Augustine. Lib. 8.
Conf. c. 6.


. II.
Behold, my EDESIMVS, how powerfully pious reading preuailes. It is a most true
saying of S. Augustine: When we read God talks with us. He that profits
nothing by reading, let him not say that God speaks not to him, but that he
attends not to God.

According to the things a man reads is the profit he reapes: those things we
read should not be so prolixe as profitable. I do not say that Maro or Cicero
should absolutely be abandoned; but that Thomas a Kempis and other pious Writers
should be likewise perused; lest with S. Hierom we be accused before the
tribunal of Christ, to have been rather Ciceronians then Christians. S.
Augustine long sought for the truth amongst Logicians and Sophi^ers, which he
was so far from finding amongst them, that he fell into the Manichae^ dotage.
Nor could he be reclaimed til he nead the epistles of Paulus Tarsensis.
EDESIMVS. What books therefore do you think are chiefly to be read. For it
often happens that many both young and old are much deceived in their choice.
In my opinion books and meats are not to be chosen alike, as if those which are
most sauory should nourish most. PARTHENIVS. I allow of your judgment; we
should not read to please our taste, but to reap fruit; nor to become learned,
but virtuous thereby. Infinite is the number of pious books in this our Age, and
yet they daily increase. But behold I give you a very brief Catalogue of those
I think more profitable then a thousand others, both for youth, riper age, and
for men in years. 1. The motives of virtues. 2. The considerations of
Eternity. 3. The imitation of the most B. Virgin Mary.


The last of these was written by Francis Arias, al whose works to you I
likewise commend. But let that book be first which I named in the first place,
to wit, Stimuli virtut^m, The motives of virtues; of which this is my opinion:
that I know not any book, in most libraryes of the world, more profitable for
young men. From this proceed to the second, and upon the foundation thereof let
Eternity be placed. But whilst I persuade the reading of these few, I deny not
but others are very profitable: namely Lewis Granatensis, entitled The guide
of sinners, and other books of his, which are indeed very learned and pious.
That of Thomas a Kempis of the following of Christ; The lives of Saints written
by Zacherias Lippelous; The Christian Zodiac of twelve signs of
Predestination: The Horology of the Angel guardian; Cardinal Bellarmines book
entitled, The Ascension of the mind to God: The same author of the Eternal
felicity of the Saints; likewise his Degemitu columbae, and the Art of dying
well written by the same man. Albertus Magnus, or James Aluarez of virtues; The
first and second part of Spiritual works written by Luca Pinellus; The Manual
of the Sodality set forth by Francis Veron; The four parts of Francis Bruno,
of the most Blessed Virgin, and of the life and death of Christ; The six parts
of Meditations of Lewis de Ponte. Behold a great many, and yet I have named but
a few in respect of those that are extant: make your choice. Most of them you
may buy for a small charge, and read with facility. Do so (my EDESIMVS) you will
never repent you of my counsel. EDESIMVS. I will obey you; but I likewise expect
some documents for reading. PARTHENIVS. I will give just as many as the books I
assigned. Three things seem to me chiefly to be avoided in reading pious
books. 1. Celerity. 2. Variety. 3. Vanity.


And lest my words may seem riddles I explane them.

. III.
The pious Reader must before al things, principally beware of Celerity. I have
spoken of his already. Let not him that desires to profit himself, read much,
but a little with much attention. I approve not of those readers who fly
through books, as a cock would through hot coals. They speedily slubber over
many things; stay upon nothing, read nothing advisedly. Let pious reading be
scrious, deliberate, and often interrupted; that what is read may be pondered
by meditation, and by inuoluing, better understood. There are some that do not
eat, but devour; and Plantus speaks properly of them, Tubur^i^antur do
^ourmandize: they hastily take in great morsels, and without chewing straight
swallow and devour them. To these meat is not so much a nourishment, as
detrimet. So he that swalloweth much by reading, but disgesteth nothing by
pondering, reads without discretion or profit. There are showers soft, but
soaking, which falling mildly, and by little drops, s^ke into and make fruitful
the earth. But a stormy and sudden shower does seldom fertilize the soil. So
hasty reading without some mixture of meditation, like a sudden deluge
ouerwhelmes; but does not penetrate and water the parched earth. If you read
any thing that may tend to the better ordering of your li^e, suffer it. I
beseech you to penetrate think whether you have been or in ^ithe to come shall
be such an one. You read in vain if you read not with deliberation.

Moreover Variety, for the most part, in all reading, is utterly to be
condemned. The multitude of dishes impaires the health of many, who otherwise
would perfectly enjoy it. Multiplicity of medicines shortneth the life of many
sick men. So in like sort variety and excess in reading hinders the
proficient in solid virtue. The reading of al manner of books causes a
certain confusion and instability of mind. That man who is every where, is no
where; nor is it wholesome to take diverse sorts of different medicines. It is
the property of a queasy stomach to be still tasting several meats; which being
of so distinct and diverse quality, corrupt rather then nourish. Many dishes
beget many diseases: so in like manner, it is a fault in a reader, to seek in
books rather his pleasure then his profit. Polibius compares these men to
licorish fellows, and glurtonous Epicures, who tasting here and there a bit of
al sorts of meats, set before them, have little or no pleasure for the present,
nor future nourishment or profit. Let us so read (my EDESIMVS) that we not only
delight our palate with those things that are sauory, but likewise with those
that are for instruction and profit: with that rather which is commodious then
delightful.

Vanity likewise in reading is not to be tolerated. I call that vanity which a
man reads not to practice, but only to know: to please the understanding
rather then to incite the will. Ah (my EDESIMVS) not our science but our
practice shall be approved of in heaven. To what end do I read much, if I never
purpose to put any thing in practice? What does it avail us to read sacred and
practice profane things? Why are pious books daily in our hands, if we have
not so much as the very shadow of piety in our lives? Why do I entertain my
mind with the precepts of chastity, if I refuse to put them in practice? When
we begin to read, we ought to have an ingenuous and firm determination to
execute in each respect whatsoever a pious book by divine inspiration shall
dictate either to be followed or eschewed. An Angel did not only lay open a
book before Ezechiel and S. John, Ezech. 3.1. Apoc. 10.9.
but also commanded them to devour and enclose it in their bowls. Vain is
that reading which is not sealed and rutifyed by works. After reading let us
begin to be such men, as the books instructed us to be. Otherwise though we
sow store of seed, no harvest ensues. And woe be to him, who only knows and
does not those things which he ought. Christ exhorting us, says: Luc. 12.47.
That servant that knew the will of his Lord and prepared not himself, nor did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

The B. Virgin Mother of our Lord (whose most holy life no man is able
sufficiently to commend) read the holy scriptures from three in the afternoon
til night; and thereby this one Virgin profited more for the accomplishment of
her beatitude; then the wisest men could with all the vast libraryes of that
world.

Si^ia Ruff^a the Governors daughter of Alexandria, obtained such perfection
by daily reading in the Theban solitude, that she not only seemed not to be
alone, when she was most solitary, but endeavored to imitate their lives she
read and to exemplify their virtue in her life.

They recount how Alcibiades when he was a young man, entering into a school,
earnestly requested of the Master Homers Iliads. The Master answered he had
no such book. To whom this audacious young man replied not but with a box on
the ear, and so departed; only muttering to himself he said: May he be
reputed a Schoole-Maister that wants Homer? Perhaps (my EDESIMVS) thou may
find some of the Sodalitie of the most Blessed Virgin, whom if thou ask
whether they read that little book of the Imitation of Christ, will deny they
have any such. May thou not vpbraid them with like words; and ask how can
they be of the Sodality, and not have this sacred Writer? There can be nothing
more vicious then to be an enemy to the best things. Alfonsus, that most
excellent King, in times past, being asked who were the best Counselors,
answered: They that are dead; meaning books, which without flattery or
concealing any thing, sincerely express and instruct men in documents of truth.

Hardly can he be healthful, who having an auersion from wholesome meats
delights his appetite only with cherryes and al manner of fruit: so shall he
never be a holy man, who contemning pious books feeds himself with hearing
or reading fables. We are to read both profitable and pious things: which unless
we often peruse, we shall neither reap profit nor piety by them.

This I had to say of Reading, being the first word of the verse. The other, to
wit, Stripes, follows. EDESIMVS. Now my shoulders shrink at this; but go
forward (my PARTHENIVS) I have not yet given over to be attentive.

THE SECOND ANTIDOTE against Incontinency: Chastizement of the body, CHAP. IV.
PARTHENIVS. Resistire diabolo, and fugiet a vobis, Iac. 4.7
Resist the devil and he will fly from you. Without war (my EDESIMVS) there is
no chastity. Will thou not fight? thou love not thy chastity. Well known is
that saying of Chrysostom; A virgin never cease to wage war. Her enemy is
as flattering and deceitful, as near unto her. A man is not only the nearest,
but also the worst enemy to himself. In vain the devil and world fight against
us, if our own traytorous flesh favor not their faction. Nor is the wicked
spirit ignorant, that al his victoryes in a manner are to be attributed to the
flesh. With facility he conuinceth the Lady Reason, who but once subdues her
handmaid the flesh. She, deceived with self-loue, to purchase a few honey
drops, selles her patrimony in heaven: she cares not to perish eternally, so
she may for a moment live pleasantly. Ecclesiasticus, extremely condemning this
madness, says: Eccles. 17.30.
What is more wicked then that which flesh and blood has invented?

Here take into thy consideration Iahel, that Cinaean woman, who was as strong
as subtle. Iudi. 4.
There came unto her Tent a warlike captain called S^fara, weakened with
battle, and wearyed by flight. Iahel with sweet allurements and flattering
pretenses of freindship went forth to meet him. Come in my good Lord (said she)
come in, there is no cause why you should fear. He (even as an ox goes to the
slaughterhouse) entering in, requested a cup of cold water. She as one more
liberal to her guest then he required, gave him milk, and covering him with
skins of beasts, left him to take his rest. But setting upon him in the depth
of his sleep, she struck a great nail through his temples. So, poor man, that
sleep which then began is not yet finished. Like Iahel, yea worse, the Flesh
handles us; wanton, petulant, full of deceits, and furnished with a thousand
subtiltyes to betray us; it gives our thirsty soul a delicious potion to
drink, and plies us with sundry carnal contentments and pleasures. And
although this draught be mingled with deadly poison, it is nevertheless grateful
to a dry soul; which it also couers with skins, inuiting it to sleep
securely in sin. This is the property of the Flesh still to avoid whatsoever
is sharp and laborious, and to offer soft and delicate entertainment. With
these blandishments that great Commander the Soul is laid asleep, and so
whiles she attends not her affairs, is with that great nail of Luxury fastened
and transfixed to the earth. O Sisara! O most miserable soul! do thus begin
thy sleep, which is accompanied with everlasting death?

O (my EDESIMVS) why do we not here take up whips and scourge this wicked
impostor, as she deserves? Fodder, the whippe, and burden for an Ass: bread,
discipline, and labor for a servant: unloose his hands, and he seeks after
liberty, Eccl. 33. verse. 25.


. I.
Plutarch recounteth that Agason ready to be stricken by one that was incensed
against him, cried out: Plut. (...) Irae.
I am an Athenian, I am an Athenian. He, craftily diuerting the blow toward
an ass that stood by, said but thou art no Athenian: and forthwith struck the
silly beast with a great cudgel. Our Soul had her beginning from heaven, this
is her country, here she is a citizen: the flesh, but the daughter of the
earth, sprung from most sordid parentage. Why then are we so partial toward
her? She is no Athenian, she has no offspring from heaven; this honor is due
to the soul. Why therefore are we so facil and benign toward this beast?
This is a vicious and foolish kind of pity. But so the flesh may fare well, and
want no cherishing and pampering, so the flesh may escape whipping, let the
soul be corrupted, let it perish, what matter is it? In this we imitate
Agrippina Neroes mother. She asking counsel of the Augures concerning her son
Nero; they answered it would come to pass, that he should govern and put his
mother to death. To which she impiously answered: Occidat, dum imperet, let him
kill me, so he may govern. Tacit. lib. 14. Annal. post initium.
So we, prone to our own destruction, and indulgent to the Flesh, with an
impious scoff laugh our holy admonishers to skorne. Christ exhortes us, the
Prophets cry out, the Apostles counsel us, Clergymen importune, all the holy
Saints teach us by their examples, Ad Romans 8.
that we must not walk according to the flesh, but according to the spirit:
That the prudence of the flesh is death: That the wisdom of the flesh is the
enemy of God. That they who are in the flesh cannot please God: That we are
debtours not to the flesh to live according to the flesh. That we shall dye, if
we live according to the flesh, but if by the spirit we morifye the works of
the flesh, we shall live. What say we to these things? Let me dye, let me be
killed and perish, so the flesh may bear rule, so al go well with it: let what
will, happen to my soul. Again those Admonishers exhort us more earnestly: Ad
Romans 13.14. 1. Cor. 15.50. Galat. 5.
Make not provision for the flesh in concupiscences. Flesh and blood cannot
possess the Kingdom of God. Let us cleanse ourselves from al inquination of
the flesh. Walk ^n the Spirit, and the lusts of the flesh you shall not
accomplish. The works of the flesh be manifest, which are fornication
uncleanness, impudicitie, letchery etc. The fruits of the Spirit are Charity,
Toy, Peace, Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Longanimity. And they who are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with the vices and concupiscences. O (my
EDESIMVS) do we hear these things, and can we yet keep our hand from the
whip? Verily we pardon and dimisse without punishment an Ass, and with most
wicked blandishme^ts overthrow our Soul the companion of Angels. A whip and a
burden for this ass; a whip, a whip.

. II.
The Master of the gallyes a farre-off discovering on the sea a vessel of
Moors, or Gallie of Turks making toward them, if he think himself not
able to encounter, straight resolving to fly, he falls upon the gallye-slaues,
whom if he find^ loitering or slack in rowing, presently he lays hold on his
whip; and with a terrible voice menacing them cries out again and again: Row
dogs, row, row. If fear of scourges persuades them not to dispatch, the Master
lays down his whip, draws forth his sword and without making many words
cutes of an arm or a hand of him that is most stubborn amongst them.
Afterward he salutes every one as before: Row dogs, row, row. And are not we
likewise (my EDESIMVS) in a stormy sea, exposed to the winds and waves, as a
sport? here gulfes, there rocks; here Scilla, there Charybdis threaten our
destruction. We wrestle with dangers on every side. Pirates enuiron us, and
endeavor to stop our passage to Heaven. Amongst these innumerable perils our
contumacious and perfidious flesh (a great lover of sloth, and ease) looks
about for pillowes, cushions, and soft beds; dreams of nothing but trifling
and voluptuousnes; lives secure, neglects al dangers, and so falls to riots
and wantonness. And why do we not here play the men? Why linger we? Why do we
not compel this beast to row, with scourges and whips. O flesh thou must be
whipped, beast, thou must be whipped, thou must be scourged.

Verily this ^ile gally-slaue is no otherwise to be deak with. To be a little
indulgent to the body is to offer violence to the dominion of reason. Let it
learn therefore to serve and be subject: let it learn to preserve its
chastity by labor. But to this it will never be persuaded by reason, and
cherishing; we must use violence and stripes. A shameful thing it is, that
those holy men should so earnestly strive to maintain their chastity: S.
Benedict amongst the briars; S. Francis in the midst of the snow. S. Bernard in
a freezing lake: A shame it is a thousand others should tear themselves with
scourges and whips, whole hours, almost whole days together to keep their
chastity entire; That Dominick Loricat, in the holy time of one only Lent (for
he kept diverse every year) should so often, so cruelly scourge himself during
the time of his prayers til 45000. stripes were numbered: and that we living in
far greater danger then any of these, should wallow securely in idleness and
sloth: and like cowardes spare ourselves, whereas we should lay on load with
both hands, seeing lust so easily in^lts and triumphs over us. Vide Jacob.
Gr^tser. de discipline. ^x Pet. Dam. Surius Tom. 5. ad 14. October. in vita.
Ah silly mortals, this is not the path which leads to heaven, nor the way for
you to so are above the stars. I pray thee (my EDESIMVS) name but one only
Sai^ amongst so many thousand thowsands who was not austere to his body, of
spare diet, and hardly nourishing it, inuring it to al manner of sufferings.
Dominick Loricat was wont to say he ascended by little and little, to this
height of voluntary disciplining himself; that any man, by the assistance of
God might attain to the like; and that he himself might learn to watch whole
mights, he began to watch some part at the first: for sleep (said he) inuiteth
sleep, and by watching we may more easily watch: so by abstaining we learn to
abstain. We must therefore begin: questi^onles, beginnings are hard; we must
not presently recoile upon the first onset; we shall proceed with less
difficulty. Do not give way to approaching mischiefs; observe this well or
thou loosest thy chastity. Doubtless a discipline has two excellent things in
it: the first, it notably keeps under and suppresseth the wantonness of the
flesh, as it were with a sharp bridle, when it grows too insolent: the other
is, that no man sufficiently or sensibly feels the torments of Christ, when
he was beaten with stripes, crowned (...) thorns, nailed upon the cross,
except he taste of like torments and whips. And if our own disciplines seem so
sharp and paineful, which we lay not on with an angry hand; we may think how
great our Saviors pains were when the hands of his enemies tyrannized over
his tender body, with their sharp whips of wire and knotty cords. This was a
sea of griefs indeed, an vnspreakeable torment. Therefore albeit a man have his
flesh in subjection, yet if he would seriously enter into consideration of the
passion of Christ and his great torments, let him not shun these little ones:
let him make use of those whips which our Lord has for our use consecrated
with his own blood. Let us think that spoken unto us which Solomon says:
Pro 23.13.14.
Withdraw not discipline from a child; for if thou shall strike him wuh the
rod, he shall not dye. Thou shall strike him with the rod and deliver his soul
from hell.

. III.
Notwithstanding sometimes haire-cloth is to be preferred before disciplines:
now and then the body is to be punished with lingering asperityes. And for this
respect lying upon the ground, rough clothing, and haire-cloth are best. These
sharp garments in times past even in the old law were very much used, not only
amongst the people; but likewise Kings and princes themselves, Achab, David,
Ioram wore these rough garments next their shin. 3. Reg. 21.27. Psalm. 34.13.
4. Reg. 6.30.
Judith, that star of the Hebrews by wearing haire-cloth made her chastity
and modesty more remarkable and secure. In the new law nothing is more usual
amongst holy men and women, then haire-shirts: people of al ages, orders,
states, conditions and sexes, even til this day, wear them, to tame and
afflict their flesh. There have been those, who for twenty, thirty, yea
foure-score years together, day and night with these haire-clothes have kept
under al rebellion of the flesh.

S. Lupus bishop of Troys who was wont to sleep upon the ground, and for the
space of twenty years, never suffered himself to come in any bed; spent every
other night in prayers and vigils; covered himself with one only coat, wore
continually haire-cloth, and had diverse to imitate him. The like did S. Maximus
Bishop of Rhegium, and others. Abraham the Eremite, who was his fathers sole
heir, reserved to himself nothing of his ample patrimony, but a haire-shirt,
a bed made of a matte, and a wooden cup. He wore his garments of haire-cloth
and never changed them for the space of fifty years. S. Amatus Abbot would
admit no other mattresse then one of haire-cloth on which he lay in his last
sickness, and dyed upon the same. The Earl Elzearius under a silken stomacher
wore another of haire-cloth. I he same Earl at every verse of the fiftieh
psalm (called the Miserere) with a little iron chain gave three strokes on
his breast. Well known is the haire-cloth of the Emperor Charles the Great.
Francis Borgias, Duke of Gandia, even at such time as he was at his own
liberty out of Religion, armed himself with haire-cloth when he went to visit
any woman. S. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, wearing a hairy garment down
to his knees, said: How shall I be able to keep under so many others, if I be
not able to keep mine own body in subjection? S. Edmond who did succeed in the
same seat, wore a hair shirt out of Lent, and in Lent one of iron. To this
his mother accustomed him from a very child, who always sent him, with his
linens to Paris, a little new shirt of hair, persuading him to wear it twice
or thrice every week. EDESIMVS. Give me leave to ask you but one question.
Who I pray you wore the first haire-cloth? PARTHENIVS. Marry that did Adam the
first man together with his wife. They sewed together fig tree leaves, and
made themselves aprons. Genesis 3.7.
These leaves are rough and nothing pleasing to them that are naked. So such
haire-cloth as was gathered from the tree had its beginning from Paradise.
Jacob did the like, who beholding his sons bloody coat, rending his clothes
put on haire-cloth. Genesis 37.34.
Many others have imitated them, who with rough and hairy clothing fought
against their flesh. It is an ordinary canticle in the Church: Sancta Caecilia
cilicio membra domabat; Deum gemitibus exorabat: S. Cicely tamed her body with
haire-cloth, with sighs she prayed unto God. Neither had her very nuptial day
power to pull off from her this rough habit. It Is true she glittered with golden
garments, but secretly with her haire-cloth punished her body; and whilst her
wedding songs were singing she was recommending her virginity to God. Not
inferior to her was Editba, the King of England's daughter; who, piously to
dissemble the asperity of the haire-cloth she wore day and night, adorned her
self outwardly in a princely manner. S. Ethelwold beholding her in that
Queene-like attire, with a bended brow said: Not so (my daughter) you must not
think to go thus to heaven. Your celestial Spouse regardes not this gorgious
attire. She answered modestly: Holy father, this is that which comforts me, my
God respects my heart, and not my apparel. By which this holy man perceived,
that a virtuous mind must not always be censured by the outward garment. I
omit Radigund, the wife of King Clotarius, and Cunegund, the wife of Henry the
Emperor, whereof this later would not only sleep but dye in haire-cloth.

. IIII.
This was the practice of all the Saints, continually to afflict and chastize
their bodies. Al were very ingenious in this point: this was their only care,
lest under the pretense of necessity, there might creep in voluptuous
superfluity. This was the cause of their long watchings, their hard lodgings,
and lyings on the ground, perpetual hunger, harsh and unsavory meats, bitter
drinks and rough clothing; which they endured with invincible patience. That
they might not delude their souls, they played and iested with their bodies.
My flesh (said they) would thou sleep? well, thou may: but this bed is too
hard for thee; do it therefore either standing or sitting, whether thou will: or
if thou had rather take thy rest lying, behold there a stone, an excellent
cushion. Would thou dine or suppe? This likewise mai'st thou do: behold
here are herbs; see, here are very good roots, not without sawee; ashes,
vinegar and salt: oil for thee is nothing so good. O my body art thou thirsty?
Behold a crystal stream of water, perhaps somewhat warm, least the cold
rawnesse afflict thy stomach. Thus sharply checking their bodies, they brought
them into subjection. They maintained stoutly these continual battles against
their flesh; for they knew well enough, when the enemy was within their own
walls, it was a very dangerous warfare. Therefore every one of them labored
to subdue their body (which is a close and reserved enemy; so says Nazimzen;
Greg. Naz. de pa^p. cura.
or a deceitful friend) with prayers, labors, fastes, hunger, haire-cloth and
other innumerable rigours. Out of a religious tyranny against themselves they
observed that of Caligula: Sicferi, vt sentiat se mori, So to be stricken that
he may even feel himself die. They after this manner entreated their body,
that it might remember itself to be not a Lord but a servant. Thus they
exercised their flesh, that the medicine might work effectually against the
mallady, curing carnal pleasure with sensible pain.

But we delicate milk-sops (certainly such are we in comparison of them) we
Carpet-knights aim at this only, to dye sweetly. We carefully avoid that which
delights not the flesh. And why spare we this ass? not he, but our soul is
the Athenian or citizen of heaven. Shall we with such obsequious flatteryes
cherish this worms meat to our own destruction? Do we not know that there is
not a more dangerous plague to work our ruin then a domestical enemy. Boeth.
lib. 3. de consolat. philos.
It Is our flesh does beleagre us, our most capital enemy. We have daily, yea
even hourly experiments thereof. Our flesh couets against the spirit, our
spirit desires things opposite to the flesh, these are contrary to one another.
Galat. c. 5. verse. 17.
Here is perpetual wrangling and quarrelling; and the oftener the flesh
obtains the victory, the greater forces it recouers, becoming always
victorious, where it is not reputed an enemy.

Ah vain, ah miserable men! What a darkesome night possesses the breasts of
us mortals? Why are we so in quest after pleasures and delights, where is
neither time nor place to enjoy them? He who is desirous of pleasures must go
into a better world: in this of ours the desire of pleasure is full of anxiety,
and the inioying thereof fraught with repentance. Every one that will but call to
mind his passed lusts shall truly understand how bitter the end of pleasure is:
from hence we reap nothing but diseases, pains and maladyes; of a lewd and
licentious life the infallible fruits. And so in fine al pleasure turns into
torment. But the flesh only seems ingenious in removing from her self both
burden, scourge and labor, that she may enjoy repose in delights and
voluptuous contentments. Therefore (my EDESIMVS) it is both just and meet, this
beast should have laid upon it the burden, rod, and labor; or else
questionless we shall find her a rebel.

Now in the end of this discourse I cannot but extol an admirable act of most
illustriours and exquisite continency. Vouchsafe yourself with eyes and mind to
be a spectatour.

John Godefrey Bishop of Bamberg and Wurzburg, who dyed in the year 1622. upon
the 28. day of December when the Diet was held at Ratisbon; did so wholly
consecrate himself to chastity throughout the whole course of his life, that
(as if they had been the devils themselves) he avoided and had a particular
auersion from those that were the slaves of their lusts: nor could he ever be
induced to entertain the least familiarity with such men. From a little child
this Godefrey was accustomed to wear haire-cloth both day and night, and that
for whole weeks together. He sharply disciplined himself upon fridayes,
saturdayes, the Eues of Christmasse, all the Eues of the most Blessed Virgin
Mary, and upon the Eve of his particular Patron. All the time he performed the
office of a Bishop, he slept only upon straw covered with a sheet; many nights
he lay upon the bare ground, covered only with a course cloth; and many times
at midnight rose to his usual prayers. Besides (which is not impertinent to
our purpose) al fridayes and saturdayes he abstained from meat, contenting
himself with a little draught of drink and one only morsel of bread. If at
any time upon these days, hospitality, or some other cause drew him to the
table, piously to dissemble the constant rigor of his abstinence, he took
meat from the caruer, as if he would have eaten it, and anon after, when he
might do it with the least observation of others, as if his mind had been upon
some other matter, he gave it away untouched to his servant. Upon Good friday
and diverse other times in the year he tasted nothing else but bread and water.
This he did most when he perceived himself least noted of others. In the fast
of Lent he neither eat fish, not any such like things, contenting himself only
with herbs, pease, beans, or rape-rootes: throughout all the days of Aduent
he never eat any flesh. Certainly sincere love of chastity was of no small
esteem with him: which how highly he prized, by this that follows may very
plainly appear.

In his youth he was of comely countenance, and well favored; but so that
beauty and modesty made a noble mixture together. The devil by this stratageme
undertook to lay siege to his virginal chastity. Diverse women of note by the
extraordinary beauty of this young man drawn to affect him immodestly, under an
honorable pretext invited him to a feast: who refused not to come, but (that
he might as well be free from danger, as suspicion) brought with him his Tutour;
whom before al others they plied with wine, having by wicked subtilty conspired
that he above the rest should be least able to depart from the house, and
consequently compelled together with the young man, committed to his charge, to
take up his lodging there. The matter succeeded accordingly; so that soundly
tipled. staggering and reeling, they commanded him to be laid to sleep in the
next chamber. This young man was also hindered from departing that night: and
suspecting no evil suffered himself to be brought to a bed fit for such a
guest. But the night being far spent, the youth fast asleep, and al things
in deep silence, these Furyes enflamed with lust, stole secretly into his
chamber, and approaching near his bed both by words and impudent gestures
provoked him to lust. Whereupon this chaste young man, frighted as is were with
the sight of so many Stygian Monsters, awaked, and straight with horror crying
out, leaped forth of his bed clothed as he was with linen breeches, and a
shirt upon his back, and so saved himself from those impure hands; leaving al
his apparel behind him, and flying out of that treacherous house, betook
himself for refuge unto the next neighbors, as to a sanctuary, where he spent
the residue of the night in prayers and thanksgiving for the victory he had
obtained in defense of his chastity. O fact worthy of eternal records! O
Nicetas, there are some willing to fight thy combat, though perhaps if they
had thy opposites they could never come away with the victory. O Joseph, thou
Egyptian Viceroy, acknowledge here one that emulates thy virtue! O my
EDESIMVS here I present thee even with Nicetas himself suruiuing in this young
man. I could easily be persuaded that Godefry, after so noble a victory,
obtained of God the same favor, which Thomas Aquinas did; whose loins the
Angels girded in such sort that he afterward felt no rebellion in his flesh, or
if he did, easily suppess'd it. Nor did he for all this live so secure and
careless as to confide in his own chastity, but still was provident and
circumspect, fearing the devils subtiltyes. He knew very well what we spoke of
before; that a virgin never gives over warfare. Therefore being invited another
time to a suspected house, he said he had rather go to an hospital, and suppe
amongst lepers, then only enter into those houses to hazard his chastity, and
willingly cast himself headlong into the fire. Neither did he otherwise then he
said; and giving an austere example of virtue, perpetually established his
continency, being ingenious in seeking diverse punishments for his body. His
custom was to wear an iron girdle full of sharp prickles buckled close above
his naked loins. His very bracelets, if at any time he wore them, were no
instruments of lasciviousness, but of Chastity, not discovering ostentation
but concealing virtue: for under this golden chain there was secretly
contrived sharp prickles to torment his wristes; which would rather have been
without those ornaments of gold, then daily goared with the perickles which
were under. Questionles Godefrey's, chastity cost him dear; for he bought and
retained this candor as well of body as soul, with str^pes fastes and other
austerityes. Ex funebribus orationibus Dn. D. Friderici Forneri and P. Ioannis
Salleri.
But the verse admonishes us of Reading, Stripes, and Prayers. We have spoken
of Reading and Stripes: Now I come to prayer.

THE THIRD ANTIDOTE against Incontinency: Prayer and the Practice thereof. CHAP.
V.
A Certain man (as Pelagius recounteth out of a Greek history) Libell. ^. n.
3^.
asking the advice of an old Anchorite concerning a secret mallady of his mind:
What shall I do? (said he) my cogitations wonderfully afflict me; they draw me
to nothing else but lust. I cannot so much as for one hours space be at liberty
or free. The old man answered. When by the devils instigatio^ such impure
thoughts disturb thee, enter not into discourse with them: because it is the
property of the devil to suggest, and thy duty to repel and suppress them. It
is in thy power either to admit or reject such guests at their first entrance.
If thou do but resist they cannot wrest from thee any consent whether thou will or no. To which the young man thus replied: But (Father) I am weak and
hardly able to resist, the temptations strong and violent; wherefore I am
overcome and forced to yeald. But none (said the old man) are overcome in this
combat, but they that are willing. Do you know what the Madianites did? they
set their daughters as it were to sale before the eyes of the Israelites, being
combed and trimmed to allure them al what they could. Number. 25.2.
So they might allure, but were not able to compel any to dishonesty. It was in
the Israelites power not to perish. Many who honored from their heart the law
of God, not only contemned this venereous allurement, but also with laudable
revenge punished those they saw caught with this vain and enticing (...). So
must we likewise. Does the devil set before thine eyes fair objects to provoke
thee? Contemn them; give no answer to impure thoughts, spit at al such
venerous trumpery; arise, pray, and cry out: O son of God take compassion
upon me. To this the young man answered again: Alas Father, I pray, meditate,
cry out, but with no sensible gust* I am stupefied and moved no more the^ a
stone. Do thou notwithstanding (said this old man) both pray meditate and
incessantly cry out. Many times the enchanter himself knows not the efficacy
of the words he pronounces, yet the enchanted spirit i^ sensible of them;
and, whether he will or no, is made subject to that humane voice: So although we
have a stony heart, and are often insensible of our prayers, yet the devil is
sensible of them, is terrified and forcibly put to flight. Pray therefore
though you seem to your self as hard and impenetrable as flint.

. I.
Should Solomon (that prodigy of wisdom and wealth) only speak concerning
this matter it would without doubt be sufficient to persuade us. I knew (said
he) ^ap. 8.21.
I could not otherwise be continent, except God bestowed the gift upon me. And
even this was a point of wisdom, to know from whom this benefit proceeded. I
went to our Lord and besought him. Chastity and modesty is a very precious
gem^e, notwithstanding it is sold unto us at a small and reasonable rate. He
buys it that desires it. Pray to God for it and thou have bought it. Doubtless
every virtue is the gift of God; but chastity in a particular man's:
therefore by most ardent prayers it ought to be desired of our most liberal
Lord; who, being earnestly sought unto, infuseth that light into our souls,
whereby we may foresee approaching dangers, inciteth and (...) our will,
constantly to apply fitting remedies to this malady. He subiecteth our
unbridled appetite to the government of his law; he strengthens the combatant,
that through the difficulty of the conflict he fall not into despair, but with
an erected mind confide of assistance from heouen: finally he supplieth a man
with new forces again and again, so that he which has once begun may run
through this race of chastity, and obtain the prize promised to them that keep
and preserve it entire. This was the cause that moved S. Augustine to pray so
earnestly: Lib. 19. cons. c. 29.
O my God inflame me. Thou command continency: give what thou command,
and command what thou will.

That guest of Paradise, chaste S. Paul, was so great a lover of virginity that
he desired al should be like him: notwithstanding he was likewise sensible of
these durty dregs. There is given unto me (said he) 2. Cor. 12.7.
a sting of the flesh, the Angel of Satan to buffer me. And I pray you by what
means, did this divine man deliver himself from the injury of his flesh? By
prayers; and those thrice repeated. For which respect (says he) thrice have I
besought our Lord that it might depart from me. That prayer at last obtains
which perseuers and breathes-out fire. Cold languishing prayers neither move
man nor God to condescend. God is a spirit, and it behooves them that adore
him, to adore in spirit and truth. It is falsehood and shameful slouthfulnes,
when our tongue mutters out prayers and words, and yet our mind in the mean
while wavering and estranged from our devotions, flies abroad to plays and
dancing-reuels. You would imagine this man prayed; but it is merely his mouth
that is laboring, while his heart trifleth; or which is worse dallies, and is
busied about I know not what. This is not to pray in spirit. By these kind of
prayers no man will obtain the jewel of chastity. That most holy David
laboring in his daily prayers, said: Ps. 1^2. verse. 1. and 2.
Unto thee have I lifted mine eyes, who inhabitest in the heavens. Behold even
as the eyes of servants are in the hands of their Masters, and as the eyes of
the handmaid are in the hands of her Mistress, so are our eyes to our Lord
God, til he have mercy upon us. He says that the eyes of the servants are in
the hands of their Masters, not in his face: that is to say this cast of their
eyes, is a kind of asking with a desire to receive; it has recourse to the
Masters right hand that he may open it to give them some thing. So let us wholly
place our eyes on the hand of God, and with a kind of pleasing violence, so
acceptable to his divine majesty, even wrest from him this most preciousi jewel
of chastity.

. II.
If at any time a warlike Captain to whom the defense of a castle is
committed, beholdes it ready to be besieged; presently he writes letters to the
owner, that the enemy is near at hand, and the castle in danger; that he and
his soldiers are in hazard to be distressed unless he speedily help them.
Therefore he intreates his Lord, if he will have his castle secured, he would be
pleased to send fresh soldiers to assist him, so soon as possibly he can. We
live in warfare (my EDESIMVS) and have undertaken to defend the castle of our
soul: diverse enemies make their incursions upon it, chiefly Cupid that
venereous Archer, who leads along with him mighty troops of allurements,
tentations and manifold occasions. Often (alas) we are bosieged and beleagred
on every side with great armies: what counsel shall we take? The first is, not
to defer nor loose time. The next to write letters and send them forthwith to
our Lord. Our Messenger is our prayer; our letters when we power out prayers
before Almighty God. In this case it stands us upon to be of a quick
dispatch. So soon as our chastity is in danger, when occasions inuit,
enticements flatter, and tentations provoke us, let our Epistle straight fly
unto God; and immediately offer up fervent prayer unto him. It will suffice even
with any of these following, or the like to implore Gods help and assistance:
Ps. 50.16.
O God, the God of my salvation, deliver me from bloods.

O my most loving God succor me. I perish: save me.

Ps. 69.2.
O God intend unto my aid; o Lord make have to help me.

O most chaste Jesus! the salvation of my soul is in danger; guard me that I
perish not.

Ps. 24.1.
Unto thee o Lord have I lifted my soul, my God in thee I trust, I will not be
ashamed.

O my Jesus! o most powerful Jesus defend me; deliver me out of the snares of
Satan.

Ps. 30.17.
Illuminate thy face upon thy servant make me safe in thy mercy.

O my God thou who art the fountain of purity, the lover of chastity, create
in me a clean and chaste heart.

Ps. 30.1.
In thee o Lord have I hoped, I shall never be confounded: in thy justice
deliver me.

O most pure Jesus preserve me in purity of heart.

Ps. 59.14.
May it please thee o Lord to deliver me: O my Lord look back to help me.

O my Jesus most worthy to be desired, draw me wholly unto thee.



Ardent prayer is a powerful weapon against the wicked spirit, which you may
learn by that which I relate. There was one of the Sodality of the most
Blessed Virgin (a very intimate friend of mine) who by sundry inward
suggestions, was much tempted to dishonesty. Thrice in the night the wicked
spirit impetuously assaulted him: one while in the likeness of a tal man,
instantly contracted to the stature of a little dwarf, at last in the
semblance of a Virgin: but proiected nothing less then that which was
virgin-like or pure. This young man, taken in these straights, began to bend all the weapons he had against the enemy. Sometimes he called upon his Patroness;
anon he endeavored to sign his heart with the sign of the cross, but this
was almost in vain, for both his hand and his thumb was benumbed and destitute
of strength. At last his tongue relieved him; so that calling upon God, his
hands returned to their proper office; and the shapes of those Sirens vanished
into smoke. Yet was not the fire quenched at their departure; but the young man
burned still with living flames, whereupon he rushed out of his bed, and
falling flat on the ground began to punish himself, and when he had lain
there for the space of an hour, triumphed over those impure flames. Anno 1614.
factum.


Christ commanded us daily to pray: Et nenos inducas in tentationam, and lead
us not into tentation. And likewise commanded this final clause to be added:
Sed libera nos a malo, but deliver us from evil. We ought as well to beseech God
we may not fall into, as that we may escape out of danger. And let not this
prayer proceed from the lips only, but from the inward feeling of the heart.

. III.
Here I would have you represent unto your self two special men in prayer,
while they are in great danger of loosing their chastity. These were King
Iosaphat, and Thomas Aquinas, Thomas had determined to consecrate to God and to
chastity the prime of his youth. His parents to divert him from this
determination, endeavored to overcome his most ch^st heart, by fair means,
threats, promises, and other strange inventions. Al their strokes were in
vain; vanished into air: and their son was more confirmed and settled in his
determinate purpose. Therefore to ruinate this wall, it was to be shaken with a
more forcible engine. Satan was not wanting, but always most vigilant to
provoke them. S. Thomas thought himself secure alone in his chamber, which he
afterward perceived was a dangerous prison. For thither was sent a woman more
remarkable for beauty then modesty, discovering wantonness in her very
looks, who began with many fair and lascivious allurements to inuit to
lewdness this modest young man. There was nothing in her but spoke
perswasiuely: her voice, beauty, gesture, eyes, apparel; yea the very odor of
her garments. So many words, so many darts; whatsoever she uttered was
contagion and poison.

O Thomas how many shafts fly against thee? every one of them brings death and
destruction. If thou admit but one it will inflict a deadly wound. Assuredly
this excellent young man felt this flattering poison penetrate to his heart. Here
imitating Nicetas, like a brave Champion in the Listes, he advised on the
matter, and presently addressed himself to Christ; cried out: Suffer not, I
beseech thee, (o my Lord IESV) and thou most holy Virgin Mary, suffer me not to
commit any dishonesty in your sight. O my most chaste IESV permit me not to sell
for any filthy lust the eternal delights of heaven. Having said this, he
snatched up a burning firebrand, and drove away that enchanting Siren, thrust
her out of his chamber, shut the door against her, and got the victory. In
this encounter he had no aid more aduantagious then prayers powered from a
fervent breast.

. IIII.
More perilous was that of Iosaphat son of King Abenerus; and had not his
singular virtue, as it were twice conquered upon the same theater, he had not
gained so great an applause of the Angels. Damas. lib. de Barl. and Ios. c. 30.
This young Prince had been instructed in Christian religion by Barlaam an
Eremite; and thereupon became more chaste in his life and conversation, then
when he worshipped idols. Abenerus his father nothing approved this severe life
of his son as one that knew no other heaven then to wallow in impurityes, and
to be drowned in pleasures. Who (after the attempting of sundry stratagemes)
finding his son impregnable; determined, by persuasion of certain Magitians,
to set upon him with subtilty and craft. He removed al his Court-like retinue,
appointing only certain young damsels to wait as handmaids upon him. Bring me
Sampson, give me David or Solomon, and let us see whether any one of them would
have remained free from impiety amongst so many corrupt and fraudulent
enticements. Nor had Iosaphat a heart of adamant, or steel; he rellish'd their
false allurements, began to burn, and in fine his breast conceived such flames
of lust, as he thought himself not able to extinguish. Yet doubtless he
withstood his enemies bravely, and opposed them manfully. For one while he set
before his eyes God; another while his laws; the pains of hell, the reward of
heaven. Yet were not the venereous flames allayed in his breast. Neither God,
nor the consideration of heaven or hell, hope or fear, reason or discourse
could much mitigate these unreasonable thoughts. It seemed his last refuge and
presentest remedy against this mischief, to fall prostrate on the earth, and
betake himself to prayer. Wherefore lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven,
he said: O my God, thou that art the only hope of those that are distressed,
cast a merciful eye upon me. Al things are in thy power, thou take compassion
upon al. Behold (o Lord) what I suffer; my cogitations kill me: I perish veterly
unless thou help me. I desire to keep my self chaste both in body and soul,
but am vanquished if thou defend me not. O my God, let me be only thine, stay
me from falling into perdition: to thee will I live, to thee I Will dye. Our
benign God moved with his fervent prayers assisted him, and suddenly that
rabble of impure cogitations vanished away. Yet did nor this young man though
victorious desist from prayer, but from that time (which was then in the
evening) watched and continued in this holy exercise til (...) rising the next
day.

. V.
But Iosaphat had not yet passed al his danger: a sharper and far more
perilous combat was at hand. There had not long before been given to his
father Abenerus, a certain damsel the daughter of a King taken in the wars,
a woman of so singular beauty that the seemed to surpass the fairest of those
times; yea to be even a Goddess upon earth. This Lady was laid, by the strong
endeauours of the Kings Magitian, as the chief foundation of this tragedy: who
to make himself more secure of the victory, by a Magic spel conveyed a wicked
spirit into her, fortifying heerby these combinations in such sort, that there
might be no possibility of evasion. The devil therefore comes performed under
that comely shape, and to affaile more cruelly, began by flattery at the first.
The damsel instructed by devilish subtilty, to deceive as much as possibly she
could, craftily feigned her self very desirour to embrace the Christian
religion. Satan, that hellish fisher, fixed that bait on his hook, which he
knew such kind of fisches most earnestly sought after. Young Iosaphat, thinking
this an excellent occasion to save a soul from damnation, said, he desired
nothing more, then that many might with him be converted from Idolatry to the
faith of Christ. Whereupon speeches passed on both sides. The young maid,
quaintly faining her self to be overcome, and by degrees to condescend and
yeald to the truth, said there should be no want in her, she would willingly
(if he vouchsafed to take her to wife) be baptized and embrace the Christian
faith: that she wanted only the fortune and not the blood or descent of a
Queen: but she was of opinion, the Christians not so much esteemed the
fortune, as the mind and virtues for a dowry. That her Father, grandfather,
great grandfather and their ancestors were Kings. That their royal estate
was by war somewhat impaired: but nevertheless believed (seeing she brought
virtue) she should not come without a portion to him that would make her his
wife. Alas Iosaphat, alas! thou were never in more danger to be utterly undone.
The poor young man stood astonished, and in silence commended and admired her
prudent and graceful speech: and, as it happens to men upon such terms, often
cast his eyes (which now began to forget their wonted recollection) upon the
speakers face, who to persuade him not to have so great auersion from honest
marriage, began to allege, I know not what sentences out of the Gospel, (which
she had learned of her Master the devil) as namely that by Christ's own
presence marriages were commended. She extolled honorable marriage, and an
immaculate bed. To conclude, brought many things in commendation of wedlock.

To gaze on her, and listen to her eloquence, and not to be persuaded, must
rather proceed from dluine power, then the frailty of a man. Even silent beauty
it self, is a most eloquent Orator, with prowerful charms euicting whatsoever
it will. When it has once powered forth its honey intermixed with elegant terms,
the mind overcome with allurements is easily persuaded. Hitherto Iosaphat
against all the violence of lust seemed a stone, an immovable rock: but this
lascivious devil with impure flames had so powerfully environed this bulwark,
that it began like fleeting sand to be weakened and moulder away. Iosaphat was
not as yet overcome, notwithstanding the victory was doubtful; for he began to
be turmoiled with perplexities of mind, who before had determined to reserve
his body free from touch of any woman. He begins to waver, to be troubled, to
stagger anxiously between both, not able to resist this perturbation, nor
absolutely quit himself from these ambiguous thoughts.

. VI.
After this most pestilent Orator was departed, he assumed the office both of
judge and accuser, and began both to propound and answer his own objections,
and so entered into a great conflict with himself, wavering in his resolution;
til at last he spoke to his solitary self in this manner: There is no
dishonest thing, said he, required at thy hands; marriage, and that without
disparity, is fairly propounded. A Queen she is that desires a husband, a
thing ratified by the Christian laws: Eccl. 26.20.
it is true. But do thou remember what Barlaam taught thee? nothing can
parallel a continent life. But here is an occasion offered of gaining a soul,
by the conversion of a prince-like young maid to the Christian faith.

O my Iosaphat, this is not to gain souls; thou rather art in danger by
seeking to gain another, to betray thine own; thou know well that saying:
Matthew. 6 16.
what profits it a man if he gain the whole world, and suffer detriment of
his own soul?

But it belongs not to every one to lead a chaste Angelical life; it is true. But
he that fightes not like a virgin, must not expect the rewards promised to
virgins. But it is a hard matter to live in perpetual conflict; still to
contradict a man's self, is difficult, but glorious, and the only thing most
grateful to God.

Certain it is that many very holy men, who otherwise had perished, have been
saved in wedlock. But it is no less credible that many have perished in
wedlock, who had been saved without it.

Admit I proceed as I have determined, who knows whether I shall persevere? it is
one thing to begin, another to continue constant til the end. But that must be
left to God; this care he will take to himself, he that persuaded me to begin,
will assist me to accomplish my design. But nature is repugnant. That which is
corrupt, not entire: and God is far more powerful then nature.

But what shall I do? I burn; I am enflamed; my mind has been long since set
on fire with impure cogitations: that Stygian torch flameth in the very marrow
of my bones.

But thou may easily overcome this heat with the flames of Christ's love, with
Christ's precious blood thou may easily extinguish this fire.

Did not one of the Apostles say: 1. Cor. c. 7. verse. 38.
He that joins his virgin in matrimony does well? It is so. But the self same
Apostle added: He that does not join her does better; and: It is good for a
man not to touch a woman. But had not some of the Apostles wives? They had, but
amongst al which they left for Christ's sake, were included their wives: so
that all the Apostles were either virgins, or (when they were called) continent
after marriage.

Is it not the saying of S. Paul: It is better to marry then to burn? Yea, and
his also are these words: 1. Cor. 7.8.
But I would have al men, be like my self. And I say to those that are not
married, and to widows: It is good for them if they so continue as I am.

Alas what shall I do? I would to God, I had never seen, I would I had never
listened to this betwitching damsel. This perhaps had been better, but yet
though I have done otherwise I ought not to despair.

But her beauty never cease to represent it self to my mind. Yet is not God
more beautiful, from whom (as a silly drop from an immense ocean) proceeds
the form and beauty of al things.

Ah if this vehement conflict of mind continue any longer, I am not able to
endure it. Leave this to God's providence, let us endure that which God will
have us to day, and he will have care of us to morrow. But what? shall I leave
that poor wreched maid still in the jaws of the hellish dragon? On the
otherside have thou already forgotten into what dangers thou were falling by
the familiarity of women? Thou have scarcely escaped, and do desire again
to run into them? None can better judge of perils then they that have tried
them. Notwithstanding it is the part of a Christian to be careful of another
salvation; but before al of his own. For the flesh inuenteth very fair
pretexts to shroud it is dishonesty: it plotteth with a thousand subtiltyes how
to supplant us.

A long time he was in this manner warring with himself reciprocally debating
the matter: til at last making a virtue of necessity, he found a means to
relieve himself: and so, as to a sacred anchor, retired to prayer. And having
a long time continued therein, not without tears, he fell asleep, and saw in a
vision those things, which when he awaked, made him both weep for joy, and
tremble for reverence of Almighty God. From that time forward (says S.
Damascene) the beauty of any woman whatsoever he beheld, seemed to him more
loathsome then a stinking puddle or putrified carcass. Thus were those cruel
assaults of the wicked spirits suppressed by prayer. It is continency therefore
(my good God) thou command: give me what thou command, and command what
thou will. August.
But by right, prayer must be accompanied with confession.

THE FOVRTH ANTIDOTE against Incontinency: Frequent confession. CHAP VI.
HE that loves purity of heart, for the grace of his lips, shall have the King
for his friend. Pro. 22.11.
Nothing so much deserves divine favors, as to have always a pure and clean
conscience. But no man is able to keep it so, unless he often cleanse it.
Frequent confession of our sins enableth us, which if it be but seldom, will
hardly be entire, as most truly says S. Bernard: Bernard l^b med. c. 37.
Computatio dilata multa facit obliuisci; Accountes long deferred make a man
forget many things. He that looks into them but seldom, must needs omit one
thing or other. And as accountants are more careful, who if not every day, at
least once a week, read over their book of receipts and expenses: so for the
most part are they of a more pure life, who every week present the staynes of
their consciences to the ears of the Priest. Speedy confession affordes speedy
remedy. And this is the first important reason to move us to frequent
confession. I will give you another.

We are continually exposed to infinite dangers of offending God. Our known
enimyes, the devil, the flesh, and the world (albeit we withstand the^ never so
much) suggest, draw, persuade, allure, and daily importune us; but they only
draw, they cannot compel us; their special endeavor (to the end we not may
become good and virtuous men, nor carefully observe the staynes and spots of
our conscience) is to persuade us to be slack and negligent in washing them
away. What meanest thou (say these our deceauers) to have so nice and tender a
conscience? Thou will still have enough to do, thou shall never want business
nor trouble; there will always be something to wipe away, nor shall thou ever
have any end of thy labors. Do thou not here perceive what thine enemies go
about? These are the secret counsels of the devil in the disguise of a Friend.
If thou would not be damnified by these pernicious suggestions, make the^
presently known. He that lays open the secrets of his friend loses his
credit. The devil faineth freindiship with thee: thou shall easily be rid of
this masked friend, if thou disclose al his secrets by frequent confession.
Eccl. 27.17.
The same which S. Bernard wrote of the sacred Eucharist, we may likewise
allege of the Sacrament of Confession. Two things (says he) In caena Dom. de
Bapt. and ablut. ped.
the Sacrament works in us. It extennates the difficulty in resisting small
sins, and in greater preuents and hinders our consent. The Council of Trent
affirms that they, who with due preparation participate of this Sacrament,
are preserved from yealding to temptation, and with facility proceed warily and
vigilant in the way of virtue. These are the words of the Council: But the
difficulty itself of this kind of confession, and shame of disclosing our
sins, might without doubt seem very great, were it not that so many benefits
and consolations, worthily concurring with this Sacrament, are by absolution
certainly bestowed upon us. Experience, itself is a sufficient witness, since
in those cities, where the Sacrament of Confession is frequented, we see many
spend the whole course of their life without any great or heinous crime.

I will likewise add a third reason why a man's conscience ought to be purged
with often confession. We are so enlightened by this Sacrament of Penance, that
our sins, and the original causes of them, are far more easily discerned.
The beginning of salvation is the knowledge of sin. Of which he that is
ignorant will not be corrected. It is requisite thou should find thy
selfguilty, before thou go about to amend thy fault. Some men glory in their
impietyes, and how is it possible they should have any thought of remedy, when
they number their vices in lieu of virtues? Therefore as much as thou can
accuse thy self: look into thine own conscience. First perform the office
of an accuser; then of a judge; and lastly sue for pardon. Sometimes likewise
do that which is repugnant unto thine own will. It is the prayer of that
Kingly Prophet: Psalm. 12.4.
Illuminate mine eyes, that I never sleep in death; least at any time mine
enemy say I have peruailed against him. Public sermons, if they move any one
in particular to amendment of life, in this respect they move the less, for
that they aim at moving the whole audience: but those admonitions which are
given by a ghostly father for the avoiding of vices, supply the place of a
sermon, which are so much more effectual, in regard they are delivered to
direct and guide but one in particular. War is begun and managed in due
order, and there shall be salvation where many counsels are. Thy war in the
defense of chastity will not long be successeful unless thou dispose thy self
thereunto by often confession; wherein thou may likewise take advise how with
dexterity to overcome the enemy of chastity, which is a very crafty and in a
manner a domestical enemy. And be assured thou never stand more in need of
present and mature counsel then in this conflict, which is so secret and
intestine.

. I.
The fourth reason is for that a sinner^ and exact confession is never made
without some new increase of divine grace imparted to the penitent. As God is
much offended with an impudent sinner, so is he highly pleased with him that
modestly confesses his sins. Very true is that which S. Bernard says: In
Confession is al hope of pardon and mercy, neither can any one be justified
from sin, unless be first confess it. For every one, from the time he becomes
an accuser of himself begins to be just. Therefore Pipin chief Steward under
Dagobert King of France, that is to say Governor of the whole Court, and the
next in authority to the King himself; Stephanus al. de ^o. l. 1. c. 2.
a man of a most entire good life and fame, and who was not unworthily called
Disciplina regum. the discipline of Kings: he (I say) always when he came to
Confession (in token of his penitence and sorrow) went to this sacred tribunal
upon his bare feet.

Will you have the fifth reason? He that refuses to be wary, shall never be
chaste. You shall see for the most part, those that are the wariest are the
chastest. Chastity and modesty are more tender and frail then Venice glass;
with the least knock that may be, they are either crazed or broken. But the
most necessary cautions for the preservation of this crystal vessel, are
chiefly taught by frequent confession. Therefore the devil, that Master so full
of frauds and subtilties, so much labors to make confession grievous and
hateful unto us. He obiecteth tediousness, interposeth business, alleges
diverse things, and leaves nothing unattempted, that our Confession may be
seldom and coldly performed. These (says this crafty impostor) are but small
matters: what need have thou to be so fearful of trifles? What a butchery of
conscience will thou make, if every, little moat be so scrupulously picked out
But beware (my child) of the least sins, if thou would not fall into
greater. He that contemnes small things, shall fall by little and little. Eccles.
19.1.
None shall ever be wary of great matters, if he neglect those that seem small.

Unto this I also adioyne the next reason. The joy and peace of conscience is
by no means otherwise to be procured then by frequent confession. Al things,
(says S. Bernard) Lib. med. cap. 37.
are washed in confession: the conscience cleansed, bitterness taken away,
sin put to flight, tranquillity returns, hope reuiues, the mind waxes
cheereful. After Baptism no other remedy or refuge but Confession is allowed
us. We daily contract some kind of filth; we are daily contaminated (such is
the condition of this our life) and if we do not often wash out those spots
with which we are soyled, they will increase to a great multitude, and wa^
almost infinite; and from a few grains, even like the very sands of the sea.
David was the best and holiest of Kings, notwithstanding for so much as he had
deferred his repentance, as he himself witnesses, he was arrested by
innumerable miseryes. Evils (says he) Ps. 3.13.
have compassed me which have no number: mine iniquityes have overtaken me, and
I was not able to see: They are multiplied above the hairs of my head. Of such
kind are these impurities of the mind, that if they be not quickly purged by
penance they will presently more and more increase. Hereupon it comes to pass
that he that is in sin will be yet more and more contaminated. Apoc. 22.11.
And who can have a quiet and cheereful conscience where these impurities
perpetually increase. Cleanse thy conscience if thou would have it merry:
take away the clouds of so many sins; the gnowing of so many worms, if thou will have it clear and perspicuous. It will never find any quiet in the remorse
and sharp stings of thy crimes. But light sins (say you) disturb not the
tranquillity or peace of the soul. No sin is so light but it has its sting
more or less; nor can there be any true repole or cordial mirth so long as the
mind is compelled to endure it. A secure conscience is as it were a continual
feast. Pro. 15.15.
Wherefore I constantly affirm that thou shall never have repose of
conscience, but by frequenting the Sacrament of Penance: since it is the only
means to help a man to true and perfect security. When thou have killed al
those gnawing worms of thy troubled soul, then finally shall thou enjoy a
pleasing delicate banquet: if thou long suffer these to live, it is in vain to
expect any feast. Where a man is stung, he is troubled: nor can he enjoy true
alacrity of mind unless he be wholly freed from the gnawing of a perplexed
conscience. No man but he that has a secure mind enjoys that daily banquet;
and secure it will never be unless it be pure, and as it were always newly
washed and embelished by Confession.

. II.
Here I add the seventh reason near allied to the first. Many holy persons,
as well men as women much delighted with repose and tranquillity of conscience,
did frequent this Sacrament as often as they could: yea many have purified
their souls by daily confession, and would oftener have done it, if they might
have had leave.

Birgerus a man potent and noble, father of S. Brigit, every friday to make his
confession kneeled at the feet of the Priest. Sur. tom. 4. die 2^. Iulij.
I will said he, (for this was his reason) so compose and order my affairs with
God this day, that I may bea^e patiently whatsoever troubles and crosses, the
days following he shall be pleased to send. The same likewise did Birgerus his
son throughout the whole course of his life; who also before or after
Confession was wont to discipline himself His daughter Brigit from her tender
years* Vlpho her husband, and others of this most religious family observed
the like course. The grandfather of B. Lidwine practisc'd the same: who having
upon the friday purified his soul by Confession, on the day following, fasting
only with bread and water, punished his body. This has always been the mind
of the most religious; either not to commit sin, or if through frailty they
transgressed, to be absolved thereof so soon as possibly they could. They run
a quite contrary course who take a pleasure, and delight to be drowned in
turpitude, live in sin like Libertines, and think it a base thing to be
reputed modest or continent: but, when they are to make Confession of their
sins, put on a brazen face, which with them is bashful modesty: wickedly
blushing to confess, that which they nothing feared to commit. These senseless
wretches who are shameless in sinning, and yet in pernicious silence impously
bashful, may be warned by a dreadful example which I have here, recounted in a
Poem. This happened about 1590. as appears by letters written thence by F^.
Ben^iu^ and Gaspar Pitil^
If you will, EDESIMVS, I will read it.

'TWas silence made my Muse abruptly sing:
From rich Peru I heavy tidings bring;
Which being heard with an attentive ear,
Shall strike the stoutest heart with horrid fear.
Silence I say made me recount in verse
What graue-authenticke writers do rehearse,
Of one but young; of sixteen years of age
Who to be seen now comes upon the stage,
That Europe on a maid may fix her eye
Which lately acted this sad tragedy.
Pernicious silence! oh! Be not afraid,
I blame not silence in a modest maid:
But most admire that virtue. My intent
Is not to tax her for this ornament.
But as the dumb and never croaking frog,
That lurked within the foul Seriphian bog,
Transported into Scirus was the same,
Remained so silent, that by prattling Fame
Prouerbially Seriphian frog did suit
With those that were in all occasions mute,
When they should speak: Alas! thus it befell
When Catherine was baptized, and so from hell
Transported, where she long had made abode;
Yet now a member of the Church of God,
Like the Seriphian frog in Scirus she
Remains as mute. Deep taciturnitye
Had seized upon her faultring tongue: when sins,
Great sins were to be vtter'd, she begins
By sacrilege to augment them, every time
Confessing, she commits another crime,
Because she only venial sins reueales,
And from the Pastor of her soul conceales
Her mortal crimes, like monsters in her breast,
Which partly in behavior she expressed.
For with a soul impure do ever suit
Lascivious words and carriage dissolute.
Which when her Mistress saw, as she was bound,
She often chid her for it; but the wound
Thus was not cured, which festred in her heart.
Not Paeons skill, nor yet Machaons art
Could heal this fore. Poor soul! she still went on
In her dishonest course: but had not gone
So far as to escape that hand, whereby
Sick souls, that lie on a dead lethargy,
Are often raised. Catherine fell sick, what did
She then, who hitherto had always hid
Her greatest sins? She had (it seems) remorse,
Called for her ghostly father, and her course
Of vicious living she would change, 'twas thought.
But, oh! that dumb-accursed devil wrought
So powerfully, that she nine several times
Confessing, still concealed her mortal crimes,
As lurking vipers in her sinful breast
And only light and triuial sins confessed.
Nay more; the Priest having but stepped aside,
She (wretch) began to morke, scoff and deride,
And to her fellows said: My sins confess?
Have I naught else to do? Then filthiness,
With foul lascivious terms, she so depaines,
That straight therewith her Mistress one acquaintes.
Who schools and chides her for her lewd behavior,
Exhortes her to return unto her Savior.
With contrite heart: And then with mild aspect
Persuaded her so far as to detect
What she concealed even from her ghostly father.
It Is very strange; she to her Mistress rather
Impartes her greatest sins; and why not then
Unto the Priest; who, not like other men,
Hears in confession, which for ay concealed,
By word or countenance never is revealed.
But as Hyparchion in the solemn rites,
And feast amongst the Iuliopolites,
Was suddenly struck dumb, when most of al
He should have spoken in that festiual:
So Catherine in the sacred solemn rite,
When most of al she should have brougt to light
Her secret sins, tongue-ti'd she was as mute
As was Hyparchion tuning of his lute:
Runs on the smaller strings, when she begins,
But touches not the Base of mortal sins.
She to her Mistress yealdes a reason why:
Near my left hand a Blackamore stands by,
Biddes. me conceal from him and not unfold
Such venial crimes as mine. Which were enrolled
As black as hell within her sinful breast.
Besides (said she) this black one does suggest,
Should I tell al, the Priest would me repute
A grievous sinner, lewd and dissolute.
At my right hand (quoth she) one says, confess,
(For then appeared the sacred Potronesse
Of greatest sinners) biddes me up with all,
To free my sinful soul from hellish thral,
And vomit forth al filthy dregs of sins.
The Priest is called for; who again begins
TO exhort her to a full confession then
As had before S. Mary Magdalen.
In vain. For she more obstinate became,
Would not pronounce so much as JESUS name.
Dumb devil (oh!) how hard it is I see
Above the rest, to foil and vanquish thee.
For Christ himself, whose beck thou must obey,
Was casting out of Satan, Scriptures say:
It was not done, he was but doing it.
Thou made indeed delays that were not fit,
But that thereby we might avoid that evil,
The mutt'ring dumb and ever silent devil.
Upon a time her ghostly father brought
A crucifix, and earnestly besought
She would reuolue, and call to mind the pain
Christ suffered for her on the cross. Again
Wil'd her to think how by his death redeemed,
Her soul was highly prized by him. She seemed
With this offended, and with angry looks,
And indignation shows how il she brooks
His ghostly counsel: adds these words thereto,
I know it well, what would you have me do?
To whom her Mistress presently replied,
Convert thy self to Christ who for thee died.
He will forgive thee al if thou confess.
But 'twas in vain, she would do nothing less:
Desires them not to molest her more,
And then begins, as she had done before,
To sing loue-songs, with words lasciuious-rude
Thus many, days and nights in turpitude
She spent, as she before in health had done.
Until at last when the Al-lightning sun
Posting from that bright hemisphere, descends,
She for her Mistress and the servants sends,
And then burst forth into these words: Ay me!
I have offended God most grievously,
In not confessing of my sins aright.
My guilty conscience does my soul affright.
Which having said, stretched forth she lay for dead,
And her dull eyes were sunck into her head
A ghastly look! O horror to behold!
O might the form of this foul ugly mold
(The soul) be seen which lurked within that shed!
While all the standers by thought she was dead,
And seriously amongst themselves confer
Where they may best this loathed corpse interre.
But lo, how often, like the loving hen
Gathering her chickens, God does deal with men:
How often saught under his mercyes wing
To shroud her soul, which now he seems to bring
From depth of hell; for thither it seemed gone
Til she awaking with a hydeous groan,
Appeared with sad aspect; revived again,
They hoped that now, t'escape eternal pain
She would entirely with a contrite heart,
(Now calling for the Priest) her sins impart.
Heavens stand amazed, your gates be desolate,
And men astomisht hear what I relate.
This soul, as now come from the lower bell,
Retired again into her earthly cel,
Is still the sa^, as silent as before,
Confessed small sins; but would confess no more.
Yet had three bo^ers given. O precious time!
One tear at least for every mortal crime:
One act of sorrow. Oh! in time begin.
Take but the cross into thy hand (quoth they)
A holy taper. She would not obey.
Say IESV, IESV. No? Oh endless shame!
Not once? Not once would call on JESUS name.
Who is that JESUS? said this wicked creature,
I know him not; and then with ugly feature
Turning her ghastly look with shaking head
Unto the further side of the horrid bed,
With one not seen, she secretly conferred.
With that a fellow-seruant much deterred;
Who trembling (sick in bed being laid there-by)
Desired to have a chamber severally
For ugly shapes (she said) to her appeared,
Which rounded Cather'nes bed, wherewith affeard
Would feign go thence; for who would make ab^de
With her who was even quite bereft of God?
For now the time approch'd of her decease,
The night of bondage not of her release;
The night in which her sinful soul departes:
But whither? Oh! How many trembling hearts
That night with horror shook? What then befell
Shall serve in lieu of Cather'nes doleful knel.
That al, who hear the sound may sighing cry:
Confess aright to live eternally.
A filthy stench that seemed exhaled from hell
Filled all the house, where she lay dead: the smell
They so abhorred, that straight the corpse they drew
To the open air. But lot, what did ensue.
As when a sheep but newly fallen to ground
Dead of the murren, ravens compass round,
And greedy vultures, seeking for their pray,
Wherewith engorg'd they fly not straight away,
But houering in the air, or on a bough,
Attend the carcass: So the devils now,
That seized upon her soul (experience tries)
Are houering round where her dead body lies.
For then out of his bed (yet without harm)
They drew the Ladies brother by the arm.
A maid upon her shoulder had a blow,
The marks whereof she many days could show.
And as for beasts: the dogs did howl and bawle,
The horses beat their heels against the wall,
Like creatures haunted with some hellish sprite
Ran to and fro, as mad, that dismal night.
Next day the body dragged t'a dung-hil pit
They without Christian burial covered it.
Which done, what happened wondrous is to tell,
How like a fury Cather'ne now of hell
Bestirres her in the house; or else the devil,
Or both, at times were actours of the evil.
A maid passed through this stinking chamber, where
Cather'ne deceased: though nothing did appear,
To fling at her, yet at her head was thrown
A vessel from the shelf: but she was gone
Before; and so escaped that battering bal,
Which was in pieces burst against the wall.
Bricke-bats and tiles out of the air fell down
In every street, and far without the town.
From whence that stony-stormy shower should fall,
Al men admired; for there the houses al
With reeds and palms are covered not with tiles.
Of brick and lime there were no lofty piles:
The very palace was not framd of brick.
But now behold another antike trick.
A maid was drawn about yet nothing seen,
Drawn by the foot, and so (poor wench) had been
So far, that al, amazed to see her, stand,
How she discurteously (not by the hand)
Was dragged about; yet nothing was descried,
And so the more thereby were terrified.
Upon another time, a maid (I wot)
Went for her gown, or else her peticoat,
But she in have entering into the room,
Perceau'd that Cather'ne thither too was come,
Who raised her self upon her toes, thereby
To reach an earthen vessel suddenly,
Which, aiming at the maid, the damned ghost
Let fly against her head, but hit the post;
Which in a thousand pieces burst the pot,
And so the maid escaped the infernal shot.
The Mistress of the house, upon that day,
Supped in her garden where the ghost would play
Her wonted prankes. A brick-bat there in view,
Almongst the dishes and the platters flew.
The supper thereupon fell to the ground,
None stayed to take a morsel at rebound.
Then did her son, (for still the ghost did rage)
That was a little boy four years of age,
Cry out aloud: O mother, mother see
Where Cather'ne comes: o now she thrattles me.
But holy relics to his neck applied
Asswag'd the pain, the ghost durst not abide.
The house with sprites thus haunted night and day
Constrained the Mistress to remove away.
But yet some servants there she left behind
Although they were a tun'rous sex by kind.
Where having staid awhile, Cather'ne hard by,
With hollow voice called in the pantery.
And called one thrice by name. Away she ran,
And so perchance had done the stoutest man.
She tells her fellows what she heard, and they
Ready to follow or to lead the way,
Willed her t'implore his aid, that was Almight,
And (bearing in her hand a hollowed light)
Go back to see who called: with whom they went,
T'encourage her. Behold incontinent
The ghost appears, and with a frowning look,
Biddes her put out her candle, could not brook
The hallowed taper; and commandes her train
Should not stay there, but straight return again.
Mean while, what heart so stowt, what man so bold,
That could this sad and fearful sight behold?
Cather'ne, appeared in flames that issued out
From every joint, and clasping round about
Her wast, a guirdle near ten fingers broad
Of hellish-scorching flames was seen. O God!
This was for her lascivious life a pain,
Embraced before, and now embraced again
With flaming guirtes, that was before enflamed
With burning lust: and she, who was a shamed
To utter her foul sins, brings al to light,
And shows what pains succeed a short delight.
So like a barrel filled with pitch and tar
Mounted upon a beacon, that is seen far,
Cather'ne is flaming with a hydeous blaze,
Which may with terror all the world amaze.
Al you that sail in this tempefluous maine,
Behold the beacon's fired; behold again,
How from her head the flames are mounting high,
And from her feet the like you may descry:
Because her thoughts and steps were wholly bent,
To burning lust, and life incontinent.
O! let this beacon flaming in your eye,
Denounce the pain, that lastes eternally,
In lieu of pleasure which a moment gave,
Make to the haven, and sail aright to save
Your crasye vessels. Let not shame make hard
TO explain your sins. The needle of your card
Must point at truth in your confessions. Shame
It is to sin, not to confess the same.
As dreadful to the sight, so to the smell
She was as loathsome: that even now from hell,
From that sulphurean lake, she seemed new come,
With filthy vapors having filled the room.
The maid astonished like a statue stood,
While in her face and lips appeared no blood
Behold the dreadful ghost biddes her draw near,
Come hither; fly not from me: do not fear
(Said she) why do thou shake and startle back?
How often have I called thee? Like a crack
Of thunder breaking from a clowd, which scares
The hardi'st wight, that's taken unawares,
The hollow voice had daunted so the maid,
And had her soul with terrors ouerswaid;
That, not her self (for so how could she be?)
Cried out, Good IESV! who in seeing thee
Can but with terror quake? This having said,
Behold a child appears unto the maid,
Which from above descends as bright and fair,
As Phoebus rays embellishing the air.
Be not afraid (said he) but now draw near,
And unto Cather'ne lend attentive ear,
That thou may tell the world each thing she says.
And when thou go from hence, without delays,
Make thy confession: for who first begins,
May teach the rest to expiate their sins.
Then Cather'ne spoke, being come to act her last,
Amidst the flames with countenance horrid-ghast
Says to the maid, but with a hydeous tone,
While every word was ended vith a groan:
Know I am damned, damned to the lowest pit;
For ever damned, for I deserved it.
For to confession though I often went,
I fl^ abused that holy Sacrament:
Confessed my light and triuial sins: as these;
Distractions, idle words, did not ap'pease
My angry thoughts. While I (alas! full raines
Gave to unbridled lust, for which these pains
I now endure. I lived dishonestly,
Sin upon sin ceased not to multiply.
Yet never would confess my monstrous crimes.
And therefore learn, oh! learn of me betimes,
To make a true confession, vtt'ring al,
TO avoid this pain and everlasting thral.
Thus I admonish, and am forced heerto,
Or else damned souls this office would not do;
That my example may a terror be
To them that will conceal, sins willingly.
This having said, the Au^ Mary bell
Rung in the Church, and so the ghost to hell,
B^ing slunke into a corner, fled with speed
Tendure the punishment for her decreed.
The Angel then although a child to sight,
Before he took to heaven his nimble flight,
Commandes the maid to get her thence, and tell
Her fellow servants whatsoever befell.
The actours here are gone: the angel mountes on high.
To Plutoes tiring house or vestery
The ghost descendes with flaming robes, in pain,
Which she must wear, and never put off agame.
O hear and see; but be not According to the Proverb. Audi vide, tace.
silent tho,
For silence 'twas which caused Amiclas woe
Oh! be not partial when thou do confess,
Conceal not great, and little sins express.
For when a sic^e man bleedes, if forth comes good
They say it is dangerous; for corrupted blood,
Lies linking in the veins: So many times,
It is observed, some tell their petty crimes,
Or else make known how often they have done good,
And so are letting forth their har^s best blood,
While sin like rank and peccant humors find
A latent veme to lurk and stay behind.
What ere it be, the Priest has prower to unloose.
Then to the Priest, what so e're it be, disclose.
Ah! sinner when thy cons^ience finds ve^se,
Help is at hand; s^ne may thou stint the course
Of fluent sin, that swells into a ^loud:
The surgian is prepared to let thee blood.
Raphael for Tobie, but a man's for thee,
Assigned by Christ to cure thy malady.
No Seraphi^; the keys it is Peter ^res,
Heavens gates he opneth: hence then sham^ fe^res.
If Iosue, to game time, said to the s^nne:
Stand; and it stood, when he almost had run
His wonted course: If God his voice obeyed,
And in a trice confirmed what he had said,
When Priests say I absolve (ma^gre our f^es)
He can, be will, he does thy sins unloose.
And as in time of dearth, when men forlorn
Are pining, like to staru^ for want of corn,
The careful farmer bears a watchful eye,
And keeps the keys of his rich granary.
But when again both rich and poor have store,
The wary farmer keeps the keys no more,
But gives them to his man: Even so we find,
When Adam caused a dearth among mankind,
God kept the keys, and farnish'd souls half dead
Were not sustained, because they wanted bread.
But Christ being come, who by his death brought flore,
He gives the keys to (...), and now no more
Shutes heaven gates, nor opens them, until
Peter absolues; the keys are at his will.
If he unbind, then it is unbound be sure:
And if ^e bind, fast bound it sha! endure.
Oh! what is man that tho^ have raised him so?
Less, but not much in Dauid's time we know
Then ^gels: men have now outscript their Qu^
For man Our Savior Christ.
burns more then the Seraphick fires,
In whom our nature far does them surpass.
For when the Priest does consecrate at M^sse:
When he absolues, his power, through Christ, is such,
That all the Angels cannot do so much.
O man, to man a God! O God, to men
That give such power, assist me so, that when
I humbly kneel before thy servants feet,
As in thy presence, I, (as it is meet)
May so entirely a^ my sins impart,
That naught may ly and fester in my ^art:
And that from thee, by sin, when I shall swarne
This rule ensuing strictly may observe:
Plain, humble, pure, sincere, discreet and free,
Frequent, entire, with tears (if it may be)
True, secret, modest-bold, on, without ^tay,
My self accusing, ready to obey.
And now (alas!) I call to mind, what I cannot without sighing remember: the
miserable state of things in Luthr's time, an hundred years ago. O Age
nothing less then golden! It was then a hard matter to discern Catholics
from heretics. There was scareely any use of Sacraments. They confessed but
once a year, and then only for fashions sake. For such holy things is these,
the less they are frequented, the worse for the most part they are performed.
Such a contagion, at that time, ^eized upon al men, that to communicate any
oftener then once a year, was held little less then a heinous offense.
Religion and piety in those days were brought to a narrow straight, and as it
were to the last cast, when it was a shame for any to be reputed wise amongst
mad men. This was a ready way to the heresy that was then growing up. What was
more easy for many, whil^t they came but once a year to confess their sins,
then wholly at last to abandon this sacrament. That, which is done but seldom,
is soon left undone, especially that which is not so much a recreatio^ as a
torment. But (God be thanked) the times now are so changed, that I dare boldly
say, whosoever in this Age of ours, goes but once a year to confession, may
soon persuade others that he is but a very cold Christian, who wallowing in
his own filth, would not so much as once a year expiate his conscience, but
that the precept of holy Church constraines him thereunto. Let us fly (my
EDESIMVS) let us fly from this stupid sluggishnesse: we sin often, let us
often gre^ue that we have sinned.

. III.
EDESIMVS, But to what end, should we confess so often? Is not a monthly
confession sufficient. PARTHENIVS. I hardly can believe you speak seriously.
Have I not alleged sundry reasons for this? I pray you do but consider the
inconstant and depraved will of man, unless it be daily provoked to go right on,
it takes ^inister ways, embraces that which is forbidden, and falls in the
end to dishonest and pernicious courses. Do you see this clock neatly and
artificially framed? If the plumme^s be not daily drawn up, it will prove a
mute and silent witch-man; it will neither with bell nor hand tell you the time of
the day. See you in the corner a cob-web? This is an argument, that wall in a
long time has not been swept. Spiders shun the chambers of rich men, where
their maids often and diligently dislodge them with their broomes. Behold this
citterne how artificially it is shaped, yet if it be not often tuned according
to musical notes, it will yeald, to him that touches it, but a harsh and
untunable sound. Do you see this hankercher as white as snow? Yet by continual
use, unless it be often washed it will become sluttish and foul. Even so does it
fare with our conscience: if we do not often purify it by confession, we shall
straight find therein spots, dregs and impurityes. What is the reason that some
are unwilling to confess their sins? Because with them at that very time
they are entangled. Men use when they are awaked to tell their dreams: and, for
a man to confess his sins is a good sign of a sound and watchful
couscience. Let us therefore awaken ourselves, that we may condemn our own
errors.

But are you pleased to hear the eight reason? I will handle it briefly, for
that I have made mention thereof heertofore. The devil, that watchful
seauen-headed dragon, the most unquiet monster, often makes fierce incursions
(...) our chastity, and though a thousand times vanqui^hed, presume^ at last he
shall obtain the victory: and there is scar^ly any way more certain^ to divert
or prevent so many hostile incursions, then the sacrament of Pen^ance and
frequent confession. When this enemy is detected he is overcome: so long as he
lies in covert he becomes more or less victorious. In S. John Chryso^es time,
they write that a certain terrible Lion depopulated their fields, de^oured
their ^at^el, and infested the towns and inhabit^nts. They went for succor to
a holy Bishop then li^ing amongst them; who out of the p^lp^t delivered this
answer* that they might be assured the cause of this desolation was the neglect
and contempt of Gods laws, for which this mischief daily more and more
increased amongst them. Wherefore in fine, to avoid this destruction, he
persuaded, them to penance and confession of their ^innes.

Complaints sometimes fly through the world; what? say they, has the devil
broken al his chains? burst in pieces a^ his boltes? What? has he shaken off
al his fetters? does he take his full swi^ge, insolently commanding now, rather
then flattering and entreating? So it seems it was when the son of God
suffered his passion. Christ himself testifies a^ much. This is your hour, and
the p^er of darkness. Luc. 22.35.
The devil might then seem to have broken all the grates of his prison. Which
mischief good I^VS foreseeing, washed the feet of his disciples, deli^ered
them the sacred Eucharist, and commanded them to watch diligently in prayer.
Doubtless at such times the same remedies are to be sought for. Wherefore when
the hellish storms most violently rush upon thee, wash thy feet, purge thy
conscience and affections; watch, pray, and make have to the Eucharist:

. IV.
I conclude with the ninth and last reason of frequent confession. As long as
this life dureth we shall never be secure. There is nothing more uncertain then
death, and sudden mishaps often oppress us in ^uch places and times as we
least fear or mi^trust them. How often, and with how great solicitude, as all the Evangelists testify, did Christ admonish us to be ready at every moment?
He never inculcated any thing more often then this one command: Watch ye. He
cries out as S. Matthew recounteth: Mat. 14.42. Mat. 25.13.
Watch, because you know not what time your Lord will come. Watch ye therefore;
because you know not the day nor the hour: watch ye, and pray that you enter
not into temptation. By S. Mark with no less vehemence he calls upon us:
Man. 13.33.
Take heed, watch and pray, (for you know not when the Lord of the house
comes: in the evening or at midnight, or at the crock-crowing, or in the
morning) lest coming upon a sudden, he find you s^eeping. And that which I
say to you, I say to al: Watch ye. I pray thee how could we more seriously be
exhorted to incessant watching? But he recommendeth the self same most
earnestly by S. Luke: Luc. 21.36.
Watch therefore at al times praying, that you may be accounted worthy to
escape al those things which are to come, and stand before the Son of man.
What does Blessed S. Paul more often admonish us, then this? Act. 20.31. 1.
Cor. 16.13. These. 5.6.
For which respect watch ye. Watch ye, stand sure in faith. Therefore let us
not sleep as others do but let us watch and be sober. How often has S. Peter
admonished us of this? 1. Pet. 5.8. and 4.9.
Watch in prayers: be ye sober and watch, because your adversary the devil like
a roaring Lion goes about, seeking whom be may devour. The like S. John
proclaims: Be vigilant. If thou do not watch, I will come unto thee like a
thief, and thou shall not know at what hour I will come unto thee. Happy is ^e
that watches and keeps his garments. See (my EDESIMVS) nothing is so
necessary for us as to Watch. But il does he watch for is own behoof; who so
seldom prepares himself for his end by the Sacrament of Penance.
Contrariwise that man never much fears death, who having often confessed his
sins, and many times cast up the accounts of his life past, is ready to take
that journey. Historyes recount that a certain Priest, a man very religious,
was wont daily to confess himself before he celebrated Mass. Alph. Rodrig.
par. 1. tract. 2. de per^. c. 5.
This man when he came to the point of death was admonished to prepare himself
to receive the B. Sacrament, for his last Viaticum. At which message, lifting
up his eyes and hands to heaven, he said: Blessed be JESUS, these thirty
years and more I have daily made my confession as if it should have been my
last. And therefore it will suffice to go to confession this time as if I were
presently to go to Mass. This is to Watch. Very good is that counsel of S.
Augustine: Aug. in Ps. 44. and l. ^. de visit. infirm.
Prevent almighty God. Would thou not have him punish thee? Punish thy self.
Sin must be chastized: if no punishment were due unto is, it were not sin.
Never be ashamed to declare that unto one which perhaps thou were not abashed
to commit in the presence of many. For, as S. Bernard says, Bern. Mod. c. 37.
dissembled confession i^ not confession, but double confusion. EDESIMVS.
Verily (my PARTHENIVS) I have no obstacle but only a remiss and unwilling
mind; which I will endeavor to rectify. You have persuaded me. PARTHENIVS. I
pass now to the discourse of fasting.

THE FIFTH ANTIDOTE against Incontinency: Fasting, and exercise of Abstinence.
CHAP. VII.
FIre which once takes hold of a house is to be extinguished by water; and
sometimes the house itself to be pulled down? But that which wantes fuel, dies
and goes out of itself. Withdraw the wood from the fire and suddenly it
slaketh and vanishes. Seneca. epist. ^0.
Luxury (a fire sent from hell) in like manner inflames the body. Would thou
have this flame put-out? withdraw food from thy body; and although thou
perceauest not when, yet thou shall certainly find it quenched. Hunger is a
friend to virginity. Fasting spitle drives away a serpent: and by the virtue of
fasting the hellish Dragon is put to flight. Plin. lib. 28.
This is the common opinion of all the holy Fathers. He. 1. de Iciun.
S. Basil says that, fasting ministers arms against the power of devils. S.
Chrysostom: To. ^. ser. 2. de Iciun.
Fasting was inst^tuted against the nature of devils. S. Hierom Li. ^. (...)
Icuin.
Fasting is a beautiful thing which terrifieth Satan. Origin avouches: He. 4.
in di^ers. in Matthew.
When you fast you overcome the devils, d^ue back the whole malignant navy,
and put to flight evil desires: S. Athanasius, Li. de Virg.
that evil spirits stand infeare of the force of fasting. S. Ambrose Li. 6.
Hexa^. c. 4. ad (...).
that you can find no remedy more effectual against our enemy (the serpent)
then fasting. What shall I say more? There was never any that overcame the devil
without fasting. Job that spectacle of heaven, when he was in the midst of
his greatest misery, fasted for the space of seven days together, as Tract 3.
in Job
Origin affirms. S. John the Forerunner of our Lord came without either
eating or drinking. Matthew. c. 11. verse. 8.
For so sparing was he in his refections, that he seemed neither to eat nor
drink. Christ foretold the abstinence of the Apostles: Matthew. c. 9. verse. 15.
The bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then they shall fast. S. Paul did
not prescribe himself any certain time, but vanquished the rebellion of his
body by many fasts, by hunger and thirst. 2. Cor. 11.27.
Athanasius recounteth that S. Anthony through the whole course of his life was
so strict in fasting, that sometimes for the space of two or three days he
lived without my sustenance; and at last upon the fourth day eat only bread,
very sparingly: he used no other fance but salt, and in lieu of delicious wines
of Creet, branke water. Hilarion at fifteen years of age to extinguish al
fleshly concupiscence, imitating the same abstinence with fifteen dry figs
after sunset, rather provoked then appeased his hunger. And fearing lest all the sparks of lust were not extingulshed by this spare diet, he so englarg'd
his fast, that he lived three or four days together without any kind of
nourishment; so that he was hardly able to keep life and soul together.

. I.
There are some kinds of diseases against which the Physicians pronounce this
resolute sentence: Let the patient be let blood, and stop not the vein, til he
be even senseless: for the vehemence of his disease is not capable of a light
and favorable cure. The like did H^llarion practice on himself, who thought
the soul was to be succored by weakening the body. For so long as the flesh
was pampered, he found the Spirit could not be secured. He sustained with the
juice of herbs, and a few dry figs (says S. Hierom) his fainting life three
or four days together: besides, the labor of his work was double to that of
his fasting, so macerated and wasted in his b^dy, that scarcely his bones hung
together. Very certain is that saying of. S. Ambrose: Whatsoever impaires the
body, ^ortifyes the Spirit: And most true is that of our Savior Christ: Matthew.
17.21.
This kind of devil is not cast forth, but by prayer and fasting. For (says S.
Hierom) Li. 2. co^t. Iouin.
our Lord taught, that the fiercer sort of di^uels, are not otherwise overcome
then by fasting and prayer. Surely so it is. That most eager spirit of Luxury,
is weakened by this kind of arms. Whereupon S. Augustine says: Sermon. 65. de
Temp.
See (my Dearest) h^w great the force of fasting is, si^h it was able to effect
that which the Apostles could not. S. Ambrose discoursing very elegantly and
pitthily, says: Ser. 25.
Behold therefore what the force of fasting is, how much grace it imparteth to
him that uses it; seeing it ministers so efficacio^s a medicine to another.
See how it sanctifyeth the faster himself, seeing it so much purifies his
neighbor. It is a thing to be much wondered at: One man fasteth, and another
profits by his abstinence: this man takes the medicine, and by the operation
thereof another man is cured. Which likewise Blessed Pope L^o admiring said
that the prayer of him that fastes is (...) acceptable to God, as terrible to
Satan. For if the virtue of fasting be so great, that he, who is armed
therewith, dri^es away the enemy that possesses another, ^ow much more able
will it be to resist his assaults, and constrain^ him to forsake his own body.
The wicked spirit cannot endure the efficacy of this enemy, fasting, whilst he
possesses the body of another, how much less will he be able to sustain it in
the man himself by whom he is so floutly impugned? Aptly therefore does the
Church sing Qui corporals ieiunio vitia comprimis, Who by corporal fasting
do suppress vice. The devil by intemperance and gluttony opneth the passage
to al sins. Therefore S. Ambrose calls gluttony Primum diaholispiculum, Lib. de
Eli. c. 1.
The first dart of the devil. S. Hierom terms it Prima daemonum arma, Epist.
22. ad Eustoch.
The first weapons of the devils. S. Basil Primam malorum causam, and
universal venenum, Hom. 1. de ieiun.
The first cause of evils, and an universal poison. S. Chrysostom Rem sum
gratam daemoni, A thing highly grateful to the devil. Therefore S. Hierom
says: Epist. ad Furian.
When we stuff the flesh with abundance of meats we power oil into the fire,
that it may cast forth greater flames. And well known is that saying of S.
Augustine: Abundance of meat is wont to be attended on by insolency of words:
a full belly is accompanted with leuity of works and vanity of mind. In the
midst of feasts chastity is in great danger. Let him learn to be hungry, who
loves to be chaste.

. II.
EDESIM^S. Whosoever co^mendes hunger undertakes but a thankles office. And I
pray thee what mischief can come from eating or drinking til a man have
repressed his ^unger? PARTHENIVS. What this mischief it I will not dispute: but
that it was the beginning of al mischiefs it is most apparently known. In the
time of Noe, wh^ al flesh had corrupted it is way; when the earth was corrupted
before God; and replenished with iniquity; Genesis 6.12. and 13.
Eating and Drinking was the beginning thereof. Christ clearly testfieth as
much: Matthew. 24.38.
For as they were in the days before the ^e^uge eating and drinking, marrying
and giu^g to marriage. See how sitly ^re joined together eating and marriage;
feasting and iniquityes; fulness and lust; Becchus and Venus. Believe me, where
fasting is neglected, chastity is not esteemed. For, as very truly says
Seneca: Epist. 14.
That man has a base conceit of honesty, who too much cherishes his body. He
that h^teth hunger will hardly be in love or liking with chastity. It is the
saying of S. Ambrose: Lust is fed with feasts, nourished with delicacyes, set
on fire with wine, enflamed with drunkenness. It is even so. The allurements
of a lascivious body spring from no other sourse ^en immoderate gormandizing.
S. Hierom upon every occasion prescribes a fit medicine for this malady. For
when this most holy Doctor instructed the virgin Eustochi^, he doubted not to
affirm, that no man's chastity could be permanent and firm, unless it were
defended by spare diet and temperance? We should rather have our stomach out of
order, then our mind; and our legs fail us, then our chastity. Tho. Cister.
in Cant. c. 1. v. 4.
With chafe not with barley; with chafe we must feed our ass, as that most
chaste Hilarion admonished us before. The chariot of Luxury (as some describe
it) has four wheels: Vestium molliti^; o^j d^sidiam, oculor^m petulantia^,
ventris i^gluui^m, Soft apparel, Slouthful idleness, Wantonness of the eyes,
Gluttony of the belly. It is drawn by two horses: Prosperi^ate vita, and
abundantia rerum, Prosperity of life, and abundance of al things. Two wagoners
drive them: ^k^ and Languor Riot and Languour.

Aristotle confirming this says: Venus is the companion and waiting maid of
Satiety. Therefore chastity must needs be the companion of sobriety and
fasting. For, according to the same Philosopher, one and the some is the
science of contraries. I find a saying as old as true: Teren. in Eun.
Hunger never begat adulteryes. For without meat and wine Venus starues for
cold.

This was that which thrust the people of Israel headlong into lusts and
iniquityes: The people sat down to eat, and drink, and rose up to play.
Exodus 32.6.
This is the ordinary course of things; after feasting, dancing; which i^
always an attendant upon dainty fare. EDESIMVS. Do you likewise forbid
dancing? PARTHENIVS. Not I, but the law of modesty does. Do but observe the
dances of our Age, and for the most part you will conclude, they are nothing but
the devils theaters; vshers, or harbingers to venery. Oftentimes dances are as
it were the utmost prouocations to al unlawful mirth. As who would say, after
full feeding, they must offer sacrifice to lasciousnesse with a r^ling and
drunken kind of motion.

The body both couers and discouers the mind; the self same members that hide
it, lay it open and detect it. For the flinging of the hands, the instability
of the feet, the wandering wantonness of the eyes, argue that some thing
inwardly correspondes to the outward mot^on and agitation of the body. In
dances much is done under a specious pretext of courtefy, which cuttes the very
sinews of chastity. Here the hands, eyes, and words fly at liberty. These
things make hauock of chastity; these are the spur^es of concupiscence; these
let loose the raines to al licencious disorder. Very fitly did a certain man
pronounce this sentence of dancing: A dance is a circle, whereof the devil is
the center, and al his Angels the circumference. Surely therein a man's chastity
is much impaired, and theirs likewise full often who behold them. With this
exactly does the saying of S. Chrysostom agree: Hom. 49. in c. 13. Matthew.
Where lascivious dancing is, there is the devil. King Alphonsus said mertily,
that there was no other difference between a fool and a dancer, then that this
played the fool al his life time, and the other only whilst he danced; seeing
his only endeavor was according to time and measure of the instruments
quaintly to act the mad man. With Job it savors of lust and wantonness to
rejoice with pastimes. Job. 21.11.
And when that light kind of music flatters our ears with da^cingtunes,
doubtless there is nothing less instilled into our minds then the motions of
the holy Ghost, or chaste cogitations. By dancing (my EDESIMVS) we shall never
become Saints, nor chaste; and if we were such, I fear we should not long
continue so: It is called a recreation, which might rather be termed impiety,
or a pleasant prouocatio^ thereunto. And who is there that returns from dancing
any thing the chaster? For which respect you may likewise rightly call it the
devils purlieu, from whence that huntes-man seldom parts empty handed, or
without some booty or prey. EDESIMVS. But I fear (my PARTHENIVS) your
admonitions are in vain, and that you cannot withdraw from da^cing those that
are so eagerly addicted thereto. PARTHENIVS. If it to please them, let the,
dance on, and so down into hell. I have showed them the pit and headlong
precipice, in this course of theirs; if they will not stay their carriere, let
them impute the fault to themselves who perish so wilfully. I return to my
purpose.

. III.
By abstinence and fasting the flesh is exempted from lasciviousness. S.
Hierom comes again into my mind. Al flesh (says he) Epist. 9. ad Saluin. c. 5.
desires those things which are fleshly, and draws the mind to deadly
pleasures by plausible enticements. But it belongs unto us with the great love
of Christ to quench the ardour of this delight^, and with the bridle of hunger
to restrain youthful concupiscence, forcing it rather to seek after meat then
lust; and to carry it is rider (the spirit) with so much the more moderate and
wel-gouerned pace.

Daniel spent six whole days in fasting, without any harm, amongst seven
hungry lions, as if he had lived amongst so many lambs. Dan. 14.30.
And, as S. Basil says, he taught even the Lions themselves to fast. Do you
wonder at this? says S. Chrysostom: ask fasting, from whence this virtue
proceeds. Therefore S. Peter gave us no other lesson against the roaring Lion
of hell, then: Watch, and be sober. Therefore that most holy Hebrew King says:
Peter. 5.8. Ps. 68.13.
I have clothed my soul with fasting. A precious garment for the soul
(answers S. Ambrose) De Elia. c. 4.
is fasting. He that fasteth not, as a naked and disarmed man, lies open to be
wounded. Adam had never been put to shame with his nakedness, had he covered
himself with fasting. Noe fasting remained in security, whilst others
perished: but ignorant of the strength of wine, he drank, and so became a
laughing-stocke to his own son. Lo being sober escaped burning; but drunk
committed incest. Whilst Sampson fasted, he overcame Lions, slew a thousand in
the wars, carried away the gates of the city, as if they had been but a
feather, vanquished and break through al, remaining invincible: but when he
was once taken with the enticements of wine, and a woman, he fell into the power
of his enemies, lost his strength, eyes, life, and al his perfections. David
was not ignorant of this, and therefore prepared for the combat, and lest
lying open to the spoil, he should be wounded or slain by his enemies, he
with the robe of fasting invested and armed himself. I have clothed my soul in
fasting (said he.) Would thou defend and preserve thy chastity? Inuest thy
self with fasting: thou shall overcome by abstinence. We must often iterate
that saying of S. Ambrose: Sermon. de Quadrag.
Hunger is a friend to virginity, an enemy to lasciviousness; but saturity
wastes a man's chastity, and prouokes to Luxury. For this cause that most holy
Bishop, calls fasting the destruction of vices; the safest remedy and the
foundation of chastity. And according to S. Augustine fasting purges the mind,
raises the understanding, subiecteth the flesh to the spirit, disperses the
clouds of concupiscence, extinguishes the ardours of lust, and enkindles the
fire of chastity.

Do you hear these discourses; and as yet stand out against abstinence? I will
even ouerwhelme you with number of testimonies. S. Athanasius says: Sermon. de
ieiun.
See what fasting does. It puts the devils to flight, expels evil cogitations,
purges the soul, and heals the body. Peter of Ranen^ likewise: W^ know that
fasting is the castle of God, the fortress of Christ, the ensign of chastity,
and the trophey of sanctity. It is most apparent and without al controversy,
that abstinence is a thing very profitable, both to a man's chastity and health.
For it takes away whatsoever is hurtful and superfluous in the body, cleeres
the head, and disposes the mind to wholesome and profitable cogitations. And
this was the cause why Solomon resolved to curb and defraud his proper
appetite: I have thought (said he) in my heart to withdraw my flesh from wine,
that I might transfer my mind to wisdom, and avoid folly. So En^s, H^noch,
Math^salem, Noe, were no less remarkable for wisdom then abstinence. So the
Nazareans and Rechabites are commended alike for wisdom and abstinence. Indith
as wise as chaste, defended her beauty and chastity with haire-cloth and
fasting. To what end should I reckon up those terrestrial Angels, so many
thousand Heremits, whose whole life was nothing else but a practice of godly
wisdom and abstinence. Assuredly a tempetate sober and discreet soul will be
both continent and wise.

. IV.
The idolaters themselves were not ignorant of this. The ancient Persians (if
we credit Xenophon) were wont to feed upon nothing but bread and Cresses, yet
at that time flourished with diverse kinds of virtues, and were Lords of the
world for the space of two hundred years, from Cyrus to Darius; who drowned in
wine and voluptuous banquets, lost his life together with his Empire.
Cheredem^s affirms that the ancient Egyptian Priests always abstained from
flesh, eggs, wine and milk, that they might extinguish the ardour of their
lust, and apply themselves to divine affairs with more attention and purity.
The Essent amongst the Jews both from wine and flesh debarred themselves.
Socrates judged delicacies the greatest plague mankind could be subject to:
therefore he often exhorted those that were addicted to virtue, to be
abstinent; and for that respect being asked why he alone would so much differ
from others, answered that others lived to eat, but he would eat to live.

But let us omit these ancient examples. Far more illustrious are those of
later times. And you know my course well enough. I mean not to make a
catalogue, but will only number a few of the better sort. I have always held it
a difficult matter to abstain or sit hungry in the midst of good cheer.
Hannibal, that terror of the Romans, drank least when he thirsted most. And
to inure himself to thirst, would sometimes look^, but not so much as taste of
the water: he dallied with his thirst (as Sili^s says) and having only beheld,
departed from the fountain. This was very much. But I number not Hannibal
amongst the great ones. I admire others who far exceed him.

That great servant of God Daniel the seven and fiftieth Archbishop of M^n^s,
the one and fortieth Electour, who dyed in the year of Christ 1582. a man
doubtless great in all things, but in this surpassing many others; he was
punctual in his fasts. The physicians and sundry others persuaded him (for that
he never eat any fish) to have flesh served in to his table; and besides, the
Pope had dispensed with him. Notwithstanding being nothing indulgent to
himself when he sat with a board furnished after a court-like and exquisite
manner, he contented himself with eggs, and a little mess of pottage. S.
Ambrose Bishop of Milane for diverse years together never eat any dinner,
making but only one meele aday. Nicol. Se^ar. l. 5. Hist. Mogu^t.
S. Carolus Boromeus Cardinal, the worthy Successor of S. Ambrose in so high a
dignity, a man very nicely bred, and daintily brought up, notwithstanding so
accustomed himself to fasting, that he lived only with bread and water all the
last years of his life, excepting festiual days, wherein he took different
meats, but none plausible to his appetite: for from flesh, fish, eggs, and
wine he always abstained. Throughout the lent he likewise forbear to eat
bread, but, with beans and figs alone, rather mitigated then satisfied his
hunger. In the holy week he fed upon nothing else but lupines, a bitter kind of
pease. Out alas! shall so great a Prince impose upon himself such rigid laws of
fasting, and yet we, who in comparison of him, have strong and able bodies, our
blood boiling and prone to lust, so much abhor abstinence, that if our belly
be not always well stuffed, we straight dream of death, or sickness, whereas
hunger is the best remedy against al diseases?

. V.
In Italy the chiefest medicine for every disease amongst the skilfullest
physicians, is hunger and fasting. These things stand with very good reason.
For the principal cause of al diseases is gorma^dizing and excess, which is
only best cured by abstinence. Therefore as hunger cures diseases of the body,
so it does of the soul, being a sovereign Antidote against all the vices
thereof. Do you not see how hunger brea^es the neck of a proud man? The
covetous is persuaded by hunger to draw forth is rusty treasure. The angry
pinched with want, becomes gentle and tractable. An idle man by hunger is
pricked forward to work. He that auoides the mill, auoides likewise the
mealing of his clothes. And whereas hunger is not so loathsome as superfluity
that causes surfets, it draws a glutton from his dainty viandes, to
frugality, a luxurious man from obscene lust, to be sober and continent. Hunger
makes resistance, against al vices, but chiefly against luxury. There have
been armies, says Seneca, Epist. 17.
that have suffered extreme want of al things; they have lived on roots, and
herbs; and by hunger have endured that which is even most loathsome to be
spoken. Al these things have they suffered (which you may marvel at) only to
subdue another kingdom; and shall any one, for delivering his own soul from
the thraldom of carnal concupiscence, think much to endure hunger? Rus^us
Aquileiensis relates a thing worthy of memory. Lib. 3. apud R^sv^eid. ^. 62.
There came a certain person to visit a religious old man, and said unto him:
Father what shall I do? I am not able longer to endure so many obscene
cogitations wherewith I am troubled, they so fill my mind with abominable
impurityes. To whom the old man answered. I remember not that ever I have been
subject to such unclean thoughts The other took his answer in il part, and
judged it almost impossible. How, said he, can that be that you should never be
infested with these troublesome cogitations? The old man answered, that from
the time he had put on the habit of a Monk, he had never eaten his fill of
bread, never drunk his fill of water, never taken his fill of sleep. By which
means, having never been satiated, I rather desire sleep or meat, and so am
never tempted by carnal suggestions. This young man gave ear, and profited very
much by this modest commendation of abstinence. I inculcate my former saying,
and so make en end: Hunger is a friend to virginity.

THE SEVENTH ANTIDOTE against Incontinency: Labors, and the love of exercise.
CHAP. VIII.
EDESIMVS. You have said enough of fasting. PARTHENIVS. More ought to have been
said; but I imagine you conceive how near abstinence is allied to chastity.
But do you remember our verses? Lectio, flagra, preces, confessio, lympha,
labores.
Books, prayers, stripes, confession, labors, fasting.


I have expounded what the meaning of Lympha and fasting is. Doubtless
abstinence to lust is the same which water is to fire. But let us go forward.
I will demonstrate in few words, that labor is as great a friend, as idleness
an enemy to chastity You may find some perhaps that will not endure to be termed
idle persons, notwithstanding they labor in such sort, that it may be doubted
whether it be better to be idle then so employed. They prattle and talk of
nothing but vain matters; and this they call discourse, and serious conference:
they sport themselves, walk up and down, drink, read over no good books, but
only look upon them for curiosity; they overcome tediousness with idleness,
spend the day with a thousand fopperyes, and in doing al things do nothing at
al. And (to use Seneca's words) Epist. 15.
they are men occupied between oil and wine, who spend the day according to
their desire, and think they have labored when they have sweat soundly, and
powered in as much drink, as they have sweat forth humors. O how much of our
life slippeth away whilst we are idle, how much while we are ilimployed? But I
will furnish you with other labors whereby you may defend your chastity.

You know Diana was fained to be a virgin because she hated idleness, and
exercised her self daily with her Nymphs in hunting. Amongst this company of
virgins the Nymph Salmacis was taxed, for that whilst the rest perpetually
spent their time in labor, she only, very idly imployd, either combed her
hair, burnished her face, painted her cheeks, prancked herself in her glass,
laid in order the pleites of her garments, or gathered flowers. Not
withstanding persuaded herself, she did more then all the rest, and that (...)
were more holy then she. Ovid speak^ very elegantly of this Nymph: Li 4. de
Metam.
Sape suas illi fa^ est dixisse sorores:
Salmaci, vel iaculum, vel pictas some pharetras,
Et t^a cum duris venatibus otia misc^.
Nec iaculum sumit, nec pictas illa pharetras
Nec sua cum duris venatibus otia misce^.
As fame reports her sisters often said:
Salmace, thy dart or painted quiver take,
Mix hunting-sports with rest, thou slouthful maid.
But she nor dart nor painted quiver took,
Nor for their hunting toil, her ^ase forsook.


These speeches must often be repeated to a young man il employed: Why loyterest
thou sluggard? do, do something; unfold thy paper, take thy pen, note,
exercise thy style, compose epistles, make orations, sing poemes. Have thou
written? another while take thy book, ^e^d, commit it to memory. Have thou
read? pray sometimes, treat with God, meditate o^ pious and sacred things. Have
thou prayed? recall thy self again to reading or writing. Nature has bestowed
nothing upon mortal men without great labor. By daily labor and long exercise
al things are acquired.

Yet I wish you not always to hang over your book or writing. There must be
some intercourse for recreation of your mind; but so that it may not too much
dissolve, but rather breath and recre^te a man. Have thou breathed? return to
thy labors, take again thy pen, paper and books, and go forward in thy
business. Here we must observe a circle in our course of life, either ^o
labor, or else take some little breathing by desisting from labor: ye^ in
t^king breath we must not be altogether idle, but in idleness itself (...) h^d
of idleness.

. I.
Upon a time S. Anthony grew weary of the wilderness; and, as they write, with
great anguish of mind cried out: I desire to be saved, but mine own
cogitations are against me, Whilst he was thus wavering, he espied a man near
unto him clothed in a Monastical habit, who one while woue baskets, another
while fell down upon his knees to his prayers; and withal he heard this voice:
Anthony do thou in this manner.

Following therefore this Oracle, and intermixing prayers and work
interchangeably with invincible perseverance, he took away all the tediousness
of the wilderness, that was before so troublesome unto him.

The change of labor is a kind of repast, and generous minds are nourished
with employment. EDESIMVS. To what end should we thus continually be embroiled
and tired with labors? PARTHENIVS. That our flesh which is no less desirous
of ease, then lust, may by this means be suppressed; lest by rest and
idleness, concupiscence inflame it, which it is prone and ready to embrace.
Most commonly when our hand cease from work, our heart is busied with impure
thougts. For which cause S. Hierom prudently admonishes us: Let the devil
(says he) never find you idle, or il employed. For that cause throughout al
Egypt, the Monks were not at any time idle, but got their livings by their
own labors; otherwise it was not lawful for the^ to accept of any sustenance,
though it were freely offered them. Cassian lib. 10. Institut. c. 22. and 23.
Do thou labor for thy self (said they) let thine own hands feed thee, and
not others. It is not fitting a man should stand in fear of sweating. Thus
were they industrious, and labored not only to feed themselves, but also to
provide some little supper for Pilgrims and strangers. Yea and through diverse
places of Lybia which were oppressed with famine, and in many prisons they
liberally distributed out of their labors for the nourishment of the poor.
Whereupon it was almost grown to be a common proverb amongst them: He that
labors is vexed but with one: but the slouthful stuggard is infested with
innumerable devils. One of their number named Paul. an Abbot of most approved
life, although he were abundantly furnished with the fruit of his palm trees,
and increase of his own garden, and so might very well have forborne labor,
for providing his own diet; yet for fear of end angering his chastity and
provoking innumerable devils to assail him by idleness, he made little
baskets, and severely exacted of himself a daily task in that kind of work.
But so far was his dwelling from any city. that though he would h^e made
sale of those commodities, the carriage would have far exceeded the price. So
that at the end of the year when he had filled his cel with this kind of over
wares, he made a fire of his whole years labors. Teaching us thereby that no
man shall have chaste thoughts, or a clean heart, or overcome the devil by
idleness. Cassian. lib. 10. inst. c. 24.


. II.
The way of the slouthful is an hedge of thorns. Pro. 15.19.
Wheresoever an idle man goes, ^e finds brambles and b^i^; al his paths (...)
beset with the thorns of impure cogitations: and the labor of an idle man, is
with dishonest matter^ to busy his thoughts. These are the baskets he makes,
which afterward with a wanton tongue he selle^ (...) his pleasure to every one
he meets, For ha^dly ca^ that man contain himself from obscene discourse, who
refraine^ not from such impure cogitations O Salmace. ^ ^luggard take thy
quiver, take thy (...), and shake of idleness with labor and industry: Do
some thing, labor, g^t thee about thy business, or else a thousand, yea
innumerable diuelt will afflict and perplex thee.

Pelagius recounteth how a certain man was desirous to be delivered from the
troublesome suggestions of the Devil and the Flesh, but never seriously applied
his mind to resist them. Libell. 5. n. 15.
Whereupon a religious old man reprehending him said: O thou that creepest like
a snaile, have we so much leisure? Know we already perfectly how to live and
dye well? O hardy champion would thou be saved sleeping? go labor, afflict
thy self; go, watch, knock. Do thou not know what the comb^t^antes do when
they are called to play their prizes? They stand stretching forth their arms
as far and as high as they can; they practice to defend with a strong guard
their head and face, ready either to give or avoid blows: they ar^ expert in
striking either with hand or foot. In this manner we ought to have (...) mind
always ready and vigilant. We must constantly withstand and by all meane^
endeavor to establish our heart with holy cogitatio^s. Let us do what we are
able, and our Lord wll fight for us. We must labor, we must never cease from
working, and refer the rest to our good God's and and assistance. But
sluggard if thou ar^ not yet persuaded to labor, do but attend to S. Paul,
who thus inuiteth and pricketh thee forward: 2 Thessalonians. 3.11.
But to those who are of that sort we denounce, and beseech in our Lord IESV
Christ, that working, with silence they eat their bread. Because if any one
will not work, he shall not eat. This most skilful physician applies one
medicine to many infirmities, for with that only salve of labor he cures all the v^cers proceeding from the root of idleness and sloth. And he observed
first himself the law which he gave unto others. For you know, says he, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. and 8.
how you ought to imitate us: because we were not unquiet amongst you; neither
have we eaten our bread gratis from any one, but in labor and wearines day and
night working, lest we might be burdensome to any of you.

Behold S. Paul of Tarsus, in that very place, where he sounded the trumpet,
which drew the greatest part of the world to the standard of Christ, earned his
food by the work of his hands, twisted ropes, made tents and pauillions. Yea
the mother of our Lord herself, how far was she at al times from idleness?
There was never any woman spent the daily course of her life in better order
then this most B. Virgin; who from the break of day til the third hour,
applied herself seriously to her prayers; from that time til noone in
spinning; and after dinner (which she took very sparingly) entertained the
rest of the day in reading divine matters.

. III.
But if the Apostles (as says S. Hierom) Epist. ^. ad Ru^. (...).
who might have lived by the Ghospel, labored with their own hands, lest they
should be burdensome to others, why are you not doing somewhat that may be
necessary for yourself? Be employed in some good work or other, that the devil
may always find you in action.

O Salmace, Salmace, o sluggish kind of cattle! We are borne to labor, and
without industry there will fall no portion of virtue to our share. Thou know
whilst David exercised himself in warfare, no luxury could vanquish him: but
when he began to be slouthful he was assaulted with adulterous thoughts.
Solomon overcame Luxury whilst he was building the Temple* but when he gave
over that work he worshipped the Goddess Venus and Astartes. Let us do (my
EDESIMVS) let us always be doing some thing, that the devil never find us
idle. Whilst we have leisure let us attend to our affairs: let not a day, no^
so much as an hour ouerpasse us, no nor any part thereof without some kind of
pious labor or employment. Those that are delighted with loitering and
trifling have not yet learned this Nosse ^pus to know how precious time is,
whereof Pittacus does admonish us.

Time is a most rich treasure; there is no greater loss of any thing: which if
we once let slip, we can never recover or ^ecal it again. Therefore the
Parthian Kings themselves, lest they should wax sluggish with idleness,
accustomed to sharpen weapons, and that seriously, not so much for recreation,
as to gain even their subjects applause. Certainly it is far better to be
honestly employed then unprofitably idle. He who does nothing seems no other
then a putrified carcass leaning upon a bolster and buried in drowsines.
Pliny the elder seeing his Nephew spend the day idly in walking up and down
said: You should not loose these hours. Ah! (not without grief I sigh) ah how
often may we behold a young man, (yea infinite of al ages) whom we may call upon
with like words, you should not loose these hours, nay these days, weeks,
months and years. Short is the race of this our life. (says S. Hierom) At
this very instant wherein I speak, dictate, write, correct, or read over, time
redounds to my benefit or damage. There is nothing that more aptly instructs,
or more strongly confirms the life of man, then industry and honest
employment. By sloth the mind becomes stupid, the body drowsy, and much more
subject to diseases: by exercise both are supported. Al virtue consistes in
action. That man who lives in idleness shall never escape the devils shackles.
Labor is the mother of virtue and glory; he that neglects that, rejects
these. Nothing of great value can be bought for a trifle. Aptly for our purpose
speaks Laurentius Iustinianus: Lib. de lig^ vitae c. 5.
As with temperate labor the fire of concupiscence is suppressed; so with
idleness it is nourished and augmented. A hundred times we must repeat this
saying: Daily do something, that the devil may always find you well employed.
Now follows Portarum excubiae: that is, a strict watch over our senses.

THE SEVENTH ANTIDOTE against Incontinency: Careful watch over our senses.
CHAP. IX.
WE declared before that our eyes ought to be modestly closed. Yet never shall
that city which shuts one gate and opens another, wholly exclude the enemy. Al
are to be strongly barred. A great part of innocence dependes on the careful
shutting of our eyes. But there are more gates through which the enemy slippeth
in. The nostrils take in odours, the ears words, the taste delicacies, the
hands delight themselves in touchings. At al these doors we ought to keep a
very vigilant watch. It is to little purpose for the porter to be expert in
watching, unless he be as dexterous in warding and fighting to withstand
courageously the shocke of the enemy. Of these five senses of the body Nicetas
speaks elegantly: Unless (says he) In (...). ^8. N^z.
the senses be well governed, they are ready ways to vice, and open gates to
sin; for through them lies a direct passage unto vice, and through them sin
enters into our souls. These are bawdes which with flattering enticements
corrupt our minds; messengers, which inuit us to pleasure; rauishers which
take the soul from the Creator, to render it wholly enthralled to the
creature. They are windows through which the contagion of al wickedness creepes
in; they are doors, through which the soul stealing away from her self,
prinily flies out to forbidden repasts. Therefore S. Gregory the Great says,
Initio cap. 31. Job.
that to preserve purity of heart it is necessary we should keep our exterior
senses free from infection. Death ascends by the windows, and enters into
the house: for concupiscence by the corporal senses steals in, and takes
possession of the habitacle of the soul. Thus we miserable wretches perish; we
are oftentimes full of thinks and windows: and so on which side so^uer
pleasure comes and asks admittance we entertain it willingly and easily, no
otherwise then the Tro^ans did the fa^ al horse, which being admitted was the
destruction of the city. Many things we take in by the senses, which at the
first pretend freindship, but after they are entertayn'd assail us with
hostile cruelty and ruinate our soul. Who is he that seeks not to please his
taste with delicate banquets, choice wines, dainty cates and exquisite viandes?
They enter in smoothly, but in conclusion bite like a serpent, and diffuse
their venom like a basiliske. Who is he that does not with greedy ears harken
to the sweet harmony of Sirens? Music being not alwai^ modest and chaste,
sometimes fiercely stirs up men to wars, sometimes prouokes them to lust.
Who is he that does not with open nostrils attract sweet odours and aromaticke
sentes? Who is he that would not with prompt hands touch and handle that which
does often infuse into our minds I know not what kind of lenity and effeminate
delight? Who is he that does not most willingly behold a comely personage of
beautiful aspect? Yet (alas) oftentimes beguiled, he may bewail himself in
this manner:

Vt vidi, vt p^ij, vt m^ mal^ abstulio error?
Ah how I saw, and how misled
By seeing, have I perished?
. I.
Thus oftentimes by seeing and hearing, by smelling, tasting, and touching we
are treacherously led not only into danger, but even destruction itself.
Solomon admonishes us: Pro. 4.23.
With all care keep thy heart, because life proceeds from it. But there will be
no guard kept over thy heart, unless it is five windows or doors be always kept
shut. EDESIMVS. To whom (I pray you) should the keys of these five doors be
committed? PARTHENIVS. To Necessity or Vtility: still to one of these, but never
to pleasure. This is my opinion: If thou would suffer any thing to have
access to thy senses, let either Necessity compel, or Vtility constrain thee.
If at the only beck of pleasure, al, or any of these doors be opened, thou
keep not but betrayest thy heart. Thou shall soon perceive thou do not
govern but treacherously yeald up thy castle. For when pleasure once gets
these keys, ^he lets in a promiscuous rabble; more enemies then friends, even
into the very secret closet of thy heart. Whereupon (alas) with how many
fopperyes, fantasies and fooleries is thy poor soul deluded? The Ideaes of
infinite things, and most of them vain, filthy, and obscene intrude into thy
heart. So does pleasure discharge her office when she becomes Mistress of the
keys, which belong to those five doors: al things are turned vpside down,
and that which is only practiced, is to inueigle and allure the soul, to give
it self wholly to her concupiscence, and not conceive a horror against any
cogitations how filthy soever. This is according to the words of S. Basil: Lib
de vera virginitate. Sermon. de abdicat.
The appetite of delectation flows from the flesh as from a fountain, and is
diffused through all the senses, as through so many rivers. The same author
says: Rate thy seeing and hearing according to the profit they bring thee. So
ought we to do. Whosoever measures the things he hears by the pleasure he
takes, shall by his only hearing make his soul liable to many inconveniences.
They are thought perhaps but final matters for a man to listen to vain,
curious, ridiculous tales, news, and fables; to trifles, babbling, or a man's
own praises. Who is he that will be either deaf or sleepy, when such things
are spoken of? This only word news, news, makes us stretch our ears to the
utmost But let your genius pardon me which is delighted with relation of new
occurences, and fed with lies; which gives so willing an ear to toys and
fables, and catches the winds in a net. Heerupon a man sometimes takes
occasion, willingly to open his ears to scurrilous discourses, lascivious
speeches, filthy songs, infamous detractions; which oftentimes are as hurtful
to hear, as to speak. Well known is the censure of S. Bernard against those
kind of hearers. Whether (says he) Li. ^. de Consid.
he that detractes, or that willingly hears the detractour be more damnable,
I can hardly determine. Nor is S. Hierom deceived, who says: If hearers were
not, there would never be detractours. He is truly wise, who shuts his ears
against these malignant tongues; even wax will not sufficiently stop them. A
man had need of more solid stuff then that which Ulysses used amongst his
companions. Guard thine ears, not with a waxen but a thorny hedge, and
sometimes turn a deaf ^are even to those that love thee best. Senec. epist.
31.


. II.
Our smelling likewise had need to be guarded. EDESIMVS. What if flowers in
gardens, perfumes in churches, and clouds of frankincense inuit; would you
have me stop my nose against them? At these times I desire rather to be al nose
with Catullus. PARTHENIVS. This, I grant, is a Catullian desire, not a
Christian. I have said already, that not pleasure but either Necessity or
Vtility must keep the keys of the exterior senses. If either the Church or
gardens send forth their sweet odours, I wish thee not to stop thy nose, but
withal exhort thee to in large thy mind and remember the saying of S. Paul: 1.
Cor. ^.15.
We are the good odor of Christ unto God; and that of David: Ps. 140.2.
Let my prayer be directed like incense in thy sight. Think of the golden
vials full of odours; which are the prayers of the Saints. Apoc. 5.8.
So shall the incensories or flowery banks, without harm present their odours
unto thee. S. Augustine in this respect was of a generous mind. Lib. 10
Confess. c. ^2.
Concerning the enticement of odours, says he, I trouble not myself: when they
are absent I require them not, and am well contented to be always without them.
But should pleasure only be the cause that our garments, gloves, hands, and
chambers smell of musk; should we desire a foreign musk cod, amber, or ciuet
only for delight; hence would ensue mischief, and provocation to lust and
those effeminate delights that deserve reprehension. The desire and use of
these things, especially if it be excessive, is branded with incontinency. And
for the most part these delights either show leuity, or are accompanied with
some loathsome infirmity. The Assyrians, Arabians, Sabaeans, vanquished by our
arms, by their odours overcome us. In very deed this curious perfuming is a
sign of some evil savor, and hidden defects. It is more unseemly to use
artificial things, then those that are natural and sincere. Every indecent
thing the more artificial, the less commendable it is. Do thou remember
that young man who going to render thanks to Vespasian the Emperor for a
Captains place he had bestowed upon him, smelt in such sort of prefumes, that
the Emperor being offended, with a frowning brow, and shril voice, said: I had
rather thou had sauoured of garlic. Having thus reprehended him, and
recalled those letters of favor he had formerly granted, he dismissed him well
perfumed as he was. So you see such like odours are disgraceful and sometimes
prejudicial to them that use them. Muleasses King of Tuni^e, to recover his
Kingdom, encountered with his son Amidas, but with no good success: for
flying amongst the disordered troops, besmeared al with blood and dust, he
might easily have escaped unknown, had he not been discovered by his sweet
perfumes, and odor of his ointments. After he was taken prisoner, his son
with a red-hot penknife put out both his eyes, condemning to eternal darkness
his miserable father. I remember many like accidents which have happened: As
that most horrible, whereof Peter Damian writes concerning the woman of Venice,
which I will not here recount; but only annexe the saying of the Poet: He
smells best, who smells of nothing: and we learn by experience, that their
carcases stink worst when they are dead, which smelt best whilst they lived.
Let that man fly these effeminate vanities, who disdaineth to be made a slave
to wantonness and lust. Certainly unguents are apt to penetrate, but apter are
vices which speedily make way into us by this means. Epist. ad Bl^cam
com^tiss. de instit. monial. c. 11. B^ron. tom. 10. Ann. 998. n. 20.


. III.
As it is unfit to appoint pleasure to keep the key of the sight, hearing, and
smelling, so likewise of the taste. We have already discoursed of pernicious
viandes, and abstinence; but how to eschew the suggestions of pleasure in our
taste and appetite S. Augustine notably instructs us, saying: Tom. 9. de
conflictu vitioru^. c. 18.
As the sick man comes to take a medicine, so every one ought to come to his
meat; that is, to satisfy necessity without desiring his own pleasure therein.
And then rejoicing he had obtained of God this jurisdiction and power over his
taste he said: Lib. 10. conf. c. 31.
Thou have taught me to take my meat as I would a medicine, not so much for
pleasure as necessity. I stand not infeare of the uncleanness of my meat, but
rather of concupiscence. I know Esau was deceived by greedily desiring a mess
of pottage; that David reprehended himself for thirsting after water; and that
our Lord was not tempted with feasts, but with bread. And true wisdom did not
only teach him to utter these things, but also to practice them. For S.
Augustine for the most part abstained from flesh, banished from his table al
dainty meats; and carefully avoiding other men's feastings, was so regular that
he testifies thus of himself: I daily wage war in my fasting, often
bringing this body of mine into servitude. S. Wolstan Bishop of Worcester
triumphed no less victoriously over his taste. Sur. de code^ 19. Iunij.
It happened on a time, praying more then ordinary after Mass in a place of
retirement, a pleasing smell of rost-meat provoked his appetite. This holy man
perceauing how his mind was distracted, and transported from his prayers into
the kitchen and pottage-pot, discoursed thus with himself: Is this, said he,
to pray? Is this to talk with God? whilst my tongue vtters words, and my
hands are lifted up toward heaven, my thoughts are wandering through the
kitchen. Doubtless thou shall dearly pay for this fault. Would thou not
willingly be eating of those rost-meats? I will season them for thee, that thou
may relish them the better. Assuredly thou shall neither taste what thou now
smellest, nor the like hereafter. So I decree by an irreuocable law. He said
and performed it; perseuering as constant in his purpose, as resolute in making
it. By this one triumph over his taste, he made a great step to his future
sanctity, and famous for miracles dyed in the year of Christ 1067. This has
been the principal endeavor of many very holy men, to curb gluttony, and by all
means to mortify their taste as a traitor no less flattering then pernicious.
It was not only S. Isidore the Priest, who never rose fully satisfied from the
table, but many more that observed this rule: Nunquam satiari, never to be
satisfied. Great was the prophet Daniel, great were his fellows in this
respect: for that they abstaining from strong wines, and daintier sorts of
dishes, contented themselves with water and ordinary food. Thus they got the
upper hand not only over gluttony, but likewise over the fire enkindled
thereby. We take a quite contrary course: for gluttony with more facility
thrustes us headlong into excess, while it daily palliates itself under the
honest name of necessity. Whereby we often add flame to flame, and power oil
into the hot burning fire, with much wine provoking our natural appetite, which
of it is own accord is too prone to excess. Wine largely taken is a bad
Counselor. Therefore refrain gluttony, and thou shall more easily suppress
sensuality.

. IV.
We have said that pleasure should not carry the keys that belong to the eyes
and ears, smelling and tasting; much less those that belong to touching. This
sense ranging throughout our body is a sly hunter after al delights.
Oftentimes making use of the other senses in pursuit of pleasures, it draws
them together with itself into destruction. Touching, as S. Basile teaches, is
the worst of all the senses; it flattereth it is fellows, to win their
assistance in following the sweetness of delights; and therefore we must carry
ourselves very warily, and according to the rule of honesty, have in mind the
admonition: Quod non licet concupiscere, noli tangere, Touch not that which
thou ought not to covet. This sense is not satisfied when the body is
clothed, but it must have soft apparel; nor is it content to lie when it
sleeps, but it must have a downe-bed. This is the principal care of touching,
to find al things soft and smooth; and that, as we may easily perceive, only
for it is pleasure. But this has been condemned long since by Christ our
Savior: Behold (says he) Matthew. 11.8.
they that are clothed in soft garments are in the houses of Kings: to wit,
such as are upon earth, but not of the high and eternal King. And he commended
John the son of Zachary, who lived about the river Jordan not for his soft,
but for his rough and hairy garment. Nor would S. Luke have accused the
purple-clothed glutton for his soft garments, had not the citizens of heaven
hated it, who accompanied the funeral of poor Lazarus, and wouchsafed not to
honor him that dyed in purple, and was buried in hell. Doubtless chastity loves
no soft or delicate apparel: these are either the ensigns or enticements of
lust.

Modesty is best pleased with plain and neat attire. For the most part, the
soft and rich garments are most used where modesty is least esteemed. The
Emperor Augustus being highly offended with a certain light attire that his
daughter wore, called this her leuity and vanity in apparel, the ensign of
pride, and the nest of Luxury. Notwithstanding the sense of touching seeks
after al these impertinencies, if it be not severely restrained according to
the rules of Christian piety. But if we give it full scope, 't will desire a soft
garment, and a softer bed; nor will it content itself, or think it can sleep
soundly, except it may lie deeply drowned in a feather-bed. Beginning with
these principles it goes on to embrace a more licentious liberty; and at last,
grown more impudent, infringeth the laws of modesty. But too much in a manner
is the very name of shameless touchings, embracings and kisses. I have said
enough, and perhaps it will be more secure to reprehend these dishonesties with
only naming them. Thou must be wary, yea very warily must thou behave thy self
heerin (my EDESIMVS) if thou will live chastely. Oftentimes by a light touch no
small dishonesty has ensued. S. Augustine being asked why he would not dwell
with his sister; replied because they are not my sisters that live with my
sister. Without doubt it is evil to behold a woman, worse to speak to her,
worst of al to touch her. Therefore Nicetius a very holy Priest, elected Bishop
of Lions, a great lover of purity, daily admonished those that were under his
charge, to beware both of al touchings, and lascivious words. Gregor. Turon. in
vitis PP. c. ^. Sur. 2. April.
And for his own part, very mindful of himself, was afraid to handle so much
as the naked bodies of infants. For none he thought could be too wary in this
respect, since pleasure is wont to insinuate itself so deceitfully. When the
steel is stricken with a flint, sparkles instantly issue forth: a serpent
touched presently turns back his head to bite him that touched him. The more
chaste, the more wary is every one, forbearing even to touch his own flesh, for
fear of burning, or lest this serpentine luxury feeling those immodest touches
should sting, and instill it is venom into the wound.

Editha, daughter of Edgar King of England, a woman not only illustrious in
respect of her roial parentage, but also for her virtues, appearing to S.
Dunstan Bishop in his sleep, after her death, advertised him where her body
lay: and that he might not deem this an illusion, she added that it was to be
found as yet entire without any putrefaction; only the eyes, hands and feet
were dissolved into dust, for that she had in times past, by certain girlish
leuities wantonly abused them: but the thumb of her right hand wherewith she was
wont so often to bless herself with the sign of the cross, remained entire:
that the benign elemency of God might appear in the parts preserved, as the
severity of his justice did in those that were consumed and wasted. Very
rightly therefore says S. Basil: Lib. de vera virgin.
Let a virgins eyes and ears, tasting and touching be virgins, es^huing
whatsoever degenerates from true virginity.

. V.
It serves for our purpose what I have read of B. Iacopon a very holy man of
the order of S. Francis, who very elegantly described a man's five exterior
senses in this manner. Virid. Rad. part. 1. de contemp. sui. c. 3.
There was a virgin who had five brothers: the eldest of them a Painter, the
second a Musician, the third a Cook, the fourth an Apothecary, the fifth an
Inn keeper; men of very mean fortunes. I heir sister by means of a certain
precious pearl she had, was esteemed very rich. This ^ewel her poor brothers
by fair entreaties endeavored to get from her. The Musician said: Thou
know what poor means I have, give me thy jewel, and thou may save my
life: I will compose for it such musical sonnets as thou shall deem worthy of
great praise. But the virgin answered: Rest contented, brother; I will not sell
my jewel at so small a rate. The Painter to gain the Jewel promised her a very
curious picture, but was denied his request. The Apothecary attempted the same,
profering I know not what rare perfume, but in like manner was dismissed with
denial Nor had the Cook any other answer, albeit he promised her the brains
of Jupiter, and certain exquisite daintyes.

The Inne-keeper (an impudent fellow) said he knew diverse proper young men who
al desired her to wife, and undertook in her behalf to negotiate very
diligently. He, who thought most of al to have been favored, was farthest from
giving content; but was presently rejected with the rest. In conclusion the
noblest of al others, by marriage of the virgin, obtained this jewel. Which
Iacopon explicated in this manner. The soul is the virgin; our will the jewel;
the five senses are her brothers: our sight the Painter, hearing the Musician,
Smelling the Apothechary, taste the Cook, and our touching the Inne-keeper. And
had not this virgin grossly doted, had ^he for those fond trifles deprived her
self of her jewel which was to be preserved for Christ her Lord, the noblest of
al others? But far more foolish are we, and rightly may be called mad men,
who sell not, but shamefully cast away the most precious pearl of our
understanding and free will, for delicious meats, obscene discourses, venereous
delights, broken glasses, and puppits, yea even for the very shadow of a fly.
One man by seeing those things which he desires loses his innocence: another
impaires his chastity to pamper his gluttony. This man expels modesty to
harbor in his ears al sorts of filthy discourses: That man neglects the
laws of modesty to give al manner of liberty to his smelling and taste. Thus
those five wicked brothers depriving us of our jewel, that is to say, our will
and consent, we fall into extreme poverty of spirit, by Smelling Touching,
Tasting, and chiefly by Seeing and Hearing.

I remember I have read how a certain sick man, of a very upright conscience,
at the approaching of death, playing as it were the Orator with himself, gave
unto all the senses of his body due thanks in this manner. O mine eyes, I love
you for that you have suffered yourselues to be darkened and blinded, as often as
you were in danger of beholding any vanity or lasciuiousnes: and by
entertaining this night and blindness you have often freed me from ensuing
perils. O my ears, I render you thanks, for by a speedy retrait you were wont
to become deaf to al dishonest, detractiue, and pernicious discourses: this
deafnes has often been my safety. O my hands, I gratefully acknowledge you
curiously avoided those things that were pleasing to the sense of touchiug:
this your co^tinency was profitable unto me. O my smelling, to you likewise I
exhibit thanks, for that you were accustomed both to despise pleasant odours,
and suffer those that were ^npleasant, for Gods sake; much has your patient
care auailed me. And to you my taste I gratefully attribute my victories; a
great part of my confidence and security depended on you; you abstained from
meat, and suffered hunger, in the midst of feastings: well were you able to
refrain in plenty, and live contented in poverty. Freely I confess had it not
been for you, my enemies had often vanguish'd me: by abstaining and sustaining
we prevailed and overcame them. Therefore, o my body, suffer me but for a short
time to be absent from thee, we shall e're long be joined again, and enjoy
together an unspeakable reward and eternal felicity. These are very profitable
admonitions, were there any that would embrace them as they should. Pelagius
recounteth that Holy Syncle^ica was wont to say: Let us live soberly, for
thieves enter in through our bodily senses. Verily this is most true: not one
by one, but a multitude of thieves and robbers, a great number of foul
thoughts and representations. Heerupon was the mournful groaning of that
lamenting Prophet: Thren. 3.51.
Mine eye has undone my soul. Let us follow his voice that goes before us,
let every one cry out for himself: Alas! I am become a spoil, to my mouth and
eyes, to mine ears and hands: my sight, my hearing, my touching and tasting
have betrayed my soul. A man's heart, without the custody of his senses, i^ a
city without walls, a house without a door, a garden without a hedge: Into
the first the enemy suddenly makes incursions; the second thieves easily rob;
and the third wild beasts deface, trample down, and make desolate.

THE EIGHT ANTIDOTE against Incontinency: The presence of God, daily before our
eyes in every place. CHAP. X.
EDESIMVS. My PARTHENIVS thou put me in great hope that I shall lead a
virtuous life. Thou instructest teach and fortifiest me against all the force
of mine enemies. PARTHENIVS. If thou praise me, I shall deem it mere flattery:
I will not be interupted, but go on with the same tenor as I began; for now I
draw near to an end. There remains not much to be said; yet if you look well
into the matter, it cannot be expressed in a few words. You remember the
verse: Portarum excubiae, Christi praesentia, paenae.
Strict watch, Christ's presence, torments everlasting.


We have placed a guard upon the gates. Now les us contemplate the presence of
God. And first I cannot but admire when I consider our neglect in many things,
since the vigilant eye of our Lord beholdes us every moment, and in all places.
EDESIMVS. Is therefore God present with my tongue, eyes and hand? PARTHENIVS.
Make thou any doubt of this? Yea, he is within thine eyes, within thy tongue,
and within thy hand, and penetrates the most secred corners of thy heart. What
more clearly does holy Scripture inculcate, then the presence of God euere
where? I will only according to my custom produce some few authorities. Solomon
pronounces most plainly that in every place the eyes of our Lord behold the
good and the evil. Pro. 15.3.
These eyes never sleep, there is no moment of time wherein they are shut. The
same is affirmed by Siracides: Eccl. 23.28.
The eyes of our Lord are much brighter then the sun, beholding round about
all the ways of men, looking into the hidden parts. O eyes far brighter then
the sunbeams! which may be excluded by a thousand means; but not so the eyes
of God, which search into the bottom of every thing, and penetrate walls,
though they were of iron. Nothing is shut from them. S. Paul most clearly
witnesses this verity affirming there is no creature invisible to his sight;
Ad Heb. 4.13.
but al things are naked and open to his eyes, which (as the Prophet Jeremy
says) Ch^. 2^. ver. 19.
are open upon all the ways of the children of Adam, to render to every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his innentions.

. I.
King Abimelech having given to Sara the wife of Abraham a thousand pieces of
silver, adjoined this admonition withal: Whithersoeuer thou shall go remember
thou were taken. Verily this ought to be written in letters of gold: Memento te
deprehensum, Genesis 20.16.
Remember thou were taken. There is no cogitation so hidden, no lust so secret,
no these so close but the eye of God assuredly beholdes it: this, and that, and
the other are seen and discovered alike; whatsoever thou say or do (be it
never so hidden a secret) whatsoever thou think, Memento te deprehensum,
Remember thou art taken. To conclude wheresoever thou art, whatsoever thou
do, although so secret that not so much as a fly is in thy company, yet
Memento te deprehensum, Remember thou art taken.

This is our ignorance whereof we may be ashamed. We sigh after God, as if he
were distant from us a far off. He is very near us: yea in us, and we in him,
as a fish in the sea, a bird in the air, or a point in a circle, which
whithersoeuer it be moved, remains environed on al sides. to what place soever
the fish swimmes it is beset on al sides with water; whithersoeuer the bird
flies it is encompassed with air. S. Augustine condemning his own error, who
imagined God to be as it were far off from him, said: Soliloq. c. 31.
I have erred, and much labored, seeking thee with out me, whereas thy
habitation was within me. Thou were with me, and I was not with thee. I did il
to seek that without, which was within: I (deformed wretch) rushed upon those
beautiful creat^res which thou had created. Those things which could not
subsist without thee, detamed and held me so far off from thee. EDESIMVS. But
i^ God so present likewise in the wicked? PARTHENIVS. Are you a Christian and
speak thus? He is present, yea even in the most wicked; and (to speak
according to Divines) both by Essence, Presence, and Power: only he is not
present by his grace. Almighty God with all his sanctity and wisdom, with all
his rich attributes, was as wholly present in Judas that betrayed Christ, as in
Peter that defended him. Miserable and blind wretches! how far are we from
thinking of these things? We are every moment sustained by the hand of God,
and as it were daily created anew. Let God forbear but for one instant of time
to preserve us, and al those things we call our's vanish into nothing. Very well
says S. Bernard: For so much as there is no moment wherein we enjoy not the
mercy of God, let us omit no moment, but have him still in our memory. God is
able in an instant to condemn us to eternal fire, or to enrol us everlastingly
for heaven. We never depart from God. And I pray thee tell me: If one stood
environed on every side with devouring flames, and knew he should presently
perish, were he but touched with the least sparkle; how far would he be from
laughter? how modestly would he recollect himself? how would he be appal'd, and
tremble for fear? Questionles we stand in God, that most immense fire; we
move, we walk and whatsoever we do, we do it in him, being on al sides
encompassed with him. Nor can we be ignorant that even one Velle, that is to
say, one act of God's will, yea one beck is able in a moment to d^ssolue us into
ashes, or tumble us headlong into hell: notwithstanding with this most
intelligent fire we are fighting, on this we are spitting, this, with the
weapon of impiety we are stabbing, this, with new injuries we daily are
provoking, whilst (O what can be more absurd!) we (wretches) imagine our wicked
courses are not seen nor observed. Alas poor creatures! we are surprised on
every side by God, and as near death as hell. Why do we with closed eyes rush
blindly into destruction? In every place the eyes of our Lord bebold both the
good and bad. Ah how warily, how submissiuely ought a man to behave himself in
the sight of so great a Lord, from whom we cannot so much as for one moment
depart or step a side? Quocunque perrexeris, memento te deprehensum,
Whithersoeuer thou go, remember thou art taken.

. II.
The principal and most desperate provocation to al mischief is to believe
that a man is not marked or seen. Do but ask any thief, how he durst commit
so many thefts so boldly and without fear; he will answer you: I thought I was
not seen nor observed. Go likewise to an adulterer, and demand how he dares
enter into another man's house, and most dishonestly violate his wife; and
whether, if he have no fear of God, he dare also neglect the punishment the
Magistrate may inflict He will answer fearfully: I thought none should have
known it. I will send you to others. Go privately to a man given to detraction,
and finding him curse his Master with all the execrable words that he can; ask
against whom he disgorgeth al those virulent speeches; and he struck with
terror will answer you: I thought I had been alone, and that no body had heard
me. This is the ready way to hell; for a man to live, as if no eye saw him or
observed his actions. Heerupon are those sayings of the wicked: Psalm. 7^.11.
Ps. 93.7.
How does God know, and is there knowledge in the highest? And they have said:
The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob understand. Against these
the kingly Psalmist sharply inueighing, says: Understand ye foolish in the
people, and ye fools be sometimes wise. He that planted the ear, shall be not
hear? or he that made the eye, does he not consider? Our Lord knows the
cogitations of men, that they are vain. Behold he knows thy thoughts, even
those that are most secret, and shall he be ignorant of thy actions and
attempts? But this fellow that plays least in sight, only desiring to shun the
eyes of men, not regarding those of God, the Wise man displayes, speaking in
this manner: Eccl. 23.26.
Who sees me? Darkness encompasseth me, and the walls cover me, and no man
beholds me: who^ do I fear? The highest will not be mindful of my sins.
These impious speeches he thus answers: And he understands not that his eye
sees al things, for that such fear of man expels from him the fear of
God. EDESIMVS. Our faith teaches us that nothing is done which God knows
not; that al men, and al things are always in his sight; and therefore it is
most meet a man should in all his courses incite himself in this manner: Attend
tibi, look to thy self. PARTHENIVS. You say well. But behold (my EESIMVS) how
far a man is transported by corrupt affection, and lascivious appetite, how
he is seduced from that faith? A man that is impure and prone to carnal lust
(which is the property of al other vices) has only these two principles before
his eyes; the wantonness of his flesh, and the knowledge of his faith and
religion. Concupiscence will have these things practiced which it most desires:
but faith will not admit them; assuredly affirming that God sees al things.
Wherefore rather then he will forsake his vicious lust, he abandons his faith,
and to become an adulterer, ipso facto proves an heretic. The like happens
when he is delighted with lascivious thoughts, and yet is not ignorant that
Almighty God is thereof an eye-witnes. Behold here faith again and again
pricketh, gauleth, and admonishes him in this manner: God sees those things
which thou think; Almighty God sees through the most secret corners of thy
heart; repel those filthy thoughts and impure representations. How does the
wretch behave himself in this case? Rather then he will be compelled to reject
these obscene cogitatio^s, he relinquisheth his faith, and does as much, as if
he should say: God sees not these things which I think or reuolue in my mind.
So (poor soul) he goes forward, and forsaking or burying his faith, he
retains and cherishes those most sordid thoughts and imaginations, and
finding them in show pleasing and beautiful, dallies with them, and with
obscene delights works his own ruin and destruction. To this mischievous
disaster and down-fal he is animated by that foolish and impious saying: Nemo
me videt, No body sees me. What an infamous couple of wicked old men were
those that assailed Susanna's chastity. The only cloak to cover their villainy
and wicked purpose, was the very same: The doors of the orchard (say they)
Dan. 15.20.
are shut, and Nemo nos videt, no body sees us. By this means carnal
concupiscence is enkindled, and enflames the heart, whilst the devil chanteth
flatteringly in the ears of the sinner: Nemo te videt, No body sees thee.
Lend a willing ear, Nemo te videt. So; go forward resolutely, Nemo te videt,
No body sees thee. Even in this manner do we miserable wretches proceed. We
imagine we are encompassed with walls, not to live more securely, but to sin
with less shame and more secretly. But what auailes it thee to hide thy self,
and shun the eyes and ears of men? If what thou do be honest, let al men
know it: If dishonest, what avails it that men are ignorant, when thou thy
self art guilty and know it? Alas, silly mortals, in this respect we are no
wiser then unreasonable creatures. If the foolish mullets, and lampreyes (as
Pliny writes) Plin. l. 9. c. 10. and 23.
do but hide their heads, they think the rest of their body is invisible
though it lie above water. The partrige likewise is subject to the same
ridiculous folly. This bird, if she can but only hide her head, thinks she is
vne^pied, and out of sight. Little children do the like; they hide their head
behind the door, or under some bodies cloak, and though their feet appear;
yet they imagine while they see no body, that no body sees them. We behave
ourselves like children, yea are as foolish as brutish creatures: so we may but
conceal our wickedness from the eyes of men, we little regard the eyes of the
Al-seeing God, and think no body sees us, or beholdes us. Whereupon these kind
of speeches are ordinarily used: My Lord, my father, my master sees not this;
this will never come to light; al things are safe. Thou art deceived (poor man)
thou can never be in safety, who stand in no fear of the eyes of God,
that behold thy impieties. Thou have not thought on me in thy heart (says God
by the Prophet Esaias) Esaias. 57.7.
because I am silent, and as one not seeing, thou have for gotten me. Quocunque
perrexeris memento te deprehensum, Whithersoeuer thou go, remember thou art
taken. Thou art seen, thou art heard, wheresoever thou art, thou lie exposed
to the Al-seeing eyes of God.

. III.
But as this most foolish saying: Nemo me videt, No body sees me, made many
wicked men foole-hardy in their vicious life; so this alone: Deus videt omnia,
God sees al things, has advanced innumerable others to excellent sanctity of
life. Abel, Cam's brother (who was the first Martyr and Virgin) by being
always mindful of the presence of God, profited in all manner of virtue, as
clearly witnesses Josephus. Abel (says he) Lib. 1. Antiq. c. 3. initio.
loved justice, and in all his actions imagining God to be present, proceeded in
the course of virtue. Here I will intimate in a word that, ambulare cum Deo,
frequent in the old testament (that is, to walk with God) ought thus to be
interpreted: that God who is present every where, should continually be in our
memory; for we neither can, nor are accustomed, to walk with any but him that
is present. Heervpon the ancient Fathers were so highly extolled, for that, cum
Deo ambularunt, they walked with God. That most renowned Enoch not long after
the beginning of the world ambulauit cum Deo, walked with God, Genesis 5.2^.
and was seen no more, because God took him. Noe was a just and perfect man in
his generations, Genesis 6.9.
Cum Deo ambulauit, he walked with God. This same commandment was given to
Abraham when he was ninety and nine years of age: Ambula coram me, walk
before me, Genesis 17.2.
and be perfect. Myoses that God of Phara^, who was likewise of God's secret
counsel, a Captain of infinite numbers of people, and of Prophets the
greatest, did for no other cause more, deserve the liberality of God toward
him, then for his daily veneratio^ of the divine presence. S. Paul affirming
the same, says: Heb. 11.17.
By faith he left Aegipt, not fearing the fury of the King for him who is
invisible, he sustained as if he had seen him. I his was daily in his mind:
Deus videt omnia, God sees al things. Heervpon most patient of so great
troubles, he perseuered invincible. King Ezechias by this means (as I may say)
begged of God fifteen years of longer life; and in few words obtaining what he
asked, said: Is. 38.3.
I beseech thee Lord remember quomodo ambulauerim coram to etc. how I have
walked before thee in truth and in a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thine ey^s. All the Prophets in the old law, some Kings, all that ever
more studious of virtue, by this one saying profited very much in all manner of
piety: Deus videt omnia. In this King David was admirable. Questionles he was
much oppressed with the burden of affairs, and yet daily used this saying: Ps.
24.15.
Mine eyes are always to our Lord; as much as if he should have said: there
scarcely passes any time wherein I am not mindful of the presence of God. And
testifying much more plainly of himself says: Psalm. 15.8.
I fore saw our Lord in my fight always; God is daily in mine eyes. Thereupon
become resolute, with a great spirit he said: Although I shall walk in the
midst of the shadow of death, I will not fear evils, quoniam tu mecum es,
because thou art with me. Nor did he think it sufficient to fix his own eyes
continually upon the presence of God, but earnestly encouraged others to this
kind of practice saying: 1. Par. 16.10.
Seek our Lord and his power: Seek ye his face always. And further urging
the same says: Ps. 104. verse. 4.
Seek ye our Lord, and be confirmed, seek his face always. And when he found
himself negligent in observing this, with abundance of tears lamenting his
fault, says: Ps. 50.5.
To thee only, before thee ^ly, have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight. My
Lord I have not been mindful of thy presence, I have not been obseruant of
thine eyes, I have neglected thee whilst thou lookedst upon me. It is true, I
shunned the eyes of Vrias when I committed that heinous offense, but (o my
Creator) I was not able to avoid thine. Thou, o God, see al things, thou
were present, thou did behold and write it in thy book. Therefore I have
sinned, but (...) soli unto thee alone, and in thy presence only have I
committed this haynons offense. Ah, before thine eyes, thou looking on, I
boldly presumed to perpetrate this shameless and horrible crime. If I had
imagined thee to have been present, I had never been Adulterer, never inc^rred
the name of a pa^ricide. O you mortals, be wise by my example: Deus videt
omnia; God sees al things. Job was absolutely of the same mind. Does he not
(says he) Job. 31.4. Cap. 13. ^7.
consider my ways, and number al my st^p^ And, thou have observed al my
paths, and have considered the steps of my f^t. Deus videt omnia, God sees al
things: he numbreth both the (...) of the head, and the steps of the feet. The
most chaste Susanna beset with extreme difficulties; of the one side, a
reproachful act, on the other (should she not condescend) in fallible death,
cried out: Dan. 13.22.
Perplexities are to me on every side. If I do this i^ is death to me, if I
do it not I shall not escape your hands. And how at last did she deliver and
quit herself from these quicksands? She imagined herself to stand in the
presence of God, she beheld God as present, and beholding her in combat: and
thereupon conceived so much horror of that offense, that she burst forth into
this freedom of speech: But it is better for me without the Act t^ fall into
your hands, then to sin in conspectu Domini, in the sight of our Lord. You
say the orchard is shut, there is here no witness, nobody sees us: but, Deus
videt omnia, God sees al things. I had rather undergo death, then offend God
who beholds al things. O words worthy to be written in heaven, that
whosoever shall be tempted by lasciuiousnes may there fix his eyes and read
them, Mori malo quam peccare in conspectu Domini. Deus videt omnia, I had
rather dye, then sin in the sight of our Lord. God sees al things. Nicetas
when he was impugned was alone; and yet did not thin ^e himself alone; he saw
God present, he implored his aid who was present: he ^ath^ chose to die a
hundred times, then so much as once give consent to: commit that offense in the
(...) of God* On the one side a bloody batt^l on the other (...) glorious
victory. Deus vidi^ be (...) God saw al these things. There are some (my
EESIMVS) that adorn their (...) with pictures: but garnish thine with written
sentences, and (...) his one b^ hundred times written in large characters upon
al thy windows and walls: Deu^ vid^ omnia, God sees al things.

. IV.
This powerful voice: Deus videt omnia, has sometimes thundered even into the
ears of wicked persons, and withdrawn them from their headlong pursuit* of
sin. Tha^s of Alexandria, a woman notorious both for good and bad life; S.
Ant. part. 2. hist. tit. 15. c. 10. 5. 3.
to make her perdition the more grievous drew with her many into the gulf of
disordinate lust. Paphnutius taking compassion of her and those she allured to
vice, putting on the habit of a soldier, and faining himself one of her
customers went to visit her. And after some discourse desired they might retire
to some private chamber out of the eye and sight world. She fulfilled his
request. But (the said he) this place is not secret enough. She lead him ^o
another more private. Still he made the ^a^e excuse. As last she brought him
into the most secret part of all the house, wh^e this disguised soldier looking
here and there, and round about him: I pray thee said he) are we secure in this
place, and free from al spies? Why doubt you, Sir, (says she) none shall see or
hear us now but God or the devil. By this speech Paphnutius took occasion,
and as if he h^d conceived some horror thereby, replied: What ^ do thou
believe there is a God? She answered: Yea Sir, assuredly I do. He asked
further: And do thou believe he is present in all places, sees al things?
This also I believe, answered she. Paphnutius added: And has not he prepared
everlasting fir^ for the wicked? Doubtless he had, said she. Whereupon he
inferred. Do you believe these things, and yet shall we in the eyes of that
most just judge that beholds al things commit so foul a sin? Why do, o
thou impious and cash wench, prodigal of thine own eternal salutation, why
do make this thy only practice, to draw so many others with thee into
eternal perdition? Is this obscene pleasure of thy body so much worth? Fear
thou neither God nor the devil? him as judge; nor the other as accuser? Does
not God see al things? This woman deeply stricken with his speeches began
bitterly to sigh. And having no excuse, as one ashamed of her foul enormities
with tears streaming from her eyes fell down upon her knees, and promised
penance and amendment of life. She said and performed it. For not long after,
burning al her apparel and dressings which had been the instruments of her
lust, she entered into a religious house of Virgins, where she was closed up in
a straight and narrow cel, and lived only with bread and water, not presuming
so much as once to pronounce the name of God, but daily repeated these words
only: Thou who have created me, have mercy on me. Having lived in this manner
for the space of three years, delivered both from that, and the imprisonment
of her body, her soul departed into a better world And S. Paul, disciple of
that great S. Anthon^ saw in vision a bed prepared for her in heaven. Thus for
having so much grieved that she had lived desired in an unchaste bed on earth,
she enjoys now a celestial bed in heaven. This is strange; yet the like has
often happened. By virtue of these words Deus videt omnia; God sees al things,
B. Ephrem reduced a woman as shameless and unchaste to modest and virtuous
co^uersatio^. And certainly, unless we degenerate into brute beasts and stones,
it cannot be, but that by often and serious calling to mind that Deus videt
omnia, we must needs keep our selves within the bounds of our duty. S. Bernard
says: How can a man become negligent who perpetually beholdes God looking upon
him. Why may not a man as well overcome luxury as negligence, considering the
eyes of God, which are ever fixed upon him? Dorotheus, a good religious Monk,
admitted into his family a young man of whom there was no great hope, for that
he was so accustomed to liberty, vanity, and al kind of enormityes; who not
withstanding made all the means he could to be a professed Monk. Dorotheus
thought there was little hope that such a licentious young man, would embrace
and observe many rules and precepts: therefore he gave him only one, but such
as deserved to have been written in gold: Cogita semper Deum tibi presentem,
and te coram illo stare, Think that God is always present with thee, and that
thou stand before him. Dositheus was the name which this Nouice took in the
Monastery: who by observing only this precept profited so much in virtue, that
after five years were passed he became altogether a new man; so exact in
imitation of the virtuous, that at last he was appointed a guide to others and
a mirror of virtue. So much profit did he reap by daily meditating on Deus
videt omnia, God sees al things.

. V.
Phengites, a stone of admirable brightness, is said to represent even those
things which are behind ones back. Suetonius affirms that Domitian the
Emperor made use of the same. In D^. c. 14.
For when he suspected any danger at hand or conspirary against his person, he
was so vigilant, that he caused this stone to be hung upon the walls of the
galleries, where he was accustomed to walk, that he might by the splendor and
shadow thereof discry whatsoever was done behind his back. Maximilian the
first Emperor of that name is said to have had such a kind of stone: And
entering into a famous city of Germany, there came in congratulation the chief
Magistrate of the town, and presented him with a cup full of pieces of gold, as
a token of his due faith and allegiance. The Emperor was then in a chamber,
not far from the marketplace, where certain shows were prepared. When the
Magistrate of the city was departed thence, the lusts and Tourniaments began.
The most part of the Courtiers took their places where they could best
accommodate themselves. The Emperor attended with a small company followed,
leaving the golden goblet upon the table, and the doors open through which he
had passed. Now, while al were attentive to the sports, one of the household
servants entered secretly into the Emperor's chamber; I imagine to take account
(but for his own purse) of those pieces of gold: therefore he laid hold of the
cup, and imagining no body saw him, with no sparing hand took out a great part
of the gold. In the mean while the Emperor privately put his Phengites before
his eyes, and beheld therein what was done behind his back, and withal the
thief then in action. The Emperor returning to the chamber, where every one
earnestly expected the distribution of the present, commanded his servants to
take out their equal shares. Amongst the rest the man, who had been there
before he was invited, was called and commanded to take out as much as he could
well hold in his hand. At the first he seemed backward, but in the end without
shame took out his share. Which done, the Emperor bad him number the pieces,
and withal commanded him to draw forth those he had taken away whilst he was
absent. Let us see (said he) whether now or before thou have dealt most for
thine own advantage. The poor man was even stricken dead, and began to
stammer, tremble, scarcely able to speak a ready word, and besought his
Highness to pardon his offense. At last with shame enough he drew forth the
pieces of gold and numbered them, which were far more then the other he had
taken. Well, said the Emperor, take it al, it is thine; but see thou come no
more in my sight If thou be wise, play not with great ones (much less with
God) for they are sharp sighted, and have eyes behind the^. Know thou not
that Kings have long hands, sharp piercing eyes, and many vigila^t ears?
Know thou not that God is al eye, al hand, al foot? So ^aith S. Augustine:
Epist. ^.
God is al eye, because he sees al things; he is al hand because he works al
things, he is al foot, because he is euerywhere. This questionles would keep
the tongues and hands of servants in awe, that they durst not gather a flower,
pull an apple, or filch so much as a crust of bread, except they could be
certainly assured of his absence. My Master is always at my back, I am taken
in those places where I least fear or mistrust him. And who in any place; was
ever able to avoid the eyes of God that clearly sees al things? Deus videt
omnia. Therefore whithersoeuer thou go, Mement o'te deprehensum, Remember
thou art taken.

Pausanias in his Corinthiakes writes of the image of Jupiter with three eyes
honored in regard of his triple Empire over the highest, midst, and lowest
things. But, to pass over these fictions, has not our God three eyes,
wherewith he sees through al, even the least things, in heaven earth and seas,
and the lowest hell? No place, to use S. Augustin's speech, be it never so
hidden, no enclosures of walls exclude the eyes of God, who sees al things at
once: neither are men's acts and proiects only known to him, but even those
which are to be thought or perpetrated hereafter: Deus videt omnia, God sees
al, both past present and future things.

. VI.
All this deeply imprinted in a man's mind, will both strengthen him in his
labors, and maruelously erect him in his griefs and afflictions. For the most
part the nobler the spectatours are, the more earnestly we apply ourselves to
labor for honor and reward. In the siege of Jerusalem no incitements were so
powerful to animate the Romans against their enemy, as the eye of Titus the
Emperor then present in person. Josephus witnesses as much in these words:
De bello Iud. lib. 6. c. 8.
The custom of ouercoming (having seldom been subdued) encouraged the
Romans. But most of al they were enflamed by Titus, who still in every place
presented himself. For slouthfulnes seemed a most heinous offense, whilst
Caesar looked on, and assisted as an eye-witnes to reward him with rich
donatiues, who fought courageously: Yea even to be known to the Prince for a
valiant man was a sufficient motive to valor Therefore many of them th^s
encouraged exceeded their own strength. The eye of the Master makes a fat
horse: and the eye of Titus makes his soldiers magnanimous: they stand
invincible like men of marble or iron. Were the eyes of Titus the Emperor able
to do this? Then much more powerful should the eyes of God be, who is present
in all places: The holy Scripture speaking of Judas Machabe^s and his army
s^ies: ^. Match. c. 15. verse. 27.
They were with the hand fighting, but in their hearts praying to our Lord: They
overthrew no less then five and thirty thousand, being greatly encouraged and
delighted with the presence of God. They overcame, because in prayer they had
God always before their eyes, while they were mindful of his presence, hunger
and thirst, wearines and dust, wounds, stroks, dangers of death, and al seemed
easy and light. But if these soldiers amidst drums and trumpets and the
clas^hing of armor, clamours and hydeous groans of wounded, slain, or dying
men, did so lively apprehend God as present with them, that they were
wonderfully delighted therewith; we likewise may (if we will) even in the
midst of our most troublesome businesses, remember God is always present.
Now if there be any one who too nice and tender handed, feeble, faint and
irresolute, labors as if he were half asleep, and by peecemeale, his
companion has just cause to stir him up in this manner: What do thou
sluggard? Where are thy hands, where^s thy work. Do thou labor so slackly,
and slouthfully, so remissely, and negligently, because thou think thy self
to be alone and unseen? The Moon sees thee, the stars are witnesses, the
Angels behold thee; God himself looks upon thee. Stand thou not in fear of
the eyes of God? Art thou not ashamed having God thy spectatour, to fall into
such a dead lethargy, that like a brute beast thou make no have but only to
sleep and and take thy ease? Look about thee sluggard, and though thou neglect
the eyes of men, at least reverence those of God. Deus videt omnia, God sees
al, as well those that labor carefully and industriously, as thy self who
labourest so faintly and negligently. God beholds both the laborers and lo^t
(...), he takes notice as well of the deceauer, Job. 12.16.
a^ the deceived. Deus videt omnia. Seneca not only Christian-like, but almost
(if I may so say) divinely, properly, and truly wrote of this point to
Lucilius: Ep. 41. initio.
God is very near unto thee, with thee, and is within thee. So I say ( my
Lucilius) a holy spirit resides within us, which both preserues and observes
us, whether we commit evil or do good; and deals with us, as we demean our
selves with it. There is nothing concealed from God, Ep. 95.
he is present with us, and conueies himself into the midst of al our
thoughts. God is present in all places, and with all persons. I am astonished to
see so much light shine on this man in darkness. Again, (says he) Ep 25. med.
fere.
Do al things a^ if some body beheld thee. It is a thing profitable without
doubt to set a watch over thy self, and to bear respect to some one or other
who thou may imagine beholdes thy cogitations. Sin for the most part, is
prevented by an eyewitness. Let us stand in fear of some body, that
regarding his authority we may abstain, and in secret be more piously
employed. O happy is that man who rectifieth not only his actions, Ep. 10. fine.
but also his thoughts. Happy is that man, who can so stand in fear of some
one or other, that calling him to mind, he may compose and order his life.
Wherefore line with men as if God saw thee, speak with God as if men heard
thee. Al excellently well said. And did a man that was no Christian write these
things? Good IESV! what answer will Christians make at the day of judgment? We
are already convinced by thousands of witnesses. We know that God sees al
things, yet live as if he saw or knew nothing.

. VII.
The more we observe the eyes of men, the less we regard those of God. And
this (according to the opinion of S. Chrysostom) is the cause of our
destruction. We carefully endeavor to behave our selves commendably in the
eyes of men, but contrariwise are negligent of the sight of God; as if there
were no God to behold us. That Golden-mouth had reason to complain, that while
we sin we contemn God, and stand in fear of men. In 1. Epist ad Corint.
None in the presence of man would commit fornication; for even shame would
suppress the violence of his affections: yet while God beholdes us we dare
adventure upon this and more grievous offenses. Is not this alone a sufficient
cause why God should strike us from heaven with innumerable thunderbolts? From
hence proceed al our mischiefs; because in perpetrating dishonest things, we
fear not the eyes of God, but of men. There is nothing hidden, which shall not
be revealed, nor any thing concealed, which shall not be known. Matthew. 10.26.
S. Ambrose is so eloquent and serious heerin, that if one retained any remorse
of conscience, it were impossible not to be moved. Give me any one (says he)
inflamed with the most intemperate heat of concupiscence, who neglecting
justice, will not curb his fleshly appetites, yet will he be wary to preserve his
good name; and though he blush not at the sin it self, yet will he blush to
have an eye-witnes of his cri^. If by chance he takes notice of any that
beholdes him offending, through shame he leaves of his intemperance, and
blushing there at desistes from that wicked enterprise. Ah! how much rather
would he do this, if he did but consider that al places are full of Angels; the
air, earth, seas and churches, of which the Angels are protectour^. Do thou
fear the sight of men, and art not afraid of the presence of God? O shame!
When thou art told that God knows the hidden secrets of men, thou will not
give care thereunto, lest thou should begin to know what thou ought to
fear, and thereby be afraid to transgress. Tell me, do not think Christ
beholdes thee in the stews, who saw thee entering in? Will he not take thee
offending, whom he saw resolved to offend? But grant (what may not be admitted)
that God should not behold thy wickedness; Belial is spectatour, a legion of
devils who thrust thee upon it are witnesses. Think not they will dally with
thee in keeping thy counsel, who must share with thee in the punishment. They
desire to see many like themselves; their glory is to bring many to perdition.
Therefore, Quocunque perrexeris, memento te deprehensum. Deus videt omnia,
Whithersoeuer thou go, remember thou art surpised. God sees al things.

Thou may easily dazzle the sight of men, and (as Plautus says) Glaucoma
obijcere, cast a mist before their eyes; but none could ever by any art deceive
the eyes of God: which the Ancient^ did express by that pretty fable.

Upon a time a certain Heart putsued by hunters fled through fear to a stable
for covert, where he entreated a mule to afford him a little room to hide
himself til the hunters were past. The mule replied: Thou will find little
security in this place; for e're long my Master and his servants will be here.
The Heart constant in his resolution, answered: I Will adventure, and shroud my
self as well as I can; I hope thou will not betray me. Scarcely had he hidden
himself, when the servant rushed in, but saw not where the Heart lay covered, as
deep as he could in the hay. The Heart wonderfully rejoicing to see he had
deceived the servant, and wel-nigh escaped al danger, began to be out of fear.
In deluding this blind buzzard (said the mule) there was not so much art as
fortune. Woe be to thee when my Master comes: he has Lincies eyes; if thou
can deceive him then thou may triumph. E're long the Master came and
looking round about with a piercing eye discovered the Hart's horns above the
hay, and the poor fugitive himself. Whereupon clapping his hand's he instantly
called for his servants: and so this poor beast fell into a snare where he
hoped to have found a sanctuary.

The moral of the fable is this. The servants signify mortal men; the Master
God himself. It is an easy matter to deceive the eyes of these servants; a
thousand visards may delude them: but the Master, who is nothing else but eye,
no man could ever deceive. God searches the heart and reins. Psalm. 7.10.
Speak of what man soever thou will, God is witness of his reins, a true
searcher of his heart, and a hearer of his tongue. Man sees that which is
apparent, but our Lord looks into the heart. Sap. 1.6.
Therefore Quotunque perrexeris, memento te deprehensum. Deus videt omnia,
Whithersoeuer thou go remember thou art surpised. God sees al things.

. VIII.
There is a figure in Rhetoric called Conuersio, which with one answer
decideth many questions. S. Basil making use thereof, with few words resolved
many questions. His scholars asked him, who above al others was soonest and
oftnest angry? Who ought to be reputed most slouthful in the service of God?
Who the most distracted in his prayers? Who lightest in behavior. And finally,
who was to be called the most turbulent of al others? S. Basil answered in a
word: In quaest. fuse e^plic^tis. q. 20.
He who thinks not that God beholdes al his actions and thoughts. But they
demanded further, how a man might always subdue his passions of anger, and
restrain his thoughts from wandering? Who could a midst disasters and
perplexites of mind be as cheerful and pleasant, as if he were playing or
dancing? And lastly who was so wary in his life and conversation, as to have al
his words and deeds composed and ordered with a due decorum? S. Basil replied,
as before: Al these things are easily compassed by him who always thinks
himself in the presence of God. Ecclesiasti^us says: Eccles. 27.3.
If thou hold not thy self every moment in the fear of our Lord thy house shall
quickly he overthrown. He fears not God who imagines him to be absent.
Therefore S. Augustine says: Sermon. 46. de verb. Dom.
God who is in secret is to be feared in public. Do go abroad? he beholdes
thee: Do return home? he sees thee. Are lights put out? he discouers thee.
Are the candles lighted? he descr^es thee. Do retire into thy chamber? thou
art in his fight. Are thy thoughts busied? he beholdes them. Therefore fear
him who has a watchful eye over thee, and at least by fearing live chaste. For
our Lord has known al knowledge (as the Wise man says) Eccli. 42.18.
be has searched into the depth and hearts of men, and in their subtility he
has considered. At last al deceit is published by the testimony of the sun.
Deus videt omnia, God sees al things.

Ferdinand the Emperor was much delighted with little clocks and watches. He
had a great number of them artificially wrought of diverse fashions. Upon a time
it pleased him for his recreation to cover a whole table with this kind of
tatling commodities, and place them in order, as if he would have set them to
sale, affording thereby a grateful spectacle to his courtlike retinue. And when
he had sufficiently pleased his sight, he stepped aside, and fell into some
discourse. In the mean while, one amongst the rest, as ready to purloyne, as
willing to behold, whether moved by the occasion offered, or out of a filching
humor, I know not, snatched up one, and theeuishly conveyed it into his
pocket. The Emperor reflecting his eye perceau'd it; called the man and held
him in discourse, til the hour came, wherein this golden pratler, to tell what
a-clocke it was, spoke in his pocket. The poor man blushing sore against his
will, without uttering any word confessed the fact. The Emperor satisfied with
this blush, vouchsafed to conniue, and freely forgave him the thief. And we (my
EESIMVS) are not unlike this thief. How often do we set a fair gloss on
falsehood, delight in lascivious discourses, and secret stolen lusts of the
mind. Miserable wretches! We persuade our selves we lie hidden; but in fine
this short hour of our life being past, the clock, I mean our conscience,
will speak. The eye of Almighty God not glancing, but every moment steadfastly
beholding al our actions, will convince us. For, in every place the eyes of our
Lord contemplate both the good and evil. Pro. 13.3.
God sees al things. For a time he seems not to see, suffers this man to
steal, another to commit Adultery. What this or that man, what we and al men
think, he viewes, and holds his peace. A time will come when this judge will
object to every particular man, in this manner: Thou have done these and these
things, this and that thou have perpetrated, yet I have been silent. Ps. 49.21.
Now thine own conscience accuses thee, nor may thou, (thy self being
judge) obtain pardon. Alas, poor wretched man, what then will thou answer,
what patron will thou seek too, when the just man shall hardly be secure? Hell
and perdition are before our Lord, how much more the hearts of the children of
men? Pro. 15.11.
If thou deny thy sin before men* (says S. Ambrose) thou shall confess it
before God, and though thou would deny it, thine own conscience and
thoughts will convince thee. Lactantius, very well admonishing us hereof, says:
Lib. 6. de vero cult. c. 24.
What do thou, what go thou about, to what and do thou conceal any
thing? He that observes al follows thee. Do thou think (mad man) tho^
shall be able to escape the eyes of al men? What does it avail thee to have no
man privy to it, if thou thy self have a conscience. Paternus Deo vndique, we
lie open unto God on every side. Therefore Quocunque perrexeris memento te
deprehensum. Deus videt omnia, Whithersoeuer thou go, remember thou art
taken. God sees al things.

. IX.
EDESIMVS. May I ask you a question? PARTHENIVS. I would have commanded you,
if you had not done it of your self. In the interim I Will take the opportunity,
and breath awhile. EDESIMVS. From whence I pray you proceed daily so many
foul, and heinous offenses amongst Christians? Do they not believe al those
things, whereof you have discoursed concerning God's Vbiquitary presence?
PARTHENIVS. It Is true, they believe, but with so slender faith, as if they
believed not at al. I knew a certain Postilion, a bold and desperate fellow,
who being accustomed to ride post, and make his iourneyes as well by night as
day, would sometimes force his horse through stony rough ways and precipices:
and being admonished of the danger, that he might at least have a care of his
life, if not of his horse, he laughing at them said: I shut mine eyes
wheresoever I travail; al ways are plain and even to me. They are like this
man, who believe that God is present in every place, but do nothing at al
worthy of this presence. They shut their eyes, and rush into every way that
comes next them. Such wretches were those sensual old men, that lay in wait
for another man's wife, soliciting the chastity of Susanna. They were inflamed
with the concupiscence of her, and subverted their sense, and diclmed their
eyes that they might not see heaven, nor remember just indgements. Dan. 13.9.
David commending this very gravely to Solomon his son said: 1. Par. ^.
And thou Solomon, my son, know the God of thy father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and a voluntary mind, for our Lord searches al hearts, and
understands al cogitations of minds. If thou seek him thou shall find, but
if thou reject him he will forsake the for ever. An admonition very worthy of
the ears of Kings. But Solomon becoming unmindful of his fathers discipline,
losting after women that were strangers, fell so far into dotage and impiety,
that he forgot the God of his father; and so loved the frail beauty of
another, that he grew out of love with his own soul. And from whence
proceeds this corruption of life, but by persuading our selves foolishly and
wickedly, that God beholdes not our sins; or, if he does, will easily pardon
them? O darkness of man's soul! This eye which sees al things, and is seen of
no body, will in time bring to light whatsoever lies secret and hidden. This eye
will discover how many dead bodies Toby buried by night: this eye will manifest
how many throats privately, how many publicly were cut by cruel Herod: this
eye will declare to the world what that Bishop Nicolas was, who by night with a
bag of money charitably rescued a poor maids chastity from imminent danger:
this eye will make known to al, it was Joseph that solicited his Mistress to
wickedness; but that she importuned him: this eye will declare, how Elizabeth
daughter: of the King of Hungary in a private corner of her garden washed the
scall'd head of a poor beggar: this eye in time will bring to light all the most
secret actions of mankind. Things pass oftentimes in this world with extreme
partiality, and sometimes very wickedly. Some devour the figs, and accuse
others; the guilty are pardoned, and the innocent condemned. The crows offend
without punishment, and the poor pigeons pay for it. These things will not be
concealed. There is nothing so secret which shall not be manifested, nor so
hidden, which shall not be known and come to light. Luc. 8.17.
Therefore Christ says: Matthew. 6.18.
And thy Father who sees in secret shall restore unto thee. Therefore Quocunque
perrexeris memento te deprehensum. Deus videt omnia, Whithersoeuer thou shall
go remember thou art surpised. God sees al things. There is no thought that
ouerslippeth him: no word that soundes not in his ears. Eccl. 42.20.
But to the intent we may never be forgetful heerof, we ought for helping of
our memory to set before our eyes some obiectes which may daily admonish is: a
picture in our chamber; some notable sentence written in our study; or some
part of our garment, for that purpose exposed to our sight: a ring upon our
finger, or that daily saying of the Priest in the holy Mass: Dominus vob^seu^,
Our Lord is with you Whatsoever it be, we are daily to be admonished thereby
that God present in every place beholds al things. Add the closing sentence
of that learned man and holy Martyr Seuerinus Boethius, who with these words
sealed up that his golden little book of Philosophical Consolation: Lib. 5.
consol. Philos. fine libri.
There is a great necessity impased upon you of honesty and virtue, if you will
not dissemble, for so much as you live before the eyes of a ludge who sees al
things. Either we are stones, or we shall be moved with these words: Deus videt
omnia, God sees al things.

THE NINTH ANTIDOTE against Incontinency, with the nine punishments of
eternity. CHAP. XI.
Here I had rather weep then speak, since whatsoever we say will be too little.
We shall never express with words, nor fully conceive in thought that
unspeakable Eternity of the damned. I know, many, have discoursed at large
concerning the torments of the damned; but in vain is writing, in vain is al
speech, while the mind is not attentive by a serious and profound
consideration. We read and hear of those torments; we set them painted before
our eyes, and belleeue they shall come to pass; but al quickly vanished away,
unless we often ponder them in our imagination, and fix them seriously in our
mind. Out alas, (my EDESIMVS) many are those unspeakable pains: which I shall
here both for thine and mine own meditation compendiously respresent unto thee.

THE FIRT punishment of hell to be feared; to wit vnspakeable Darkness.
This is the chief, the greatest and most unspeakable torment of al others.
But understand what darkness I mean: which depriues thee of a glorious vision.
O how great and true delight will it ^e* to behold Almighty God for all eternity:
We take some pleasure in seeing a proper and comely man: but admit Almighty God
should create a man infinitely more amiable then the most beautiful in the
world, what excessive love would it cause in those that beheld him? Now compare
this silly man with an Angel: An Angel? yea even all the Angels of heaven; with
God and his infinite beauty. Do thou not perceive the disparity? All the
beauty of flowers, of men and Angels, and of al beautiful things, compared with
that of God, is a gloomy mist, mere night and utter darkness. Wherefore to be
excluded from beholding this immense beauty, and that eternally, is an
horrible, inexplicable and incomprehensible torment. And this the Divines call
poenam damni the pain of loss. In the opinion of S. Chrysostom, a thousand
hels are less, then to be cast off from the sight of God. I rehearse his
words: I know (says he) In cap. 7. Mat. hom. 42.
there are many that only fear the torments of hell, but I say the loss of
that glory is much more grievous then the punishment inflicted in hell. And
after a few words says: Hell likewise is intolerable. Who knows it not? who
considers that horrible torment and is not shaken with fear? Notwithstanding
if a man should endure a thousand hels it were nothing in comparison of the
loss of that glorious sight, and to remain for ever hateful to Christ,
pronouncing those dreadful words, against him: Non noni vos, I know you not, A
thousand thunderbolts were more sufferable then to behold that countenance full
of mildnes and pity auerted from us, and those most pleasing eyes not
tollerating our sight. What therefore may be more terrible then to hear that
horrible thunder, the voice of God thus rejecting us: Depart from me you
accursed: without are dogs, and the unchaste. Ah how far are we from
conceauing this punishment of irrecouerable loss besides the inward darkness
(for so we may call it) which ouerwhelmeth the understanding, will, and memory
with error and blindness. Whatsoever the memory representes to it self, shall
afflict it; whatsoever the understanding thinks upon, shall be hydeous and
execrable, and of infinite torment. The will shall be astonished, at it is own
obstinacy; for it shall never be able to desire that which God wills, and so
shall always have within it the punishment of it is own malignity. Truly (says
S. Augustine) those that are cast into outward darkness shall never be
illuminated with any intrinsecal light. O darkness most to be feared! To this
inward is added an outward darkness, of which our Savior speaks in these
express terms: Cast out the unprofitable servant into utter darkness; Mat.
25.30.
which shall far exceed the darkness of Egypt. If the damned have any light at
al, it shall be for their greater punishment, that they may see what may more
augment their torments. Their parents, children, friends, kinsfolk, and
brothers shall be no solace unto them but pain and affliction. O land dark
indeed, and covered with the shadow of death! O land of misery and desolation!
Where there is the shadow of death, and no order, but where everlasting horror
inhabiteth. Job. 10.21.22.
Let therefore libidinous eyes learn now of their own accord to condemn
themselves to voluntary darkness, and utterly to exclude al venereous wantonness.
Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God.

THE SECOND: Weeping, and gnashing of teeth; Howling and ^oring most horrible
and lamentable.
After the torment of the eyes, follows that of the ears. Here represent
unto thy self all that may torment them: the clamours of men, bellowing of
beasts, thundering of clouds, down-fal of waters, and whatsoever may seem harsh
and horrid to the ears; all this shall the howling of the damned infinitely
exceed. Christ openly forewarning us says; Luc. 13.28.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called, but few are
chosen. This weeping, howling and roaring of the damned, as it were of brute
beasts, will proceed from their mighty and grievous pains, which shall
constrain the most stony hearts to break forth into desperate lamentations.

With these Odes and warbling tune^ shall the ears of these miserable creatures
be daily vexed. The burden of this music shall be stridor dentium gnashing of
teeth through exceeding great cold. Job. 24.19.
These shall be the changes in hell, but without al change or mitigation of
torments. They pass from extreme cold waters to excessive heats. O most cruel
fever of the damned, which never remitteth. Here everlasting horror inhabites,
terror, trembling, weeping and grief surcharge these captives on every side.
And for so much as this is not only to be suffered for certain hundreds of
years, nor for twenty, fifty, or for a hundred thousand Ages, Job calls it
sempiternum horrorem, everlasting horror. Sometimes even one night seems a
whole year, which a man passes without sleep in solitary darkness, vexed with
some sharp pain, although he lie upon a soft feather-bed. O how anxiously
lying awake he countes the hours, how earnestly he expects an end of that
heavy night? Yet what is this imaginary year, what this night without any
sleep, and full of pains; what are a hundred, what a thousand nights, compared
with that eternity in hell, where mourning, weeping and torments are
everlasting? Ah, how horrible a thing is it to fall into the hands of the living
God! O let us now throw ourselves into the hands and arms of Christ our Lord
hanging dead upon the Cross. Ah grieve, grieve for whatsoever delights your
ears have hitherto admitted; from hence forward suffer them to be hedged about
with thorns. It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

THE THIRD: Hunger and thirst incredible.
Where our offense is, there shall be our punishment. How many mischiefs do we
heap upon ourselves by gluttony? alas, we shall pay for it with hunger and
thirst. The glutton clothed in purple, thrusting forth his tongue, cried out:
Luc. 16.24.
I am tormented in this flame; and desired it might at least be cooled with a
little drop of water hanging on the very tip of ones finger. He demanded not a
vessel full, but only a little drop, yet could not obtain it. Behold that rich
glutton suffered such extreme want that he begged not a challice full, but as
much as might hang on the tip of a man's finger: not any delicate wine, but a
drop of water; and this not of any honorable cup bearer but of Lazarus the
beggar. Notwithstanding all this was denied him. They are utterly so destitute
of al hope of solace in that place, that which way soever they turn their
hands or eyes, they are without any ease, and never released from pain. As he
that is fallen into the sea, inuolued in the swelling waves on every side,
finding no place to fasten his foot, in vain casts abroad his arms, in
vain catches at the fleeting waters: So those unfortunate wretches plunged in
this maine sea of torments find no where any refuge, or release from their
pains. There is nothing in that place can assuage their hunger or thirst. O
miserable wretches! all the good you can expect you have received before in your
life time. There is nothing else now due unto you, but torments, and those
eternal. In times past you feasted; now your fasting days are come, now others
are feasting who heertofore fasted. For this respect our Lord uses these
words: Isa. 65.13.
Behold my servants shall eat, and you shall be hungry. Behold my servants shall
drink, and you shall be thirsty. Behold my servants shall rejoice, and you shall
be confounded. Behold my servants shall yeald-forth praise through the
exultation of their heart, and you shall cry out through the grief of your
souls, and shall howl through contrition of spirit. A hundred times was it
preached to you (deaf wretches) in times past, that with punishments you
should pay for your delights. No man gave ear to it. I called, and you
returned no answer. I spoke and you heard me not, and you wrought evil in my
sight, and those things, which I would not, you made choice of. Now must your
merry cheer and short madness be disgested with a long and eternal hunger,
your fleeting pleasures and full cups be punished with perpetual thirst. It is
now too late to seek redress of your hunger and thirst. After such a dinner
follows such a supper. Gluttony well deserves to be entertained with hunger,
drunkenness to be punished with thirst. This reward is due to gluttony. O my
God! he indeed auoideth hell who often ponders seriously thereof.

THE FOVRTH: Intolerable stench.
By sin all the exterior senses are infected* and punished by revenge. In
times past our Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorta fire and brimstome. Genesis
19.24.
With this kind of rain was that heat of lust to be extinguished. There is
nothing hotter then fire, nothing more unsavory then brimstome. They therefore
who were tainted with lascivious concupiscence of their flesh, perished by fire
and brimstone, that by their just punishment, they might learn what their
filthy lust had deserved. He shall rain snaeres upon sinnners: fire and
brimstome and blasts of storms the portion of their cup. Ps. 10.7.
A libidinous and impure man is subject to a double punishment. Whilst he
lives he intangleth himself more and more in the snares of luxury; and
deceasing, passes into the lake of brimstome. Oh how great is the stench even
of one carcass! how intolerable then will it be amongst so innumerable carcases
of the damned? There is now no smell on earth though never so odious, that is
not as sweet as saffron, compared with this most loathsome stench of hell. That
Angel in the Apocalypse often threatens the lake of brimstone: Apoc. 21.8.
Their portion shall be in the lake burning with fire and brimstone. Go now you
Christians, and deem it your greatest felicity to abound in pleasures and
delights; to morrow perhaps you may be plunged in this sulphurous gulf. Oh!
what will your voluptuousnes avail you, when you, shall be buried in the flames
of hell, and the smell of brimstone shall drive away al your rare and exquisite
odours Let us then be wise in time, least the sequel of a sweet and short
moment come to be a bitter and everlasting eternity.

THE FIFTH: Fire not to be extinguished with any length of time.
These things are more then apparent, which the Prophets and the Master of the
Prophets, Christ himself, has foretold of this fire. Matthew. 25.41.
Depar: from me you accursed into eternal fire. He will burn the chafe with
unquenchable fire. It is better for thee to enter lame into life everlasting,
then having two feet to be cast into the hell of unquenchable fire. Every tree
that does not bring forth good fruit shall be cut up and cast into the fire:
Matthew. 3.12. Matthew. 13.42. Marc. 9.45.
into the fire never to be quenched, which will exceedingly torment al their
whole sense of touching. The tree is not only bad which bears worme-eaten
apples, but that also which bears none. We are often to be blamed, not for
committing any great evil, but for not doing good; seeing for the most part
that tree is sooner cut down for fuel which bears no fruit at al, then that
which bears hard and stony pears: as that servant is not only beaten who
has done amiss, but he likewise who through idleness has been unprofitable.
Not only sharp thorns, but also green darnel and cockle are gathered, bound
into bundels, and cast into the fire. So shall it be in the end of the world.
The Angels shall go forth, and separate the wicked from the midst of the just,
and cast them into the furnace of fire: of fire, alas! and (which is most
dreadful) of eternal fire. The ingenious cruelty of man in the invention of
punishments, finds out most exquisit torments; yet none more violent, none
more intolerable then those of fire. Notwithstanding as no torments are more
grievous, so none are more transitory then those of fire which consumes al
things. What a kind of fire then shall that be which both sharply torments, and
yet shall never cease to torment. Verily if these things were but believed, and
thought upon attentively, none guilty in his own conscience of mortal sin
could abstain from sighs and tears; none would procrastinate and defer
their repentance. O my EDESIMVS, we do nothing, if we endeavor not as much as
in us lies, to behold and touch with our eyes and hands those immortal flames.
O, thou, whosoever thou art scortch'd and inflamed with lust, put I beseech
thee but the end of thy finger into the flame of a little wax candle and take
it not out before thou have said one Pater noster. Why delayest thou the trial
of this? Pullest thou out thy finger so soon as thou put it in? Having
scarcely pronounced two words, straight thou say this is an intolerable
torment. Try, put thy finger once again into the fire. Thou say it is
impossible to be done, the pain is so extreme. Ah, my God! ah, ah, we deem
it terrible, extreme, intolerable pain to put even the end of our finger into
a little fire, during the least moment of an hour, divided into an hundred or
a thousand parts. What then will that pain be, when our whole body shall burn,
not in these painted fires, but in those horrible flames of hell: not for an
instant or an hour only; not for a day, a month or a year; not for an Age
only, or for ten thousand, or a hundred thousant years; not for a hundred
thousand millions: but for innumerable, infinite years, for all Ages, for all
eternity! O my God! O EDESIMVS, whosoever he is that does but once a week
seriously think upon this, it will either make him live as a man endowed with
reason, or he is already hardened and transformed into a stone, degenerated and
turned into a brute and savage beast. He is a very flint, who thinking of this
terrible and unspeakable torment of hell is not melted and mollified. But it is
a common madness which depriues us of understanding, and al wholesome
considerations. Oftentimes we are no more moved with these things, then if we
heard or saw so many painted fables. This I say is a common madness amongst men,
who going in quest after a happy life, fly from it, and are not afraid of
eternal death, which they seem willing to fly from, but shun the labor by
which they might avoid it. O fires! O flames of hell! O you hellish scorchings,
that for no Age shall ever be extinguished! One only pain or disease in any
part of the body, be it in the stomach, head, feet, breast, teeth, or eyes; how
tedious it makes the nights, how grievous the days? But admit a sick man
should be tormented with sundry griefs in all the parts of his body, and had
for every one of them a particular torture; yea were a man so miserable and full
of dolours in all his limbs that he might even mollify a flint, and make it
sensible to commiserate him; notwithstanding he himself as yet should not be
sensible of the unspeakable tormenting flames of hell, since our's compared
with them may seem but a painted fire, and our pains in comparion of theirs,
a slight scratch or flea-biting. The least torment of the damned is more
grievous then the greatest in this world. Great are the torments of diseases,
yet tolerable by intermission of some good hours: but there, (alas!) is none.
In this world greatest pains are either quickly over, or when they are
extreme, we are not sensible of them. No pains can be excessive, and continue
long but those in hell. For nature has so disposed of things in this world that
pain is either tolerable or transitory. Senec. ep. 78.
But in hell most intolerable, continual, and everlasting: For their fire shall
never be extinguished. Is. 66. and vl^. 24.


THE SIXTH: Miserable torment of conscience.
Their worm shall not die, says the Prophet Isaias. Is. 66.14.
With the very same words Christ confirms it, saying: Marc. 9.44.
Where their worm shall not dye, and their fire shall not be quenched; and after
a few words (to make the most stupid capable thereof) he repeates it the third
time: Marc. 9.44.
Where their worm dies not, and their fire is not extinguished. The quilty
conscience of the damned, like a mad furious dog which is daily barking and
biting, forces these miserable wretches to most desperate frenzy. Whereupon
they shall accuse themselves of wicked folly; every ones conscience shall
continually vpbraid him in this manner: See (desperate wretch) between jest and
earnest thou liast lost a kingdom. Thou might, if it had pleased thee, have
been eternally happy. Thou might with a short and easy labor have purchased
immortal beatitude. But thou would not. Behold thou most senseles fool, for
a little carnal pleasure, and that most obscene and momentary, thou have sold
an infinite delight. They flesh (forsooth was dearer to thee then heaven. Thou
see now what pleasures thou have followed. I foretold thee, I forewarned
thee, I rebuked thee: nothing could prevail. Now thou art separated both from
thy hopes and things hoped for, and no body is in fault but thy self. See
brutish beast, for embracing thy voluptuous and forbid pleasures which were so
small and momentary, thou have lost al happiness. Far out of thy reach are now
those honour^, treasures, and delectations of the Blessed, from which thou art
utterly excluded. Now thou art for ever banished from those joys of heaven
because thou would have it so. These are the torments thy lusts have
purchased, thine, incon^nency has cast thee headlong into these fires. Now
thou paiest dearly, with everlasting mourning, for thy mirth and momentary
delights. Desperate wretch do weep because thou art deprived of the joys of
Paradise? Thou, thou depriued'st thy self. Do bitterly, deplore the
disesteem thou had of the everlasting banquet in heaven? 'I was thy own
madness, who so vnderualued'st it. Do lament that heaven gates are shut
against thee? Thou and none but thou did shut them* Now (if heertofore thou
would thou had been blessed for ever, and with a little labor might
have gained heaven. But by deferring and neglecting it thou (O blindness!)
did cast thy self headlong into this dungeon, out of which thou shall never
be delivered. Despair (damned ghost) a hundred and a thousand times despair:
thou shall despair and die eternally; and yet shall never be so happy as to
approach to death. Thou (wretch) thou art the only cause or the torments which
thou suffre^. Thou art damned, because thou would be damned: thou art cast
from the face of God, because thou did turn away thy face from him. Thou
have not perished by any others fault, but by thine own, and eternally thou
must perish. These shall be the bitter and remorseful discourses of a man's
conscience: but (alas) they come too late. Whilst we live in this world we
find means to delude and prevent this remorse of conscience, which is wont to
vpbraid us; some times by reading vain books, sometimes by discoursing: now
by sleeping, another time by laboring, and sometimes by feasting and
merriments. But with them in hell, there is neither sleep nor rest; no reading
no feasting, no consolation. Day and night the worm of conscience shall g^aw
their hearts tormented on al sides. The damned persons shall be furiously mad,
and storm against themselves. They shall continually howl with this mournful
song in their mouths: O time, O you golden days, how are you vanished,
whither are you gone, never to return again! O blind and foolish so^tes! we
had our ears stop^, our eyes closed up, we were mad with lust, and by lewd
examples drew one another into destruction. Hither (miserable wretches) hither
we hastened, and despising al admonitions ran headlong to destruction and death:
oh! to death, yea even eternal death. What now do all the pleasures of the
deceitful world avail us? Every delight we call to mind is a tormenting
certain; al our pleasures are gone and vanished: and although we might enjoy
the for a thousand years, what were i^ in comparison of these eternal
torments. It was but a poor shadow of vanishing pleasure we snatched at. Who
was it that so spite fully bewitched us to make us run headlong into this
infernal Chaos? O that we had once a year seriously thought upon eternity! O
that one short day or hour might be granted us! But in vain are al our
desires, time is past, al our hopes are vanished. Cursed therefore be the day
wherein we were borne, cursed be God by whom we were created etc. Here I
moderate my speech, and remit to hell those blasphemies not to be spoken of.
This one thing I inculcate: Their worm shall never dye, and their fire shall
never be extinguished. Marc. 9.44.
Let him be wise and wary betimes, whosoever fears these eternal torments.

THE SEVENTH: A horrible place, and detestable Associates.
The place is exceeding far remote from the residence of the Blessed. Abraham
cried out from above: Luc 16.22.
Between us and you there is a great Chaos, that they who will pass from hence
to you may not, nor come hither from thence: and yet Abraham was not then in
heaven.

Hell has no parlours, chambers, or places of retirement, as we have. Their
sepulchers are their houses for ever: neither have the richest any better
lodgings: Luc. 16.22.
For the rich man also dyed and was buried in hell. O infinite deep sepulchere*
This serves now instead of his houses, towers, and triumphal arches: this lake
is in lieu of his bathes: this dungeon ^nsteed of his Theathers and palaces.
Nor do they here range at liberty, but are bound and fettred in chains.
Christ commanding, said: Matthew. 22.13.
Bind his hands and feet, and cast him into utter darkness, The damned there
cannot walk about, nor so much as stir hand or foot, but tied and as it were
fastened to an iron spit, they burn as miserable fuel to that fire. How great a
torture is it for a sick person to be in a burning fever, and never move out of
his place? What a torment was that to Marcus Arethusius (a most glorious
Martyr) S. Greg. Naz. ^rat. 1. in Julian.
who starck-naked was bound fast to a stake, exposed to the hot parching sun,
and innoynted with honey, that he might be stung and bitten with gnats, flies
and waspes, and so endure a long and tedious martyrdom? But, o you Christians,
these are but painted torments in respect of those in hell. This was accompanied
with pleasure: it was a comfort to this Martyr he suffered but for a short
time, and thereby was to obtain everlasting joy in heaven: for he knew, what
tribulation soever he endured, it was but light and momentary, and therefore
persisted a resolute Champion of our Lord; and the greater torments he suffered,
the greater was the reward he expected. But neither time nor place shall yeald
any consolation to the damned. For where they first began to suffer they shall
lie bound in chains for ever.

Another torment is the most execrable company. It is a great part of the
Saints felicity in heaven to line amongst the Quires of Angels, and a great
part of their misery in hell to burn amongst the howlings of devils. This is
the decree of divine justice, that the wicked shall have those or their
torturers and enemies, whom before they followed as Counselors and friends.

THE EIGHT: Eternal despair of al happiness.
Beatitude is an Epitome of al joys, as hell is of al pains and punishments.
Al acerbities desolations and tormenting griefs are companions to the damned:
al pleasures, joys, delights, and contentments attend the Blessed in heaven.
No disaster in this world is so great which may not be mitigated. Reason
persuades, time shortens, meat and drink asswages, our friends, with those that
have endured the like, comfort and encourage us; finally hope of seeing an end
does somewhat recreate us in afflictions: In hell all the doors are shut against
consolation, and al passages thereunto intercepted. They can hope for no
release from heaven not earth, nor expect any present or future succor, Which
way soever they cast their eyes, they behold cruel darts of death thrown
against them; on every side mourning, anguish, wailing, lamentation and
innumerable torments.

The sorrows of death Ps. 114.3.
have truly compassed them about; they have found tribulation and sorrows
indeed, so manifold, that every one shall suffer pains correspondent to his
offense. Let no man therefore pamper his body: for this very flesh of our's,
according to it is delight shall be afflicted and punished. This very body of
our's if it raise more curious fabrics for itself, then temples for the honor
and service of God; if it be ouer-careful in building magnificent roofes,
polishing pillars of marble, and making stately towers and windows: if it take
too much pleasure in costly gardens and shady arbours, shall be banished into a
darksome land covered with the thick and foggy mist and shadow of death. If it
make use of hot bathes for it is pleasure, or cold streams for it is wantonness,
to hazard either life or chastity; there is prepared a deep and vast Topheth
which has fire and store of word to nourish it, and the breath of our Lord to
enkindle it as a to^rrent of brimstome. This flesh of ours if it spend all the
morning in combing and dressing itself: if it be adorned with variety of rich
embrodred garments; rottennes and worms shall inherit it. This flesh of ours if
it be delighted with sluggishnes, and spend it is time in sleep (the enemy of al
good discipline) consuming many hours of the day in this drowsy and sluggish
delight; it shall be tormented with perpetual vigils, and everlasting want of
sleep. This flesh of ours if it solace itself in immodest and lascivious
revels, bales, and dances, shall then be afflicted with the wrestings, rackings,
and conu^lsions of al it is members; not according to the measures of musical
instruments, but the terrible howlings and roarings of devils. This flesh of
our's if it make itself a slave to bibbing and drunkenness, if during life it
make an ordinary practice of excessive eating and drinking, shall be vexed
hereafter with most cruel hunger and thirst. This flesh of ours which suffers
it is wandering eyes (the bauds of incontinency) to roue abroad whithersoeuer
they list, shall then please it self with no flower or comelines of beauty, but
with it is eyes whether it will or no, behold terrible Behemoth, horrible
Leuiathan, and the shape of the foul and bloody Dragon. This flesh of ours
which with it is nostrils hunted up and down after sweetest odours of flowers,
shall be glutted with stench of brimstome, and putrefaction of carcases. This
flesh of ours which had it is ears shut to sermons and wholesome admonitions,
but open to scurrile talk, obscene verses, impure songs and lascivious
discourses, shall change it is pleasant carrols into a sad and doleful tune, it is
merry Hah and Heida into a perpetual woe is me, and out alas. This flesh of
ours which has defiled it is touch with diverse kinds of lusts, shall be cast
into the arms of foul ugly mo^sters, to be hugged and besmeared with melted
pitch instead of sweet and precious unguents.

This very flesh of ours by itself and not by Attorney, for all the offenses it
has committed, shall suffer torments unspeakable, innumerable, (alas) eternal.
In that whereby a man offends* in that shall he be punished. According to the
measure of his sin shall be the number of his stripes. Sap. 11.17. Deuteronomy. 25.2.


THE NINTH: Eternity.
ETERNITY is not to be comprehended by the understanding of man. This i^ things
least irksome and painful causes in fine an intolerable and unspeakable
torment.

The consideration of Eternity is so serious that it will be hardly contained
within the limits of a verse. Notwithstanding Seneca makes a prudent
observation; Senec ep. 108.
that even as our breath yealdeth a clearer sound when a trumpet, gathering the
same through the straights of a long chanel, ventes if forth at last with a
stronger and larger fare-wel: so the strict composure of a verse renders our
senses more clear and perspicacious; and contrariwise the very same matter is
in a manner neglected and makes less impression, when it is delivered in
prose. But by help of numbers an excellent sense is knit-vp with precise
measure of certain feet: and the self-same meanning is as it were darted into
a man with a strong and puisant arm.

I am of the very same opinion: and therefore that this immense Eternity, which
is a thing so hard to be conceived, may take the deeper root in our minds; of
late I endeavored, as well as I could, to comprehend it in verse. And that I
may still persevere your friend, I will be so bold as t'inuite you (my EESIMVS) to
hear them. Are your ears at leisure. EDESIMVS. Both most attentive. Read
them, I pray you, read them. These things are never too often inculcated, never
written of, read, or sung sufficiently.

PARTHENIVS. But do not you insist upon the the words and composure, but
rather weigh the sense and matter.

diagrammatic representation of Eternity ETERNITY
A Dreadful voice is thundering in mine ear,
A word, no more; but such a word I hear
As dantes my heart with terrors, which surprise
My flesh as with a Palsy. From mine eyes
A word draws tears, a voice, breath, sound, (...) more.
Yet like tempestuous winds, which blustering rore*
And toss the aged oak, until at last
It Is ouerthrown with an impetuous blast
Of nothern Eolus, which roughly shakes
The neighboring trees, the lofty cedar quakes,
Al trembling stand, viewing the sudden fate
Of that forlorn, that silent, desolate,
Which even now was pasht against the ground:
Thus am I shaken, thus I fall; the sound
Of one word struck me so, that like the tree
I prostrate lie, deep taciturnity
Has seized upon my faultring tongue. Ah speak,
Dissolve these bands of fear, these fetters break.
Let not a word thus make thee tongue-tyed. No*
A letter will suffice, this cipher O*
You see above, which circling still goes round,
Is type of that which in name ears does sound.
Without beginning as t* is letter bendes,
And circumuolu'd goes round and never ends,
Is that, which endless, never was begun,
Went never back, nor yet shall forward run.
Like to the Caspian sea, which constant goes,
Or rather stands, which never ebbes nor flows.
Ah! when I hear that voice, or fix mine eye
On the endless character; ETERNITY
S^undes a retrait, and summons me, and al
To think and often ponder that which shall
C^pe in it is arms, and hold the soul so fast,
That when in hell a thousand years are past,
As many years as leaves on trees are seen,
Or grains of corn that are, or ere* have been,
Or drops of water in the spa^ious maine
Though multiplied ten thousand times again,
ETERNITY is, as it was before
ETERNITY, and lastes for (...) more.
So do the pains as newly then begun,
Still infinis. I hi^e hower-glasse does run,
Thy days are numbered, and the hour shall come,
Yea the vt^st moment of the total su^ne,
When thou shall breath thy iast, perforce must dye;
And after that comes al ETERNITY*
To hellish flames and tortures go, descend;
Not to endure, but ponder, think, attend;
Go, that thou may eternal pains prevent,
Diue to the depth of hell: by this descent
When thou no bortome find'st in that obysse,
Raise up thy soul, think of eternal bl^sse^
Then sink again and view those t^rtures, pains,
And flames of fire, sulphur, fettering cha^es,
Gnashing of teeth, t^ades, dragons to affright,
Infernal monsters, and eternal night,
From thence look up again, and fix thine eye*
Above the he^ns, there thou ETERNITY
Of toy may s^e, where Christ 'midst glorious beams
Inuites to ^lisse* Thou art 'twixt two extremes,
And in a point of time, 'twixt life and death
Thou hangest in suspense. A blast thy breath
Thy day's amoment, NOW, thou have no more,
What is to come, or what was heretofore,
Is none of thine, for ^ow thou may depart,
Now death may seize on thee, who^so'ere thou art,
Least mortal, that wilt hardly yeald to dye,
Compare thy momentes with ETERNITY,
Days, months, years, Ages, what thou wi^t, once do
All Is but a moment to ETERNITY.
O that redoubled Echoes in men's years
Might sound ETERNITY! With dreads and fears
Mithi^kes they should quake like the Aspen leaf.
ETERNITY, ETERNITY! what deaf?
Can momentarie pleasures so encharme,
They will not hear ETERNITIE'S alarm?
ETERNITY! it is as it was before
ETERNITY, and lastes for ever more,
In joy or torments, both are infinite
With Angels to enjoy God's blissful sight,
Or else with hellish monsters l^g die
And die for ever. O ETERNITY
Perfect possession! once, for ever blessed;
Or still role up the stone and never rest,
Like Sisyphus, or like Prometheus lie,
And vultures feed for all ETERNITY.
ETERNITY! a voice, wind, breath, no more
Soundes in mine ears. Alcyon on the shore,
Against the wind stands drooping^, near her death;
Yea when she has to fate resigned her breath,
Where so *ere you view her head, you still shall find
Her tender brerst exposed unto the wind.
Ah, thus expose thy breast to that shr^l (...).
ETERNITY: st^l let this voice* rebound
As Echoes from their hellow vaults be^ow*
Which take the voice, and ^and it to and fr^.
When God inspires, and voices in thire ear
ETERNITY, resound what thou do bear;
And to this voice Alcyon-like expose*
Thy tre^bling heart, which does sad fears inclos^,
As the earth does vapors in her bosom; quake
As that does tremble when the mountains shake.
Conceive in time, bring forth with throbs and throws,
That fear by love, which to perfection grows,
May be expelled. Jacob, seven years to thee,
And seven to that, seemed short; ETERNALLY.
TO enjoy the glorious sight of G*od above,
Can time seem tedious while I serve and love?
Since others with a moment's sweet delight
Are drawn away as if 'twere infinite,
Neglect the future; shall a moment's pain
Seem long? or loss* of goods which I sustain
Seem great? or life itself so dear to me,
As not t'enlarge it by ETERNITY*
Of happiness I Heavens stand amazed at thi^*
Celestid ga^es he desolate. The Abyss^
And everlasting fountain men forsake*
And dig for c^st^nes dried up; they take*
A drop, and leave the Ocean, dare not die
To purchase heaven and live eternally;
But still on earth desire to make abode,
Here seek ETERNITY and no^ with God.
But while the heart still beats and restles goes,
No length of time can give it true repose.
Immortal life it lost by Adam's fall,
Yet still desires it. It Is connatural.
S^are then aloft, since it is not here below,
And scale the heavens; it is there it is there I know.
Thy soul's a spirit, so is God above;
By this the are like, and likeness causes love,
And to his likeness God created thee;
Here seek repose, aim at ETERNITY.
Look on thy soul, whose image does it bear?
If God's, why then to God, (why should*st thou fear?)
Yeald what is God's; let Caesar have his due,
Thy grave thy corpse, til life again renew
With an immortal robe, there let it lie
At the end of time t'expect ETERNITY:
Mean while resolve, an instant is thy time
The rest uncertain; shall a mortal crime
Seize on thy soul, clowd it with horrid night,
And banish from the Immense and Infinite?
For ever? shall a sin which in a trice
Does pass, be purchased at so dear a price?
No: be like the adder, which to save his head
Peece-meale his body suffers to be shred,
His head preserved nothing his life can se^er;
So keep thy soul, le^ al to live for eue^.
For ever! Oh! content in f^ling fo^m^s*
Soon dies; wind-beaten soul in thi^ world's storms
Heavens haven seek. O heyse up s^le, makes ^s^
Launch forth; 't will be too late, one moment pa^.
Thou have but NOW, while winged (...) does fly,
T'accoast the confines of ETERNITY.
O ETERNITY! Who it ^* I will not say that comprehendes, but that goes about to
apprehend thee? That holy man worthy of immortal ^emo^y Godefride Bishop of
Bamberg and W^rzburg, whom we mentioned before; he was the man amongst a
thousand, he in a manner himself alone seemed to apprehend what was Eternal.
For being daily mindful heerof he was wont to say: Every moment I stand at the
door of Eternity. To this and he had dead men's souls painted, engraven,
fashioned out in wax, dug out of gra^es, and placed in every chamber where
he come, that he might be always mindful of death and Eternity which was after
to ensue.

Have you read a little book that treates of Eternity. Most dreadful, yet very
true is that which is alleged there. If I well remember, it has these very
words: Consid. 4. s. 2.
Think a thousand thousand cubes, that is a thousand millions of years; which
is as much as a thousand thousand thousand thousand thousand thousand thousand
thousand thousand times a thousand thousand years. This is as terrible in
thought, as easy in pronuntiatio^. Think therefore for so many years that
fire is to be endured: but consider that all this time although doubled,
trembled, or a hundred times doubled, is without al question not so much as the
first step into Eternity. After the revolution of so many years, Eternity may
be said as yet not to have begun. O my EDESIMVS, if a lively apprehension
hereof makes us not mere holy, we are beasts, we are stones, we are mere
stupid and insensible stocks. There is nothing will stir him whom Eternity
moves not. That immense, boundles, infinite, perpetual Eternity, which that
always endure, and after innumerable Ages never be ended. As long as God is
God so long shall the damned dye, and evermore survive. Oh immortal death, o
mortal life! I know not by what name to call thee, life, or death. If thou art
life, why do thou punish more cruelly then death? If death, why make thou
no end of thy cruelty* I will not call thee one or other. Both life and death
participate of good: in life there is repose* in death a final catastrophe;
both are comfortable in all miseries: but thou have neither rest nor end. What
therefore art thou? Thou art the extremes of life and death: by death thou
have torments without end, by life immortality without rest. O Eternity of the
damned, o maine sea of endless acerbities!

Notwithstanding we cannot accuse God for any cruelty or injustice inflicting
everlasting punishment, even for one deadly sin. His infinite mercy is not
delighted with the torments of the miserable; nevertheless in regard he is most
just, his wrath is never appeased with the punishments of the wicked* Most
worthily is eternal evil inflicted upon* him, who destroyed in himself eternal
good. They shall suffer everlasting pains in destruction, from the face of our
Lord, and from the glory of his power. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
It is a maxim amongst Lawyers: Reprobata* pr^uni^ non (...) ^olu^ntem, Money
not curtant freeth not the debtour. Penance is a payment fit to discharge
sinners debts: the value of thi^ money continues as long as the market of our
life. I his being ended al penance comes too late, and is refused like
counterfeit coin. They have indeed repentance in hell, but not true and valid,
because it is too late, and full of fury and blasphemy. Neither ought we to
marvel, that the damned are always tormented. Why the torments in hell are to
last eternally.
They continually blaspheme and persist in sin, and therefore perpetually are
punished. During life they would not be reformed, yea might they have always
lived, they would have still perseuerd obstinate in sinning. Therefore they are
now always to be punished and eternally tormented. Their desire was to have
lived for ever, that they might eue^ have sinned: wherefore it belongs to the
justice of that supreme Judge to punish the^ eternally, who whil*st they lived
in s^ne resolved still to perpetrate the like. We know what their ordinary
sayings were (...) this world: Come let us spend the day in drinking, we are
called to dancing* we are invited to gardens; occasion* of mirth and pastime is
given v^: come let us go. These were their discourses while they lived on
earth. But what say they now b^ing cast into hell? their speeches are far
otherwise.

O Eternity (say they*) the most intolerable amongst al insupportable things! O
celestial Eternity the might have been gained in a short time and with
little labor! O hellish Eternity, purchased only by sloth and fordid
delights! O Eternity most bitter and inf^itly deplorable, how easily might we
^aue* escaped thee, if we had often and seriously reuolu'd thy torments! O
Eternity! ^ the we might after ninety thousand thousand years arrive but to
one half of thee* O Eternity, in the midst of our daily despair, the most to
be despaired of* O Eternity Eternity* O of al torments the most cruel and
desperate torment*

Who can (my EDESIMVS) who can conceive this Eternity, or sufficiently be
astonished thereat* For this no sighs, no groans, no tears are sufficient:
al words, yea even our deepest cogitations to express this are infinitely
defective.

To live eternally (o my God!) to live eternally in flames* To be eternally
deprived of thy sight* To be eternally tormented with unspeakable pains* Ah,
eternally? Alas, how extreme is the madness of men* With how fle^ting and
tra^sitory delights ^e we deluded? O how wantonly we daily with this deceitful
cup, til by degrees in this deadly poison, we drink our own bane?

The like dranken sorts, greedy of pleasures, unmindful of our beatitude,
forgetful of Eternity, we, as it were by way of sport plunge our selves into
this bottomeles gulf of al misery, into this huge and immense Ocean of
Eternity.

Miserable wretches! we ardently thirst after vain glory, gold and venery: but
those flames, those eternal fires (alas) we never thike of. Ah, there is no
man* there is no man who advisedly thinks i^ h^ heart. Hier. 1^.11.
My EDESIMVS, if we yet retain any sense or understanding, let us daily call to
mind and ponder this one thing necessary, Eternity.

THE CONCLUSION OF that which has been said concerning the triumph over
Incontinency. CHAP. XII.
IT is a terrible thing to be spoken which S. Remigius Bishop of Rhemes doubted
not to affirm concerning incontinency and concupiscence. By reason of the
sin of the flesh (said he) excepting little children, very few amongst those
of riper years are saved.

Do but consider the state of the world and thou will admire to see it almost
wholly burn with this infernal fire, There is searcely any vice has cost
mankind so deate* as this of lust and incontinency. It is a Hydra, a dragon,
that has not three, nor only seven, but nine heads* I will now discover them
severally.

THE FIRST HEAD. Lust and Incontinency is an Insatiable vice.
You may rightly call it the chain of hell, where one sin goes linked with
another: a second begins where the former ended. If thou do but undergo
the yoke of this vice thou shall suffer a grievous sla^ry, and after long
servitude very hardly shake it off. Voluptuousnes i^ never satiated i^ though
thou feed it never so much* i^ still desires more* It Is like the mount (...),
which burning with perpetual fires is never consumed. Do thou co^descend to
thy pleasure to day? To marrow lust will be ^auing and exacting more. Do thou
deny to yeald unto it* 'T will offer violence. Do thou present heaven unto it?
It will forcibly withdraw thee. Do thou set hell before it? 'T will turn thine
eyes another way. Therefore the Prince of the Apostles ^aith: ^. Pet. 2.11.
My Dearest I beseech you a^ strangers and pilgrims to abstain from carnal
desires which war against the soul. He says they war: for this is not
a^chieued by a short skirmish, but having once given place to this enemy, thou
shall be embroyled in a daily and miserable warfare. The dog seeing a bone in
his Masters hand, flatters, licks, fawnes and wagges his tail, til he has
laid hold of it; then do but offer to take it from him, he will snarle, and
instead of a flattering tail, show his terrible and threatening teeth: So the
devil that three-mouth'd C^rberus, with how many blandishments does he solicit
our chastity? And having once despoiled us of it, alas, how laborious and
difficult has it been to recover it again? Therefore be assured this flesh of
ours the more it flatters, the more mischief it intendes against us, and
fawnes most upon us, when most of al it goes about to deceive us. For which
cause oftentimes there is less diffienity for a man not to fall into finne,
then to rise again after his relapse. This vice is most powerful over those on
whom i^ has seized, and being fastened will very hardly let go it is hold.
Therefore withstand in the beginning, and constantly resist the first and least
allurements of enchanting lust. For if thou do but once yeald unto it, it will
bereave thee of thy liberty, deprive thee of reason, rob thee of al humane
discretion, despoile thee of al sense of modesty, and in a word make thee a
very beast, and hateful both to God and man. Alas who had ever so spiteful an
enemy against himself as his own delights, those I mean that are obscene and
prohibited? Into which notwithstanding (miserable wretches) most plunge
themselves so deep, that having been long accustomed thereto, they deem it
impossible to live without them, having made those things in a manner
necessary, which before were superfluous: whereby they become slaves to their
corrupt flesh, and, which is the greatest of al other mischief^, are fallen in
love with their own will. Wickedness is grown to the height, when dishonesties
do not only please, but also make delight so excessive and insatiable, that
men being habituated to vice their disease becomes desperate and incurable,
Fly, ^h fly, fly from whatsoever is prejudicial to chastity.

THE SECOND HEAD: The sin of the flesh is almost Incurable.
In the time of Noe the whole world violently ran after all that was forbidden,
but chiefly obscene lust. Heerupon were those complaints made by Almighty God:
Genesis ^* 3.
My spirit shall not remain in man for ever, quia caro est, because he is
flesh. Al men ( Noe exepted) delighted only in the flesh, being wholly carnal.
God lothed and detested this their foul and licentious intemperance;
notwithstanding he deferred his revenge for the space of five hundred years.
In the interim he diverse times admonished them by Noe, gave order for the
building of the Arc, rebuked their extreme malice, foretold their
destruction, and oftentimes threatened that al mankind, if they desisted not
from their wicked courses, should be drowned with waters. Yet would they not
amend their lives; no, not so much as one only man. They were so ensnared and
enthraled with sin, that whatsoever Noe said or admonished, they slighted and
put off with scoffs and laughter. There was none that repented themselves of
their dishonesty, none grieved for having so hainously offended. At last, God
according to his decree giving a sign, rayned down continual showers, which
for the space of forty days and nights continued* til the whole earth covered
with waters seemed a maine sea. And thus he abolished all that Generation, which
was so given to lust, that he might create another pure and free from sin.
This is the nature of concupiscence, to reject al remedies, and contemptuously
spurn at al admonitions, whereupon Clemens Alexandr^us gives it this proper
Epithet, Lib. ^. paedag.
Immedicabdem an incurable disease Christ says in S. Mark's Ghospel: Marc.
4.10.
The deceitfulnes of riches, and concupiscences about other things en^ing a^,
choke the word and make it fruitles. When a fire has once gotten into a wood,
there is no need to carry any more fuel to that which has such sto^e to
maint^yne it self. We miserable wretches are like a wood; if the fire of lust
once take hold of us, it finds continually new fuel, whereby it is more and
more augmented. And surestly no vice so obstinately and stubbornly resists
the spirit of God. Most plainly does the Wise man witness as much: Eccl.
21.18.
The luxurious man has heard a wise w^d, and it shall displease him, and he will
cast (...) behind his back. Osee agreeing with him says: Osee 5.4.
They will not apply their minds to return to their God, because the spirit of
fornications is in the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord.
Therefore turn thy self away, fly and detest whatsoever sauoureth of venery or
lust. Be thou suspicious of al manner of incontinency. This is the will of God,
your sanctification. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.


THE THIRD HEAD: The sin of the flesh is a very common vice.
I shall commit no error, if I say that almost the whole world burns with
this most detestable and pestilent fire. This Luxury does not only creep into
the palaces and castles of Kings, but enters even into the poor folks sheds
and cottages. It not only assailes men cou^hed in feather-beds, but also lying
in straw: not only provoke young men in their flourishing age to dishonesty,
but those also sometimes that are old and decrepit. Al of each sex, state, and
condition ought to be the more cautelous and wary in shunning this vice, and
flying al occasions, considering how secretly it creeps, and suddenly seizes
on the hearts of al sorts of people. The sense and cogitations of man's heart,
are prone to evil from their youth. Genesis 8.^1.
Lust never dies through old age: this mischief is never overwhelmed with
time, nor buried in oblivion. This vice is to be prosecuted without end or
measure; for that it has neither bounds nor limits. Yet now adays, such is
the corruption of manners, that this detestable lasciuiousnes both in words
and gestures is honored with the title of ciuility and curtesy. Thus (alas)
sin is shamefully applauded, and every one is the rather reputed a merry and
bone companion, if he exceed in ribauldry and loud behavior. If thou might,
says S. Cyprian, Lib. ^. Epist 2* ad Dona^.
behold and penetrate from a high watch tower, the secrets of men, open the
privy doors of their chambers, unlock their private closet^, and search their
consciences* thou should find dishonest m^n c^ry that about them, which no
honest-m^n (...) ^ble to behold* thou would discover that, which only to see
were an offense. Oh how many lustful and shameless ^rt^ are environed every
where with domestical walls: where sin the more secret it is* the more it
embold^eth him that commits it. Verily the whole world i^ set upon wickednes^
1. Ioh. 5.19.
and especially upon the of lust and impurity* O let him fly the world*
whosoever he is that desires to live chaste* let him, d^rest al impurity, that
affects beatitude: Let your loins be girded. Luc 12.35.


THE FOVRTH HEAD: The s^e of the f^shes most hateful to the Angels.
Ah! whoso'ere thou ar^ that love ^d honor the Angels, quench th^se
venereous fires, and rebellions motions, For they that are in the flesh can not
please God, nor be greateful to the Angels. Romans 8.8.


It is hard to link an Angel and a swine together in bands of mutual ^ity.
Verily he is transformed into a hog, who h^ing purity walloweth in the mire of
lust* Let no such man ^uer hope to have any society with the Angels. Those most
chaste and pure Spirit^ love them most entirely, who perfectly seek to resemble
them in purity. They abhor and derest all that they see unclean or impure;
they have no familiarity nor society but with them only the ^re lovers of
chastity and integrity. Those that are like goats and swine, are to them most
abominable: but if they know any man that is a fervent lover of chastity, they
admit him as their most intimate friend, and make him an Angel. For such are as
the Angels of God in heaven. Matthew. 22.30.
Nothing is more excellent then a single life. It is very easy for him,
whosoever he be that desires to live chaste, to become an Angel. For, if we
believe S. Chrysostom, Hom. 25. in epist. ad Ephesians.
Christ brought from heaven the virtue of Angels. And it is an usual saying of
the holy Fathers: Ambr. l. 1. de virg. Basil. de vera virgin. Cass. l. 6.
instis. c. 6. and l. 12. c. 11. Bern. Ep. 42.
The chaste life i^ the life of Angels. Neither are they deceived. Eccl. 26.^0.
Omnis ponderatio non est digna cont^entis anima, Al weight is no^ comparable
to a continent foul. Note (my EDESIMVS) note, Al weight, al, a^ is not
comparable to a chaste mind. Propound now unto thy self the triumphs of Pompey
the Great, glittering with gol^, and beset with gemme^ and precious stones* The
towers of Basilius the Emperor al garnished with gold; the Persian riches and
the treasures of Cr^su^; yea even golden towers and mountains themselves: yet
thou have not so much ^lightly expressed the value of a pure and chaste soul.
Al weight is not equivalent to a cominent soul. But we (foolish merchants) for
one farthing or some base piece of coin, rather cast away, then fell our
chastity* and soothed with a poor transitory pleasure loose ^ jewel of
incomparable price. There is no man in this point gives credit to S. Cyprian,
whose excellent saying was, that, to overcome carnal delights is of al others
the greate^t delight. It is the part of a true Christian ^o place his chiefest
pleasure i^ the dis^in^ of (...) chiefest glory in keeping his body undefiled,
and to have the Angels for his friends. It is the greatest dishonor that
possibly may be, not to be loved of the Angels, (who otherwise are most ready
to love and tender the good of mankind) and to have for his enemies all the
inhabitants of heaven. Let no man love lasciuiousnes, who fears to incu^re the
hatred of Angels.

THE FIFTH HEAD: The sin of the flesh is most transitory.
It is but for an instant, o you wretches, it is but for a moment that which
delights you. But your torments shall be everlastingly permanent. Concerning
this most swift and cursory delight* in dishonesty, none seems to have spoken
more significantly and properly then Tertullian: They (says he) Lib. de
mulier. hab. c. 1. and 2.
who sometimes called to mind from whence they had fallen, after the
euapourated moments of concupiscence, sigh^d after heaven. Very fitly he
terms obscene pleasures of the flesh an instant, an euaporated moment; for it
vanishes before a man sufficiently takes notice of it. Divinely has Boethius
expressed this in his verses: Lib. ^. de cons. phil. Metro 7.
Habet omnis hoc voluptas;
Stimulis agit fruentes:
Apiumque par volan^um
Vbi grata ^ella fudit,
Fugit, and nimis tenaci
Ferit icta corda mors^.
Al pleasure, those it does delight,
Drives headlong with a furious sting:
And like the Be with wandering flight
Does first delicious honey bring;
But soon departes, and in the mind
A deep remorse it leaves behind.


Youth and pleasure are vain, says Ecclesiastes. Eccl. 11.10.
S. John the Apostle affirms that the world passes, and the concupiscences
thereof. 1. Joan. c 2. v. 15.
This is proper to the joys both of the world and flesh, to pass away
speedily: Yea sometimes their pleasures are at an end before they are fully
begun, and may well be compared to sweet wine that lastes not til the year
following, but waxes sower before it be al drawn out. They lead their lives
in pleasures, and in an instant descend to hell. Job. 12.21.
Therefore fly, o man, fly, fly from those swift fleeting and inconstant
pleasures.

THE SIXTH HEAD: The sin of the flesh is most pernicious.
From hence have sprung such inconveniences and detriments, as never did from
any other vice whatsoever. How many valiant nations have been enthralled by
lust, and betrayed to their enemies? How many strong fortresses has it
demolisht and brought to ruin? How many men has it vanquished and subdued,
who feared neither fire nor sword? How many great and heroic spirits has it
drawn to such shameless exorbitan^ies, as they before never feared or thought
of? No man can be ignorant of this, unless he never took notice of Sampson,
David, or Solomon.

For this crime the city of the Siche^ites was overthrown, and the Prince with all the inhabitants put to the sword. Genesis 34.25.
For this enormity five and twenty thousand of the Beniamites, and of the
Israelites forty thousand were stain in battle. Iudic. 20. ver. 21. 25. and 46.
For this the wisest of al mortal men became a worshipper of Idols. 3. Reg.
11.4.
For this David the most powerful of Kings was afflicted with innumerable
plagues. 2. Reg. 12.10.
For this the seven husbands of Sara were killed by the devil. Tob. 6.17.
For this those wicked old men, that conspired against the chastity of Susanna
were stoned to death: Dan. 13.62.
an ordinary punishment inflicted on such offenders. For this crime four and
twenty thousand of those that committed fornication with the daughters of M^a^,
at one time by pestilence were destroyed* Number. 25.9.
I will not recall thee to ancient histories, We are instructed sufficiently by
daily examples how prejudicial lust and incontinency has been to particular
men, whose strength, health* wealth, memory, indgement, good name and even life
itself are maimed and impaired thereby. But admit they were exempted from al
these inconveniences, yet is makes hauock of a man's soul, depriueth him of
heaven; and after the loss of al these delights, brings hell and damnation. At
Rome in times past the temples of Venus and L^biti^ were very fitly joined
together* for by venery men run the nearest way to death both of body and soul.

How many young men that lived like Angels have afterward turned devils, and
leaving their chaste conversation, fallen head long into the precipice of al
enormities? Therefore very well does the Church, as a mother careful of her
childrens safety, daily pray: A spiritu fornication^, libera nos Domine,
Deliver us, o Lord, from the spirit of fornication. But I pray thee (my
EDESIMVS) why art thou so long silent? speak some what, that we may benefit and
edify one another. What reason have thou to impose the whole discourse upon me?
What thou profitest by my speech I know not: this I am sure, by holding thy
peace I learn very much of thee, and admire thy great patience in hearing me.
But to the end I may no longer abuse the same I will presently make an end. And
indeed the evening coming on like a crier, pronounces those last words:
Actum est, ilice^, The discourse is ended, you may depart when you please.
EDESIMVS. I pray you go on, and make use of this little time which remains;
for I intend not to interrupt you with my questions. PARTHENIVS. Three heads of
this monstrous Hydra are yet lurking behind, which I will instanely discover.

THE SEVENTH HEAD: The sin of the flesh is very deceitful; and besides, no
plague is more pernicious to Mankind.
Luxury is a sweet Siren, a pleasant poison, deadly bewitching honey; the devils
surest bait, whereby he catches and draws men unto him to their everlasting
destruction. Concupiscence, when it is conceived brings forth sin; but
sin when it is con^i^m^te ingendreth death. Iac. 1.15.
Therefore the present delight is not so much to be considered, as the future
pain that instantly ensues. When it comes it smiles and flatters, but it
stings bitterly at the departure. Before, sweet allurements appear, but behind
are sharp poisoning stings. It is a plague as deceitful as pernicious, which S.
Bernard excellently declaring, says, that as this plague is always
accompanied with many mischiefs, so it is repelled with greatest difficulty.
This* whether a man will or no intrudeth itself as a thing sweetly burdensome,
and unpleasantly delightful. It subtly enters and possesses the mind; and
unless it be suddenly driven out, allureth, inflameth, and like the poison of
some plague diffuseth itself by little and little through the whole body. It
multiplieth wicked cogitatio^s, begets evil affections, infecteth the mind
with carnal delectation, enticeth it to dishonest consent, and corrupts all the powers of the soul. He that is once entangled with this plague, can hardly
be withdrawn from it, because he either knows not how, or is ashamed to
confess the allurements and prouocations thereof; they are so subtle and
obscene. Help me, ^ my Lord God, to resist and free my self from this vice
which is so pestiferous and deadly. I know it is laborious for the combatant,
but crowns the victorious. I know if I pollute my soul with any unclean
cogitation, I cannot please thee who art the Author of al purity. My God
create in me a clean heart.

Iuli^ Solin^s recounteth De inter dom. c. 29.
that the Phala^m (a kind of spider) which we likewise call Tarantula, is a
direful little creature that has a most pestilent sting. And though the
strength and force it has be little or nothing, yet it is most pernicious and
violent in operation for whomsoever it stingeth, it killes with it is poison
especially in the hottest time of the year. For when the sun daily scorcheth
the fields of Apul^ia, either by reason of some malignant wind, or through
extremity of heat, these Tarantulaes so pestiferously infest men's bodies, that
whosoever are poisoned with their deadly venom, continually sing, weep, rave,
or lie oppressed with such a mortal stupidity, that, al their members
putrefying and withering away, they die miserably, Lust is a Tarantula, and I
know not whether it has more venom or fraud in it, seeing it is most
mischievous unto them who least mistrust it. It creeps subtly, infecteth
speedily, and kills sweetly. They that are tainted with this contagion fall
into so unquiet a madness, that they daily most desire that which is most
hurtful unto them. This Tarantula is not so much felt when it is stinging, as
after the wound inflicted.

THE EIGHT HEAD: The sin of the slesh is full of reproach and infamy, and
above al, most dishonest.
This vice whereof we speak in comparison of others, is so foul and dishonest,
that it is called by it is proper name dishonesty itself. This is in every
respect a monstrous and filthy sin; therefore it seeks to be shrouded in
darkness and corners, and is of al others most in fear of itself. Those
virtuous parents of Susanna (as the history of Daniel recounteth) Dan. 1^.63.
Helcias and his wife, praised God for their daughter Susanna, together with
Io^him her husband and al their kindred, because there was not found in her res
t^pis any dishonest thing. That most chaste S. Paul commanded the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 5.4.
they should not so much as name dishonesty. In the epistle he wrote to the
Romans, Romans 6.^1.
having made some mention of iniquity and uncleanness: What fruit therefore
(says he) have you had then in those things, for which you are now ashamed?
There is no vice that so much makes men blush and be confounded, as this most
foul and ugly beast, which brooks not the day, hates light, and always
seeks for darkness. Asa that King of the Hebrews is exceedingly commended for
breaking an immodest statue of an Idol, Simulachrum ^urpissi^um, a most filthy
Idol: 3. Reg. 15.13.
he burned it, and cast the ashes into ariuer* Lust is always accompanied with
filthiness, chastity with cleannes of body, and beauty of soul. Chastity can
never be deformed, and contrariwise it is impossible in continency should ever
be beautiful. That brings forth roses and lillies, this nothing but nettles and
thorns: to the chaste man nothing can be grateful but that which is clean and
sanctified; but the obscene is wholly delighted to wallow in mire and
filthiness. Christ the son of a Virgin, suffered al m^nes of reproaches, but
would not be taxed for incontinency, so foul (...) abominable is this sin of
dishonesty. He amongst the Ancie^ts spoke wisely, who said, that even as a hog
seeks neither for heaven, nor any precious pearl* so the soul intoxicated
with the sweetness of pleasures, and plunged into the ordure of luxury can
hardly think of celestial matters, or ^olli^ any thing, worthy of God.
Incontinency is the mother of impurities: ^he borne in turpitude, fed in
uncleanness, brought up and dies in filthiness. Doubtless the stream ^ like the
sourse and fountain: never has a clear river flowed* from a muddy spring.
Therefore whatsoever issues from luxury defiles and brandes the incontinent
with an infamous note of Turpitude.

THE NINTH HEAD: The sin of the flesh is an Epitome of al enormities.
I said too little when I compared lust to the Tarantula, though it be a most
pestilent and pernicious creature. For lust is a beast, and that most terrible,
such an one as lives amongst the I^dia^s (if we credit C^esia^) caled a
Manticor, which has the fiercenes of al other wild beasts, in so much as it
can never be ^a^ed by the industry of man. It has three ranks of teeth that
close together like combs: in body it is as big as a lion* it has ears and
face like a man, eyes gray and burning, a tail forked like a scorpions, and
armed with a goating sting* the color bloody: the noise it makes is not
unlike to that of a pipe; and is as swift as any heart. This beast most greedily
pursues and huntes after man's flesh. Concupiscence is very like this ugly and
horrible monster. It participates in a manner of the malice and poison of al
sins whatsoever. It is seldom and hardly ever tamed by any art or industry
so long as it is suffered to predominate. There is in lust three sets of teeth.
The first gnawes and consumes the strength of body and temporal estate: the
other teareth in pieces a man^ honesty and reputation: the third grindes and
wastes all the riches and indowments of the soul. Lust has the cruelty of a
Lion* it breaks al divine and humane laws, and trampleth underfoot al
wholesome admonitions: but yet (...) has the face of a man, for amongst al
vices it seems most pleasing to flesh and blood. It begins with flattery,
it is sweet and pleasant; but the ^ile stingeth like a scorpion, and fastneth in
the heart a deep remorse of conscience. It has burning eyes which it employeth
in beholding al manner of filthiness. This vice is of a bloody color, for it
makes no show of any thing, but what flesh and blood desires. The voice of lust
is the voice of a pipe: Fistula ^ulee cani^, (...) dum decipit auc^ps,
Sweet soundes the pipe whilst fowlers birds ensnare.
Dishonesty flattereth while it e^tangleth with such incredible celerity, that
sometimes with one only glance of the eyes it penetrates into the soul. Who
shall see a woman to covet her, ^ath already committed adultery within has heart.
Mat. 5.29.
Which S. Augustine expounding, says: Lib. 12. de Trin. 6. 13.
Though the fact follows not, the conscience is made guilty by consent. Oh
what a mad and cruel beast is this I thou art utterly undone if thou have* not
warily prevented the same. And therefore* S. Cyprian persuading us, says very
well* Thou must resist the first suggestions of the devil, and not ober^h the
snake til it grow to a dragon. Thou shall find one sometimes of whom thou may
truly say: This man of^e^ prays, willingly gives alms, i^ no gamster i^ no
vnthirst, no perfidious person, no back-bi^er, no calu^niatour, no drunkard;
nay he is a man courteous, industrious, complemental and civil: but yet he is
given to lust. Ah! by this alone he has lost al his former praise, too much
hold has the devil laid on him (whosoever he be) that is libidinously given.
Lust deflowers al virtue; nay he has none at al whosoever is possessed with
this pernicious viper. Whosoever observes the whole law besides, and offends
but ^n ^e precept* is made guilty of al. Iac. 2.10.
He has no liberty who is shackled with these fetters. This sin of the flesh
is like a masker which will put on the visards of al manner of vices, if thou
prevent it not by freeing* thy self quickly from it is snares, which will daily
more and more entangle thee.

Perhaps thou know* not* how to comb and* prank thy self* This vice
assuredly will teach thee. It spruceth up, curies and crisper young gallants*
with whom it grows familiarly acquainted. Perhaps thou were ignorant before
how to cheat other men of their money or prodigally to spend* thine own. By
this thou may learn. Perhaps it has not hitherto been thy custom to wast
whole days in extrauagant* co^plements. Thou may now habituate* thy self
unto it; and in idleness securely sleep til* thou s^ort. And if there remain
any part of the day besides, thou may bestow it in reading wanton books, to
please curiosity and enkindle the flames of thy lust. I warrant thou shall be
well read in the shapes of al manner of vices, if thou have but only
inco^tine^cy for thy Maistres. And though thou abhorrest al dishonest acts,
yea though thou have an auersion from all lasciulousnesse that represents it
self to thine eyes; yet if thou repel not al unclean thoughts, and extinguish
not the sparck of ^ust so soon as it is enkindled in thine heart; if thou
give entertainment to impure fantasies and imaginations, this will be enough
to cause thy destruction. He perishes sufficiently who perishes after this
manner, without any noise or resistance. He is evil enough who secretly
harbors sin, or refuses to be good. And doubtless he aspireth not toward
heaven, that walloweth and delights himself in these sordid and impure
cogitations. If one only idle word shall be scanned at the day of judgment,
shall obscene thoughts be exempted from this tribunal? That soul which loves
purity recalles even the least glances of the eyes so soon as she apprehends
the^ to be (...) chastity. O chastity (cries out S. (...)) Tom. 1. in En^.
cast.
whose whole course of life (...) Angelical, which make m^n like Angels! To
who^ delights, (...) in apparel, and too m^ ^are of the (...) no other then
inf^my and tha^. O chastity, which restrainest the eyes, which (...) (...)
whole body out of darkness into blessed and happy light! Thou amongst daily
battles (...) thout al fear, and against thine (...) vigilant and courageous!
O chastity, prudence of (...), and capable of celestial things! Thou art the
mighty chariot which mountest up above the stars with those that observe
thee. O chastity, thou art ^th a f^re and precious possession, the most rich
house of God, the mother of ^nocency, the ornament of manners. Thou winnest the
favor of al honest persons, and even unto thy very enemies ar^ ^ither
venerable or admirable! O chastity, thou art thin^ owns honor, thou art
blessed and make happy those that possess thee: thou flourishest like a ^st
and pleasantly smellest in the midst of body and soul. In thee God the ^er
of al purity lays up in store his eternal riches and treasure.

Unto these S. Cyril of Hierusal^m subscribing, says: Cateches. 12.
Let us not be ignorant of the glory of chastity? it (...) (...) Angelical
crown. Let us pr^serue our bodies without stain, which ought to shine like
the sun. It (...) but a small pleas^r^, which ^steth but for the space of a
(...) hour: but by s^nne comes eternal shame, and punishments eu^rlasting.

^o many thousands of virgins (my EDI^IMVS) suff^ing by sword, hung on gibb^ts,
stricken through with stakes, torn with lions, ^e headed, burned and consumed
with fire, lost their lives to save their virginity: so that the greater their
care wa^ to keep themselves virgins, the greater was their victory and glory.
The chastity of Tecla was adored by a lion: the immodesty of Alcion revenged by
a storke. Diverse young maids of Rome were registered amongst the Vestal virgins:
those that were possessed with the Delph^n fury never married; those that
served as Priests the Scythi^ Diana, the Acharian Juno, the Eleusian Ceres,
lived a single life. Blush, o flesh, which did put on Christ in thy Baptism.
To them the devil preached continency, and was heard: to thee the Apostle
preaches chastity, wishes that al Christians were virgins, volo on^s
h^inesesse ^icut meipsum, and yet is neglected. 1. Cor. 7.7.
Ah wicked wretch, when thou are about to commit a dishonest act, do but even
consider these two words, quid ag^ wh^ do I? So said that most chaste Joseph.
How can I do this evil, and sin against my Lord? So shall thy ha^ be endowed
with fortitude, for that thou have loved chastity and shall be blessed for
ever. Because i^ (...) good for a man to be so; for an v^m (...) woman and a
virgin thinks of those things which belong to our Lord, that s^ may be holy
both in body and spirit. 1. ^r. 7.18.
O man, whosoever th^n are that admirest Nic^as, do but imitate him in this,
and keep thy self c^ast. The fruits of the Holy Ghost are charity, continency
and chastity. Ga^. 5.12.
The fruits of the flesh lust, inco^tinency, and dishonesty. My EDISIMVS thou
have heard me hither^o, seen the Triumph over Incontinency in a garden: behold
now the same Incontinency triumphing in a garden. I would with all my heart that
al young men might hear it with thee: ^o that the whole world would be
attentine, and learneby al possible means to derest Inco^tinency, as the
foulest and most ignominious spo^ of their life, and most certain plague of
their souls. Give care now to a stupendous tragedy. There was in the famous
city of Lubech a ve^rable matron wife to a (...), who at one birth brought
forth three sons, whereof one died of a leprosy, the second was drowned, the
third, of whom we now speak, killed himself. By when disastrous means he came
to so shameful an end, a c^rtaine person has fai^fully set down, who very well
knew both him, hi^ brothers and all that family and ki^red. This third brother
was a comely propet Gentleman, of a sharp wit, court like behavior, welthy and
costly in apparel; but, to blemish and ouers brow al these good (...) he was
(...) given to last: and having through in continency lived lewdly with diverse
others, at last happened upon (...), who^ he thought to shrposse all the (...) of
Lubech in beauty. This (...) did so capti^ate that poor wretch intarag^doin:
(...) shameless love, that neither the ^xpence of money, weakening of his body
through lust, fear of God, admonition of his frein^, terror of hell, public
or private shame could withdraw him from this licentious and dishonest life. By
which exorbitant courses, his patrimony being at last consumed, he began to
stand in need even of necessary maintenance. When his mother (his father being
dead) perceived her son fallen into such extreme poverty as might redound to
the disparagement of his parentage, moved with motherly compassion, the gave
him at several times great sums of money, and with w^ping tears admonished
him to return to God, to have a special care of his own reputation, to
remember from whom be was descended, to tender his own aternal salvation, to
renounce dishonest* company; and finally from that time forward; to put on a
firm resolution utterly to forsake that inueterate lasciuiousnes of life. But
alas! she lighted a candle to a blind man: this poor nightingale chanted to a
deaf auditour. Miserable wretch, he would and would not, faintly endeauonring,
and therefore never firmly arising out of the mire of concupiscence.

At last when she perceived whatsoever she bestowed upon him was lewdly spent
to his further ruin and destruction, she hardened her heart, and shut her hand
against him. Which he observing, and taking advise of his own wants and
brutish lust (the worst Counselors) sundry times assaulted her with his sword
drawn, and (I ^remble to speak it) spurned and trampled her under his feet,
cruelly threa^ning ^e would instantly run her through, if she did not then
re^eeue his extreme wants and necessities. The poor miserable mother, quaking
for fear under her sons sword as an enemies* gave, though unwillingly,
whatsoever he exacted. Yet d^rst not make known to any friend or Magistrate
the cruelty of this par^icide, fearing le^t the Gouern^ur. of that city (whose
^euere justice was apparent to the world) should thunder out some rigorous
sentence against him, as guilty of so heinous and unnatural a crime. She
therefore held her peace, and silently suppressed the in^ry. But e're long (I
know not by what means discovered) this foul detestable fact diu^ged abroad*
their kinsfolks me together, and consulting amongst themselves, commanded
this young man under pain of death never hereafter to draw his sword against
his mother, or make any the like outrageous or ungracious attempt. He, though
otherwise without al shame, blushing at this so severe a decree and penalty,
straightway withdrew himself, and departed from his mothers house. And that he
might (to the greater disgrace of his whole family) have some companions in his
shame, with that infamous woman he took up his lodging in the common stews.
Where having worn out his rich apparel, long dissembled his extreme hunger,
spent al his money, sick in mind, and pining away with grief, destitute of
confort and in a manner of al hope of any means to live on; partly by reason
of a burning ^eauer, and partly through despair of al succor; his malady
daily increasing, and finding no cure or remedy, wearyed out with grief, he
desperately determined to shorten his life by a violent death. And lest any one
should hinder the Epilogue of this dismal tragedy, faining some business, he
sent that lewd woman out of the way, whom til then he had dishonestly loved.
She being now gone, he, left alone in the house, took a knife out of the
kitchen, and went into the garden, the place where Incontinency had prepared to
triumph: where casting his rolling eyes on every side, and seeing himself
sequestered from the sight of al, tearing open his buttons, he exposed his bare
breasts, thin and withered with sickness; and setting the haft of the knife
against a pale, so forcibly thrust his body against the point thereof that
piercing the bulk of his breast, it passed through the very chine of his
back. Having sped himself with this wound, he fell to the ground, and seeing
his blood gush forth was surprised with madder furies, for that he was not yet
deprived of his loathed life, which he with such cruelty sought to abandon.
Alas, behold a direful spectacle! Oh with what fury did this self-murtherer
wrest and turn the knife round on every side sticking in his breast! Oh, how
he cut and mangled his own entrails (as it appeared afterward in his dead
body) whereby he rather sought to ^ast headlong, then breath out his most
impious soul.

In the mean while that unfortunate woman returned, and finding her Paramou^
in the garden wallowing in his own blood, with horror and amazement waxing
pale and fai^ting, she fell to the ground. At last recovering her senses ^he
raised all the neighbors with a l^m^ntable outcry: to who^, as they rushed
into the garden, she al d^owned with tears, declared in what manner she had
found his dead body. S^r^ight ^ame flying through the whole city, came to his
mothers ^are, who at this newc^, ro^ing out like a lioness robb^d of her
whelpe^, pale and wa^, and like another dead body* forthwith seemed rather to
fly then go to this garden: where amongst hea^b^ and flowe^ she found her
son hor^ibly slaughtered. And presently at the first aspect falling into a
swo^ne sunk to the earth, as if she would there have dyed with him. The
spectatours themselves by this time were moved to weep, b^holding this double,
yea almost triple funeral.

The mother recovering by little and little out of this fainting fit, drenched
in a fl^d of ^eares, turning her weeping eyes toward her sons harlot, said:
O woman what have thou done? thou have seduced and taken from me mine own
flesh and blood; it is thou (unfortunate woman) that art the cause of al these
disastres. The next morning his kinsfolks with a great piece of money hardly
obtained to bury his miserable corpse in the earth; for according to the laws
it was adiudg'd to be burned. So this young man that so cruelly butchered
himself was according to his deserts buried in a profane place. The night
after he was buried the earth of his grave settled, and became so hollow, that
some imagined wicked spirits, which before had taken his soul, had likewise
carried his body away. I my self (says the Author) saw the turfes heaped upon
him, whereby an extraordinary high gra^e was raised; yet the next day the earth
was so sunck down, that one would hardly believe any corpse to have been buried
there. This was the desperate and disastrou^end which happened to this young man
through lust and incontinency. A fearful example to al succeeding Ages, that
men may with terror see into what a gulf of evils those are precipitated who
give the bridle and full liberty to their lusts*

This was the prodigious trophy of Incontinency that triumphed in a garden: and
over which our Nicetas (having likewise overcome in a garden) gloriously
triumplied. Let young and old men take example; yea let the whole world learn
heerby to be wise by another man's ruin, mortify their lascivious appetites,
and fly from the company of them that are slaves to concupiscence.

But unto thee (o Christian Sampson) do I return, and with thee (most chaste
Nicetas) I make an end, who in a garden did raise that most noble trophey by
triumphing over Incontinency.

O Nicetas, live again in us, o most Illustrious Co^querour, fight and triumph
in us. Let thy example, let thy battle and victory animate, set us on fire, and
inflame us to co^bate. Let us take courage with Nicetas, let us fight and
overcome with him. That man certainly goes away with victory, who cease not
to fight courageously: we must fight, there is no victory in this warfare
without combat: there is no reward here but only for them that fight lawfully.
Chastity is a treasure of inestimable value, to which is due an eternal reward;
neither can any man purchase chastity for nothing. This if thou do highly
prize, thou must undervalue al other things, which in respect of it are nothing
worth. Omnis ponderatio non est digna continentis animae, Al weight is not
worthy a continent soul. Eccl. 26.20.


LAVS DEO Qui dedit velle and perficere.
INDEX.
THE FIRST BOOK.
THe entrance into the discourse. Chap. 1. page 1. The most illustrio^s act of
Nicet^ related somewhat at large. Chap. 2. page 5. Idleness the first allurement
to incontinency. Chapter 3. p. 13. The second allurement to incontinency: Dai^ty
fair, surfeting, and Gluttony. Chap. 4. page 20. The third allurement to
incontinency: Impure and obscene books. Chap. 5. page 26. The Fourth allurement
to incontinency: Dishonest pictures. Chap. 6. pa^. 3^. The fifth allurement to
incontinency: Wa^dring* curious, and gazing eyes. Chap. 7. page 47. The Sixth
allurement to incontinency: Las^io^s and dishonest Words. Chap. 8. page 69. The
Seventh allurement to incontinency: End Companions. Chap. 9. page 70. The
first effects of incontinency: It con^meth the body and wastes riches. Chap.
10. page 100. The other effects of incontinency: (...) the soul, and impayreth
the judgment. Chap. 11. page 112. The third effect of incontinency. It ta^teth
the same, and extirpateth al virtues. Chap. 12. page 117.
THE SECOND BOOK.
S. Benedict may be called the brother of Nicetas, in respect of a certain
illustrious act of his. Chap. 1. page 129. The battle of Nicetas and his
victory descri^ed in ^eroical verse. Chap. 2. page 169. The first antid^te
against incontinency: Reading of pious books. Chap. 3. page 181. The second
antidote against incontinency: Chastiz^ment of the body. Chap. 4. page 198. The
third antidote against incontinency: Prayers, or the study of D^tion. Chap. 5.
page 222. The fourth antidote against incontinency: Often Confession of a
(...). Chap. 6. page 245. The fifth antidote ^gai^st incontinency: Fasting and
the exercise of Absti^nce. Chap. 7. page 282. The sixth antidote against
incontinency: Labors and the love of exercise. Chap. 8. page 302. The Seventh
antidote against incontinency: Careful keeping of (...) exterior senses. Chap.
9. page 31^. The eight antidote against incontinency: Cont^ual memory of the
presence of God in all places. Chapter 10. p. ^17. The ninth antidote against
incontinency: The nine punishments of Eternity. Chap. 11. page 381. The
Epilogue of those things which are said concerning the triumph over
incontinency. Chap. 12. page 425.

