The.xi. Books of the Golden Ass, Conteininge the Metamorphosie of Lucius
Apuleius, enterlaced with sondrie pleasant and delectable Tales, with an
excellent Narration of the Marriage of Cupide and Psiches, set out in the.iiij.
v. and vj. Books.

Translated out of Latin into English by William Adlington.

Imprinted at London in Fleetstreate, at the sign of the Oliphante, by Henry
VVykes. Anno. 1566.

To the right Honorable, and Mighty Lord, Thomas, Earl of Sussex, Viscont
Fitzwaltre, Lord of Egremont and of Burnell, Knight of the most noble Order of
the Garter, Justice of the Forestes and Chases, from Trente sowthwarde, and
Captain of the Gentlemen Pentioners, of the house of the Queen out
Sovereign Lady.
AFter that I had taken upon me (right Honorable) in manner of that unlearned
and foolish poet Cherillus, (who rashly, and unadvisedly, wrote a big volume
in verses of the gestes and valiant prowess of Alexander the great) to
translate this present book, conteyninge the Metamorphosy of Lucius Apuleius:
being moved thereunto by the right pleasant pastime, and delectable matter
therein: I eftsoon consulted with my self, to whom I might best offer so
pleasant and worthy a work, devised by the Author, it being now barbarously
and simply framed in our English tongue. And after long deliberatio^ had,
your Honorable Lordshippe came to my remembrance, a man much more worthy then
to whom so homely and rude a translation should be presented. But when I
again remembered the iestinge and sportfull matter of the book unfit to be
offered to any man of gravity and wisdom, I was wholly determined to make no
Epistle dedicatory at all: till as now of late, persuaded thereunto by my
friends, I have boldly enterprised to offer the same to your Lordshippe, who
as I trust will with no less good will accept the same, then if it did
entreat of some serious and lofty matter, considering that although the
matter therein seem very light, and merry, yet the effect thereof tends to a
good and virtuous moral, as in the followynge Epistle to the Reader may be
clearly perceived. For so has all writers in times paste employed their
travel and labors, that their posterity might receive some fruictfull
profit by the same. And therefore the Poets feigned not their fables in
vain, consideringe that children in time of their first studies, are much
allured thereby to proceed to more grave and deep disciplines, whereas
otherwise their minds would quickly loathe the wise and prudent works of
learned men, wherein in such unripe years they take no spark of delectation
at all. And not only that profit arriseth to children by such feigned
fables, but also the virtues of men are covertly thereby commended, and their
vices discommended and abhorred. For by the fable of Actaeon, where it is
feigned, that when he saw Diana washinge her self in a well, he was
immediately turned into a Heart and so was slain of his own Dogs: may be meant
that when a man casts his eyes, on the vain and soon vadynge beauty of the
world, consentinge thereto in his mind, he seems to be turned into a brute
beast, and so to be slain thorough the inordinate desire of his own affectes.
By Tantalus that stands in the midst of the floode Eridan having before
him a tree laden with pleasant apples, he being nevertheless always thursty
and hungry, betokens the insatiable desire of covetous persons. The Fables of
Atreus, Thiestes, Tereus and Progne signifies the wicked and abominable
factes wrought and attempted by mortal men. The fall of Icarus is an example
to proud and arrogant persons that weeneth to clymbe up to the Heavens. By
Mydas, who obtained of Bacchus that all things which he touched might be
Gold, is carped the foul sin of avarice. By Phaeton, that unskillfully took
in hand to rule the Chariot of the Sun, are represented those persons
which attempt things passinge their power and capacity. By Castor and
Pollux, turned into a sign in Heaven called Gemini, is signified, that
virtuous and godly persons shall be rewarded after life with perpetual bliss.
And in this fable or feigned ieste of Lucius Apuleius is comprehended a figure
of man's life, ministringe most sweet and delectable matter, to such as shall be
desirous to Read the same. The which if your Honorable Lordshippe shall accept
and take in good part, I shall not only think my small travel and labor
well employed, but also receive a farther comfort to attempt some more serious
matter which may be more acceptable to your Lordshippe: desiring the same, to
excuse my rash and ^olde enterprise, at this time, as I nothing doubt in
your Lordshippes goodness. To whom I beseech Almighty God to imparte long
life with increase of much Honor.

From University College in Oxforde the.xviij. of September. 1566. Your
Honors most bounden William Adlington.

To the Reader.
WHen that I had (gentle Reader) slightly here and there run over the
pleasant and delectable iestes of Lucius Apuleius (a man of ancient descent,
and endewed with singular learning) written in such a frank and flourishing
style, as he seemed to have the Muses always at will, to feed and maineteine
his pen: And when again I perceived the matter to minister such exceedinge
plenty of mirth, as never (in my judgment) the like has been showed by any
other, I purposed according to my sclender knowledge (though it were rudely,
and far disagreeyng from the fine and excellent dooinges now a days) to
translate the same into our vulgar tongue, to the end, that amongst so many
sage and serious works (as every man welny, endeavor daily to increase) there
might be some fresh and pleasante matter, to recreate the minds of the
Readers withal. Howbeit I was eftesoones driven from my purpose by two causes:
First, perceiuinge that the Author had written his work in so dark and
high a style, in so strange and absurd words, and in such new invented
phrases, as he seemed rather to set it forth, to show his magnifency of prose,
then to participate his dooinges to other: Secondly, fearinge lest the
translation of this present book (which seems a mere jest and fable, and a
work worthy to be laughed at, by reason of the vanity of the Author,
might be contemned and despised of all men, and so consequently, I to be had
in derisio^, to occupy my self in such frivolous and trifling toys: but on
the other side, when I had thoroughly learned the intent of the Author, and the
purpose why he invented so sportfull a jest: I was verily persuaded, that my
small travel, should not only be accepted of many, but the matter it self
allowed, and praised of all. Wherefore I intend (God willinge) as nighe as I
can, to utter and open the meaning thereof to the simple and ignorant, whereby
they may not take the same, as a thing only to jest and laugh at (for the
Fables of Esope, and the feigninge of Poets, wear never written for that
purpose) but by the pleasauntnes thereof, be rather induced to the knowledge of
their present estate, and thereby tra^sforme them selves into the right and
perfect shape of men. The argument of the book is: How Lucius Apuleius the
Author him self, traueled into Thessaly (being a region in Greece, where all
the women for the most part, be such wonderful witches, that they can
transfourme men into the figure of beasts) wheare after he had continued a
few days, by the mighty force of a violent confection, he was changed into a
miserable Ass, and nothing might reduce him to his wonted shape, but the
eatinge of a Rose, which after endura^ce of infinite sorrow, at length he
obtained by prayer. Verily under the wrappe of this transformation, is taxed
the life of mortal men, when as we suffer our minds so to be drowned in the
sensual lusts of the flesh, and the beastly pleasure thereof: (which aptly
may be called, the violent confection of witches) that we leese wholly the use
of reason and virtue (which proprely should be in man) and play the parts of
brute and savage beasts. By like occasion we read how diverse of the
compaignions of Ulysses, wear turned by the marvelous power of Circe, into
Swine. And find we not in the Scripture, that Nabuchodonoser the ninth King of
Babylon, by reason of his great dominions and roialmes, fell into such
exceedyng pride, that he was suddenly transformed of almighty God, into an
horrible monster, having the head of an Ox, the feet of a Bear, and the
tail of a Lion, and did eat heye as a beast? But as Lucius Apuleius was
changed into his human shape by a Rose, the compaignions of Ulysses by great
intercession, and Nabuchodonoser by the continual prayers of Daniell, whereby
they knew them selves, and lived after a good and virtuous life: So can we
never be restored to the right figure of our selves, except we taste and eat
the sweet Rose of reason and virtue, which the rather by mediation of prayer,
we may assuredly attain. Again, may not the meaning of this work, be
altered and turned in this sort. A man desirous to apply his mind to some
excellent art, or given to the study of any of the sciences, at the first
appears to him self an Ass without wit, without knowledge, and not much
unlike a brute beast, till such time as by much pain and travel, he has
achieved to the perfectnes of the same, and tastinge the sweet flower and
fruicte of his studies, does think him self well brought to the right and
very shape of a man. Finally, the Metamorphosie of L. Apuleius, may be
resembled to youth without discretion, and his reduction, to age possessed with
wisdom and virtue. Now since this book of Lucius, is a figure of ma^s life,
and touches the nature and manners of mortal men, egginge them forward from
their Asinall form, to their human and perfect shape, beside the pleasant
and delectable iestes therein contained, I trust if my simple translation be
nothing accepted, yet the matter it self, shall be esteemed by such, as not
only delight to please their fancy in readinge the same, but also take a
pattern thereby, to regenerate their minds from brutish and beastly custom.
How be it, I have not so exactly passed thorough the Author, as to point every
sentence according as it is in Latin, or so absolutely translated every
word, as it lies in the prose, (for so the French and Spanish translators
have not done) considering the same in our vulgar tongue would have appeared
very obscure and dark, and thereby consequently, loathsome to the Reader, but
nothing erringe as I trust from the given and natural meaning of the author,
have used more common and familiar words (yet not so much as I might do)
for the plainer settinge forth of the same. But how so ever it be (gentle
Reader) I pray thee take it in good part, considering that for thee I have
taken this pain, to the intent, that thou may, Read the same with pleasure.

FINIS.
THE LIFE OF LUCIUS Apuleius, briefly expressed.
LVcius Apuleius African, an excellent follower of Plato his sect, borne in
Maudara, a country sometime inhabited by the Romans, and under the
jurisdiction of Syphar, situate, and liyng upon the borders of Numidia and
Getulia, whereby he calls him self, half a Numidian, and half a Getulian:
And Sidonius named him the Platonian Madaure^ce: his father called Theseus, had
passed all offices of dignity in his country, with much honor: his mother
named Saluia, was of such excellent virtue, that she passed all the dames of
her time, borne of an ancient house, and descended from the noble Philosopher
Plutarche, and Sextus his Nephew. His wife called Pude^tila was endowed with as
much virtue and richesse as any woman might be. He him self was of high and
comely stature, gray eied, his hear yellow, and a beawtifull personage: he
flourished in Carthage in the time of Iolianus Auitus, and Claudius Maximus
proco^sules, where he spent his youth in learning the liberal sciences, and
much profited under his masters there, whereby not without cause, he
gloriously calls him self, the nourice of Carthage, and the Clestial Muse
and venerable mistres of Afric, sone after at Athenes (wheare in times past
the well of all doctrine flourished) he tasted many of the cups of the Muses,
he learned Poetry, Geometry, Music, Logic, and the universal knowledge of
Philosophy, and studied not in vain the nine Muses, that is to say, the nine
noble and royal disciplines. Immediately after he went to Rome, and studied
there the Latin tongue, with such labor and continual study, that he
achieved to great eloquence, and was known and approved to be excellently
learned, whereby he might woorthily be called Polyhistor, y^ is to say, one
that knows much or many things. And being thus no less endewed with
eloquence, than with singular learning, he wrote many books for them that
should come after: Whereof part by negligence of times be intercepted, and
part now extant, do sufficiently declare with how much wisdom and doctrine
he flourished, and with how much virtue he excelled emongst the rude and
barbarous people. The like was Anacharsis emo^gst the most luskishe Scythes:
but emongst the books of Lucius Apuleius which are perished and prevented,
howbeit greatly desired of us now a days, was one entitled Banketing
questions, an other entreatinge of the nature of Fish, an other of the
generation Beasts, an other conteininge his Epigra^mes, and an other called
Hermagoras: but such as are now extant, are the four books named Floridorum,
wherein is contained a florishinge style, and a sauery kind of learning,
which delights, holds, and reioyseth the Reader meruelously, wherein you
shall find a great variety of things, as leapinge one from an other: One
excellent and copious oration conteininge all the grace and virtue of the art
Oratorie, whereby he cleereth him self of the crime of art Magic, which was
sclaunderously objected against him by his envious adversaries, wherein is
contained such force of eloquence and doctrine, as he seems to pass and
excel him self. There is an other book of the God or spirit of Socrates,
whereof S. Augustine makes often mention in his book of the definition of
Spirits and description of men, two other books of the opinion of Plato,
wherein is briefly contained that which before was largely expressed: one book
of Cosmographie, comprisinge many things of Aristoteles Meteors: the Dialogue
of Trismegistus, translated by him out of Greek into Latin, so fine, that it
rather seems with more eloquence turned into Latin, then it was before
written in Greek: but principaly, these eleven books of the Golden Ass, are
enriched with such pleasant matter, with such excellency and variety of
florishinge Tales, that nothing may be more sweet and delectable, whereby
woorthely they may be entitled: The books of the Golden Ass, for the
passinge style and matter therein. For what can be more acceptable than this
Ass of Gold in deed: How be it there be many which would rather Entitle it
Metamorphosis, that is to say, a transfiguration or transformation, by reason
of the Argument and matter therein.

FINIS.
THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR, to his son Faustinus, and unto the Readers of
this book.
THat I to thee some joyous iestes, may show in gentle gloss:
And fra^kly feed thy be^ded ears, with passing pleasant prose.
So that thou daine in seemly sort, this wa^ton book to view
That is set out and garnisht fine, with written Phrases new.
I will declare how one by hap, his human figure lost,
And how in brutishe fourmed shape, his lothed life he tossed:
And how he was in course of time, from such estate unfold.
Who eftsoons turned to pristine shape, his lot unlucky told.
WHat and who he was, attend a while and you shall understand, that it was even
I, the writer of mine own Metamorphosie, and strange alteration of figure.
Hymettus, Athens, Isthmia, Ephire, Tenaros, and Sparta, being fat and fertile
soiles (as I pray you give credit to the books of more everlasting fame) be
places where mine ancient progeny and lignage did sometime flourishe: there I
say, in Athens when I was young, I went first to school. Sone after (as a
stranger) I arrived at Rome, whereas by great industry and without instruction
of any scholemaster I achieved to the full perfection of the Latin tongue:
behold, I first crave and beg your pardon, least I should happen to
displease or offend any of you by the rude and rustike utterance of this
strange and foreign language. And verily, this new alteration of speech does
correspond to the enterprised matter whereof I purpose to entreat, I will set
forth unto you a pleasant Grecian lest. Whereunto gentle Reader if thou will
give attenda^t ear, it will minister unto thee such delectable matter, as thou
shall be well contented withal.

FINIS.
The first book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How Apuleius ridinge into Thessalie, fortuned to fall into company with two
strangers, that reasoned together of the mighty power of Witches.

cap. 1.
AS I fortuned to take my voyage into Thessalie, A country where are many
Inchanteresses and Witches.
about certain affairs which I had to do (for there mine auncestrie by my
mothers side inhabiteth, descended of the ligne of that most excellent person
Plutarche, and of Sextus the philosopher his Nephew, which is to us a great
woorshippe and honor: The virtue of parents makes the children honored.
And after that by much travel and great pain, I had passed over the high
mountains and slipperie valleis, and had ridden thorough the cloggy fallowed
fields, perceiuinge that my horse did wax somewhat slow, and to the intent
likewise, I might repose and strengthen my self, (being weary with ridinge) I
lighted of my horse, and wipinge away the sweat from every part of his body,
I unbridled him, and walked him softly in my hand, to the end he might piss,
and ease him self of his werines, and travel: And while he went grasinge
freshly in the field (castinge his head sometimes aside as a token of
rejoicing and gladness) I perceived a little before me two compaignions ridinge,
and so I ouertakinge them made the third: And while I listened to hear their
communicatio^, the one of them laughed and mocked his fellow: saying, leave of
I pray thee and speak no more, for I cannot abide to hear thee tell such
absurd and incredible lies: Which when I heard, I desired to hear some news,
and said: I pray you Masters make me partaker of your talk, that am not so
curious, as desirous to know all your communication: So shall we shorten our
journey, and easily pass this high hill before us, by merry and pleasant
talk: but he that laughed before at his fellow, said again: verily this tale
is as true, as if a man would say, that by Sorcerie and inchauntment the
floodes might be enforced to run against their course: Witches in old time
wear supposed to be of such power that they could pull down the Moon by
their inchauntment.
the seas to be immovable: the air to lack the blowinge of winds: the Sun
to be restrained from his natural race: the Moon to purge his skumme upon
herbs and trees, to serve for sorceries: the Stars to be pulled from
heaven, the day to be darkened, and the dark night to continue still. Then I,
being more desirouse to hear his talk then his companions, said: I pray you,
that began to tell your tale even now, leave not of so, but tell the reside
we. And turning to the other, I said: You perhaps that are of an obstinate
mind and gross ears, mock and contemn those things which are reported
for truth, know you not, that it is accounted untrue by the praue opinion of
men, which either is rarely seen, seldom heard, or that passes the capacity
of man's reason, which if it be more narrowly skanned, you shall not only
find it evident and plain, but also very easy to be brought to pass.

How Apuleius told to the two strangers, what he saw a Iuglar do in
Athens.

Cap. 2.
THe other night, being at supper with a sort of hu^gry fellows, while I did
greedely put a great morsel of meat in my wouth, that was fried with the
flower of cheese and barley, it cleaued so fast in the passage of my throat,
and stopped my wind, in such sort that I was welnie choked. And yet at Athens
before the porche there, called Peale, I saw with these eyes, a Iugler that
swalowed up a twoohand swoorde with a very keen edge, and by and by, for a
little money that we, that looked on, gave him, he devoured a chasing spear,
with the point downward. And after that he had co^uaide the whole spear
within the closure of his body, and brought it out again behind, there
appeared on the top thereof (which caused us all to marvel) a fair boy,
pleasant and nimble, windinge and turninge him self in such sort, that you
would suppose that he had neither bone nor gristle, and verily think that he
were the natural Serpent, crepinge and slidinge on the knotted staff, The God
of medicine is called Asculapius.
which the God of Medicine is feigned to bear. But turninge me to him that
began his Tale, I pray you (quod I) follow your purpose, and I alone will give
credit unto you, and for your pains will pay your charges at the next Inn we
come unto. To whom he aunsweared, Certes sir, I thank you for your gentle
offer, and at your request, I will proceade in my tale: but first I will swear
unto you by the light of this Sun y^ shines here, y^ those things which I
shall tell be true, least when you come to the next City called Thessalie,
you should doubt any thing, of that which is rife in the mouths of every
person, and done before the face of all men: And that I may first make relation
unto you, what, and who I am, and whither I go, and for what purpose: know ye,
that I am of Egin; trauelinge these countries about from Thessaly to Etolia,
and from Etolia to Beotia, to provide for honey, cheese, and other victuales to
sell again: And understanding, that at Hippata (which is the principal City
of all Thessalie) is accustomed to be sold new cheeses of exceedinge good
taste and relishe, I fortuned on a day to go thither, to make my market there,
but (as it often happens) I came in an evil hour, for one Lupus a purueiour
had bought and engrossed up all the day before, and so I was deceived.
Wherefore, toward night (being very weary) I went to the baines to refreshe my
self, and behold, I fortuned to epsy, my compaignion Socrates sittinge upon
the ground, covered with a torn and course mantell, who who so meigre and of
so sallowe and miserable a countenance, that I scantly knew him: for fortune
had brought him into such estate and calamity, that he verily seemed as a
common beggar, that stands in the streets to crave the benevolence of the
passers by: Toward whom (how be it he was my singular friend and familiar
acquaintance, Misery makes some men forget acquaintance.
yet half in despair) I drew me, and said: Alas my Socrates, what means
this? how fares it with thee? what crime have thou committed? verily there is
great lamentation and weepinge made for thee at home: Thy children are in ward
by decree of the provincial judge: thy wife (having ended her mourninge time
in lamentable wise with face and visage bloubered with tears, in such sort
that she has welny wept out both her eyes) is constrained by her parents to
put out of remembrance the unfortunate loss and lack of thee at home, and
(against her will) to take a new husband. And do thou live here as a ghost
or hegge, to our great shame and ignomie? Then answered he to me, and said: O
my friend Aristomenus, now perceive I well that you are ignorant of the
whirlinge chaunges, the unstable forces, and slipperie inconstance of fortune:
and therewithal he covered his face (even then blushing for very shame) with
his rugged ma^tell, in so much that from his navel downward he appeared al
naked. But I (not willing to see him any longer in such great misery and
calamity) took him by the hand and lifted him up from the ground: who
(having his face covered in such sort) let fortune (quod he) triumph yet
more, let her have her sway, and finishe that which she has begun. And
therwithall I put of one of my garments and covered him, and immediately I
brought him to the baine, and caused him to be anointed, wiped, and the
filthy skurfe of his body to be rubbed away, which done (although I wear
very weary my self) yet I led the poor miser to my Inn, where he reposed
his body upon a bed, and then I brought him meat and drink, and so we
talked together: for there we might be merry and laugh at our pleasure, and so
we wear, until such time as he (fetching a pitiful sighe from the bottom of
his heart, and beatinge his face in miserable sort) began to say.

How Socrates in his return from Macedonie to Larissa, was spoiled and robbed,
and how he fell acquainted with one Meroe, a Witch.

Cap. 3
ALas poor miser that I am, that for the only desire to see a game of trial
of weapons, am fallen into these miseries and wretched snares of misfortune.
For in my return from Macedonie, whereas I sold all my wares, and played the
merchant by the space of ten months, a little before that I came to Larissa,
I turned out of the way to v^ew the situation of the country there, and
behold in the bottom of a deep valley, I was suddenly environed with a company
of thieves, who robbed and spoiled me, of such things as I had, and yet would
hardely suffer me to escape. But I (being in such extremity) in the end, was
happily delivered from their cruel hands: and so I fortuned to come to the
house of an old woman that sold wine, called Meroe: who had her tongue
sufficiently instructed to flattery: unto whom I opened the causes of my long
pexegrination and careful travel, and of nune unlucky abue^ture, and after
that I had declared unto her such things as then presently came to my
remembrance, she gentely entertained me, and made me good chere, and by and by
being pricked by carnal desire, she brought me to her own bed chamber,
where as I (poor miser) (the very first night of our liyng together) did
purchase to my self this miserable face, To use and hau^t women makes me^
have meigre and palc ^aces.
and for her lodging I gave her such apparel, as the thieves left to cover me
withal.

Then I (understanding the cause of his miserable estate) said unto him: In
faith, thou art worthy to sustain the most extreme misery and calamity,
which have defiled and maculate thine own body, forsaken thy wife
traitorouslie, and dishonored thy children, parents, and friends, for the
love of a vile harlot and old strumpet. When Socrates hard me rail against
Meroe in such sort, he held up his finger to me, and as half abashed, said:
peace, peace, I pray you, and (lokinge about least any person should here,) I
pray you (quod he) take heed what you say against so venerable a woman as she
is, lest by your intemperate tongue you ^^^che some harm. Then (with
resemblance of admiration) what (quod I) is she so excellent a person as you
name her to be? I pray you tell me. Then answered he, verily she is a
Magicien, which has power to rule the Heavens, to bring down the sky, to
bear up the earth, to turn the waters into hills, and the hills into
runninge waters, to lift up the terrestiall spirits into the air, and to pull
the Gods out of the heavens, to ertinguishe the Planetes, and to lighten the
d^epe darkness of hell. Then said I unto Socrates, I pray thee leave of this
high and mystical kind of talk, and tell the matter in a more plain and
simple fashion. Then answered he, will you hear one or two, or mo of her
factes, which she has done, for where as she enforces, not only the
inhabitants of ye country here, but also the Indians and the Aethiopes the
one and the other, and also the Antictons, to love her in most raginge sort,
such are but trifles and chippes of her occupation, but I pray you give ear,
and I will declare of more greater matters which she has done openly and
before the face of all men.

How Meroe the witch turned diverse persons into miserable Beasts.

Cap. 4.
IN faith Aristomenus, to tell you the truth, this woman had a certain lover,
whom by the utterance of one only word, she turned him into a Beuer,
because he loved an other woman beside her, and the reason why she transformed
him into such a beast, is, for that it is his nature, when he perceives the
hunters and hounds to draw after him, to bite of his members, and lay them in
the way, that the hounds may be at a stop when they find them, and to the
intent it might so happen unto him, (because he fancied an other woman) she
turned him into that kind of shape. Semblably she changed one of her
neighbors, being an old man and one that sold wine, into a frogge, in that
he was one of her occupation, and therefore she bare him grudge, and now the
poor miser swimminge in one of his pipes of wine, and welny drowned in the
dregs, does cry and call with a hoarse voice, for his old gestes and
acquaintance that pass by. Likewise she turned one of the Advocates of the
court (because he pleaded and spoke against her in a rightful cause) into a
horned Ram, and now the poor Ra^me is become and Advocate. Moreover she
caused that the wife of a certain lover that she had, should never be
delivered of her child, but according to the computation of all men, it is
eight years past since the poor woman began first to swell, and now she is
increased so big, that she seems as though she would bring forth some
great Oliphant, which when it was known abroad and published thorough out all the town, they took indignation against her, and ordained that the next day
she should most cruelly be stoned to death, which purpose of theirs she
prevented, by the virtue of her enchauntmentes, and as Medea (who obtained of
king Creon but one days respite before her departure) did burn all his
house, him and his daughter, so she (by her coniurations and inuocations of
sprites, which she uses in a certain hole in her house, as she her self
declared unto me the next day followinge) closed all the persons of the town
so sure in their howses, and with such violence of power, that for the space of
two days, they could not come forth, nor open their gates nor doors, nor
break down their walls, whereby they wear enforced by mutual consent, to
cry unto her, and to bind them selves (streictly) by oaths, that they would
never afterward molest or hurt her, and moreover if any did offer her any
injury they would be ready to defend her, whereupon she (moved at their
promises, and stirred by pity) released all the town. But she conveyed the
principal Author of this ordinance, about midnight, with all his house, the
walls, the ground, and the foundation, into an other town distant from
thense a hundred miles, situate and being on the top of a high hill, and by
reason thereof destitute of water, and because the edifices and houses, wear
so nighe builded together, that it was not possible for the house to stand
there, she threw down the same before the gate of the town. Then spoke I and
said: O my friend Socrates, you have declared unto me many marvelous things
and strange chances, and moreover stricken me with no small trouble of mind,
yea rather with great fear, least the same old woman vsinge the like practice,
should fortune to here all our Witches are supposed tobeare whatsoever is said.
communication: wherefore let us now sleep, and after that we have taken our
rest, let us rise betime in the morninge and ride away from hens before day, as
far as we may possible.

How Socrates and Aristomenus slept together in one chamber, and how they were
handled by Witches.

Cap. 5.
IN speakinge these words, and deuisinge with my self of our departing the
next morrow, least Meroe the Witch should play by us, as she had done^ by
diverse other persons: It fortuned that Socrates did fall a sleep, and slept
very soundly, by reason of his travel and plenty of meat and wine,
wherewithal he had filled him self. Wherefore I closed and barred fast the
doors of the chamber, and put my bed behind the door, ^are and care (...)
me^ wa^^nge.
and so laid me down to rest, but I could in no wise sleep for the great
fear which was in my heart, until it was about midnight, and then I began to
slomber: but alas, behold suddenly the chamber doors brake open, the locks,
boltes and posts fell down, that you would verily have thought, that some
thieves had been presently come to have spoiled and robbed us. And my bed
whereon I lay being a trockle bed, fashioned in form of a cradle, and one of
the feet broken and rotten, by violence was turned vpside down, and I
likewise was overwhelmed and covered liyng in the fame. Then perceived I in my
self, that certain affectes of the mind by nature does chance contrary.
For as tears oftentimes trickleth down the cheeks of him that sees or
hears some joyful news, so I being in this fearful perplexity, could not
forbear laughinge, to see how of Aristomenus I was made like unto a snayle in
his shell. And while I lay on the ground covered in this sort, I peeped under
the bed to see what would happen. And behold there entered in two old women,
the one bearinge a burninge torche, and the other a sponge and a naked swoorde:
And so in this habit they stood about Socrates being fast a steape. Then
she (which bare the swoorde) said unto the other, behold sister Panthia this is
my dear and my sweet heart, which both day and night has abused my wa^ton
youthfulnes. This is he (who little regardinge my love) does not only diffame
me with reproachful words, but also intends to run away: And I shall be
forsaken by like cras^e as Ulysses did use, and shall continually bewail my
solitarines as Calipso, (which said) she pointed to wards me, that lay under
the bed, and showed me to Panthia. This is he (quod she) which is his
counseler, and persuades him to forsake me, and now (being at the point of
death) he lies prostrate on the ground covered with his bed, and has seen
all our dooinges, and hops to escape (skotfree) from my hands, but I will
cause that he shall repent him self too late, nay rather forthwith of his
former vnte^perate language, and his present curiosity. Which words when I
hard, I fell into a cold sweat, and my heart trembled with fear, in so much
that the bed over me did like wise rattle and shake. Then spoke Panthia unto
Meroe, and said: Sister, let us by and by tear him in pieces, or else tie him
by the members and so cut them of. Then Meroe (being so named because she was
a tauerner Meroe, so called of Meris, which in Englis he is strong wine
vntempred.
and loved well good wines) answered: nay rather let him live, and bury the
Corpse of this poor wretch in some hole of the earth, and therewithal she
turned the head of Socrates on the other side, and thrust her swoorde up to the
hiltes into the left part of his neck, and received the blood, that gushed
out, with a pot, that no drop thereof fell beside, which things I saw
with mine own eyes, and (as I think) to the intent she might alter nothing
that pertained to sacrifice, which she accustomed to make, she thrust her
hand down into the entrailles of his body, and (searchinge about) at length
brought forth the heart of my miserable compaignion Socrates, who (having his
throat cut in such sort) yielded out a doleful cry, and gave up the ghost.
Then Panthia stopped the wide wound of his throat with the sponge, and said:
O Sponge spronge and made of the sea, beware that thou The sponge (...) meth of
the (...)
pass not by the runninge river. This being said, the one of them moved and
turned up my bed, and their they stridde over me, and slapped their buttockes
upon my face, and all bepissed me, till I was wringing wet: when this was
ended, they went their ways, and the doors cl^sed fast, the posts stood in
their old places, and the locks and boltes were shut again. But I, that l^ye
upon the ground, like one without soul, naked and cold, and wringinge wette
with piss, like to one that wear more then half dead, yet reuiuinge my
self, and appointed as I think for the gallows, began to say: Alas what shall
become of me to morrow, when my compaignion shall be found murdered here in the
chamber? The presumptions of Magistrates.
To whom shall I seem to tell any similitude of truth, when as I shall tell
the truth in deed? They will say if thou wearest unable to resist the violence
of the weme^, yet should thou have cried for help, wile thou suffer the man
to be slain before thy face and say nothing? Or why did not they slay thee
like wise? why did they spare thee that stood by and saw them commit that
horrible fact? Wherefore although thou have escaped their hands, yet thou
shall not escape ours. While I pondred these things with my self, the night
passed on: And so I thought best to take my horse before day, and got forward
in my journey. How be it the ways were unknown unto me, and thereupo^ I took
up my packet, unlocked and vnbarred the doors, but those good and faithful
doors which in the night did open of their own accord, could then scantly
be opened with their keys. And when I was out I cried hossra, Osteler, where
art thou, open the stable door, for I will ride away by and by. Such drousie
seruaeuntes have ready answers
The Osteler liyng behind the stable door upon a pallet, and half a sleep,
what (quod he) do not you know that the ways he very dangerous? what mean
you to rise at this time of night? If you perhaps (guilty of some heinous
crime) be werie of your life, yet think you not that we are such sottes that
we will die for you. Then said I, it is welny day, and moreover what can
thieves take from him that has nothing? do not thou know (fool as thou
art) that The wayfaring man that has no money may singe merely before the
thief
if thou be naked, if ten Giantes should assail thee, they could not spoil
or rob thee? Whereunto the drowsy Osteler half a sleep, and turninge on
the other side, answered: what know I whether you have murdered your
compaignion whom you brought in yesternight or no, and now seek the means to
escape away. O Lord, at that time I remember, that the earth seemed to open,
and that I saw at hell gate the dog Cerberus Cerberus is the dog of, hell
feigned by the Poets to stand a^ Plutoes gates
gaping to devour me, and then I verily believed, that Meroe did not spare my
throat, moved with pity, but rather cruelly pardoned me to bring me to the
gallows. Wherefore, I returned to my chamber, and there devised with my self
in what sort I should finishe my life. But when I saw that fortune would
minister unto me no other instrument, then that which my bed proffred me, I
said: O bed, O bed, most dear unto me at this present, which have abode
and suffered with me so many miseries, judge and arbiter of such things as were
done here this night, whom only I may call to witness for mine innocence,
render (I say) unto me some wholesome weapon to end my life that am most
willinge to die. And therewithal I pulled out a piece of the rope wherewith the
bed was corded, and tied one end thereof about a rafter by the window, and
with the other end I made a slidinge knotte, and stood upon my bed, and so
put my neck into hit. And when I leped from the bed, thinkinge verel^ to
strangle my self and so die, behold the rope being old and rotten brast in
the middle, and I fell down tomblinge upon Socrates that lay under. And eue^
at that same very time, the Osteler came in criyng with a loud voice, and said
where are you that made such have at midnight, and now lies wallowinge a bed,
whereupon (I know not whether it was by my fall or by the great cry of the
Osteler) Socrates (as waking out of a sleep) did rise up first and said: It is
not without cause that strangers do speak evil of all such Ostelers, for
this captife in his coming in, and with his criyng out, I think under a
color to steal away something, has waked me out of a sound sleep. Then I
rose up joyful, with a merry countenance, sa^ynge: Behold good Osteler, my
friend, my compaignion and my brother whom thou did falsely affirm to be
murdered by me this night. And therewithal I embrased my friend Socrates and
kissed him, but he smellyng the stink of the piss wherewith those hegges had
embrued me, thrust me away and said cleanse thy self from that filthy odor,
and then he began gentely to enquire how that noisome sent happened unto me,
but I (finely feigninge and couloringe the matter for the time) did break of
his talk, and took him by the hand and said, why tarry we? why leese we the
pleasure of this fair morning? Let us go, and so I took up my pacquette, and
paid the charges of the house and departed: and we had not gone a mile out of
the town but it was broad day, and then I diligently looked upon Socrates
throat to see if I could epsy the place where Meroe thrust in her swoorde,
but when I could not perceive any such thing, I thought with my self what a
mad man am I, that (being overcome with wine yesternight) have dreamed such
terrible things: Behold I see Socrates is sound, salve and in health, where is
his wound? where is the sponge? where is his great and new cut? and then I
spoke to him and said: verily it is not without occasion that Physicians of
experience does affirm, that such as fill their gorges abundantly with meat
and drink shall dream of dire and horrible sightes, for I my self (not
tempryng mine appetite yesternight from the pottes of wine) did seem to see
this night strange and cruel visions, that even yet I think my self
sprinkled and wette with human blood: whereunto Socrates laughing, made
answer and said: Nay thou art not wette with the blood of men, but thou art
embrued with stinkinge piss: and verily I my self dreamed this night, that my
throat was cut and that I felt the pain of the wound, and that my heart
was pulled out of my belly, and the remembrance thereof makes me now to
fear, for my knees do tremble that I can uneath go any further, and therefore
I would feign eat somewhat to strengthen and revive my spirits: then said I,
behold here is thy breakefast, and therwithall I opened my skrippe, that
hanged upon my shoulder, and gave him bread and cheese, and we satte down
under a great plane troe and I eat part with him: And while I beheld him
eatinge greedely, I perceived that he waxed meigre and pale, and that his
lively color vaded away, in so much that (being in great fear and
remembringe those terrible furies of whom I lately dreamed) the first morsel
of bread that I put in my mouth (which was but very small) did so stick in my
jaws that I could nether swallowe it down nor yet yield it up, and moreover
the small time of our being together increased my fear, and what is he, that
saying his compaignion die in the high way before his face, will not greatly
lament and be sorry: but when that Socrates had eaten sufficiently he wared
very thirsty, for in deed he had welnie devoured all a whole cheese, and
behold evil fortune, there was behind the plane tree a pleasant runninge
water as clear as Cri^tall, and I said unto him: come hither Socrates to this
water and drink thy fill. And then he rose and came to the river, and kneeled
down upon the side of the bank to drink, but he had skase touched y^ water
with his lips, when as behold, the wound of his throat opened wide, ^anthia
said before beware spoge that thou pass not by the runninge river.
and the sponge suddenly fell into the water and after issued out a little
remnant of blood, and his body (being then without life) had fallen into the
river, had not I caught him by the leg, and so pulled him up. And after that
I had lamented a good space the death of my wretched compaignio^, I buried him
in the sands there by the river. Which done, in great fear I rode through
many outwaies and deserte places, and as culpable of the death of Socrates, I
forsook my country, my wife, and my children, and came to Aetolia where I
married an other wife. This tale told Aristomenus, and his fellow which
before obstinately would give no credit unto hi, began to say: Verily there
was never so foolish a tale, nor a more absurd lie told then this: and then
he spoke unto me, saying: Ho sir, what you are I know not, but your habit and
countenance declares, He speaks to Apulcius.
that you should be some honest gentleman, do you believe his tale? yea verily
(quod I) why not? for what so ever the fates has appointed to men, that I
believe shall happen. For many things chance unto me, and unto you, and to
diverse others, which being declared unto the ignorant be accounted as lies.
But verily I give credit unto his tale, and render entier thanks unto him in
that (by the pleasant relation thereof) we have quickly passed and shortened our
journey, and I think that my horse also was delighted with the same, and has
brought me to the gate of this City without any pain at all. Thus ended both
our talk and journey, for they two turned on the left hand to the next
villages, and I rode into the City.

How Apuleius came to a City called Hipate, and was lodged in one Mil^s house,
and brought him letters from Demea of Corinthe.

Cap. 6.
AFter that those two compaignio^s were departed, I entered into the City,
where I espied an old woman, of whom I enquired whether that City was called
Hypata, or no, who answered yeas: Then I demanded whether she knew one Milo
an Alderman of the City, whereat she laughed, and said: verily it is not
without cause that Milo is called an elder man, and accounted as chief of
those which dwell without the walls of the City: To whom I said again, I
pray thee good mother do not mock, but tell me what manner of man he is, and
where he dwells: Marry (quod she) do not you see those baye windows which
on the one side abutte to the gate of the City, and on the other side to the
next lane, there Milo dwells, very rich both in money and substance, Avarice
maket^ men ill spok^ of
but by reason of his great Avarice and insatiable covetousness, he is evil
spoken of, and he is a man that lives all by Usury, and lendinge his money
upon pledges. Moreover he dwells in a small house, and is ever countinge his
money, and has a wife that is a compaignio^ of his extreme misery, Covet
ousnes is extreme misery.
neither keeps he any more in his house then one only maid who goes
appareled like unto a beggar: which when I heard, I laughed with my self, and
thought: in faith my freende Demeas has served me well, which has sent me
(being a stranger) unto such a man, in whose house I shall not be afearde
either of smooke or of the sent of meat, and therewithal I rode to the door
which was fast barred, and knocked aloude, the^n there came forth a maid
which said, Ho Sira, that knockes so fast, in what kind of sort will you
borrow money, know you not that we use to take no gage unless it be either
plate or Iuelles? To whom I answered, I pray thee maid speak more gentle
and tell me whether thy master be within or no. Yes (quod she) that he is, why
do you ask? Marry said I, I am come from Corinthe, and have brought him
letters from Demeas his freende. Then said the maid, I pray you tarry here
till I tell him so, The n^ggarde keeps close his doors always.
and therewithal she closed fast the doors, and went in, and after a while
she returned again, and said, my master desires you to alight and come in:
and so I did, whereas I found him sitting upon a little bed, goinge to supper,
and his wife satte at his feet, but there was no meat upon the table, and so
(by apointment of the maid) I came to him, and saluted him, and delivered the
letters which I brought from Demeas: which when he had read, he said, verily
I thank my freende Demeas much, in that he has sent unto me so worthy a
ge^t as you are: And therewithal he commanded his wife to sit away, and
bid me sit in her place, which when I refused, by reason of courtesy, he
pulled me by the garment and willed me to sit down, for we have (quod he) no
other stool here, nor no other great store of household stuff for fear of
robbinge. Then I (according to his commandment) sat down: and he fell in
further communication with me, and said: Verily I do coniecte by the comely
feature of your body, and by the maidenly shame fastnes of your face, that you
are a gentle man borne, as my freende Demeas has no less declared the same in
his letters: Wherefore I pray you take in good part our poor lodginge, and
behold, yonder chamber is at your commandment, use it as your own, and if
you be contented therewithal, you shall resemble and follow the virtuous
qualities of your good father Theseus, who disdeigned not the sle^der and poor
cotage of Hecades. And then he called his maid, which was named Fotis, and
said: Tarry this gentleman's pacquette into the chamber, and lay it up safely,
and bring quickly water to wash him, and a towell to rub him, and other
things necessary: and then bring him to the next baines, for I know that he
is very werie of travel. These things when I hard, I partly perceived the
manners of Milo, and (endeavoring to bring my self further in his favor) I
said, Sir there is no need of any of these things, for they have been every
where ministered unto me by the way, how be it I will go unto the baines, but
my chiefest care is that my horse be well looked too, for he brought me hither
roundly, and therefore I pray thee Fotis take this money and by some heye and
Dates for him.

How Apuleius goinge to bie fis^e met with his compaignion Pithias.

Cap. 7.
WHen this was done, and all my things brought into the chamber, I walked
toward the veins, but first I went to the market to bie some victualles for
my supper, where as I saw great plenty of fish set out to be sold: and so I
cheapened part thereof, and that which they first held at a hundred pence, I
bought at length for twenty: which when I had done and was departinge away,
one of mine old compaignions, and fellow at Athens, named Pithias, fortuned to
pass by, and viewinge me a good space, in the end brought me to his
remembrance, and gentely came and kissed me, saying: O my dear freende
Lucius, it is a great while paste since we two saw each other, and moreover
from the time that we departed from our master Vestius, I never hard any
news of you, I pray you Lucius tell me the cause of your peregrinatio^ hither:
Then I answered and said: I will make relation thereof unto you to morrow: but
I pray you tell me, what means these seruitours that follow you, and these
rods or verges which they bear: and this habit which you wear, ^o used
Magistrates to goo sometime in ^ome.
like unto a Magistrate: verily I think that you have obtained your own
desire, whereof I am right glad. Then answered Pithias, I bear the office
and rule of the clarke of the market, and therefore if you will have any
pittance for your supper, speak and I will puruey it for you: Then I thanked
him heartily, and said I had bought meat sufficient already. But Pithias when
he espied my basket wherein my fish was, took it and shaked it, and demanded
of me what I paid for all my sprottes: in faith (quod I) I could skase enforse
the fishmonger to sell them for twenty pence, which when he hard, he brought
me back again into the market, and enquired of me of whom I bought them, I
showed him the old man which satte in a corner, whom by and by (by reason of
his office) he did greatly blame and said. Is it thus that you serve and handle
strangers? and specially our friends? wherefore sell you this fish so dear
which is not worth a halfpennie? Now perceive I well that you are an occasion
to make this place, which is the principal City of al Thessalie to be
forsaken of all men, and to reduce it into an inhabitable desert, by reason of
your excessive prices of victuales, but assure your self that you shall not
escape without punishment, and you shall know what mine office is, and how I
ought to punish such as do offend. Then he took my basket and cast the fish
on the ground, and commanded one of his sergeantes to tread them under his
feet: this done he persuaded me to depart, and said that that only shame and
reproach done unto the old caitife did suffice him, so I went away all amassed
and astonished, toward the bames (considering with my self, and deuisinge of
the grace of my compaignion Pythias) where when I had washed and refreshed my
body, I returned again to Milos house both without money and meat, and so
got into my chamber, then came Fotis immediately unto me, and said that her
master desired me to come to supper, but I (not ignorant of Milos abstinence)
prayed that I might be perdoned, since as I thought best to ease my weary bones
rather with sleep and quietness, than with meat: when Fotis had told this
unto Milo, he came him self, and took me by the hand, and while I did
modestly excuse me, I will not (quod he) depart from this place, until such
time as you shall goo with me, and to confirm the same he bound his words
with an oath, whereby he enforced me to follow him and so he brought me into
his chamber, where he satte him down upon the bed, and demau^des of me how
his freende Demeas did, his wife his children and all his family: and I made
him answer to every question, specialy he enquired the causes of my
peregrination and travel, which when I had declared, he^ yet busily
demanded of the state of my country, and of the chief Magistrates there, and
principaly of our Lieutenant and Viceroye, who when he perceived that I was not
only weried by travel, but also with talk, and that I fell a sleep in the
midst of my tale, and further that I spoke nothing directly or advisedly, he
suffered me to depart to my chamber. So escaped I at length from the pratlinge
and hungry supper of this rank old man, Such suppers uses vserers to make.
and being compelled by sleep and not by meat (as having supped only with
talk) I returned into my chamber and there be took me to my quiet and long
desired rest.

Here ends the first book of Lucius Apuleius.
The second Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How Apuleius fortuned to meet with his cousin Byrrhena.

Cap. 8.
AS soon as night was passed, and the day began to spring, I fortuned to
awake and rose out of my bed as half amassed, and (very desirous to know and
see some marvelous and strange things, remembringe with my self that I was in
the midst part of all Thessalie, whereas, by the common report of all the
world, the sorceries and enchauntmentes are most used) I oftentimes repeted
with my self the tale of my compaignion Aristomenus touching the manner of
this City, and (being moved by great desire) I viewed the whole situation
thereof, neither was there any thing which I saw there, that I did believe to
be the same which it was in deed, but every thing seemed unto me to be
transformed and altered into other shapes by the wicked power of sorcerie and
inchauntment, in so much that I thought that the stones which I found, were
indurate and turned from men into that figure, and that the birds which I
hard chirpinge, and the trees without the walls of the City, and the
runninge waters were changed from men into such kind of likenesses: And
further I thought that the statues, images, and walls could go, and the oxen
and other brute beasts could speak and tell strange news, and that
immediately I should see and here some Oracle from the Heaven, and from the
gleede of the Sun. Thus being astonished or rather dismaide and vexed with
desire, knowinge no certain place whither I intended to go, I went from
streate to streate, and at length (as I curiously gas^d on every thing) I
fortuned unawares to come into the market place, where as I espied a certain
woman accompaignted with a great many servants, toward whom I drew nie and
vlewed her garments ^esette with gold and precious stone, in such sort that
she seemed to be some noble Matron: And there was an old man which followed
her: who (as soon as he had espied me) said to him self, verily this is
Lucius, and then he came and embrased me, and by and by he went unto his
mistres, and whispered in her ear, and came to me again, saiynge: How is it
Lucius, that you will not salute your dear cousin and singular freende? To
whom I answered: Sir I dare not be so bold as to take acquaintance of an
unknown woman: how be it as half ashamed I drew toward her, and she turned
her self and said: Behold how he resembles the very same grace as his mother
Saluia does, behold his countenance and stature agreyng thereto in each
point, behold his comely state, his fine selendernes, his vermilion color,
his hear yellow by nature, his graye and quick eyes like unto the Egle, and
his trim and comely gate which do sufficiently prove him to be ye natural
child of Saluia: And moreover she said: O Lucius I have nourished thee with
mine own proper hands, and why not? For I am not only of kinr^de unto thy
mother by blood, but also by nourice, for we both descended of the ligne of
Plutarche, lay in one belly, sucked the same pappes, and brought up together in
one house: And further there is no other difference between us two, but that
she is married more honorably then I: I am the same Byrrhena whom you have
often hard named, amongst your friends at home. Wherefore I pray you to take
the pains as to come with me to my house, and use it as your own, at whose
words I was partly abashed, and said: God forbid cousin that I should
forsake mine hoest Mylo without any just and reasonable cause, but verily I
will (as often as I have occasion to pass by your house) come and see how you
do: And while we went talkinge thus together, by little and little, we came to
her house, and behold the gate of the same very beautiful set with pillors
quadra^glewise, on the top whereof wear placed carved statues and images,
but principally the goddess of Victory was so lively and with such
excellency portraide and set forth, that you would verily have thought that
she had flied, and ho^ered with her wings hither and thither. On the contrary
part, y^ image of y^ goddess Diana was wrought in white marble, which was a
marvelous sight to see, for she seemed as though the wind did blow up her
garments, and that she did encounter with them that came into the house: on
each side of her, were Dogs made of stone, that seemed to menace with their
fiery eyes, their pricked ears, their bended nosethrilles, and their grinning
teeth, in such sort that you would have thought they had bayed and barked: And
moreover (which was a greater meruell to behold) the excellent caruer and
deviser of this work had fashioned y^ dogs to stand up fiersly with their
former feet, and their hinder feet on the ground ready to fight. Behind the
back of the Goddess was carved a stone in manner of a cauerne, environed with
moss, herbs, leaves, Sprigges, green branches, and bows, growingi^ and
about the same, in so much that within the stone it glistened and shone
meruelously, under the brimme of the stone hanged appels and grapes carved
finely, wherein art (enulynge nature) showed his great cunninge: For they were
so lively set out, that you would have thought (if Summer had been come) they
might have been pulled and eaten, and while I beheld the runninge water,
which seemed to spring and leap under the feet of the Goddess, I marked
the grapes which hanged in the water, which were like in every point to the
grapes of the vine, and seemed to move and stir by violece of the stream,
moreover emongst the branches of the stone appeared the image of Acteon, And
how that Diana (which was carved within the same stone standinge in the water
because he did see her naked) did turn him into a heart, and so he was torn
and slain of his own hounds. And while I was greatly delighted with the view
of these things, Birrhena spoke to me and said: Cousin, all things here be at
your commandment. And there, withal she willed secretly the residewe to
depart, who being gone she said: My most dear cousin Lucius I swear by this
goddess Diana that I do greatly tender your safety, and am as careful for
you, as if you were mine own natural child, beware I say, beware of the evil
arts and wicked allurementes of that Pamphiles that is the wife of Milo, whom
you call your host, for she is accounted the most chief and principal
Magicien and enchanteresse living, who by breathinge out certain words and
charms over bows, stones, and other frivolous things, can throw down all the
powers of the Heavens into the deep bottom of Hell, and reduce all the whole
world again to the old Chaos: For as soon as she espieth any comely young
man, she is forthwith stricken with his love, and presently sets her whole
mind and affection on him: She sows her seed of flattery, Young men are
prone to fall into the danger of love.
she inuades his sprite, and entangleth him with continual snares of
unmeasurable love. And then, if any accord not to her filthy desire, or if
they seem lothesome in her eye, by and by in the moment of an hour she either
turns them into stones, sheep, or some other beast as she her self
pleases, and some she presentely s^eaeth and murdreth, of whom I would you
should earnestly beware. For she burns continually, and you, by reason of
your tender age and comely beawtie are capable of her fire and love: This with
great care Birrhena gave me in charge, but I (that always coueted and desired,
after that I hard talk of such Sorcerye and Witchecrafte, to be experienced
in the same) little esteemed to beware of Pamphiles, but willingely determined
to bestow my money in learning of that art, and now wholly to become a
Witch: And so I wared ioyefull and wringinge my self out of her company, as
out of linkes or chains, I badde her farewell, and departed toward the house
of mine host Milo, by the way I reasoned thus with my self: O Lucius, now
take heed, be vigilant, have a good care, for now thou haste time and place
to satiffie thy desire, now shake of thy shildishnesse and show thy self a
man, but specially temper thy self from the love of thine Ostesse, and
abstain from violation of the bed of Milo, but hardely attempt to win the
maiden Fotis for she is beautiful, wanton, and pleasant in talk. And son^
when thou go to sleep, Time, place, and occasion te^pteth a man much.
and when she brings thee gently into thy chamber, and tenderly lays the
down in thy bed, and lovingly covers thee, and kisseth thee sweetly, and
departs unwillingly, and casts her eyes oftentimes back and stands still,
then haste thou a good occasion ministered unto thee, to prove and try the
mind of Fotis. Thus while I reasoned with my self, I came to Milos door
perseueringe still in my purpose, but I found nether Milo nor his wife at home.

How Apuleius fell in love with Fotis.

Cap. 9.
WHen I was within the house I found my dear and sweet love Fotis minsing of
meat, and making potage for her Master and Mistress, the cupborde was all set
with wines, and I thought I smelled the sauer of some deintie meats, she had
about her middle a white and clean apron, and she was girded about her body
under her pappes with a swathell of read silk, and she stirred the pot and
turned the meat with her fair and white hands, in such sort that with
stirringe and turninge the same, her loins, and hippes did likewise move and
shake, which was in my mind a comely sight to see. These things when I saw,
I was half amassed, and stood musinge with my self, and my courage came then
upon me, which before was skant. And I spoke unto Fotis merely, and said: O
Futis, how trimly you can stir the pot, and how finely (with shakinge your
buttockes) you can make potage. O happy and twice happy is he to whom you give
leave and license but to touch you there: Then she being likewise merely
disposed began answer: Depart I say miser from me, depart from my fire, The
like saying has Terence.
for if the ^^ame thereof do never so little blase forth, it will burn thee
e^tremely: and none can extinguishe the heat thereof, but I alone who in
stirring the pot, and making the bed can so finely shake my self: when
she had said these words, she cast her eyes upon me and laughed, but I did
not depart from thence until such time as I had viewed her in every point:
but what should I speak of others? when as I do accustom abroad to mark
and view the face and hear of every dame, and afterward delight my self
therewith privately at home, and thereby judge the residew of their shape,
because the face is the principal part of all the body, and is first open
to our eyes: And whatsoever flourishyng and gorgeous apparel does work and
set forth in the corporal parts of a woman, the same does the natural and
comely beauty set out in the face. Moreover there be diverse, that (to the
intent to show their grace and feature) will cast of their partlettes,
collars, habillimentes, frontes, cornettes and krippins, and do more delight
to show the fairenes of their skin, then to deck them selves up in gold
and precious stone. But because it is a crime unto me to say, so and to give no
example thereof, know ye: that if you spoil and cut of the hear of any woman
or deprive her of the color of her face, though she wear never so excellent
in beauty, though she wear thrown down from heaven, spronge of the seas,
nourished of the floudes, though she wear Venus her self, though she wear
accompanied with the Graces, though she wear waited upon of all the court of
C^pide, though she wear grided with her beautiful skarfe of love, and though
she smelled of perfumes and muskes, yet if she appeared balde: she could in no
wise please, ^o, not her own Vulcanus. O how well does a fair color, and a
shininge face agree with glitteringe hear? Behold it encou^tereth with the
beams of the sun, and pleases the eye meruelously. Sometimes the beauty of
the hear resembles the color of Gold and honey, sometimes the blewe plume
and asured feathers about the necks of dooues, especially when it is either
annoin^ted with the gum of Arabia, or trimly tufte out with the teeth of a
fine comb, which if it be tied up in the pole of the neck, it seems to the
lover (that beholds the same) as a glass that yeldeth forth a more pleasant
and gracious comelines then if it should be sparsed abroad on the shoulders
of the woman or ha^ge down scatteringe behind. Finally, there is such a
dignity in the hear, that what so ever she be, though she never be so bravely
attired with gold, silks, precious stones, and other rich and gorgeous
ornaments, yet if her hear be not curiously set forth, she cannot seem
fair. But in my Fotis, her garments vnbraste and vnlaste, did increase her
beauty, her hear hanged about her shoulders, and was disparsed abroad upon
her partlette, and in every part of her neck, howbeit the greater part was
trussed up in her pole with a lace: Then I unable to sustain the broylinge
heat, which I was in, ran upon her and kissed the place, where she had thus
laid her hear, whereat she turned her face, and cast her rollinge eyes upon
me, saying: O scholar thou have tasted now both honey and galle, take heed
that thy pleasure do not turn into repentance: tushe (quod I) my sweet
heart, I am contented for such an other kiss to be broyled here upon this
fire, wherwithal I embrased and kissed her more often, and she embrased and
kissed me likewise, and moreover her breath smelled like sinnamome, and the
licour of her tongue was like unto sweet Nectar, wherewith when my mind was
greatly delighted, I said: behold Fotis I am yours, and shall presently die,
unless you take pity upon me, which when I had said, she eftsoons kissed me
and bid me be of good courage, and I will (quod she) satisfy your whole
desire, and it shall be no longer delaied then until night, when as (assure your
self) I will come and lie with you, wherefore go your ways and prepare your
self, for I entende valiantly, and courageously to encounter with you this
night: Thus when we had lovingly talked and reasoned together, we departed for
that time.

How Birrhena sent victuales unto Apuleius, and how he talked with Milo, of
Diophanes, and how be lay With Folis.

Cap. 10.
WHen noone was come Birrhena sent unto me a fat pigge, five hens, and a
flagon of old wine. Then I called Fotis and said, Such meat f^^reth up (...)
excidingh.
behold how Bacchus the egger and stirrer of venerie does of fer him self of
his own accord, let us therefore drink up this wine, that we may prepare our
selves, and get us courage against soon, for Uenus wants no other provision
then this, that the lamp may be all the night replemshed with oil, and the
cups filled with wine: The residewe of the day I passed away at the baines,
and in banquettinge, and toward eueninge I went to supper, for I was bid by
Milo, and so I sat down at the table, out of Pa^philes sight as much as I
could, being mindful of the commandment of Birrhena and sometimes I wonlde
cast mine eyes upon her, as if I should look upon the furies of Hell, but I
(es^sones turninge my face behind me, and beholding my Fotis ministringe at
the table) was again refreshed and made merry. And behold when Pamphiles did
see the candell standinge on the table, she said, verily we shall have much
rain to morrow, which when her husband did here, he demanded of her, by
what reason she knew it: Marry (^ she) the light on the table does show the
fame:then Milo laughed and said, vsrely we neurishe and bring up a Sibelle
prophecier, which by the view of a candell does divine of Celestial things,
and of the Sun it self: Then I mused in my mind and said unto Milo: Of
truth it is a good experience and proof of divination, neither is it any
marvel, for although this light is but a small light and made by the hands of
man, yet has it a remembrance of that great and heavenly light, as of his
parent, and does show unto us, what will happen in the skies above: For I
knew at Corinthe a certain man of Assiria, who would give answeares in every
part of the City, and for the gain of money would tell every man his
fortune, to some he would tell the days of their marriages, to other he would
tell when they should build, that their edifices should continue: to other,
when they should best go about their assayres: to other when they should
travel by land: to other when they should go by seas: and to me (purposinge
to take my journey hither) he declared many things strange and variable. For
sometimes he said that I should win glory enough, sometimes he said, I
should write a great History, sometimes again he said, that I should devise
an incredible tale, and sometimes, that I should make B^okes. Whereat Milo
laughed again, and enquired of me of what stature this man of Assiria was, and
what he was named: In faith (quod I) he is a talle man, and somewhat black and
he is called Diophanes. Then said Milo the same is he and no other, who
semblably has declared many things here unto us, whereby he got and
obtained great substance and treasure. But the poor miser fell at length into
the hands of vnpitifull and cruel fortune. For being on a day emongst a
great assembly of people, to tell the simple sort their fortune, a certain
Cobbler came unto him, A pretty tale.
and desired him to tell when it should be best for him to take his voyage,
the which he promised to do: the Cobbler opened his purse, and told a hundred
pence to pay him for his pains, whereupon came a certain young Gentleman, and
took Diophanes by the garment: Then he turninge him self embrased and kissed
him, and de^ired the Gentelman (who was one of his acquaintance) to sit down
by him. And Diophanes being astonished with this sudden chance forgatte what
he was doing, and said: O dear friend you are heartily welcome, I pray you when
arrived you into these parts: then answered he I will tell you soon, but
brother I pray you to tell me of your coming from the Isle of Euboea, and how
you spedde by the way, whereunto Diophanes (this notable Assirian, not yet come
unto his mind but half amassed) gave answer and said, I would to God that
all our enemies and evil willers might fall into the like dangerous
peregrination and trouble, for the ship where we were in, (after that it was
by the waves of the seas, and by the great tempests t^ssed hither and thither,
in great peril, and after that the maste and stern brake likewise in pieces)
could in no wise be brought unto the shore, but sonke into the water, and so
we did swim and hardly escape to land: and after that, what so ever was
given unto us, in recompense of our losses, either by the pity of strangers
or by the benevolence of our friends, was taken away from us by thieves,
D^ophanes told the fortune of others, but his own he could not tell.
whose violence when my brother Arisuatus did assay to resist, he was cruelly
murdered by them before my face. These things when he had sadly declared, the
cobbler took up his money again, which he had told out to pay for the
tellinge of his fortune and ran away: Then Diophanes coming to him self,
perceived what he had done, and we all that stood by laughed greatly. But
that, (quod Milo) which Diophanes did tell unto you Lucius, that you should be
happy, and have a prosperous journey, was only true: Thus Milo reasoned with
me, but I was not a little sorry in that I had trained him in such a vain of
talk, that I lost a good part of the night, and the sweet pleasure thereof,
but at length I boldly said unto Milo. Let Diophanes farewell with his evil
fortune, and get again that which he lost by sea and land, for I verily
do yet feel the werines of my travel, wherefore I pray you perdon me, and
give me license to depart to hedde, wherwithall I rose up and went unto my
chamber, where I found al things finely prepared, and the childrens bed
(because they should not here, what we did in the night) was removed far of
without the chamber door. The table was all covered with such meats as was
lest at supper, the cups were filled half full with water to temper and
delay the wines, the flaggon stood readdy prepared, and there did nothing
lack which was necessary for the preparation of Venus: And when I was
enteringe into the bed, behold my Fotis (who had brought her mistress to
sleep) came in and gave me roses and flowers, which she had in her apron, and
some she threw about the bed, and she kissed me sweetly, and tied a
garlande about my head, and bespred the chamber with the residewe. Which when
she had done, she took up a cup of wine, and delaide it with whote water, and
proffred it me to drink, and before I had drunk up all, she pulled it from my
mouth, and then gave it me again, and in this manner we emptied the pot
twice or thrice together. Thus when I had well replenished my self with wine,
and was now ready unto Venerie not only in mind but also in body, I removed
my clothes, and (showinge to Fotis my great impaciencie) I said, O my sweet
heart take pity upon me and help me: for as you see, I am now prepared unto
the battle which you your self did appointe, for after that I felt the
first arrow of cruel Cupide within my breast, I bent my how very strong, and
now fear (because it is bended so hard) least the stringe should break, but
that thou may the better please me, undress thy hear and come and embrase
me lovingly, wherewithal (she made no long delay) but set aside all the
meat and wine, and then she vnapparelled her self, and vnatired her hear,
presentinge her amiable body unto me, in manner of fair Venus, when she goes
under the waves of the sea. Now (quod she) is come the hour of iustinge, now
is come the time of war, wherefore show thy self like unto a man, for I
will not retire, I will not fly the field, see then thou be valiant, see thou
be courageous since, there is no time appointed when our skirmishe shall cease:
In saying these words she came to me to bed, and embrased me sweetly, and
so we passed all the night in pastime and pleasure, and never slept till it was
day: but we would eftsoons refreshe our werines, and provoke our pleasure, and
renew our Venerie by drinkinge of wine. In which sort we pleasauntly passed
away many other nights followinge.

How Apuleius supped with Birrhena, and what a strange tale Bellephoron told
at the table.

Cap. 11.
IT fortuned on a day that Birrhena desired me earnestly to suppe with her,
and she would in no wise take any excusation. Whereupon I went unto Fotis to
ask counsel of her as of some divine, who (although she was unwilling y^ I
should depart one foot from her company) yet at length she gave me license
to be absent for a while, saying: beware that you ^acry not long at supper
there, for there is a rabblement of common barrators and disturbers of the
public peace that roueth about in the streates, and murdreth al such as they
may take, neither can law nor justice redress them in any case. And they will
the sooner set upon you, by reason of your comelines and audacitie, in that
you are not affeard at any time to walk in ye streets. Then I answered and
said, have no care of me Fotis, for I esteem the pleasure which I have with
thee, above the deintie meats that I eat abroad, and therefore I will
return again quickly. Nevertheless I mind not to come without company,
for I have here my swoorde, whereby I hope to defend my self. And so in this
sort I went to supper, and behold I found at Birrhenas house a great
company of strangers, and of the chief and principal of the City, the
beds (made of Citorne and Yuorie) were richly adornde and spredde with clothe
of Gold, the cups were garnished pretiously, and there was diverse other
things of sondrie fashion, but of like estimation and price: here stood a
glass gorgeously wrought, there stood an other of Cristall finely painted,
there stood a cup of glitteringe Silver, and here stood a another of shinyng
Gold, and here was an other of Ambre artificially carved, and made with
precious stones: Finally there was all things that might be desired, the
Seruiters waited orderly at the table in rich apparel, the pages arrayed in
silk robes did fill great gemmes, and pearls made in form of cups with
excellent wine, then one brought in candelles and torches: and when we wear
set down and placed in order, we began to talk, to laugh and be merry. And
Birrhena spoke unto me, and said: I pray you Cousin how like you our country?
Verily I think there is no other City which has the like Temples, Baynes,
and other commodities as we have here: Further we have abundance of
household-stuffe, we have pleasure, we have ease, and when the Roman
marchantes do arrive in this City, they are gentely and quietly entertained,
and all that dwell within this province (when they purpose to solace and repose
them selves) do come to this City. Whereunto I answered: Verily (quod I) you
tell truth, for I can find no place in all the world, which I like better
then this, but I greatly fear, the blind and incuitable trenches of
Witchcrafte, for they say that the dead bodies ar dug out of their graves,
and the bones of the^ that are burned be stolen away, and the toes and fingers
of such as are slain, be cut of to afflicte and torment such as li^e: And the
old Witches as soon as they hear of the death of any person, do forthwith
go and uncover the hearse, and spoil the corpse, to work their
enchauntmentes: Then an other sittinge at the table spoke and said, in faith
you say true, neither yet do they spare or favor the living. For I know one
not far hense that was cruelly handled by them, who (being not contented with
cuttinge of his nose) did likewise cut of his ears, whereat all the company
laughed heartily, and looked upon one that satte at ye boordes end, who being
amassed at their ga^inge, and somewhat angry withal, would have risen from the
table, had not Birrhena spoke unto him and said: I pray the freende Telepheron
sit still, and according to thy accustomed courtesy, declare unto us the
loss of thy nose and ears, to the end that my cousin Lucius may be delighted
with the pleasauntnes of the tale: To whom he answered, a dame you in the
office of your bounty shall prevail herein, but the insolency of some is not
to be supported. This he spoke very angerly, but Birrhena was earnest upon him
and assured him that he should have no wrong at no man's hand, whereby he was
enforced to declare the same: And so (lappinge up the end of the table cloth
and carpette together) he leaned with his elbow thereon, and held out the
three forefingers of his right hand in manner of an Orator, and said: When I
was a young man I went unto a certain City called Milet, A pl^asant tale.
to see the games and triu^phes there called Olympia, and being desirous to
come into this famous province, after that I had traueled over all Thessalie, I
fortuned in an evil hour to come to the City Larissa, where (while I went up
and down to ^^ewe the streets, to seek some relief for my poor estate,
(for I had spent al my money) I espied a talle old man standing upon a stone,
in the midst of the markette place, cryinge with a loud voice, and saying:
that if any man would watch a dead corpse that night, he should be resonably
rewarded for his pains: which when I hard, I said to one that passed by: what
is here to do, do dead men use to run away in this country. Then answered
he: hold your peace for you are but a babe and a stranger here, and not
without cause you are ignorant how you are in Thessalie, where the women
Witches do bite of by morselles the fl^she of the faces of dead men, and
thereby work their Sorceries and enchauntmentes. Then (quod I) in good
fellowshippe tell me the order of this custody and how it is: Marry (quod he)
first you must watch all the night, with your eyes bent continually upon the
corpse, never lookinge of nor mouinge aside: For these Witches do turn them
selves into sundry kind of beasts, whereby they deceive the eyes of all men,
sometimes they are transformed into birds, sometimes into dogs, and myce,
and sometimes into flies, moreover they will charm the keapers of the corpse a
sleep, neither ca^ it be declared what means and shifts these wicked women
do use to bring their purpose to pass: and the reward for such dangerous
watchinge is no more then four or fire shillinges: but harken further, which I
had welny forgotten, if the keeper of the dead body do not render (on the
morninge following) the corpse whole and sound as he received y^ same, he
shall be punished in this sort. That is: if the corpse be diminished or spoiled
in any part of his face hands or toes, the same shall be diminished and spoiled
in the keeper. Which when I hard I took a good heart and went unto the crier,
and bid him cease, for I would take the matter in hand, and so I demanded
what I should have: Marry (quod he) a thousand pence, but beware I say young
man that you do well defend the dead corpse from the wicked Witches, for he
was the son of one of the chiefest of the City: Tu^he (said I) you speak
you can not tell what, behold I am a man made all of iron, and have never
desire to sleep, and am more quick of sight then Lynx or Argus. I had skarse
spoken these words, when he took me by the hand, and brought me to a
certain house, the gate whereof was closed fast, so that I went thorough the
wicket, then he brought me into a chamber somewhat dark, and showed me a
matron clothed in mourninge vesture and wepinge in lamentable wise: And he
spoke unto her and said: Behold, here is one that will enterprise to watch
the corpse of your husband this night, which when she hard, she turned her
bloubered face covered with her hear unto me, saying: I pray you young man
take good heed, and see well to your office: have no care (quod I) so that you
will give me any thing above that which is dew to be given, wherewith she was
contented: And then she rose and brought me into a chamber whereas the corpse
lay covered with white sheets, and she called seven witnesses, before whom
she showed the dead body, and every part and parcel thereof, and (with
weepinge eyes) desired them all to testify the matter, which done she said
these words of course as follow: Behold his nose is whole, his eyes salve,
his ears without scarre, his lips untouched, and his chinne sound: All
which was written and noted in tables, and subscribed with the hands of the
witnesses to confirm the same: which done, I said unto the matron: Madame I
pray you that I may have all things here necessary: what is that? (quod she)
marry said I a great lamp replenished with oil, pottes of wine, and water to
delay the same, and some other drink and deintie dishe that was left at
supper, then she shaked her head, and said: Away fool as thou art, think
thou to play the glutton here, and to look for deintie meats, where so long
time has not been seen any smoke at all? come thou hither to eat, where we
should weep and lament? and there withal she turned back and commanded her
maiden Mirrhena to deliver me a lamp with oil, which when she had done, they
closed the chamber door and departed. Now when I was alone I rubbed mine
eyes, and armed my self to keep the corpse, and to the intent I would not
sleep, I began to singe, and so I passed the time till it was midnight, when
as behold there crepte in a Weasell into the chamber, and she came against me
and put me in very great fear, in so much that I marueled greatly of the
audacitie of so little a beast. To whom I said, get thee hence thou whore,
and hie thee to thy fellows, least thou feel my fingers? why wilt not thou
go? Then incontinently she ran away, and when she was gonne, I fell on the
ground so fast a sleep, that Apollo him self could not discern whether of
us two was the dead corpse, for I lay prostrate, as one without life, and
needed a keeper likewise. At length the cocks began to crow declaring that
it was day, wherewithal I waked and (being greatly affeard) ran unto the
dead body with the la^pe in my hand, and I viewed him round about: And
immediately came in the Matron weepinge with her witnesses, and ran unto the
corpse and eftsoon kissinge him, turned his body and found no part
diminished: Then she commanded one Philodespotus her steward to pay me my
wages forthwith, which when he had done, he said: we thank you gentle young
man for your pains, and verily for your diligence herein, we will account you
as one of the family. Whereunto I (being ioyeous of my unhoped gain, and
ratlinge my money in my hand) did answer: I pray you madame esteem me as
one of your seruitours, and if you need my service at any time I am at your
commandment. I had not fully declared these words, when as behold all the
servants of the house were assembled with weapons to drive me away, one
buffeted me about the face, an other about the shoulders, some stroke me in the
sides, some kicked me, and some tare my garments, and so I was handled
amongst them and driven from the house (as the proud young man Adonis who was
torn by a Bore). And when I was come into the next streate, I mused with my
self and remembered mine unwise and unadvised words which I had spoken,
whereby I considered that I had deserved much more punishment, and that I was
woorthely beaten for my folly: And by and by the corpse came forth, which
(because it was the body of one of the chief of the City) was carried in
funeral pomp round about the markette place, according to the rite of the
country there. And forthwith stepped out an old man weping and lamentinge
and ran unto the biere and embrased it, and with deep sighs and sobbes
cried out in this sort: O masters I pray you by the faith which you
profess, and by the duty which you owe unto the weal public, take pity
and mercy upon this dead corpse, who is miserably murdered, and do vengeance
on this wicked and cursed woman his wife, which has committed this fact. For
it is she and no other, that has poisoned her husband, my sisters son, to
the intent to maintain her whoredom and to get his heritage. In this sort
the old man complained before the face of all the people. Then they (astonished
at these sayings and because the thing seemed to be true) cried out, burn
her, burn her, and they sought for stones to throw at her, and willed the
boys in the streate to do the same: but she (wepinge in lamentable wise) did
swear by all the gods that she was not culpable of this crime. No (quod the
old man)? Behold here is one sent by the providence of God to try out the
matter, even Zachlas an Egiptian, who is the most principal Prophecier in all
this country, and who was hired of me for money to reduce the soul of this
man from Hell, and to revive his body for the trial hereof. And therewithal
he brought forth a certain young man clothed in linen raiment, having on his
feet a pair of pantoffles, and his crown shaven, who kissed his hands and
knees, saying: O Priest have mercy, have mercy, I pray thee by y^ celestial
Planetes, by the powers infernal, by the virtue of the natural Elements, by
the silences of the night, by the buildinges of swallows nigh unto the town
of Copton, by the increase of the floode Nilus, by the secreate mysteries of
Memphis, and by the instruments and trumpettes of the Isle Pharos, have mercy
I say, and call again to life this dead body, and make that his eyes which
be closed and shut, may be opened and see, howbeit we mean not to strive
against the law of death, neither entend we to deprive the earth of his
right, but (to the end this fact may he known) we crave but a small time and
space of life, whereat this Prophet was moved, and took a certain herb, and
laid it three times upon the mouth of the dead, and he took an other, and
laid it upon his breast in like sort: Thus when he had done, he turned him
self into the East, and made certain Oraisons unto the Sun, which caused
all the people to marvel greatly, and to look for this strange miracle that
should happen: Then I pressed in amongst them nigh unto the biere, and got
upon a stone to see this mystery, and behold incontinently the dead body
began to receive spirit, his principal veins did move, his life came again
and he held up his head, and spoke in this sort. Why do you call me back
again to this transitory life, that have already tasted of the water of
Leche, and likewise been in the deadly den of Stir? leave of I pray, leave
of, and let me lie in quiet test: when these words were uttered by the
dead corpse, the Prophet drew nighe unto the biere, and said: I charge thee
to tell (before the face of all the people here) y^ occasion of thy death, what
do thou think that I cannot by my comurations call up the dead? and by my
puissance torment thy body? Then che corpse moved up his head again, and made
reverence unto the people, and said: Verily I was poisoned by the means of my
wicked wife, and so thereby yielded my bed unto an adulterer. Whereat his wife
taking present audacitie, and reproving his sayings with a cursed mind, did
deny it: the people were bent against her sundry ways, some thought best y^
she should be buried alive with her husband, but some said y^ there ought no
credit to be given unto the dead body, which opinion was clean taken away by
the words that the corpse spoke again, and said: Behold I will give you
some evident token, which never yet any other man knew, whereby you shall
perceive y^ I declare the truth, and by and by he pointed toward me that
stood on the stone, and said: when this, the good guardian of my body watched
me diligently in ye night, and that the wicked Witches and enchanteresses came
into the chamber to spoil me of my limbs, and to bring such their purpose to
pass, did tra^sforme them selves into ye shape of beasts: And when as they
could in no wise deceive or beguile his vigilant eyes, they cast him into so
dead and sound a sleep that by their Wicthcrafte he seemed without spirit or
life. After this they called me by my name, and did never cease till as the
cold members of my body began by little and little to revive: then he (being of
more lively soul, howbeit buried in sleep, in y^ he and I wear named by one
name, and because he knew not that they called me) rose up first, and as one
without sense or persenera^ce passed by the door fast closed unto a certain
hole, whereas the Witches cut of first his nose, and then his ears, and so
that was done to him, which was appointed to be done to me. And that such
their subtlety might not be perceived, they made him a like pair of ears and
nose of wax, wherefore you may see that the poor miser for lucre of a little
money, sustained loss of his members. Which when he had said, I was greatly
astonished, and (mindinge to prove whether his words were true or no) put my
hand to my nose, and my nose fell of, and put my hand to mine ears, and mine
ears fell of. Whereat al y^ people wondered greatly, and laughed me to skorne?
but I (being stricken in a cold sweat) crept between their legs for shame,
and escaped away. So I disfigured returned home again, and covered the loss of
mine ears, with my long hear, and glewed this cloute to my face to hide my
shame. As Soon as Telephoron had told his tale, they which satte at the table,
(replenished with wine) laughed hartelie. And while they dra^ke one to an
other, Birrhena spoke to me, and said: From the first foundation of this
City, we have had a custom to celebrate the festival day of the God Kisus,
and to morrow is the feast, when as I pray you to be present to set out the
same more honorably, and I would with all my heart that you could find or
devise somewhat of your self, that might be in honor of so great a God: to
whom I answered: Verily Cousin I will do as you command me, and right
glad would I be if I might invent any laughinge or merry matter to please or
satisfy Kisus withal: Kisus the God if sport.
Then I rose from the table, and took leave of Birchena and departed, and when
I came into the first streate my torche went out, that with great pain I
could skarse get home, by reason it was so dark, and for fear of
stomblinge. And when I was welny come unto the door, behold I saw three men
of great stature heuinge and liftinge at Milos gates to get in. And when they
saw me, they wear nothing affeard, but assaide with more force to break
down the doors, whereby they gave me occasion and not without cause to think
that they wear strong thieves. Whereupon I, by and by, drew out my swoorde
which I carried for that purpose under my cloak, and ran in emongst them, and
wounded them in such sort that they fell down dead before my face. Thus when
I had slain them all, I knocked, sweating and breathyng at the door, till
Fotis let me in. And then full weary with the slaughter of these thieves,
like Hercules when he fought against the King Gerion, I went to my chamber and
laid me down to ^leape.

The third Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How Apuleius was taken and put in prison for Murder.

Cap. 12.
WHen morninge was come, and that I was awaked from sleep, my heart burned
sore, with remembrance of the murder which I had committed the night before:
and I rose and sat down on the side of the bed, with my legs a cross, and
wringinge my hands, wepinge in miserable sort. For I imagined with my self,
that I was brought before the judge in the judgment place, and that he awarded
sentence against me, and that the hangeman was readdie to lead me to the
gallows. And further I imagined, and said: Alas what judge is he that is so
gentle or benign that will think that I am vugiltie of the slaughter and
murder of these three men? How be it, the Assirian Diophanes did firmly assure
unto me, that my peregrination and voyage hither should be prosperous. But
while I did thus unfold my sorrows, and greatly bewail my fortune, behold,
I hard a great noyes and cry at the door, and in came the Magistrates and
Officers, who commanded two sergeantes to bind me, and lead me to prison,
whereunto I was willingly obedient, and as they led me thorough the streate,
all the City gathered together and followed me, and although I looked always
on the ground for very shame, yet sometimes I cast my head aside, and merueled
greatly that amongst so many thousand people there was not one but laughed
exceedingly. Finally, when they had brought me thorough all the streets of the
city, in manner of those as go in procession, and do sacrafice to mitigate
the Ire of the Gods, they placed me in the judgment hall, before the seat of
the judges: and after that the crier commanded all men to keep silence, the
people desired the judges to give sentence in the great Theater by reason of y^
great multitude that was there, whereby they wear in danger of stifling. And
behold y^ prease of people increased still, some climed to the top of the
house, some got upon the beams, some upon the images, and some thrust in
their heads through the windows, little regardyng the danger they were in, so
they might see me. Then the officers brought me forth openly into the middle of
the hall y^ every man might behold me. And after that the crier had made an
oies and willed all such as would bring any evidence against me should come
forth, there stepped out an old man, with a glass of water in his hand,
droppyng out softly, who desired that he might have liberty to speak duringe
the time of the continuance of the water, which when it was granted he began
his Oration in this sort.

How Apuleius was accused by an old man, and how he answered for him self.

Cap. 13.
O Most reuere^de and just judges, the thing which I purpose to declare unto
you, is no small matter but touches the estate and tranquillity of this whole
City, and the punishment thereof may be a right good example to others.
Wherefore I pray you most venerable fathers to whom, and to every of whom it
does appertain to provide for the dignity and safety of the common weal,
that you would in no wise suffer this wicked homicide, embrewed with the blood
of so many murdered Citizens to escape unpunished. And think you not y^ I am
moved hereunto by envy or hatred, but by reason of mine office in y^ I am
captain of the night watch, and because no man alive should accuse me to be
remiss in the same I will declare all the whole matter, orderly, as it was
done this last night.

This night past when as at our accustomed hour I The inuectiue (...) against
Apuleius.
diligently searched every part of the City: Behold, I fortuned to epsy this
cruel young man, drawinge out his swoorde against three Citizens, and after a
long combat foughten between them, he murdered one after an other miserably,
which when he had done (moved in his conscience at so great a crime) he ran
away, and aided by reason of darkness, slipped into a house and there lay hidden
all night, but by the providence of the Gods, which suffers no heinous
offenses to remain unpunished, he was taken by us this morninge before he
escaped any further, and so brought hither to your honorable presence to
receive his desert accordingly. So have you here a guilty person, a culpable
homicide, and an accused stranger, wherefore pronounce ye judgment against
this man being an alien, when as you would most severely and sharply revenge
such an offense found in a known Citizen. In this sort y^ cruel accuser
finished and ended his terrible tale: then the crier commanded me to speak,
if I had any thing to say for my self, but I could in no wise utter any
word at all for weepinge. And on the other side I esteemed not so much his
rigorous accusation, as I did consider mine own miserable conscience. Howbeit
(being inspired by divine audacitie) at length I ganne say: The answer of
Apuleius.
Verily I know that it is a hard thing for him, that is accused to have slain
three persons, to persuade you that he is not innocent although he should
declare the whole truth, and confess the matter how it was in deed, but if
your Honors will vouchsalue to give me audience, I will show you that if I be
condemned to die, I have not deserved it by mine own deserte, but that I was
moved by fortune, and reasonable cause to do that fact. For returninge
somewhat late from supper yesternight (being well tippled with wine, which I
will not deny) and approchinge nighe unto my common lodginge, which was in the
house of one Milo a Citizen of this City, I fortuned to epsy three great
Thieves attemptinge to break down his walls and gates, and to open the
locks to enter in. And when they had removed the doors out of the hooks,
they consulted emongst them selves, how they would handle such as they found
in the house: And one of them being of more courage, and of greater stature
then the rest, spoke unto his fellows, and said: Tushe you are but boys,
take men's hearts unto you, and let us enter into every part of the house, and
such as we find a sleep let us slay, and such likewise as resist let us
kill, and so by that means we shall escape without danger. Verily, ye judges,
I confess that I drew out my swoorde against those three citizens, but I
thought that it was the office and duty of one that hears good will to this
weal public so to do, specially since they put me in great fear, and
assayed to rob and spoil mine host Milo. But when those cruel and terrible
men would in no case ru^ne away, nor fear my naked swoorde, but boldly resist
against me, I ran upon them and fought valiantly. One of them which was the
Captain invaded me strongly, and drew me by the hear, with both his hands,
and began to beat me with a great stone, but in the end I proved the
hardier man, and threw him down at my feet and killed him. I took likewise
the second that clasped about my legs and bitte me, and slew him also. And
the third that came running violently against me, after that I had stroke^ him
under the stomach fell down dead. Thus when I had delivered my self, the
house, mine host, and all his family from this present danger, I thought
that I should not only escape unpunished, but also have some great reward of
the City for my pains. Moreover I, that have always been clear and
unspotted of crime, and that have esteemed mine innocence above all the
treasure of the world, can find no reasonable cause why upon mine accusation
I should be condemned to die: since, First I was moved to set upon the thieves
by just occasion: Secondly, because there is none that can affirm, that there
has been at any time either grudge or hatred between us: Thirdly, we were men
mere strangers and of no acquaintance: Last of all, no man can prove that I
committed that fact for any lucre or gain. When I had ended my words in
this sort. Behold, I weeped again pitiously, and holdinge up my hands, I
prayed all the people by the mercy of the common weal, and for the love of my
poor infantes and children, to show me some pity and favor. And when I saw
their hearts somewhat relented and moved by my lamentable tears, I called all
the Gods to witness that I was unguilty of the crime, and so to their divine
providence I committed my present estate, but turninge my self again, I
perceived that all the people laughed enceedingly, and especially my good
freende and host Milo. Then thought I with my self: Alas where is faith?
where is remorse of conscience? Behold I am condemned to die as a murderer,
for the saluegarde of mine host Milo and his family. Yet is he not contented
with y^, but likewise laugheth me to skorne, where otherwise he should comfort
and help me.

How Apuleius was accused by two women, and how the slain bodies were found
blown bladders.

Cap. 14.
WHen this was done, out came a woman wepinge into the middle of the Theater
arrayed in mourninge vesture, and bearinge a child in her arms. And after her
came an old woman in ragged robes cryinge and howlinge likewise: And they
brought with the^ the Olive bows wherewith the three slain bodies were covered
on the biere, and cried out in this manner: O right Judges we pray you by the
justice and humanity which is in you, to have mercy upon these slain
persons, and succor our widowhed and loss of our dear husbands, and
especially this poor infant, who is now an orphan and deprived of all good
fortune: And execute your justice by order and law upon the blood of this
thief who is the occasion of all our sorrows. When they had spoken these
words, one of the most ancient judges did rise, and say: Touching this
murder which deserves great punishment, this malefactor him self cannot
deny, but our duty is to enquire and try out, whether he had no coadiutors
to helps him. For it is not likely, that one man alone could kill three such
great and valiant persons, wherefore the truth must be tried out by y^ rack,
and so we shall learn, what other compaignions he has, and coote out the nest
of these mischeuous murderers. And there was no long delay, for according unto
the custom of Grecia, the fire, the whele, and many other torments were
brought in: The^ my sorrow increased or rather doubled, in y^ I could not end
my life with whole and unperished members. And by and by the old woman, who
troubled all the court with her howling desired the judges that (before I
should be tormented on the rack) I might uncover the bodies which I had
slain, y^ every man might see their comely shape and youthful beauty, and
that I might receive condign and worthy punishment, according to y^ quality
of the offense, and therewithal she made a sign of joy. Then y^ judge
commanded me forthwith to discover the bodies of the slain, liynge upon the
biere, with mine own hands, but when I refused a good space, by reason I
would not make my fact apparent to the eyes of all men, the sergeantes charged
me by commandment of the judges, and thrust me forward to do the same: I
then (being enforced by necessity) though it wear against my will, uncovered
their bodies: but O good Lord, what a strange sight did I see? what a monster?
what sodeine change of all my sorrows? I seemed as though I wear one of the
house of Proserpina, and of the family of death, in so much y^ I could not
sufficiently express y^ form of this new sight, so far was I amassed and
astonished thereat: For why, the bodies of y^ three slain men were no bodies,
but three blown bladders mangled in diverse places, and they seemed to be
wounded in those parts, where I remember I wounded the thieves the night
before: Whereat the people laughed exceedingely. Some reioysed meruelously with
the remembrance thereof, some held their stomakes that aked with joy, but
every man delighted at this passing sport, and so departed out of the Theater.
But I from the time that I uncovered the bodies stood still as cold as ise, no
otherwise then as the other statues and images there, neither came I unto my
right senses until such time as Milo mine host came and took me by the ^ha^d,
and with civil violence led me away wepinge and sobbinge where I would or
no: and because that I might not be seen, he brought me through many blind
ways and lanes to his house, where he went about to comfort me being sad
and yet fearful, with gentle entreatie of talk: but he could in no wise
mitigate my impaciencie of the injury which I conceived within my mind. And
behold, by and by the Magistrates and Judges with their ensigns entered into
the house and endeavored to pacify me in this sort, saying: O Lucius we are
advertised of your dignity, and know the Genelogie of your ancient lignage,
for the nobility of your kin do possess the greatest part of all this
province. And think not that you have suffered the thing wherefore you weep,
to any your reproach or ignominy, but put away all care and sorrow out of
your mind: For this day which we celebrate once a year in honor of the God
Risus, is always renoumpned with some solemn Novel, and the god does
continually acco^panie with the inuentor thereof, and will not suffer that he
should be sorrowful, but pleasantly bear a joyful face. And verily all the
City for the grace that is in you, entende to reward you with great honors
and to make you a patron. And further that your statue or image shall be set up
for a perpetual remembrance. To whom I answered: As for such benefits as
I have received already of this famous City of Thessalie, I yield and render
most entier thanks, but as ^ouchinge the settinge up of any statues or
images, I would wish that they should be reserved for mine au^cientes and such
as are more worthy then I. When I had spoken these words somewhat gravely,
and showed my self nore merry then I was before, the Judges and Magistrates
departed, and I reverently took my leave of them and bid them farewell. And
behold, by and by there came one runnyng to me in have, and said: Sir, your
cousin Birrhena desires you to take the pains, according to your promise
yesternight, to come to supper, for it is ready. But I greatly fearing to go
any more to her house in the night, said unto y^ messenger: My freende I pray
you to tell my cousin your Misteris that I would willingly be at her
commandment, but for breakinge my troth and credit. For mine host Milo
enforced me to assure him, and compelled me by the feaw of this present day,
that I should not depart from his company, wherefore I pray you to excuse me
and to differ my promise to an other time. And while I was speakinge these
words, Milo took me by the hand and led me toward the next baine, but by
the way, I went couchinge under him to hide my self from the sight of men,
because I had ministered such an occasion of laughter: And when I had washed and
wiped my self and returned home again, I never remembered any such thing, so
greatly was I ashamed at the noddinge and pointyng of every person. Then I went
to supper with Milo, where God wotte we fared but poorly. Wherefore (feigninge
that my head did ache by reason of my sobbinge and weping all the day) I
desired license to depart to my chamber and so I went to bed.

How Fotis told to Apuleius, what Witchcratie her Mistress did use:

Cap. 15.
WHen I was a bed I began to call to mind all the sorrows and griefs that
I was in the day before until such time as my love Fotis (having brought her
Mistress to sleep) came into the chamber not as she was wont do, for she
seemed nothing pleasant neither in countenance nor talk, but with a sower
face and frowning look, began speak in this sort. Verily, I confess that I
have been the occasion of all thy trouble this day, and therewithal she pulled
out a whippe from under her apron, and delivered it to me saying, revenge thy
self of me mischievous harlotte or rather slay me. And think you not that I
did willingly procure this anguishe and sorrow unto you I call the Gods to
witness. For I had rather suffer mine own body to be punished, then that you
should receive or sustain any harm by my means, but that which I did was by
the commandment of an other, and wrought (as I thought) for some other, but
behold the unlucky chance fortuned on you by mine evil occasion. Then I very
curious and desirous to know the matter, answered: in faith (quod I) this
most pestilent and evil favored whippe (which thou have brought to scourge
thee withal) shall first be broken in a thousand pieces, then that it should
touch or hurt thy delicate and deintie skin, but I pray you tell me, how
have you been the cause and mean of my trouble and sorrow. For I dare swear
by the love that I bear unto you, and I will not be persuaded (though you your
self should endeavor the same) that ever you went about to trouble or harm
me: Perhaps sometimes you imagined an evil thought in your mind, which
afterward you revoked but that is not to be deemed as a crime. When I had
spoken these words, I perceived by Fotis eyes being wette with tears, and
welnie closed up, that she had a desire unto pleasure, and specially because
she embraced and kissed me sweetly. And when she was somewhat restored unto
joy she desired me that she might first shut the chamber door, least by the
vntemperance of her tongue in vtteringe any vnsittinge words there might
grow further inconvenience. Wherewithal she barred and propped the door and
came to me again, and embrasing me lovingly about the neck with both her
arms, spoke with a soft voice and said, I do greatly fear to discover the
priuities of this house, and to utter the secret mysteries of my Dame: But I
have such a confidence in you and in your wisdom, by reason that you ar come
of so noble a ligne and endewed with so profounde sapience, and further
enstructed in so many holy and divine things, that you will faithfully keep
silence, and that what so ever I shall reveal or declare unto you, you would
close them within the bottom of your heart, and never discover the same: for I
ensure you the love that I bear unto you enforces me to utter it. Now shall
you know all the estate of our house, now shall you know the hidden
secreates of my Mistress, unto whom the powers of Hell do obaye, and by whom
the celestial Planettes are troubled, the Gods made weak, and the Elements
subdued, neither is the violence of her art in more strength and force, then
when she espieth some comely young man that pleases her fancy as oftentimes
it happens. For now she loves one Beotian a fair and beautiful person, on
whom she employeth all her sorcery and enchauntment, and I hard her say with
mine own ears yesternight, that (if the Sun had not then presently gone
down, and the Hight come to minister convenient time to work her Magical
enticementes) she would have brought perpetual darkness over all the world her
self. And you shall know that when she saw yesternight this Beotian sittinge at
the barbours a polinge, when she came from the baines, she secretly commanded
me to gather some of the hear of his head, which lay dispersed upon the
ground, and to bring it honey: which when I thought to have done, the
Harbor espied me, and by reason it was bruted thorough out all the City that
we wear Witches and enchantresses, he cried out, and said: Will you never
leave of stealinge of young men's hears? In faith I assure you unless you
cease your wicked sorceries, I will complain to y^ Justices: wherwithall he
came angerly toward me, and took away the hear which I had gathered, out of
mine apron, which grieved me very much. For I knew my mistress manners, that
she would not be contented, but beat me cruelly. Wherefore I intended to run
away, but the remembrance of you put always that thought out of my mind, and
so I came homewarde very sorrowful, but because I would not seem to come in my
mistress sight with empty hands, I saw a man shearynge of blown goat
skins, and the hear that he had shorn of was yellow, and much resembled the
hear of Beotian: And I took a good deal thereof, and colouringe the matter,
brought it to my Mistress. And so when night came, before your return from
supper, she (to bring her purpose to pass) went up to a high gallery of her
house, openyng to the East part of the world, and preparinge her self
according to her accustomed practice, she gathered together all her substance
for fumigatio^s, she brought forth plates of metal carved with strange
charecters, she prepared the bones of such as were drowned by tempest in the
seas, she made reddy the members of dead men, as their nosethrilles and
fingers, She set out the lumpes of flesh of such as wear hanged, the
bloudde which she had reserved of such as wear slain, and the iawe bones,
and teeth of wild beasts, then she said certain charms over the hear, and
dipped it in diverse waters, as in well water, cow milk, mountain honey and
other licour, which when she had done she tied and lapped it up together, and
with many perfumes and smelles threw it into a whote fire to burn. Then by the
great force of this sorcerie, and the violence of so many confections, those
bodies (whose hear was burning in the fire) received human shape, and felt,
hard, and walked. And (smellinge the sent of their own hear) came and rappid
at our doors in steed of Boethius. The^ you being well tippled, and deceived
by the obscurity of the night, drew out your swoorde courageously, like
furious Ajax, and killed, (not as he did the whole heard of beasts) but three
blown skins, to the intent that I after the slaughter of so many enemies
without effusio^ of blood, might embrace and kiss not an homicide but an
Vtricide: thus when I was pleasantly mocked and taunted by Fotis, I said unto
her: Verily, now may I for this achieved enterprise be numbered, as Hercules
who by his valiant prowess performed the twelve notable labors, as Gerion
with three bodies, and as Cerberus with three heads. For I have s^aine three
blown geate skins, but to the end that I may pardon thee of that which
thou have committed, perform the thing which I shall most earnestly desire
of thee, that is, bring me that I may see and behold when thy Mistress goes
about any Sorcerie or enchauntment, and when she prays unto the Gods, for I
am very desirous to learn that art, and as it seems unto me, thou thy
self haste some experience in the same. For this I know and plainly feel,
that (whereas I have always yrked and lothed the embrasinges and love of
Matrones) I am so stryken and subdued, with thy shininge eyes, ruddy cheeks,
glitteringe hear, sweet cosses and lilly white pappes, that I neither have
mind to go home, nor to depart hense, but esteem the pleasure which I
shall have with thee this night, above all the joys of the world: Then (quod
she) O my Lucius how willinge would I be to fulfill your desire, but by reason
she is so hated, she gets her self into solitary places, and out of the
presence of every person when she minds to work her enchantmentes, how be
it I regard more to gratify your request, then I do esteem the danger of
my life: and when I see opportunity and time I will assuredly bring you word,
so that you shall see all her enchauntment, but always upon this condition
that ye secreately keep close such things as are done: thus as we reasoned
together the courage of Venus assailed as well our desires as our members: And
so she vnrayed her self and came to bed, and we passed the night in pastime
and dalliance, till as by drowsy and unlusty sleep I was constrained to lie
still.

How Fotis brought Apuleius to see her Mistress Enchaunt.

Cap. 16.
ON a day Fotis came runninge to me in great fear, and said that her Mistress
(to work her sorceries on such as she loved) ente^ded, the night followinge,
to transform her self into a bird, and to fly whither she pleased,
wherefore she willed me privily to prepare my self to see the same. And when
midnight came she led me softly into a high chamber, and bid me look
thorough the chinke of a door. Where first I saw how she put of all her
garments, and took out of a certain coffer sondrie kind of boxes, of the
which she opened one and tempred the ointment therein with her fingers, and then
rubbed her body therewith from the sole of the foot to the crown of the
head: And when she had spoken privily with her self, having the candle in
her hand she shaked the parts of her body, and behold I perceived a plume
feathers did burgen out, her nose waxed crooked and hard, her nails turned
into claws, and so she became an Owl: Then she cried and skriched like a
bird of that kind, and willinge to prove her force, moved her self from the
ground by little and little, till at last she flewe quight away: Thus by her
Sorcery she transformed her body into what shape she would. Which when I saw I
was greatly astonished and although I was enchaunted by no kind of charm, yet I
thought y^ I seemed not to have y^ likeness of Lucius, for so was I banished
from my senses amassed in madness, and so I dreamed wakinge, y^ I felt mine eyes
to know whether I wear a sleep or no. But when I was come again to my self,
I took Fotis by y^ hand, and moved it to my face, and said: I pray thee while
occasion does serve that I may have the fruition of the fruictes of my desire,
and grant me some of this ointment. O Fotis I pray the by thy sweet pappes,
to make that in the great flames of my love I may be turned into a bird, so
will I ever hereafter be bound unto you and obedient to your commandment.
Then said Fotis will you go about to deceive me now? and enforce me to work
mine own sorrow? Are you in that mind that you will not tarry in Thessalie?
if you be a bird where shall I seek you? and when shall I see you? Then
answered I: God forbid that I should commit such a crime. For though I could
fly into y^ air as an Egle, or though I were the messenger of Jupiter, yet
would I have recourse to nest with thee. And I swear by the knotte of thy
amiable hear, that since the time that I first loved thee, I never fancied
any other person: moreover this comes to my mind, that if by virtue of the
ointment I shall become an Owl, I will take heed that I come nigh no man's
house. For I am not to learn how these matrones would handle their lovers if
they knew that they were transformed into Owls: moreover when they are taken
in any place, they are nailed upon posts, and so they are woorthely rewarded,
because it is thought that they bring evil fortune to the house. But I pray
you (which I had almost forgotten) tell me by what means, when I am an Owl,
I shall return to my pristine shape and become Lucius again? Fear not (quod
she) for my Mistress has taught me the way to bring that to pass, neither
think (...) that she did it for any good will or favor, but to the end I
might help her, and minister some remedy when she re^urneth home. Consider I
pray you with your self, with what friu^lous trifles so marvelous a thing is
wrought, for by Hercules I swear, I give her nothing else, save a little dill
and laurel leaves in well water, the which she drinks and washes her self
withal: which when she had spoken she went into the chamber, and took a box
out of the coffer, which I first kissed and embrased, and prayed that I might
have good success in my purpose. And then I put of all my garments and
greedely thrust my hand into the box, and took out a good deal of ointment
and rubbed my self withal.

How Apuleius thinkinge to be turned into a Bird, was turned into an Ass, and
how he was led away by thieves.

Cap. 17.
AFter that I had well rubbed every part and member of my body, I houered with
mine arms, and moved my self, lokinge still when I should be changed into a
bird as Pamphile was, and behold neither feathers nor apparau^ce of feathers
did burgen out, but verily my hear did turn into ruggednes, and my tender
skin waxed tough and hard, my fingers and toes lesing the number of five
changed into hoofes, and out of mine arse grew a great tail, now my face
became monstrous, my nosethrilles wide, my lips hanginge down, and mine
ears rugged with hear: Neither could I see any comfort of my transformatio^,
for my members increased likewise, and so without all help (viewyng every
part of my poor body) I perceived that I was no bird, but a plain Ass.
Then I thought to blame Fotis, but being deprived as well of language as
human shape, I looked upon her with my hanginge lips and watrie eyes, who
(as soon as she espied me in such sort) cried out alas poor wretch that I
am, I am utterly cast away. The fear that I was in, and my have has beguiled
me, but especially the mistaking of the box has deceived me. But it forces
not much, since as a sooner medicine may be gotten for this, then for any other
thing. For if thou could get a Rose and eat it, thou should be delivered
from the shape of an Ass, and become my Lucius again. And would to God I had
gathered some garla^des this evening past according to my custom, then thou
should not continue an Ass one nights space, but in the morninge I will
seek some remedy. Thus Fotis lamented in pitiful sort, but I that was now a
perfect Ass, and for Lucius a brute beast, did yet retain the sense and
understanding of a man. And did devise a good space with my self, whether it
were best for me to tear this mischievous and wicked harlotte with my mouth,
or to kick and kill her with my heels. But a better thought reduced me from
so rash a purpose, for I feared least by the death of Fotis I should be
deprided of all remedy and help. Then shakinge my head and dissimuling mine
ire, and taking mine adversity in good part, I went into y^ stable to mine
owne-horse, where I found an other Ass of Miloes, sometime mine host, and I
did verily think that mine own horse (it there were any natural conscience or
knowledge in brute beasts) would take pity upon me, and proffer me lodging
for that night, but it chanced far otherwise: For see my horse and the Ass,
as it wear, consented together to work my harm, and fearing least I should
eat up their prouender, would in no wise suffer me to come nighe the manger,
but kicked me with their heels from their meat, which I my self gave them
the night before: Then I, being thus handled by them and driven away, got me
into a corner of the stable, where (while I remembered their vncourtesie, and
how on the morrow I should return to Lucius by the help of a Rose, when as I
thought to revenge my self of mine own horse) I fortuned to epsy in the
middle of a pillor sustainyng y^ rafters of the stable, the Image of the
Goddess Hippone, which was garnished and decked round about with fair fresh
Roses: then in hope of present remedy I leaped up with my fore feet as high
as I could, and stretchinge out my neck, and with my lips coueted to
snatche some Roses. But in an evil hour did I go about that enterprise, for
behold, the boy to whom I gave charge of my horse came presently in, and
findinge me climinge upon the pillor, ran freatinge toward me, and said:
How long shall we suffer this vile Ass, that does not only eat up his
fellows meat, but also would spoil the images of the Gods? why do I not
kill this lame thief, and weak wretch? and therewithal lokinge about for
some kidgel, he espied where lay a faggot of woodde, and choosinge out a
crabbed trunchion of the biggest he could find, did never cease beating of me
poor wretch, until such time as by great noyes and rumbling, he hard the
doors of the house burst open, and the neighbors crying in lamentable sort,
which enforced him (being stricken in fear) to fly his way. And by and by a
troop of thieves entered in, and kept every part and corner of the house with
weapons. And as men resorted to aid and help the^ which wear within the
doors, the thieves resisted and kept them back, for every man was armed with
his swoorde and Targette in his hand, the glympses whereof did yield out such
light as if it had been day. Then they brake open a great cheste with double
locks and boltes, wherein was laid all the treasure of Milo, and ransakt the
same, which when they had done they packed it up, and gave every one a porcio^
to carry, but when they had more then they could bear away, yet wear they
loathe to leave any behind, they came into the stable, and took us two poor
Asses, and my horse, and laded us with greater trusses then we wear able to
bear. And when we wear out of the house, they followed us with great staves,
and willed one of their fellows to tarry behind, and bring them tidinges
what was done concerning the robbery, and so they beat us forward over great
hills out of y^ high way. But I, what with my heavy burden, and my long
journey did nothing differ from a dead Ass, wherefore I determined with my
self to seek some civil remedy, and by invocation of the name of the Prince
of the country, to be delivered from so many miseries. And on a time as I
passed thorough a great fair, I came amongst a multitude of Greeks, and I
thought to call upon the renoumed name of the Emperor, and to say: O Caesar,
and I cried out aloude, O, but Caesar I could in no wise pronounce: the thieves
little regardinge my criynge did lay me on, and beat my wretched skin in
such sort, that after it was neither apt nor meet to make siues or sarces.
How be it at last Jupiter ministerd unto me an unhoped remedy. For when we
had passed thorough many towns and villages, I fortuned to epsy a pleasant
garden, wherein, besides many other flowers of delectable hew, wear new and
fresh Roses, and (being very joyful and desirous to catch some as I passed
by) I drew nerer and nerer, and while my lips watered upon them, I thought of
a better advise more profitable for me: least if from an Ass I should become a
man, I might fall into the hands of the thieves, and either by suspision that I
wear some Witch, or for fear that I would utter their theft, I should be
slain, wherefore I abstained for that time from eatinge of Roses. And
(enduringe my present adversity) I eat hay as other Asses did.

The fourth Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How Apuleius thinkinge to go to eat Roses, was cruelly beaten by a Gardener
and chased by Dogs.

Cap. 18.
WHen noone was come, that the broylinge heat of the Sun had most power, we
turned into a village to certain of the thieves acquaintance and friends, for
verily their metinge and embrasinge together, did give me (poor Ass) cause to
deem ye same: And they took the trusse from my back, and gave them part of
the treasure which was in it, and they seemed to whisper and tell them that it
was stolen goods, and after that we wear unladen of our burdens, they let
us lose into a meadow to pasture, but mine own horse, and Milos Ass, would not
suffer me to feed there with them, but I must seek my dinner in some other
place. Wherefore I leaped into a gardein, which was behind the stable, and
being welnie perished with honger, although I could find nothing there but
raw and green sallettes, yet I filled my hongry guts therewithal
abundantly, and praying unto all the Gods, I looked about in every place if I
could epsy any red Roses in the gardens by, and my solitary being alone did
put me in good hope, y^ if I could find any remedy I should presently of an
Ass be changed into Lucius out of every man's sight, and while I considered
these things, I looked about, and behold I saw a far of a shadowed valley
adioyninge nigh unto a woodde, where, emongst diverse other herbs and
pleasant verdures, I thought I saw many florishinge Roses of bright Damask
color. And I said within my bestiall mind: verily y^ place is the place of
Venus and the Graces, where secretly glittereth the royal hew, of so lively
and delectable a flower: Then I desiring y^ help of the guide of my good
fortune, ran lustely toward the woodde, in so much y^ I felt my self that I
was no more an Ass, but a swifte coursinge horse, but my agilitie and quicknes
could not prevent the cruelty of my fortune: For when I came to the place, I
perceived that they were no Roses, neither tender, nor pleasant, neither
moisted with the heavenly drops of dew nor celestial licour, which grew
out of the thicket and thorns there. Neither did I perceive y^ there was any
valley at all, but only the bank of the river environed with great thick
trees, which had long branches like unto Laurel, and bearinge a flower without
any manner of sent, and the common people call them by the name of Laurel
roses, which be very poison to all manner of beasts. Then was I so entangled
with unhappy fortune, that I little esteemed mine own danger, and went
willingly to eat of those Roses, though I knew them to be present poison. And
as I drew nere, I saw a young man that seemed to be the Gardener, come upon
me, and when he perceived that I had devoured up all his herbs in the
gardein, he came swearinge with a great staff in his hand, and laid upon me,
in such sort that I was welnie dead, but I speedely devised some remedy for my
self, for I lift up my legs and kicked him with my hinder heels, that I
left him liynge at the hill foot welnie slain, and so I ran away:
incontinently came out his wife, who saying her husband half dead, cried and
houled in pitiful sort, and went toward her husband to the intent that by
her loud cries she might purchase to me present destruction: the^ all the
persons of the town, moved and raised by her noyes came forth, and cried for
dogs to tear me down: Out came a great company of bandogges and masties
more fit to pull down Bears and Lions then me, whom when I beheld, I
thought verily that I should presently die, but I turned my self about and
ran as fast as ever I might to the stable from whense I came. Then the men
of the town called in their dogs, and took me, and bound me to the staple
of a post, and scourged me with a great knotted whippe till I was welny dead,
and they would undoubtedly have slain me, had it not come to pass that what
with the pain of their beatinge and the green herbs that lay in my guts,
I caught such a laske that I all be sprinkled their faces, with my liquide
donge, and enforced them to leave of.

How Apuleius was prevented of his purpose, and how the thieves came to their
den.

Cap 19.
NOt long after, the thieves laded us again, and especially me, and brought
us forth out of the stable, and when we had gone a good part of our journey,
what with the long way, my great burden, the beatinge of staves, and my worn
hoofes, I was so weary that I could scantly go: then I saw a little before me
a river, runninge with fair water, and I said to my self: behold now I have
found a good occasion. For I will fall down when I come yender, and surely I
will not rise again, neither with scourginge nor beatinge, for I had rather be
slain there presently, then go any further. And the cause why I determined so
to do, was this, I thought that when the thieves did see me so feeble and
weak that I could not travel, to the intent they would not stay in their
journey, they would take of the burden from my back, and put it upon my
fellows, and so for my further punishment to leave me as a pray to the Wolves
and ravenous beasts: but evil fortune prevented so good a consideration: For
the other Ass, being of the same purpose that I was of, by feigned and
colored werines, fell down first with all his burden upon the ground as
though he wear dead, and he would not rise neither with beatinge nor
prickinge, nor stand upon his feet though they pulled him up by the tail, by
his legs, and by his ears, which when the thieves Beheld, as without al
hope, they said one to an other, what should we stand here so long, about a
dead, or rather a stony Ass? let us be gonne. And so they took his burden,
and divided some to me, and some to my horse. And then they drew out their
swoordes and cut of his legs, and threw his body from the point of a
hill down into a great valley: then I considering with my self of the evil
fortune of my poor compaignion, and purposed now to forgette al subtlety and
deceit, and to play the good Ass to get my Masters favor, for I perceived
by their talk that we wear welny come home to our iourneis end. And after
that we had passed over a little hill, we came to our appointed place, where,
when we wear unladen of our burdens, and all things carried in, I tumbled
and wallowed in the dust, to refresh my self, in steed of water. The thing
and the time co^pelleth me to make description of the places, and specially of
the den where the thieves did inhabit, I will prove my wit what I can do,
and then consider you whether I was an Ass in judgment and sense, or no.

First, there was an exceeding great hill compassed about with big trees,
very high, with many turning bottomes, full of sharp stones whereby it was
inaccessible: there was many windinge and hollow valleis environed with
thickettes and thorns, and naturally fortressed round about: From the top of
the hill ran a runninge river as clear as silver, and watered all the valeis
below, that it seemed like unto a sea enclosed, or a standinge floode: before
the den, where was no hill, stood a high tower, and at the foot thereof
wear shepecotes fenced and watled with clay: Before the gate of the house were
paths made in steed of walls, in such sort that you would easily judge it
to be a very den for thieves, and there was nothing else save a little coat
covered with thatche, wherein the thieves did nightly accustom to watch by
order, as after I perceived. And when they were all crepte into the house, and
we fast tied with halters at the door, they began to chide with an old woman
there, crooked with age, who had the government and rule of all the house, and
said: How is it old Witch, old trotte and strumpet, that thou sit idely
all day at home, and (having no regard to our perilous labors) haste
provided nothing for our suppers? but sit eating and swillinge thy self
from morning til night: Then the old woman trembled and scantly able to speak,
began say: Behold my puisant and faithful masters you shall have meat and
potage enough by and by. Here is first store of bread, wine plenty, filled in
clean rinsed pottes, likewise here is whote water prepared to bathe you.
Which when she had said, they put of all their garments and refreshed them
selves by the fire. And after they were washed and nointed with oil, they
satte down at the table garnished with all kind of deinty meats: they were
no sooner set down, but in came an other company of young men, more in number
then was before, who seemed likewise to be thieves: For they brought in their
prays of Gold, and Silver, Plate, Iuelles, and rich robes, and when they had
likewise washed, they satte emo^gst the rest and served one an other by order.
The^ they drank and eat excedingly, criyng, laughing, and making such noyes,
y^ I thought I was emongst the tirannous and wild Lapithes, Thebanes, and
Centaures. At length one of the^ more valiant then the rest spoke in this
sort, we verily have manfully conquered the house of Milo of Hypata, and
beside all the richesse, and treasure which by force we have brought away, we
are all come home salve, and are increased the more by this horse and this
Ass. But you that have roued about in the country of Beotia have lost your
valiant Captain Lamathus. Whose life I more regarded then all this treasure
which you have brought. And therefore the memory of him shall be renoumed for
ever emongst the most noble Kings, and valiant Capitaines, but you accustom
when you go abroad like men with ganders hearts to creep through every
corner and hole for every trifle. Then one of them that came last answered:
Why are you only ignorant, that the greater the number is, the sooner they may
rob and spoil the house? and although the family be dispersed in diverse
lodginges, yet every man had rather to defend his own life then to save the
richesse of his master, but when there be but a few thieves, then will they
rather not only regard them selves, but also their substance, how little or
great so ever it be. And to the intent you may believe me I will show you an
example: we wear come nothing nighe unto Thebes, where is the fountain of
our art and science, but we learned where a rich chuffe called Chryseros did
dwell, who for fear of offices in y^ public weal, dissimuled his estate,
and lived sole and solitary in a small cote, how be it replenished with
abundance of treasure, and went daily in ragged and torn apparel.
Wherefore we devised with our selves to go to his house and spoil him of all
his richesse. And when night came, we drew toward his door which was so
strongly closed y^ we could neither move it. nor lift it out of y^ hooks, and
we thought it not best to break it open, least by y^ noyes we should raise up
(to our harm) the neighbors bie. Then our strong and valiant Captain
Lamathus trustinge his own strength and force, thrust in his hand through a
hole of the door, and thought to pull back the bolte, but the covetous
caytife Chryseros being awake and making no noyes, came softely to the door
and caught his hand, and with a great nail nailed it fast to a post, which
when he had done, he ran up to a high chamber, and called every one of his
neighbors by name, desiringe them to succor him with all possible speed, for
his house was a fire: Then every one for fear of their own danger came
runninge out to aid him, wherewith we (fearinge our present peril) knew not
what was best to be done, whether we should leave our compaignion there, or
yield our selves to die with him, but we by his consent devised a better way:
For we cut of his arm by the elbow, and so let it hang there* then we bound
his wound with cloutes, least we should be traced by the drops of blood,
which done we took Lamathus and led him away for fear we should be taken,
but when we wear so nighe pursued that we wear in present danger: And that
Lamathus could not keep our company by reason of faintnes: and on y^ other
side perceauinge that it was not for his profit to linger behind, he spoke
unto us as a man of singular courage and virtue, desiringe us by much entreatie
and prayer, and by the puisance of the God Mars, and the faith of our
confederacy to deliver his body from torment and miserable captivity: And
further he said, how is it possible that so courageous a Captain can live
without his hand? wherewith he could sometimes rob and slay so many people, I
would think my self sufficient happy if I might be slain by one of you: but
when he saw that we all refused to commit any such fact, he drew out his
swoorde with his other hand, and after that he had often kissed it, he thrust
it clean thorough his body: Then we honored the corpse of so puisant a man,
and wrapped it in linen clothes and threw him into the sea: so lies our
master Lamathus buried and hid in the grave of water, and ended his life as I
have declared: but Alcinus though he wear a man of great enterprise, yet could
he not beware by Lamathus, nor volde him self from evil fortune: for on a day
when he had entered into an old woman's house to rob her, he went up into a
high chamber, where he should first have stra^gled her, but he had more regard
to throw down the bags of money and Gold out at the window to us that
stood under: And when he was so greedy that he would leave nothing behind,
he went to the old woman's bed where she lay a sleep, and would have taken
of the couerlet to have throwe^ down likewise, but she awaked and (knelyng
upon her knees) desired him in this manner: O sir I pray you cast not away
such torn and ragged clouses into my neighbors houses, for they are rich
enough and need no such things: then Alcinus (thinking her words to be
true) was brought in belief that such things as he had thrown out already,
and such things as he should throw out after, was not fallen down to his
fellows, but into other men's houses, wherefore he went to the window to see,
and as he thought to behold the places round about, thrustinge his body out
of the window, the old woman marked him well, and came behind him softly, and
although she had but small strength, yet with a sudden force she took him by
the heels and thrust him out headlonge, and so he fell upon a marvelous great
stone, and burst his ribs, whereby he vomited and spued flakes of blood, and
presently died: Then we threw him into the river likewise, as we had done
Lamathus before: When we had thus lost two of our compaignions, we liked not
Thebes, but marched toward the next City called Platea, where we found a
man of great fame named Demochares, that purposed to set forth a great game,
where should be a trial of al kind of weapons: he was come of a good house,
marvelous rich, liberal, and well deserved that which he had, and had
prepared many shows and pleasures for the common people: in so much that there
is no man can either by wit or eloquence show in words his worthy
preparatio^s. For first he had provided all sorts of arms, he greatly
delighted in huntinge and chasinge, he ordained great towers and tables to move
hither and thither: he made many places to chase and encounter in: he had ready
a great number of men and wild beasts, and many condemned persons were
brought from the judgment place to try and fight with those beasts, but
emongst so great preparations of noble price, he bestowed the most part of
his patrimony in biynge of Bears, which he nourished to his great cost, and
esteemed more then all the other beasts, which eitheir by chasinge he caught
him self, or which he dearly bought, or which were given him from diverse of
his friends, howbeit for all his sumptuous cost, he could not be free from the
malicious eyes of envy: for some of them were welnie dead, with too long
tiynge up: some meigre with the broyling heat of the Sun: some la^guished
with liynge, but all (having sundry diseases) wear so afflicted taht they
died one after an other, and there was welnie none left, in such sort that
you might see them liyng in the streets piteously dead: And the common people
having no other meat to feed on, little regardinge any curiosity, would come
forth and fill their bellies with the fleash of the Bears. Then by and by
Babulus and I devised a pretty sport, we drew one of the greatest of the
Bears to our lodging, as though we would prepare to eat thereof, where we
fleade of his skin, and kept his vngles whole, but we meddled not with the
head but cut it of by the neck, and so let it hang to the skin: Then we
rased of the fleash from the back, and cast dust thereon, and set it in the
Sun to dry.

How Thrasileon was disguised in a Bears skin, and how he was handled.

Cap. 20.
WHile the skin was a driynge, we made merry with the fleashe, and then we
devised with our selves that one of us, being more valiant then the rest both
in body and courage, (so that he would consent thereto) should put on the
skin, and (feminge that he wear a Bear) should be led to Demochares house
in the night, by which means we thought to be received and let in. Many
were desirous to play the Bear, but especially one Thrasileon of a courageous
mind would take this enterprise in hand. Then we put him into the Bears
skin, which fitted him finely in every point, we buckled it fast under his
belly, and covered the seame with the hear y^ it might not be seen. After
this, we made little holes thorough the Bears head, and thorough his
nosethrilles and cies for Thrasileon to see out and take wind at, in such
sort that he seemed a very lively and natural beast: when this was done, we
went into a cave which we hired for y^ purpose, and he crepte in after like a
Bear with a good courage. Thus we began our subtlety, and then we imagined
thus, we feigned letters as though they come from on Nicanor which dwelled in
the country of Thracia, which was of great acquaintance with this Demochares,
wherein we wrote that he had sent him, being his freende, the first fruictes of
his coursing and huntinge, when night was come (which was a meet time for our
purpose) we brought Thrasileon, and our forged letters and presented the^ to
Demochares. When Demochares beheld this mighty Bear, and saw the liberality
of Nicanor his freende, he commanded his servant to deliver unto us ten
crowns, as he had great store in his coffers: Then (as the novelty of a thing
does accustom to stir men's minds to behold the same) many persons came on
every side to see this Bear, but Thrasileo^, (lest they should by curious
viewyng and priyng perceive the truth) ran upon them to put them in fear,
that they durst not come nie. The people said: verily Demochares is right
happy, in that, after the death of so many beasts, he has gotten (maugre
fortunes head) so goodly a Bear, then Demochares commanded that with great
care he should be put into the park by, emongst the other beasts, but I
immediately spoke unto him, and said: Sir I pray you take heed how you put a
beast tired with the heat of the Sun, and with long travel emongst
others, which (as I here say) have diverse maladies and diseases: let him
rather lie in some open place of your house nighe to some water, where he may
take air and ease him self, for do not you know that such kind of beasts
do greatly delight ot couche under shadow of trees, and hillockes, nigh unto
pleasant wells and waters. Hereby Demochares admonished, and remembringe how
many he had before that perished, was contented that we should put the Bear
where we would: Moreover we said unto him, that we our selves wre determined
to lie all night nigh unto the Bear, to look unto him, and to give him meat
and drink at his due hour. Then he answered: Verily masters you need not
to put your selves to such pains: for I have men taht serves for nothing but
for that purpose: so we took leave of him and departed, and when we wear come
without the gates of the town, we perceived before us a great Sepulcher
standinge out of the high way, in a privy and secreate place. And thither we
went and opened the mouth thereof, whereas we found the sides covered with
the corruption of man, and the ashes and dust of his long buried body,
wherein we got our selves to bring our purpose to pass, and (having a
respect to the dark time of the night according to our custom) when we
thought that every man was a sleep, we went with our weapons and besieged the
house of Demochares round about: Then Thrasileon was reddy at hand, and leaped
out of the cauerne, and went to kill all such as he found a sleep, but when
he came to the porter he opened the gates and let us all in: and the^ he showed
us a large counter, wherein he saw put (the night before) a great abundance
of treasure, which when by violence we had broken open, I bid every one of
my fellows take as much Gold and Silver as they could bear away, and carry
it to the Sepulcher, and still as they carried, I stood at the gate, watchinge
diligently when they would return. The Bear runned about the house to make
such of the family affeard as fortuned to wake and come out: For who is he
that is so puisant and courageous, that at the ugly sight of so great a Monster
will not quail and keep his chamber especially in the night, but when we had
brought this matter to so good a point, there chanced a pitiful case: For as
I looked for my compaignions that should come from the Sepulcher, behold there
was a boy of the house, that fortuned to look out at a window and espied the
Bear running about, and he went and told all the servants of the house,
whereupon incontinently they came forth with torches, lanthornes, and other
lights that they might see all the yard over, they came with clubbes,
spears, naked swoordes, greyhoundes and masties to slay the poor beast: Then
I (duringe this broile) thought to run away, but because I would see
Thrasileon fightinge with the dogs, I lay behind y^ gate to behold him. And
although I might perceive that he was welnie dead, yet remembered he his own
faithfulness and ours, and valia^tly resisted the gaping and ravenous mouths of
the helhou^des, so took he in gree the pageant which willingly he took in hand
him self, and with much a do tumbled at length out of the house, but when he
was at liberty abroad, yet could he not save him self, for all the dogs
of the streate joined them selves to the greyhou^des and masties of the house,
and came upon him: Alas what a pitiful sight it was, when our poor Thrasileon
was thus environed and compassed with so many dogs, that tare and rent him
miserably, then I (impatient of so great his misery) ra^ne in emongst the
prease of the people, and (ayding him with my words as much as I might)
exhorted them al in this manner. O great and extreme mischaunce, what a
precious and excellent beast have we lost: but my words did nothing
prevail. For there came out a tale man with a spear in his hand yt trust him
clean thorough, and afterward many that stood by, drew out their swoordes
and so they killed him. But verily our good Captain Thrasileon, the honor of
our comfort received his death so patiently, that he would not bewray the
league between us, either by criynge, howlinge or any other means, but (being
torn with dogs, and wounded with weapons) did yield forth a doleful cry,
more like unto a beast then a man. And taking his present fortune in good
part, with courage and glory enough did finish his life, with such a terror
unto the assembly, that no person was so hardy (until it was day) as to touch
him, though he wear stark dead but at last there came a Butcher more valiant
then the rest, who (openinge the panche of the beast) slitte out a hardy and
venturous thief. In this manner we lost our Captain Thrasileon* but he lost
not his fame and honor: when this was done we packed up our treasure, which we
committed to the Sepulcher to keep, and got us out of the bounds of Platea,
thinkinge with our selves that there was more fidelity amongst the dead, then
emo^gst the living, by reason that our prays was so surely kept in the
Sepulcher: So (being weried with the weight of our burdens, and welnie tired
with long travel, having lost three of our soldiers) we are come home with
these present cheates: Thus when they had spoken (in memory of their slain
co^paignions) they took cups of Gold and song Hympnes unto the God Mars,
and laid them down to sleep. Then the old woman gave us fresh barley without
measure, in so much that my Horse sedde so abundantly that he might well think
he was at some bankette that day. But I (that was accustomed to eat branne and
flower) thought that but a sower kind of meat, wherefore espiyng a corner
where lay loves of bread for all the house, I got me thither, and filled my
hungry guts withal.

How the thieves stole away a Gentel woman, and brought her to their den.

Cap. 21.
WHen night was come, the Thieves awaked and rose up: and when they had buckled
on their weapons, and disguised their faces with visardes, they departed, and
yet for all the great sleep y^ came upon me, I could in no wise leave eatinge,
and whereas, when I was a man, I could be contented with one or two loves at the
most, now my guts wear so greedy that three pann^ers full would scantly
serve me, and while I considered all these things the morning came, and being
led to a river, (notwithstanding mine Assy shamefastnes) I quenched my
thirst. And suddenly after the thieves returned home careful and heavy,
bringinge no burdens with them, no not so much as traffe or baggage, save
only a maiden that seemed by her habit to be some gentle woman borne, and the
daughter of some worthy Matron of that country, who was so fair and
beautiful, that though I wear an Ass, yet had I a great affection to her:
The virgin lamented and tare her hear, and spoiled her garments for the great
sorrow she was in, but the thieves brought her within the cave, and assaied to
co^sorte her in this sort: Weep not fair Gentle woman we pray you, for be
you assured that we will do no outrage nor violence to your person, but take
patience a while for our profit: For necessity and poor estate has compelled
us to do this enterprise, we warrant you that your parents (although they be
covetous) will be contented to give us a great quantity of money to redeem and
ransom you from our hands. With such and like flattering words they
endeavored to appease the gentle woman, how be it she would in no case be
comforted but put her head between her knees and cried piteously. Then they
called the old woman and commanded her to sit by the maiden, and pacify her
dolor as much as she might. And they departed away to rob, as they accustomed
to do, but the virgin would not assuage her griefs nor mitigate her sorrow by
any entreatie of the old woman, but houled and sobbed in such sort that she
made me (poor Ass) likewise to weep, and thus she said: Alas can I poor
wretch live any longer, that am come of so good a house, forsaken of al my
parents, friends, and family, made a rapine and pray, closed seruily in this
stony prison, deprived of all pleasure wherein I have been brought up, thrown
in danger, ready to be rent in pieces amongst so many sturdy thieves, and
dreadful robbers, can I (I say) cease from wepinge or live any longer? Thus
she cried and lamented, and after she had weried her self with sorrow, and
bloubered her face with tears, she closed y^ windows of her hollow eyes and
laid her down to sleep: And after taht she had slept, she rose again, like
a furious and mad woman, and beat her breast and comely face more than she
did before: Then the old woman enquired the causes of her new and sudden
lamentation, to whom (sighing in pitiful sort) she answered: Alas now I am
utterly undone, now I am out of all hope, O give me a knife to kill me, or a
halter to hang me, whereat the old woman was more angry, and severely
commanded her to tell her the cause of her sorrow, and why after her sleep she
should renew her dolor and miserable wepinge, what think you (quod she) to
deceive our young men of the price of your ransom? no, no, therefore cease your
criyng, for the thieves do little esteem your houlinge, and if you will not, I
will surely burn you alive: Hereat the maiden was greatly a^card and kissed
her hand, and said: O mother take pity upon me and my wretched fortune, and
give me license a while to speak, for I think I shall not long live, let
there mercy be ripe and fra^ke in your venerable hoare head, and here the some
of my calamity: There was a comely young man, who for his bounty and grace
was beloved entierly of all the town, my coosin German, and but three years
elder then I, we two were nourished and brought up in one house, and lay under
one roof and in one chamber, and at length by promise of Marriage, and by
consent of our parents we wear contracted together: the Marriage day was come,
the house was garnished with Laurel, and torches were set in every place in
the honor of Hymeneus, my espouse was accompaigned with his parents,
kinsefolke and friends, and made Sacrafice in the Temples and public places:
And when my unhappy mother pampred me in her lap, and decked me like a bryde
kissing me sweetly, and making me a parent for children, behold there came in
a great multitude of thieves, armed like men of war, with naked swoordes in
their hands, who went not about to do any harm, neither to take any thing
away, but brake into the chamber where I was, and violently took me out of my
mothers arms, when none of the family would resist for fear. In this sort
was our Marriage distourbed, like the Marriage of Hyppodame and Perithous: but
behold good Mother now my unhappy fortune is renewed and increased: For I
dreamed in my sleep that I was pulled out of our house, out of our chamber,
and out of my bed, and that I romed about in solitary and unknown places,
calling upon the name of my unfortunate husband, and how that he (as soon as
he perceived that I was taken away, even smelling with perfumes and crowned
with garla^des) did trace me by my steps, desiringe the aid of the people to
assist him, in y^ his wife was violently stolen away: And as he went criynge
up and down, one of the thieves moved by indignation by reason of his
pursuit, took up a stone that lay at his feet and threw it at my husband and
killed him. By the terror of which sight, and the fear of so dreadful a
dream I awaked. Then the old woman rendringe out like sighs, began to speak
in this sort, my daughter take a good heart unto you, and be not afearde at
feigned and strange visions or dreams, for as the visions of the day are
accounted false and untrue, so the visions of the night do often chance
contrary. And to dream of weeping, beatinge and killing, is a token of good
luck and prosperous change, whereas contrary, to dream of laughinge, carnal
dalliance and good cheer, is sign of sadness, sickness, loss of substance and
displeasure. But I will tell thee a pleasant tale to put away all thy sorrow
and to revive thy Spirits: And so she began in this manner.

The most pleasant and delectable tale of the Marriage of Cupide and Psyches.

Cap. 22.
THere was sometimes, a certain King, inhabityng in the Weast parts, who had
to wife a noble Dame, by whom he had three daughters exceedinge fair: Of
whom the two elder wear of such comely shape and beauty, as they did excel
and pass all other women living, whereby they wear thought, woorthely, so
deserve the praise and commendation of every person, and deservedly to be
preferred above the residew of the common sort: Yet the singular passinge
beauty and maidenly Majesty of the youngest daughter, did so far surmounte
and excel them two, as no earthly creature could by any means sufficiently
express or set out the same, by reason whereof (after the fame of this
excellent maiden was spread abroad in every part of y^ City,) the Citizens and
strangers there, being inwardly pricked by zealous affection to behold her
famous person, came daily by thousands, hundreds and scores to her fathers
Pallaice, who as astonished with admiration of her incomperable beauty did no
less woorshippe and reverence her, with crosses, signs and tokens, and other
divine adorations, according to the custom of the old used rites and
ceremonies, then if she wear Lady Venus in deed: And shortly after the fame
was spredde into the next Cities and borderinge Regions, that the Goddess
whom the deep seas had borne and brought forth, and the frothe of the
spurginge waves had nourished, to the intent to show her high magnificencie
and divine power in earth, This maid was thought to be Venus.
to such as erst did honor and woorshippe her: was now conversant emongst
mortal men, or else that the earth and not the seas, by a new concurse and
influence of the celestial Planetes, had budded and yielded forth a new
Venus, endewed with y^ flower of virginity: So daily more and more increased
this opinion, and now is her fliyng fame dispersed into the next Yslelonde, and
welnie into every part and province of the whole world. Whereupon innumerable
strangers, resorted from far countries, aduenturinge them selves by long
iourneis on land, and by great perilles on water to behold this glorious
Virgin. By occasion whereof such a contempt grew toward the Goddess Venus,
that no person traveled unto the town Paphos, nor to the ysle Gindos, no nor
to Cithera to woorshippe her. Her ornaments wear thrown out, her Temples
defaced, her pillowes and quishions torn, her ceremonies neglected, her Images
and statues uncrowned, and her bare aulters unswept, and foul with the ashes
of old burned sacrafice. For why every person honored and worshipped this
maiden in steed of Venus. And in the morninge at her first coming abroad,
offered unto her oblations, provided banquettes, called her by the name of
Venus which was not Venus in deed, and in her honor presented flowers and
garla^des in most reverent fashion.

This sodeine change and alteration of celestial honor did greatly inflame
and kindle the mind of very Venus, who (unable to temper her self from
indignation, shakinge her head in raginge sort) reasoned with her self in
this manner: Behold the original parent of all these elements, behold the
lady Venus renoumed thoroughout all the world, with whom a mortal maiden is
joined now partaker of honor, my name registered in the City of heaven, is
profaned and made vile by terrene absurdities, if I shall suffer any mortal
creature to present my Majesty in earth, or that any shall bear about a false
surmised shape of my person: then in vain did Paris that sheaparde (in whose
just judgment and confidence the great Jupiter had affiance) prefer me above
the residew of the Goddesses for the excellency of my beauty: but she what so
ever she be that has usurped mine honor, shall shortly repent her of her
unlawful estate: And by and by she called her winged son Cupide, rash
enough, and hardy, who by his evil manners, contemninge all public justice
and law, armed with fire and arrows, runninge up and down in the nights
from house to house, and corruptinge the lawful marriages of every person,
does nothing but that which is evil, who although that he wear of his own
proper nature sufficient prone to work mischief, yet she egged him forward
with words and brought him to the City, and showed him Psyches (for so the
maiden was called) and having told the cause of her anger, not without great
rage) I pray thee (quod she) my dear child by motherly bond of love, by the
sweet wounds of thy percinge darts, by the pleasant heat of thy fire,
revenge the injury which is done to thy mother, by the false and disobedient
beauty of a mortal maiden, and I pray thee without delay, y^ she may fall in
love with the most miserablest creature living, the most poor, the most
crooked, and the most vile, that there may be none found in all the world of
like wretchedness. When she had spoken these words, she embrased and kissed
her son, and took her voyage toward the sea.

When she was come to the sea, she began to call the Gods and Goddesses, who
were obedient at her voice. For incontinent came y^ daughters of Nereus singing
with tunes melodiously: Portunus with his bristled and rough bearde: Salatia,
with her bosom full of fish: Palemon, the driuer of the Dolphin, the
trumpetters of Triton leapinge hither and thither, and blowinge with heavenly
noies: Such was the company which followed Venus marchinge toward the Occean
sea.

In the mean season Psyches with all her beauty received no fruicte of her
honor: She was wondered at of al* she was praised of al, but she perceived y^
no King nor Prince, nor any of the inferior sort did repair to woo her.
Every one merueled at her divine beauty, as it were at some Image well painted
and set out. Her other two sisters, which were nothing so greatly exalted
by the people, were royally married to two Kings, but the virgin Psyches
sittinge at home alone lamented her solitary life, and being disquieted both
in mind and body (although she pleased all the world) yet hated she in her
self her own beauty.

Whereupon the miserable father of this unfortunate daughter suspectyng that the
Gods and powers of heaven did envy her estate, went unto the town called
Milet to receive the oracle of Apollo, where he made his prayers and offered
sacrifice: and desired a husband for his daughter, but Apollo though he were a
Grecian and of the country of Ionia, because of the foundation of Milet yet he
gave answer in Latin verse, the sense whereof was this.

Let Psyches corpse be cladd in mourninge weed
And set on rock of yonder hill aloft
Her husband is no wight of human seed
But Serpent dyre and fierce as may be thought
Who flies with wings above in starry skies
And does subdew each thing with fiery flight
The Gods them selves and powers that seem so wise
With mighty Jove be subject to his might
The rivers black and deadly floodes of pain
And darkness eke as thrall to him remain.
The King sometimes happy, when he hard the Prophecy of Apollo returned home
sad and sorrowful, and declared to his wife the miserable and unhappy fate of
his daughter, then they began to lament, and weep, and passed over many days
in great sorrow, but now the time approached of Psyches marriage, preparation
was made, black torches were lighted, the pleasant songs were turned into
pitiful cries, the melody of Hymeneus was ended with deadly howlinge, Hymeneu,
the God of Marriage.
the maiden that should be married did wipe her eyes with her veil: all the
family, and people of the City, weeped likewise, and with great lamentation
was ordained a remiss time for that day, but necessity compelled that Psyches
should be brought to her appointed place, according to the divine
commandment. And when the solemnity was ended, they went to bring this
sorrowful spouse, not to her marriage, but to her final end and burial. And
while the father and mother of Psyches did go forward, wepinge and criynge to
do this enterprise, Psyches spoke unto them in this sort: why torment you
your unhappy age with continual dolor? why trouble you your spirits, which
are more rather mine then yours? why soil ye your faces with tears, which I
ought to adoure and woorshippe? why tear you my eyes in yours? why pull you
your hoare hears? why knock you your breasts for me? now you see the reward
of my excellent beauty: now, now, you perceive (but too late) the plague of
envy. When the people did honor me and call me new Venus, the^ you should
have wept, then you should have sorrowed, as though I had been then dead: For
now I see, and perceive that I am come to this misery by the only name of
Venus, bring me, and (as fortune has appointed) place me on the top of the
rock, I greatly desire to end my marriage, I greatly couette to see my
husband, why do I delay? why should I refuse him that is appointed to
destroy all the world? Thus ended she her words, and thrust her self
emongst the people that followed: Then they brought her to the appointed rock
of the high hill, and set her thereon and so departed. The torches and lights
were put out with the tears of the people, and every man gonne home: the
miserable parents welny consumed with sorrow, gave them selves to everlasting
darkness.

Thus poor Psyches being left alone weeping and tremblinge on the top of the
rock, was blown by the gentle air and of shrillinge Zephyrus and carried
from the hill, with a meke wind, which retained her garments up, and by
little and little brought her down into a deep valley, where she was laid in
a bed of most sweet and fragrant flowers.

The fifth Book of Lucius Apuleius
Thus fair Psyches being sweetly couched emongst the soft and tender
herbs, as in a bed of soote and fragrant flowers, and having quallified
the troubles and thoughts of her restles mind, was now well reposed: And when
she had refreshed her self sufficiently with sleep, she rose with a more
quiet and pacified mind, and fortuned to epsy a pleasant woodde enuironned
with great and mighty trees: she espied likewise a runninge river as clear as
Cristall: In the midst of the woodde, welnie at the fall of the river was a
Princely edifice, wrought and builded, not by the art or hand of man, but by
the mighty power of God: and you would judge at the first entry therein, that
it wear some pleasant and worthy mansion for the powers of heaven. For the
embowinges above wear of Cytern, and Yuery, propped and undermined with
pillors of Gold, the walls covered and seeled with Silver, diverse sorts of
beasts wear graue^ and carved, that seemed to encounter with such as entered
in: al things wear so curiously and finely wrought, that it seemed either to
be the work of some demigod, or God him self, the pauement was al of precious
stone, divided and cut one from an other, whereon was carved diverse kinds of
pictures, in such sort that blessed and thrice blessed wear they which might
go upon such a pauement: Every part and angle of the house was so well
adorned, that by reason of the precious stones and inestimable treasure there,
it glittered and shone in such sort that the chambers, porches, and doors gave
light as it had been the Sun. Neither otherwise did the other treasure of y^
house disagree unto so great a majesty, that verily it seemed in every point a
heavenly palaice fabricate and builded for Jupiter him self.

Then Psyches moved with delectation, approached nighe, and taking a bold
heart entered into the house, and beheld every thing there, with great
affection, she saw storehouses wrought exceeding fine, and replenished with
abondance of richesse. Finally there could nothing be devised which lacked
there, but emo^gst such great store of treasure, this was more marvelous, y^
there was no closure, bolte, or lock to keep y^ same. And when with great
pleasure she viewed al these things, she hard a voice without any body, y^
said: Why do you marvel madame at so great richesse? behold all that you see
is at your commandment: wherefore, go you into the chamber and repose your
self upon the bed, and desire what bathe you will have, and we whose voices
you here be your servants, and ready to minister unto you according to your
desire: in the mean season, royal meats and deintie dishes shall be prepared
for you.

Then Psyches perceived the felicity of divine providence, and according to
the advertisement of the incorporall voices, she first reposed her self upon
the bed, and the^ refreshed her body in ye baines. This done she saw y^
table garnished with meats, and a chair to sit down.

When Psyches was set down, al sorts of divine meats and wines wear brought
in, not by any body but as it wear with a wind, for she could see no person
before her, but only here voices on every side. After that all the services
wear brought to the table, one came in and sange inuisibly, an other plaide on
the harp, but she saw no man: The harmony of the instruments did so greatly
shrill in her ears, y^ (though there wear no manner of person) yet seemed she
in the midst of a multitude of people.

All these pleasures finished: when night approached Psyches went to bed: and
when she was laid, that the sweet sleep came upon her, she greatly feared
her virginity because she was alone: The^ came her unknown husband and lay
with her: and after y^ he had made a perfect consummation of the Marriage, he
rose in the morninge before day and departed. Sone after came her invisible
servants, presenting to her such things as were necessary for her
defloration, and thus she passed forth a great while: and (as it happens) y^
novelty of the things by continual custom did increase her pleasure, but
specially the sound of the instruments was a comfort unto her being alone.

Duringe this time that Psyches was in this place of pleasures, her father and
mother did nothing but weep and lament, and her two sisters hearing of her
most miserable fortune came with great dolor and sorrow to comfort and
speak with their parents.

The night followinge Psyches husband spoke unto her (for she might feel his
eyes, his hands and his ears) and said, O my sweet spouse and dear wife,
fortune does menace unto thee imminent peril and danger, whereof I wish thee
greatly to beware: For know thou that thy sisters, thinkinge that thou art
dead, be greatly troubled, and are come to the mountain by thy steps, whose
lamentations if thou fortune to hear, beware that thou do in no wise either
make answer or look up toward them. For if thou do thou shall purchase to
me great sorrow, and to thy self utter destruction. Psyches (hearing her
husband) was contented to do all things as he commanded.

After that he was departed, and the night passed away, Psyches lamented and
cried al ye day following, thinkyng that now she was past all hope of comfort in
that she was closed within the walls of a prison, deprived of human
conversation, and commanded not to aid or assist her sorrowful sisters, no
nor once to see them: Thus she passed all the day in wepinge, and went to
bed at night without any refectio^ of meat or baine.

Incontinently after, came her husband, who (when he had embrased her
sweetly) began say: Is it thus that you perform your promise my sweet wife?
what do I find here? pass you all the day and the night in wepinge? and will
you not cease in your husbands arms? Go too, do what you will, purchase your
own destruction, and when you find it so, then remember my words, and
repent, but too late: Then she desired her husband more and more, assuringe
him that she should die, unless he would grant that she might see her
sisters, whereby she might speak with them and comfort them, whereat at length
he was contented, and moreover he willed that she should give them as much
Gold and Iuelles as she would, but he gave her a further charge, saying:
beware that ye covet not (being moved by the pernicious counsel of your
sisters) to see the shape of my person, least by your curiosity you be
deprived of so great and worthy estate. Psyches being glad herewith rendered
unto him most entier thanks, and said: Sweet husband I had rather die then
to be separate from you: for whosoever you be, I love and retain you within my
heart, as if you wear mine own spirit or Cupide him self: but I pray you
grant this likewise, that you would command your servant Zephyrus to bring
my sisters down into the valley, as he brought me, W^men ca^ do^ most when
they be in bed.
wherwithal she kissed him sweetly, and desired him gently to grant her
request, calling him her spouse, her sweet heart, her joy, and her solace,
whereby she enforced him to agree to her mind, and when morninge came he
departed away.

After long search made, the sisters of Psyches came unto the hill where she
was set on the rock, and cried with a loud voice, in such sort that the
stones answered again: And when they called their sister by her name, that
their lamentable cries came unto her ears, she came forth, and said: behold,
here is she for whom you weep, I pray you torment your selves no more, cease
your weeping: And by and by, she commanded Zephyrus by the appointment of her
husband to bring them down: Neither did he delay, for with gentle blastes he
retained them up, and laid them softely in the valey: I am not able to
express the often embrasinge, kissing, and gretyng, which was between them
three, all sorrows and tears were then laid aparte: Come in (quod Psyches)
into our house and refresh your afflicted minds with your sister. After this,
she showed them the storehouses of treasure, she caused them to hear the
voices which served her, the bayne was ready, the meats were brought in, and
when they had eaten and filled them selves with divine delicates, they
conceived great envy within their hearts, and one of the^ being very curious,
did demand what her husband was, of what state, and who was the Lord of so
precious a house, but Psyches, remembringe the promise which she made to her
husband, feigned that he was a young man, of comely stature, with a flexen
bearde, and had great delight in huntinge in the hills and dales by: And least
by her long talk she should be found to trippe or fail in her words, she
filled their lappes with Gold, Silver and Jewels, and commanded Z^phirus to
carry them away.

When they were brought up to the mountain, they took their ways: ^omewarde
to their own houses, and murmured with envy that they bare against Psyches,
saying: behold cruel and contrary fortune, behold how we (borne all of one
parent) have diverse destinies, but especially we, y^ are ye elder two, be
married to strange husbands, made as handemaidons, and as it were banished
from our country and friends, whereas our yo^ger sister has so great
abondaunce of treasure and gotten a God to her husband, who has no skill how
to use so great plenty of richesse: saw you not sister what was in the house?
what great store of Iewelles, what glitteringe robes, what gemmes, what gold
we trod on? That if she have a husband according, as she affirms, there is
none that lives this day more happy in all the world then she. And so it
may come to pass that at length for the great affection and love which he may
bear unto her, he may make her a Goddess, for (by Hercules) such was her
countenance, so she behaved her self, that (as a Goddess) she had voices to
serve her, and the winds did obey her. Such task use gosseps when they meet
together.
But I poor wretch have first married a husband elder then my Father, more
balde then a coote, more weak then a child, and that locketh me up all day in
the house. Then said the other sister, and in faith I am married to a husband
that has the gowte, twyfolde, crooked, not courageous in payinge my debt, I am
said to rub, and mollify his stony fingers with diverse sorts of oils,
and to wrappe them in playsters and salues, so that I soil my white and
deintie hands, with the corruption of filthy cloutes, not using my self like
a wife, but more like a servant: and you my sister seem likewise to be in
bondage, and servitude, wherefore I cannot abide to see our younger sister in
such great felicity, saw you not I pray, how proudely and arrogantly she
handled us even now? and how in vauntinge her self she uttered her
presumptuous mind, how she cast a little Gold into our lappes, and (being
werie of our company) commanded that we should be borne and blown away?
verily I live not nor am a woman, but I will deprive her of all her bliss: And
if you my sister be so far bente as I, let us consulte together, and not
utter our mind to any person, no nor yet to our parents, nor tell that ever
we saw her. For it suffiseth that we have seen her, whom it repents to
have seen: neither let us declare her good fortune to our Father, nor to any
other, since as they seem not happy whose richesse are unknown: So shall she
know, that she has sisters (no abiectes) but more woorthier then she. But now
let us go home to our husbands and poor houses, and when we are better
instructed let us return to suppress her pride: so this evil counsel
pleased these two evil women, and they hid the treasure which Psyches gave
them, and fare their hear, renewynge their false and forged tears. When their
father and mother beheld them weep and lament still, they doubled their
sorrows, and griefs, but full of ire and farced with envy they took their
voyage homewarde, deuisinge the slaughter and destruction of their sister.

In the mean season y^ husband of Psiches did warn her again in the night
with these words: See thou not (quod he) what peril and danger evil
fortune does threaten unto thee, whereof if thou take not good heed, it will
shortly come upon thee: for the unfaithful harlottes do greatly endeavor to
set their snares to catch thee, and their purpose is to make and persuade thee
to behold my face, which if thou once fortune to see (as I have often told)
thou shall see no more: wherefore if these naughty hegges, armed with wicked
minds, do chance to come again (as I think no otherwise but that they
will) take heed that thou talk not with them, but simply suffer them to
speak what they will, howbeit if thou can not restrain thy self, beware
that thou have no communication of thy husband, nor answer a word if they
fortune to question of me, so will we increase our stock, and this young and
tender child, couched in this young and tender belly of thine, (if thou
conceal my secreates) shall be made an immortal God, otherwise a mortal
creature. Then Psyches was very glad that she should bring forth a divine
babe, and very joyful in that she should be honored as a mother: So uses
young wives to do.
She reckened and nombred carefully the days and months that passed, and
being never with child before, did marvel greatly that in so small a time her
belly should swell so big.

But those pestilent and wicked furies, breathinge out their serpentine poison,
took shippinge to bring their enterprise to pass. Then Psyches was warned
again by her husband in this sort: behold the last day, the extreme case,
and the enemies of thy blood, has armed them selves against us, pitched their
camps, set their host in a ray, and are marchinge toward us, for now thy
two sisters have drawn their swoordes, and are ready to flea thee: O with
what force are we assailed this day, O sweet Psyches I pray thee to take pity
on thy self, of me, and deliver thy husband, and this insant within thy belly
from so great danger: And see not, neither hear these cursed women, which
are not worthy to be called thy sisters, for their great hatred, and breach
of sisterly amity, for they will come (like Sirens) to the mountain, and
yield out their piteous and lamentable cries: When Psyches had hard these
words, she sighed sorowfully, and said: O dear husband, this long time
you have had experience and trial of my faith, and boubt you not but that I
will persevere in the same, wherefore command your wind Zephirus that he may
do, as he has done before, to the intent that where you have charged me, not
to behold your venerable face, yet that I may comfort my self with the sight
of my sisters. I pray you by these beautiful hears, by these round cheeks,
delicate and tender, by your pleasant whote breast, The child takes the shape
of the Father.
whose shape and face I shall learn at length by the child in my belly,
grant the fruicte of my desire, refreshe your dear spouse Psyches with joy,
who is bound and linked unto you for ever, I little esteem to see your visage
and figure, little do I regard the night and darkness thereof, for you are my
only light. Her husband (being as it were enchaunted with these words, and
compelled by violence of her often embrasinge, wiping away her tears with his
hear) did yield unto his wife. And when morning came departed as he accustomed
to do.

Now her sisters arrived on land, and never rested till they came to the
rock, without visitinge of their Father and mother, and leaped down rashly
from the hill them selves: Then Zephyrus according to the divine commandment
brought them down (though it were against his will) and laid them in the
valley without any harm. By and by they went into the pallaice to their sister
without leave, and when they had eftsoon embrased their pray, and thanked her
(with flatteringe words) for the treasure which she gave the^, they said: O
dear sister Psyches, know you that you are now no more a child but a mother:
O what great joy bear you unto us in your belly? what a comfort will it be
unto all the house? how happy shall we be that shall see this infant nourished
emongst so great plenty of treasure? that if he be like his parents, as it is
necessary he should, there is no doubt but a new Cupide shall be borne: by
this kind of means they went about to win Psyches by little and little, but
because they were weary with travel, they satte them down in chayres, and
after that they had washed their bodies in baynes, they went into a parler,
where all kind of meats were ready prepared, Psyches commanded one to play
with his Harp, it was done: Then, immediately other sange, other tuned their
instruments, but no person was seen, by whose sweet harmony and modulation,
the sisters of Psyches were greatly delighted.

Howbeit the wickedness of these cursed women was nothing suppressed by the
sweet noyes of these instruments, but they settled the^ selves to work their
treason against Psyches demau^ding who was her husband, and of what parentage:
Then she (having forgotten, by too much simplicity, that, which she had
spoken before of her husband) invented a new answer, and said that her
husband was of a great province, a merchant, and a man of a middle age, having
his bearde entersparsed with gray hears, which when she had said (because she
would have no further talk) she filled their lappes full of Gold and Silver,
and bid Zephyrus to bear them away.

In their return homeward they murmured with the^ selves saying, how say you
sister to so apparaunt a lie of Psyches? For first she said that her husband
was a young man of florishinge years and had a flexen beard, and now she says
that it is half graye with age, what is he that in so short space can become
so old? you shall find it no otherwise my sister, but that either this cursed
queen has invented a great lie* or else that she never saw the shape of her
husband: And if it be so that she never saw him, then verily she is married
to some God, The envious person pine^h as others felicity.
and has a young god in her belly, but if it be a divine babe and fortune to
come to the ears of my mother (as God forbid it should) then may I go and
hang my self, wherefore let us go to our parents, and with forged lies let
us color the matter.

After they were thus inflamed and had visited their parents, they returned
again to the mountain, and by the aid of the wind Zephirus were carried
down into the valey, and after they had strained their eye liddes to enforce
them selves to weep, they called unto Psyches in this sort: Thou (ignorant of
so great evil) think thy self sure and happy, and sit at home nothing
regardinge thy peril, where as we go about thy affairs, and are careful
least any harm should happen unto thee, for we are credibly informed, neither
can we but utter it unto thee, that there is a great Serpent full of deadly
poison, with a ravenous and gapinge threate, that lies with thee every night,
remember the oracle of Apollo, who pronounced that thou should be married to
a dyre and ^erte Serpent, and many of the inhabitants here by, and such as
hunte about in the country, affirm that they saw him yesternight returning
from pasture and swimminge over the river, whereby they do undoubtedly say
that he will not pamper thee long with delicate meats, but when the time of
delivery shall approach, he will devour both thee and thy child, wherefore
advise thy self, whether thou will agree unto us that are careful for thy
safety, and so avoid the peril of death, and be contented to live with thy
sisters, or whether thou will remain with the serpent, and in the end to be
swallowed into the gowlfe of his body. And if it be so, that thy solitary
life, thy conversation with voices, this servile and dangerous pleasure, and
the love of the Serpent do more delight thee: say not but that we have playde
the parts of natural sisters in warninge thee. Then the poor and simple
miser Psyches was moved with the fear of so dreadful words, and (being
amassed in her mind) did clean forgette the admonitions of her husband, and
her own promises made unto him. And (throwyng her self headlonge into
extreme misery) with a wane and sallow countenance, scantly vtteringe a third
word, at length began say in this sort: O my most dear sisters I heartily
thank you for your great kindenes toward me, and I am now verily persuaded
that they which have informed you hereof, have informed you of nothing but
truth, for I never saw the shape of my husband, neither know I from whence he
came, only I here his voice in ye night, in so much that I have an uncertain
husband, and one that loves not the light of the day, which causes me to
suspect that he is a beast as you affirm, moreover I do greatly fear to see
him, for he does menace and threaten great evil unto me, if I should go about
to spy, and behold his shape, wherefore my loving sisters if you have any
wholesome remedy for your sister in danger, give it now presently: Then they
openinge the gates of their subtle minds, did put away all privy gile, and
egged her forward in her fearful thoughts, perswadinge her to do as they
would have her, whereupon one of them began and said, because that we little
esteem any peril or danger to save your life, we entende to show you the
best way and mean as we may possibly do: Take a sharp raser and put it under
the pillow of your bed, and see that you have ready a privy burninge lamp
with oil, hid under some part of the hanginge of the chamber, and (finely
dissimuling the matter) when (according to his custom) he comes to bed and
sleeps soundly, arise you secreatly, and with your bare feet go and take
your lamp, with the raser in your right hand, and with valiant force cut of
the head of the poisonous Serpent, wherein we will aid and assist you: and when
by the death of him, you shall be made salve, we will marry you to some comely
man. After they had thus inflamed the heart of their sister, (fearing least
some danger might happen unto them by reason of their evil counsel,) they
were carried by the wind Zephyrus to the top of the mountain, and so they
ran away, and took shippinge.

When Psyches was left alone (saving that she seemed not to be alone, being
stirred by so many furies) she was in a tossinge mind, like the waves of the
sea, and although her will was obstinate and resisted to put in execution the
counsel of her sisters, yet she was in doubtful and diverse opinions touching
her calamity, Sometime she would, sometime she would not, sometime she is
bold, sometime she fears, sometime she mistrusteth, sometime she is moved,
sometime she hates the beast, sometime she loves her husband, but at length
the night came, when as she made preparation for her wicked intent.

Sone after, her husband came, and when he had kissed and embrased her, he
fell a sleep: Then Psyches (somewhat feeble in body and mind, yet moved by
cruelty of fate) received boldenes and brought forth the lamp, and took the
raser, so by her audacitie she changed her kind, but when she took the lamp
and came to the bed side, she saw the most meek, and sweetest beast of all
beasts, even fair Cupide couched fayrely, at whose sight the very lamp
increased his light for joy, and the raser turned his edge. But when Psyches
saw so glorious a body, she greatly feared, and (amassed in mind, with a pale
countenance, all tremblinge) fell on her knees, and thought to hide the raser,
yea verily in her own heart, which she had undoubtedly done, had it not
(through fear of so great an enterprise) fallen out of her hand. And when she
saw and beheld the beauty of his divine visage, she was well recreated in
her mind, she saw his hears of Gold, that yielded out a sweet savor: his
neck more white then milk, his purple cheeks, his hear hanging comely
behind and before, the brightness whereof did darken the light of the lamp,
his tender plume feathers dispersed upon his shoulders like shininge flowers,
and tremblinge hither and thither, and his other parts of his body so smothe
and soft that it did not repent Venus to bear such a child: at the beds
feet lay his bow, quiver, and arrows, that ^e the weapons of so great a God,
which, when Psyches did curiously behold, and merueling at the weapons of her
husband took one of the arrows out of the quiver, and pricked her self
withal, wherewith she was so grievously wounded that the bloudde followed, and
thereby of her own accord she added love upon love, then more and more
broylinge in the love of Cupide, she embrased him and kissed him a thousand
times fearinge the measure of his sleep: but alas, while she was in this great
joy, whether it were for envy, or for desire to touch this amiable body
likewise, there fell out a drop of burning oil from the lamp upon the right
shoulder of the God. O rash and bold lamp the vile ministry of love, how
dare thou be so bold as to burn the God of al fire? when as he inverted
thee, to the intent that al lovers might with more joy pass the nights in
pleasure. The God being burned in this sort, and perceauinge that promise and
faith was broken he flied away without vtteraunce of any word from the eyes
and hands of his most unhappy wife. But Psiches fortuned to catch him (as he
was rising) by the right thighe, and held him fast as he flewe above in the
air, until such time, that (constrained by werines) she let go and fell
down upon the ground: but Cupide followed her down, and lighted upon the
top of a Cypress tree, and angerly spoke unto her in this manner: O simple
Psiches consider with thy self, how I (little regarding the commandment of
my mother, who willed me that thou should be married to a man of base and
miserable condition) did come my self from heaven to love thee, and wounded
mine own body with my proper weapons to have thee to my spouse, and did I
seem a beast unto thee, y^ thou should go about to cut of my head with a
raser, who loved thee so well? did not I always give thee in charge? did not I
gentely will thee to beware? but those cursed ayders and counselours of thine,
shall be woorthely rewarded for their pains. The absent of lovers is greatest
punishment.
As for thee, thou shall be sufficiently punished by my absence: When he had
spoken these words, he took his dight into y^ air.

Then Psyches fell ^atte on the ground, and as long as she might see her
husband, she cast her eyes after him into the air wepinge and lamentinge
piteously, but when he was gonne out of her sight, she threw her self into the
nerte running river, for the great anguish and dolor that she was in, for the
lack of her husband, how be it the water would not suffer her to be drowned,
but took pity upon her, in the honor of Cupide which accustomed to broyle and
burn the river, and so threw her upon the bank emongst the herbs.

Then Pan the rustical God sitting on the river side, embrasinge and teaching
the Goddess Canna to tune her songs and pipes, by whom were feedinge the
young and tender goats, after that he perceived Psyches in so sorrowful case,
not ignorant (I know not by what means) of her miserable estate, endeavored to
pacify her in this sort: Oh fair maid, I am a rustike and rude herdesman,
howbeit (by reason of my old age) expert in many things, for as far as I
can learn by conjecture, which (according as wise men do term) is called
divination, I perceive by your uncertain gate, your pale hew, your sobbinge
sighs, and your watrie eyes, that you are greatly in love. Wherefore harken to
me, and go not about to slay your self, nor weep not at all, but rather
addore and woorshippe the great God Cupide, and win him unto you by your
gentle promise of service. When the God of shepeherdes had spoken these
words, she gave no answer but made reverence unto him as to a God, and so
departed.

After that Psyches had gonne a little way, she fortuned (unawares) to come to a
City where the husband of one of her sisters did dwell, which when Psyches did
understand, she caused that her sister had knowledge of her coming. And so
they met together, and after great embrasinge and salutation, the sister of
Psyches demanded the cause of her travel thither: Marry (quod she) do not
you remember the counsel that you gave me, whereby you would, that I should
kill the beast, who under color of my husband did lie with me every night?
you shall understand, y^ as soon as I brought forth the lamp to see and
behold his shape, I perceived that he was the son of Venus, even Cupide him
self that lay with me. Then I (being stro^ken with great pleasure, and
desirous to embrase him) could not thoroughly assuage my delight, but alas (by
evil channce) the boylinge oil of the lamp fortuned to fall on his shoulder,
which caused him to awake, who (saying me armed with fire and weapon) began say.
How dare thou be so bold to do so great a mischief? depart from me, and
take such things as thou did bring: for I will have thy sister (and named
you) to my wife, and she shall be placed in thy felicity, and by and by he
commanded Zephyrus to carry me away from the bounds of his house.

Psyches had scantly finished her tale, but her sister (perced with y^ prick
of carnal desire and wicked envy) ran home, and (feigninge to her husband
that she had hard word of the death of her pare^tes) took shipping and came
to the mountain. And although there blewe a contrary wind, yet being brought
in a vain hope she cried, O Cupide take me a more worthy wife, and thou
Zephyrus bear down thy mistress, and so she cast her self down hedlonge
from the mountain, but she fell not into the valley neither alive nor dead,
for all the members and parts of her body were torn emongst the rocks,
whereby she was made a pray unto the birds and wild beasts, as she woorthely
deserved.

Neither was the vengeance of the other delaide, for Psiches traueling in that
country fortuned to come to an other City, where her other sister did dwell,
to whom when she had declared all such things as she told to her first
sister, As every virtue is rewarded, so every vice is punisshed.
she ran likewise unto the rock and was slain in like sort. Then Psiches
traueled about in the country to seek her husband Cupide, but he was gotten
into his mothers chamber, and there bewailed the sorrowful wound, which he
caught by the oil of the burninge lamp.

Then the white bird the Gull which swimmeth on the waves of the water, flewe
toward the Occean sea, where she found Venus washinge and bathinge her
self: to whom she declared that her son was burned and in danger of death,
and moreover that it was a common brute in y^ mouth of every person (who spoke
evil of all the family of Venus) that her son does nothing but haunt harlots
in y^ mountain, and she her self, lasciuiously, use to riotte on the sea,
whereby they say yt they are now become no more gracious, no more pleasant, no
more gentle, but inciuill, mo^struous and horrible: moreover the marriages are
not for any amity, or for love of procreatio^, but full of envy, discord, and
debate. This the curious Gull did clatter in the ears of Venus reprehe^ding
her son. But Venus began to cry, and said: what has my son gotten any
love? I pray thee (gentle bird y^ do serve me so faithfully) tell me what
she is, and what is her name, that has troubled my son in such sort,
whether she be any of the Nymphs, of the number of the Goddesses, of the
company of the Muses, or of the mystery of my Graces? To whom the bird
answered. Madame I know not what she is, but this I know, that she is called
Psiches. Then Venus with indignation cried out: what is it she? the usurper of
my beauty, the viccar of my name? what did he think that I was a baude, by
whose show he fell acquainted with the maid? And immediately she departed, and
went to her chamber, where she found her son wounded as it was told unto
her, whom when she beheld she cried out in this sort.

Is this an honest thing? is this honorable to thy parents? is this reason
that thou have violate and broken the commandment of thy mother and
sovereign mistress? And whereas thou should have vexed my enemy with
loathsome love, thou haste done contrary: For (being but of tender and unripe
years) thou have with too licentious appetite embrased my most mortal foe,
to whom I shall be made a mother, and she a daughter: Thou presumest and
think (thou triflinge boy, thou verlette, and without all reverence) that
thou art most worthy and excellent, and that I am not able by reason of mine
age to have an other son, which if I might have, thou should well
understand that I would bear a more woorthier then thou, but to work thee a
greater despite, I do determine to adopte one of my servants, and to give him
these wings, this fire, this bow, and these arrows, and all other furniture
which I gave to thee, not for this purpose, neither is any thing given thee
of thy father for this intent: but first thou have been evil brought up, and
instructed in thy youth: thou haste thy hands ready and sharp: Thou have
often offended thy auncientes and especially me that am thy mother, thou have
perced me with thy darts, thou contemnest me as a widow, neither do thou
regard thy valiant and invincible Father, and to anger me more thou art
amorous of wenches and harlottes, but I will cause that thou shall shortly
repent thee, and that this marriage shall be dearly bought. To what a point am
I now driven? what shall I do? whither shall I go? how shall I repress this
^easre? Shall I ask aid of mine enemy Sobriety, whom I have often offended
to engender thee? or shall I seek for counsel of every poor and rusticall
woman? No, no, yet had I rather die, howbeit I will not cease my vengeance, to
her must I have recourse for help, and to none other, (I mean to Sobriety)
who may correct thee sharply, take away thy quiver, deprive thee of thy
arrows, vnbende thy bow, quench thy fire, and (which is more) subdew thy
body with punishment, and when that I have rased and cut of this thy hear,
which I have dressed with mine own hands, and made to glitter like gold,
and when I have clipped thy wings which I my self have caused to burgen, then
shall I think to have sufficiently revenged my self upon thee, for the injury
which thou have done: when she had spoken these words she departed in a great
rage out of her chamber.

Juno was daughter of Saturn and Opis sister and wife of Jupiter. Ceres other
wife called ^sis wife of Os^ris (...) of Egipte* she (...) supposed to be the
Goddess of Harvest.
Immediately, as she was goinge away, came Juno and Ceres demau^dinge the cause
of her anger: then Venus made answer, verily you are come to comfort my
sorrow, but I pray you with all diligence to seek out one whose name is
Psyches, who is a vagabonde, and runs about the countries, and as I think
you are not ignorant of the brute of my son Cupide, and of his demeanure,
which I am ashamed to declare: Then they standing and knowing the whole matter,
endeavored to mitigate the ire of Venus in this sort.

What is the cause madame, or how has your son so offended that you should
so greatly accuse his love, and blame him by reason that he is amorous? And why
should you seek the death of her, whom he does fancy? We most humbly entreat
you to pardon his fault, if he have accorded to the mind of any maiden, what
do not you know that he is a young man? or have you forgotten of what years
he is? does he seem always unto you to be a child? you are his mother, and a
kind woman, will you continually search out his daliance? will you blame his
luxury? will you bridle his love? And will you reprehende your own art and
delights in him? what God or man is he, that can endure that you should sow
or disperse your seed of love in every place, and to make a restraint thereof
within your own doors, certes you will be the cause of the suppression of the
public places of young dames. In this sort these Goddesses endeavored to
pacify her mind, and tercuse Cupide with all their power (although he wear
absent) for fear of his darts and shaftes of love. But Venus would in no wise
assuage her heat, but (thinking that they did rather trifle and taunte at her
injuries) she departed from them, and took her viage toward the sea in all
have.

The sixth Book of Lucius Apuleius
In the mean season Psyches hurled her self hither and thither, to seek for
her husband, the rather because she thought, that if he would not be appeased
with the sweet flattery of his wife, yet he would take mercy upon her at her
servile and continual prayers. And (espiyng a Church on the top of a high
hill) she said, what can I tell whether my husband and master be there or
no? wherefore she went thither ward, and with great pain and travel, moved
by hope, after y^ she climed to the top of the mountain, she came to the
Temple and went in, whereas, behold she espied sheefes of corn liyng on a
heap, blades writhed like garla^des, and reeds of barley, moreover she saw
hooks, sithes, sickels and other instruments to reap, but every thing lay out
of order, and as it were cast in by the hands of laborers, which when
Psiches saw, she gathered up and put every thing dewly in order, thinking that
she would not despise or contemn the Temples of any of the Gods, but rather
get the favor and benevolence of them all, by and by Ceres came in, and
beholding her busy and curious in her chapel, cried out a far of, and said:
O Psiches needeful of mercy, Venus searches for thee in every place to revenge
her self and to punish thee grievously, but y^ haste more mind to be here, and
carest for nothing less, the^ for thy safety. Then Psiches fell on her knees
before her, wateringe her feet with her tears, wipinge the ground with her
hear, and with great weeping and lamentation desired pardon, saying: O great
and holy Goddess I pray thee by thy plentuous and liberal right hand, by thy
joyful ceremonies of harvest, by the secrets of thy sacrafice, by the fliyng
chariottes of thy Dragons, by the tillage of the ground of Sicile, which thou
have inverted, by the marriage of Proserpina, by y^ diligent inquisitio^ of thy
daughter, and by the other secrets which are within the temple of Eleusis in
the land of Athe^s, take pity on me thy servant Psiches, and let me hide my
self a few dales emo^gst these sheefes of corn until the ire of so great a
Goddess be past, or until that I be refreshed of my great labor and travel.
Then answered Ceres: Verily, Psiches I am greatly moved by thy prayers and
tears, and desire with all my heart to aid thee, but if I should suffer thee
to be hidden here, I should incur the displeasure of my Cousin, with whom I
have made a treaty of peace, and an ancient promise of amity: wherefore I
advise thee to depart hense, and take it not in evil part in that I will not
suffer thee to abide and remain within my Temple.

Then Psiches driven away contrary to her hope, was double afflicted with
sorrow, and so she returned back again: and behold, she perceived a far of
in a valley a Temple standing within a forest, fair and curiously wrought, and
mindinge to ouerpasse no place, whither better hope did direct her, and to the
intent she would desire the pardon of every God, she approached nighe to the
sacred doors, whereas she saw precious richesse and vestmentes igrauen with
letters of gold, hanging upon branches of trees, and the posts of the Temple,
testifiynge the name of the Goddess Juno, to whom they were dedicate, then
she kneeled down upon her knees, and embrasinge the Altar with her hands,
and wipinge her tears began pray in this sort. O dear spouse and sister of the
great God Jupiter, which art adored among the great temples of Samos, called
upon by weme^ with child, worshipped at high Carthage, because thou werest
brought from heaven by the Lion, the rivers of the flood Inachus do celebrate
thee, and know yt thou art the wife of the great God and the Goddess of
Goddesses: All the East part of the world has thee in veneration, all the
world calls thee Lucina, I pray thee to be mine advocate in my tribulatio^s,
deliver me from the great danger which pursues me, and save me that am we^
ried with so long labors and sorrow, for I know that it is thou that
succourest and helpest such w^men as are with child and in danger. Then Juno
hearing the prayers of Psiches, appeared unto her in all her royalty: saying:
Certes Psiches I would gladly help thee, but I am ashamed to do any thing
contrary to the will of my daughter in law Venus, whom always I have loved as
mine own child, moreover I shall incur the danger of the law entitled,
De seruo corrupto, Whereby I am forbidden to retain any servant fugitive
against the will of his master.

Then Psiches cast of likewise by Juno, as without all hope of the recovery of
her husband, reasoned with her self in this sort, now what comfort or
remedy is left to my afflictions, when as my prayers will nothing avail
with the Goddesses? what shall I do? whither shall I go? In what cave or
darkness shall I hide my self to avoid the furor of Venus? why do I not take
a good heart, and offer my self with humility unto her whose anger I have
wrought, what do I know whether he (whom I seek for) be in the house of his
mother or no? Thus being in doubt, poor Psiches prepared her self to her
own danger, and devised how she might make her Orayson and prayer unto Venus.

After that Venus was weary with searchinge by sea and land for Psiches, she
returned toward heaven, and commanded that one should prepare her chariot,
which her husband Vulcanus gave unto her by reason of marriage, so finely
wrought that neither Gold nor filuer could be compared to the brightness
thereof, four white pigeons guided the chariot with great dilig^nce, and when
Vlenus was entered in, a number of sparrowes flewe chirpinge about, making
sign of joy, and all other kind of birds sange sweetly foreshowynge the
coming of the great Goddess: the clouds gave place, the heavens opened, and
received her joyfully, the birds that followed nothing feared the Egles,
Hawks, and other ravenous foul in the air. Incontinently she went unto the
ryall Pallaice of the God Jupiter, and with a proud and bold petition
demanded the service of Mercury in certain of her affairs, whereunto Jupiter
consented, then with much joy she descended from heaven with Mercury, and gave
him an earnest charge to put in execution her words, saying: O my brother,
borne in Arcadia, thou know well that I (who am thy sister) did never
enterprise to do any thing without thy presence, thou know also how long
I have sought for a girl and cannot find her, wherefore there rests
nothing else save that thou with thy trumpette do pronounce the reward to
such as take her, see thou put in execution my commanndement, and declare that
what so ever he be that retains her, wittingly, against my will shall not
defend him self by any mean or excusation: which when she had spoken, she
delivered unto him a libell wherein was contained the name of Psiches and the
reside we of his publication, which done she departed away to her lodginge. By
and by, Mercurius (not delaying y^ matter) proclaimed through out all the
world, that what so ever he were that could tell any tidinges of a Kings
fugitive daughter, the servant of Venus, named Psiches, should bring word to
Mercury, and for reward of his pains he should receive seven sweet cosses
of Venus. After that Mercury had pronounced these things, every man was
inflamed with desire to search out Psiches.

This proclamation was the cause that put away all doubt from Psiches, who was
scantly come in sight of the house of Venus, but one of her servants called
Custom came out, who espiyng Psiches, cried with a loud voice, saying: O
wicked harlotte as thou art, now at length thou shall know that thou haste a
mistress above thee, what do thou make thy self ignorant as though thou
did not understand what travel we have taken in searchinge for thee, I am
glad that thou art come into my hands, thou art now in the goulfe of Hell,
and shall abide the pain and punishment of thy great contumacie, and there
withal she took her by the hear, and brought her in before the presence of
Venus.

When Venus espied her, she began to laugh, and as angry persons accustom to
do, she shaked her head and scratched her right ear, saying: O goddess,
Goddess, you are now come at length to visit your mother, or else to see your
husband, that is in danger of death by your means, be you assured I will
handle you like a daughter, where be my maidens Sorrow, and Sadness? To whom
(when they came) she delivered Psiches to be cruelly tormented, then they
fulfilled the commandment of their Misteris, and after they had piteoufly
scourged her with whippes and rods, they presented her again before Venus.
The^ she began to laugh again, saying: Behold she thinks (that by reason of
her great belly which she has gotten by playing the hoore) to move me to
pity, and to make me a grandmother to her child: Am not I happy, that in the
flourishinge time of all mine age shall be called a gra^dmother, and the son of
a vile harlotte shall be accounted the Nephew of Venus? How be it I am a fool to
term him by the name of a son, since as the marriage was made between
unequal persons, in the fields, without witnesses, and not by the consent of
their parents, wherefore the marriage is illegitimate, and the child (that
shall be borne) a bastard, if we fortune to suffer thee to live so long till
thou be delivered.

When Venus had spoken these words she leaped upon the face of poor Psiches,
and (tearing her apparel) took her violently by the hear, and dashed her head
upon the ground. Then she took a great quantity of wheat, barley, will, popy
seed, peason, lintels, and beans, and mingled them al together on a heap,
saying: thou evil favored girl, thou seem unable to get the grace of thy
lover, by no other means, but only by diligent and painful service, wherefore
I will prove what thou caust do, see that thou separate all these graynes one
from an other, disposinge the^ orderly in their quality, and let it be done
before night. When she had appointed this task unto Psiches, she departed to a
great banquette that was prepared that day.

But Psiches went not about to disseuer the grain (as being a thing
impossible to be brought to pass by reason it lay so confusely scattered) but
being astonished at the cruel commandment of Venus, satte still and said
nothing: Then the little Pismere the Emote, takings pity of her great
difficulty and labor, cursing the cruelnes of the wife of Jupiter and of so
evil a mother, ran about hither and thither, and called to her all the
Antes of the country, saying: I pray you my friends, ye quick sons of the
ground the mother of al things, take mercy on this poor maid espoused to
Cupide, who is in great danger of her person, I pray you help her withal
diligence. Inco^tinently one came after an other disseueryng and dividing the
grain, and after that they had put each kind of corn in order, they ran
away again in all haste.

When night came, Venus returned home from the banquet well tipled with wine,
smelling of balm, and crowned with garla^des of Roses, who when she espied
what Psyches had done, began say, this is not the labor of thy hands, but
rather of his that is amorous of thee, then she gave her a morsel of brown
bread, and went to sleep.

In the mean season Cupide was closed fast in the most surest chamber of the
house, partly because he should not hurt him self with wanton dalliance, and
partly because he should not speak with his love, so these two lovers wear
divided one from an other.

When night was passed, Venus called Psyches and said: see thou yonder
forest that extends out in length with the river, there be great sheep
shininge like gold, and kept by no manner of person, I command thee that
thou go thither and bring me home some of the wool of their fleeces. Psyches
arose willingly, not to do her commandment, but to throw her self hedlong
into the water to end her sorrow. Then a green reed inspired by divine
inspiration with a gracious tune and melody began say. O Psyches, I pray thee
not to trouble or pollute my water by the death of thee, and yet beware that
thou go not toward the terrible sheep of this coast, until such time as
the heat of the Sun be past, for when the Sun is in his force, then seem
they most dreadful, and furious, with their sharp horns, their stony
forheads, and their gaping throtes wherewith they arm them selves to the
destruction of mankind: but until the midday is past and the heat assuaged,
and until they have refreshed them selves in the river, thou may hyde thy
self here by me under this great plane tree: and as soon as their great fury
is past, thou may go among the thickettes and bushes under the wood side and
gather the locks of their golden fleeces, which thou shall find ha^ginge upon
the briers. Thus spoke the gentle and beninge Reed, showinge a mean to
Psyches to save her life, which she bare well in memory, and with all
diligence went and gathered up such locks as she found and put them in her
apron, and carried them home to Venus: how be it the danger of this second
labor did not please her, nor give her sufficient witness of the good service
of Psyches, but with a sower resemblaunce of laughter, she said: Of certainty
I know y^ this is not thy fact, but I will prove if thou be of so stout a
courage, and singular prudencie as thou seem.

Then Venus spoke unto Psyches again: saying, See thou the top of yonder
great hill, from whense there ronneth down water of black and deadly color,
which nourishes the floodes of Stix and Cocitus, I charge thee to go thither
and bring me a vessel of that water: wherewithal she gave her a bottell of
Cristall, menacinge and threatening her rigorously.

Then poor Psyches went in all have to the top of the mountain, rather to
end her life then to fetch any water, and when she was come up to the ridge
of the hill, she perceived that it was impossible to bring it to pass: For
she saw a great rock gusshinge out most horrible fountains of waters,
which ran down and fell by many stoppes and passages into the valley
beneath, on each side she saw great Dragons, stretching out their long and
blouddy necks, that never slept, but appointed to keep the river there: the
waters seemed to the^ selves likewise: saying, Away, away, what will thou do?
Fly, fly, or else thou will be slain: then Psiches (seeing y^ impossibility of
this affair) stood still as though she were tra^sformed into a stone, and
although she was present in body, yet was she absent in spirit and sense, by
reason of the great peril which she saw, in so much that she could not
comfort her self with weping, such was the present danger that she was in.

But the royal bird of great Jupiter, the Egle, remembering his old service,
which he had done, when as by the prick of Cupide he brought up the boy
Ganimides to ye heavens, to be made the buttler of Jupiter, and mindinge to
show the like service in the person of the wife of Cupide, came from the high
house of the skies, and said unto Psiches: O simple woman, without all
experience, do thou think to get or dippe up any drop of this dredful
water? No, no, assure thy self thou art never able to come nigh it, for the
Gods them selves do greatly fear at the sight thereof: what have you not
hard that it is a custom emonge men to swear by the puissance of the Gods:
And the Gods do swear by the Majesty of the river Stix? but give me thy
bottle, and suddenly he took it, and filled it with the water of the river, and
taking his flight thorough those cruel and horrible Dragons brought it unto
Psyches: who being very joyful thereof presented it to Venus, who would not
yet be appeased, but menacinge more and more, said: what thou seem unto me a
very Witch and Enchaunteresse, that bring these things to pass, how be it
thou shall do one thing more.

Take this bore and go to hell to Proserpina, and desire her to send me a
little of her beauty, as much as will serve me the space of one day, and say
that such as I had is consumed away since my son fell sick, but return
again quickly, for I must dress my self therewithal, withal, and go to the
threatre of the Gods, the^ poor Psiches perceived the end of al her fortune,
thinking verily y^ she should never return, and not without cause, when as
she was compelled to go to the goulfe and furies of Hell. Wherefore without any
further delay, she went up to a high tower to throw her self down headlong
(thinkinge that it was the next and rediest way to Hell) but the tower (as
inspired) spoke unto her, saiynge: O poor miser why go thou about to slay
thy self? why do thou rashly yield unto thy last peril and danger? know
thou that if thy spirit be once separate from thy body, thou shall surely go
to Hell, but never to return again, wherefore harken to me: Lacedemon a City
of Greece is not far hense: Go thou thither and enquire for the hill Tenarus,
whereas thou shalt find a hole leadinge to Hell, even to the pallaice of
Pluto, but take heed that thou go not with empty hands to that place of
darkness: but carry two soppes sodden in the flower of barley and honey in
thy hands, and two halfpens in thy mouth, and when thou haste passed a good
part of that way, thou shall see a lame Ass carriyng of woodde, and a lame
fellow driuinge him, who will desire thee to give him up the sticks that fall
down, but pass thou on and do nothing, by and by thou shall come unto the
river of Hell, whereas Charon is Ferriman, who will first have his fare paid
him, before he will carry the souls over the river in his boat, whereby you
may see that avarice reigns emongst the dead, neither Charon nor Pluto will
do any thing for naught: For if it be a poor man that would pass over, and
lacks money he shall be compelled to die in his journey before they will show
him any relief, wherefore deliver to carraine Charon one of the halfepens
(which thou bear) for thy passage, and let him receive it out of thy
mouth. And it shall come to pass as thou sit in the boat, thou shalt see
an old man swimminge on the top of the river holdinge up his deadly hands,
and desiringe thee to receive him into the bark, but have no regard to his
piteous cry: when thou art passed over the floudde thou shall epsy old women
spinninge who will desire thee to help them, but beware thou do not consent
unto them in any case, for these and like baits and trappes will Venus set,
to make thee let fall one of thy soppes: and think not that the keepinge of
thy soppes is a light matter, for if thou lose one of them thou shall be
assured never to return again to this world. Then thou shall see a great and
marvelous dog with three heads barkinge continually at the souls of such as
enter in, by reason he can do them no other harm, he lies day and night
before the gate of Proserpina, and keeps the house of Pluto with great
diligence, to whom if thou cast one of thy soppes, thou may have access to
Proserpina without all danger: she will make thee good cheer, and entertain
thee with delicate meat and drink, but sit thou upon the ground and desire
brown bread, and then declare thy message unto her, and when thou have
received such beauty as she gives, in thy return appease the rage of the
dog with thy other soppe, and give thy other halfepeny to covetous Charon,
and come the same way again into the world as thou wentest: but above all
things have a regard that thou look not in the box, neither be not to
curious about the treasure of the divine beauty.

In this manner the tower spoke unto Psyches, and advertised her what she
should do: and immediately she took two halfpence, two soppes, and all
things necessary and went to the mountain Tenarus to go toward Hell.

After that Psiches had passed by the lam^ Ass, paid her halfpenny for
passage, neglected the old man in the river, denied to help the women
spinninge, and filled the ravenous mouth of y^ dog with a soppe, she came to
the chamber of Proserpina. There Psyches would not sit in any royal seat,
nor eat any delicate meats, but kneelinge at the feet of Proserpina, only
contented with course bread, declared her message, and after she had received a
mystical secret in the box she departed, and stopped the mouth of the dog
with the other soppe, and paid the boteman the other halfpe^ny.

When Psyches was returned from hell, to the light of y^ world she was
ravished with great desire, saying: Am not I a fool that knowinge that I carry
here the divine beauty, will not take a little thereof to garnish my face, to
please my lover withal? and by and by she opened the box, where she could
perceive no beauty nor any thing else, save only an infernal and deadly
sleep, which immediately invaded all her members as soon as the box was
uncovered, in such sort that she fell down on the gronnde, and lay there as a
sleepinge corpse.

But Cupide being now healed of his wound and malady, not able to endure the
absence of Psyches, got him secretly out at a window of the chamber where
he was enclosed, and (receauinge his wings) took his flight toward his
louinge wife, whom when he had found he wiped away the sleep from her face,
and put it again into the box, and awaked her with the tippe of one of his
arrows, saying: O wretched ^aytife, behold thou wearest welny perished
again, with thy overmuch curiosity, well, go thou, and do thy message to my
mother, and in the mean season I will provide for all things accordingly:
wherewithal he took his flight into the air, and Psiches brought her present
to Venus.

Cupide being more and more in love with Psiches, and fearing the displeasure
of his mother, did perce into the heavens, and arrived before Jupiter to
declare his cause: then Jupiter after that he had eftsoon embrased him, began
say in this manner: O my well-beloved son, although thou have not given due
reverence and honor unto me as thou ought to do, but have rather soyled,
and wounded this my breast (whereby the laws and order of the elements and
planetes be disposed) with continual assaults of terren luxury and against al
laws, and the discipline Iulia, and the utility of y^ public weal in
tra^sforming my divine beauty into serpents, fire, savage beasts, birds*
and into bulls. Howbeit reme^bringe my modesty, and that I have nourished
thee with mine own proper hands. I will do and accomplish al thy desire, so
that thou can beware of spiteful and envious persons. And if there be any
excellent maiden of comely beauty in the world, remember yet y^ benefit which
I shall show unto thee, by recompense of her love toward me again. When he
had spoken these words, he commanded Mercury to call all the Gods to
counsel, and if any of the celestial powers did fail of appearance, he
should be condemned in ten thousand pounds: which sentence was such a terror
unto all the Gods, that the high Theater was replenished, and Jupiter began
to speak in this sort. O ye Gods, registered in the books of the Muses, you
all know this young man Cupide, whom I have nourished with mine own hands,
whose raginge flames of his first youth I thought best to bridle and restrain.
It suffiseth in that he is diffamed in every place for his adulterous living,
wherefore all occasion ought to be taken away by mean of marriage: he has
chosen a maiden that fancieth him well, and has beriued her of her virginity,
let him have her still and possess her according to his own pleasure: then
he returned to Venus, and said: And you my daughter, take you no care, neither
fear the dishonor of your progeny and estate, neither have regard in that
it is a mortal marriage, for it seems unto me, just, lawful and legitimate
by the law Civil.

Incontinently after, Jupiter commanded Mercury to bring up Psiches the
spouse of Cupide, into the pallayce of heaven. And then he took a pot of
immortality, and said: Hold Psyches and drink to the end thou may be
immortal, and that Cupide may be thine everlasting husband.

By and by the great bankette and marriage feast was sumptuously prepared,
Cupide satte down with his dear spouse between his arms: Juno likewise with
Jupiter, and all the other Gods in order, Ganimides filled the pot of
Jupiter, and Bacchus served the rest. Their drink was Nectar the wine of the
gods, Vulcanus prepared supper, the hours decked up the house with Roses and
other sweet smelles, the Graces threw about baulme, the Muses sange with
sweet harmony, Apollo tuned pleasauntly to the Harp, Venus daunsed finely:
Satirus and Paniscus plaide on their pipes: and thus Psiches was married to
Cupide, and after she was delivered of a child, whom we call Pleasure.

This the trifling old woman declared unto y^ captive maiden, but I poor Ass,
not standing far of was not a little sorry in that I lacked pen and Ink to
write so worthy a tale.

How Apuleius carried away the Gentlewoman, and how they were taken again by
the thieves, and what a kind of death was invented for them.

Cap. 23.
BY and by the Thieves came home laden with treasure, and many of them which
were of strongest courage (leauinge behind such as were lame and wounded, to
heal and air them selves) said they would return back again to fetch the
rest of their pillage, which they had hidden in a certain cave, and so they
snatched up their dinner greedely, and brought us forth into the way and beat
us before them with staves, about night (after that we had passed over many
hills and dales) we came to a great cave, where they laded us with mighty
burdens, and would not suffer us to refreshe our selves any season, but
brought us again in our way, and hied so fast homeward, that what with their
haste and their cruel stripes, I fell down upon a stone by the high way side,
then they beat me pitifully in lifting me up, and hurt my right thighe and my
left hoof, and one of them said, what shall we do with this lame evil
favored Ass that is not worth the meat y^ he eats? An other said: since
the time that we had him first, he never did any good, and I think he came
unto our house with evil luck, for we have had great wounds since, and loss
of our valiant Capitaines, an other said as soon as he has brought home his
burden, I will surely throw him out upon the mountain to be a pray for wild
beasts: While these gentlemen reasoned together of my death, we fortuned to
come home, for y^ fear that I was in, caused my feet to turn into wings:
after that we wear discharged of our burdens, they went to their fellows
that lay wounded, and told them our great tarditie and slownes by the way,
neither was I brought into small anguishe when as I perceived my death prepared
before my face, saying: Why stand thou still Lucius? why do thou look
for thy death? know thou not that the thieves have ordained to slay thee?
See thou not these sharp and pointed flintes which shall bruise and tear
thee in pieces if by adventure thou happen upon them, thy gentle Magicien has
not only given thee the shape and travel of an Ass, but also a skin so
soft and tender as it were a swallow, why do thou not take courage and
run away to save thy life? Art thou affeard of the old woman, which is more
then half dead, whom with a stripe of thy heel thou may easily dispatche?
but whither shall I fly? what lodging shall I seek? behold my assy
cogitation? who is he that passes by the way and will not take me up: while I
devised these things I brake the halter wherewith I was tied, and ran away
with all my force, he ^^beit I could not escape the kitishe eyes of the old
woman, for she ran after me, and with more audacitie then becomes her kind
and age, caught me by the halter and thought to pull me home: but I not
forgettinge the cruel purpose of the thieves, was moved with small pity, for I
kicked her with my hinder heels to the ground and had welnie slain her, who
(although she was thrown and hurled down) yet she held still the halter and
would not let me go, then she cried with a loud voice and called for
succor, but she little prevailed because there was no person that hard her,
save only the captive gentlewoman, who hearing the voice of the old woman,
came out to see what the matter was, and (perceiving her hanging at the halter)
took a good courage and wrested it out of her hands, and (entreatinge me with
gentle words) got upon my back. Then I began to run, and she gently
kicked me forward, whereof I was nothing displeased, for I had as great a
desire to escape as she: In so much that I seemed to scowre away like a
horse. And when the gentlewoman did speak, I would answer her with my
neyinge, and oftentimes (under color to rub my back) I would sweetly
kiss her tender feet. Then she, f^tchinge a sighe from the bottom of her
heart, lifted up her eyes into the heavens, saying: O sovereign Gods deliver
me if it be your pleasure, from these present dangers: And thou cruel fortune
cease thy wrath, let the sorrow suffice thee which I have already sustained.
And thou little Ass that art the occasion of my sauetie and libertee, if thou
can once render me salve and sound to my parents, and to him that so
greatly desires to have me to his wife, thou shall see what thanks I will give
thee, with what honor I will reward thee, and how I will use thee. First, I
will bravely dress the hears of thy sorehead, and then I will finely kembe thy
mane, I will tie up thy rugged tail trymly, I will deck thee round about
with golden trappes, in such sort, that thou shall glitter like the Stars
of the sky, I will bring thee daily in my apron the kyrnelles of nuttes, and
will pamper the up with deintie delicates, I will set stoore by thee, as by
one that is the preserver of my life: Finaly, thou shall lack no manner of
thing. Moreover, amongst thy glorious fare, thy great ease, and the bliss of
thy life thou shall not be destitute of dignitee, for thou shall be Chronicled
perpetually in memory of my present fortune, and the providence divine. All
the whole history shall be painted upon the wall of our house: Thou shall be
renow^^ed throughout all the world: And it shall be registered in the books of
Doctors, that an Ass saved the life of a young maiden that was captive
amongst Thieves: Thou shall be no^bred amongst the ancient miracles: we
believe that by like example of truth, Phryxus saved him self from drowning
upon a Ram, Arion escaped upon a Dolphin: And that Europa was delivered by a
Bull. If Jupiter transformed him self into a Bull, why may it not be that
under shape of this Ass, is hidden y^ figure of a man, or some power Divine?
While that the Virgin did thus sorowfully unfold her desires, we fortuned to
come to a place wheare three ways did meet, and she took me by the halter
and would have me turn on the right hand to her fathers house, but I (knowing
that the thieves wear gone that way to fetch the residue of their pillage)
resisted with my head as much as I might, saiynge within my self, what will thou do unhappy maide^? why would thou go so willingly to hell? why wilt you
ru^ne into destruction by mean of my feet? why do thou seek thine own
harm and mind likewise? And while we two striued together whether way we
might take, y^ thieves returned laden with their pray, and perceived us a far
of by the light of y^ Moon: And after they had known us, one of them began say,
whither go you so hastily? be you not aferde of spirits? And you (you harlot)
do you go to see your parents? Come on, we will bear you company? And
therwithall they took me by the halter and drove me back again, beating me
cruelly with a great staff (that they had) full of knobbes: the^ I (returning
again to my ready destruction, and remembering the grief of my h^^fe) be ganne
to shake my head and to wax lame, but he that led me by the halter said:
what do thou stomble? can thou not go? these rotten feet of thine can
run well mough, but they cannot walk, thou could minse it finely even now
with the gentlewoman, that thou did seem to pass the horse Pegasus in
swiftnes. In saying these words, they beat me again that they brake a
great staff upon me, and when we were come almost home, we saw the old woman
hanginge upon a bow of a Cypress tree: then one of them cut down the bow
whereon she hanged, and cast her into the bottom of a great ditche: after this
they bound the maiden and fell greedely to their victuales, which the miserable
old woman had provided for them. At which time they began to devise with the^
selves of our death, and how they might be revenged, diverse was the opinions of
this diverse number: the first said that he thought best the maid should be
burned alive: the second said she should be thrown out to wild beasts: the
third said she should be hanged upon a gibbot: the fourth said she should be
flead alive: thus was y^ death of the poor maiden sca^ned between them four.
But one of the Thieves after every man had declared his judgment did speak in
this manner. It is not convenient unto the oath of our company, to suffer you
to wax more cruel, the^ the quality of the offense does merit, for I would
that she should not be hanged, nor burned, nor thrown to beasts, nor die any
sudden death, but by my counsel I would have her punished according to her
deserte. You know well what you have determined already of this dull Ass, that
eats more then he is worth, that feigneth lamenesse, and that was the cause
of the fliynge away of the maid, my mind is that he shall be slain to morrow,
and when all the guts and entrails of his body is taken out, let the maid
be sowe^ into his belly, then let us lay them upon a great stone against the
broylinge heat of the son, so they shall both sustain all the punishments
which you have ordained: for first the Ass shall be slain as you have
determined, and she, shall have her members torn and gnawe^ with wild
beasts, when as she is bitten and rent with worms, she shall endure the pain
of the fire, when as the broilyng heat of the son shall skorche and parche
the belly of the Ass, she shall abide the gallows when the Dogs and
vultures shall have the guts of her body hanginge in their ravenous mouths.
I pray you number all the torments which she shall suffer: First she shall
dwell within the paunch of the Ass: secondly her nosethrilles shall receive
the carraine stink of the beast: thirdly she shall die for hunger, last of
all she shall ^^nde no mean to rid her self from her pains for her hands
shall be sowed up within the skin of the Ass: This being said all the Thieves
consented to the sentence, and when I (poor Ass) hard, and understood all
their devise, I did nothing else save bewail and lament my dead carkas, which
should be handled in such sort on the next morrow.

The seventh Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How he that was left behind at Hippata to bring news concerning the robbery
of Milos house, came home and declared to his compaignions that all the fault
was laid to one Apuleius charge.

Cap. 24.
As Soon as night was paste, and the clear chariot of the sun had spread his
bright beams on every coaste, came one of the company of the Thieves (for so
his and their greatinge together did declare) who at his first entry into the
cave (after he had breathed him self, and was able to speak) told these
tidinges unto his compaignions in this sort. Sirs, as touching the house of
Milo of Hippata, which we forcibly entered and ransakt the last day, we may put
away all fear, and doubt nothing at all, for after y^ ye by force and arms
had spoiled and taken away al things in the house, and so returned hither unto
our cave, The use of cut purses now a days.
I (thrustinge in emongst the prease of the people and showing my self as
though I were sad and forowful for the mischaunce) co^sulted with them for
the boultinge out of the matter, and devised what means might be wrought for
the apprehensio^ of the thieves, to the intent I might learn and see all that
was done to make relation thereof unto you as you willed me, in so much that the
whole fact at length by manifest and evident proofs as also by the common
opinion and judgment of all the people, was laid to one Lucius Apuleius
charge, who was now (...) Ass.
as manifest author of this committed robbery, who a few days before by false
and forged letters and colored honesty, Surmises of the common people.
fell so far in favor with this Milo that he entertained him into his house,
and received him as chief of his familiar frie^des, which Lucius, after that
he had soiourned there a good space, and won the heart of Miloes maid by
feigned love, did thoroughly learn y^ ways and doors of all the house, and
curiously viewed the cofers and chestes* wherein was laid the whole substance
of Milo, neither was there small cause given to judge him culpable, since as
the very same night that this robbery was done he fled away, and could be
found in no place, and to thinte^t he might clean escape, and better prevent
such as made hew and cry after him, His white horse was likewise taken away
by the Thieves.
he took his white horse and gallopped away, and after this his servant was
found in the house, who (accused as accessory to the felony and escape of his
master) was committed to the common jail, and the next day following was
cruelly scourged and tormented til he was welnie dead to the intent he should
confess the matter, but when they could wrest or learn no such thing of him,
yet sent they many persons after toward Lucius country to enquire him out,
and so to take him prisoner.

As he declared these things, The Ass speaks.
I did greatly lament with my self to think of mine old and pristine estate,
and what felicity I was sometimes in, in comparison to the misery that I
presently sustained, being changed into a miserable Ass, then had I no small
occasion to remember, how the old and ancient writers did seigne and affirm,
that fortune was stark blind and without eyes, because she always bestows
her richesse upon rus^^ persons and fools, God se^des fools fortune.
and chooses or favors no mortal person by judgment but is always
conversant especially with such as if she could see, she should most shun
and forsake, yea and that which is more worse she sows such evil or rather
contrary opinions in men, that the wicked do glory with the name of good, and
contrary the good and innocent be detracted and sclau^dered as evil.
Furthermore I, who by her great cruelty was turned into a four footed Ass,
is most vile and abject manner, yea and whose estate seemed woorthely to be
lamented and pitied of the most hard and stony hearts, was accused of theft
and robbinge of my dear Oste Milo, which villainy might rather be called
paricide then theft, yet might not I defend mine own cause, or deny the
fact any way, by reason I could not speak howbeit least my conscience
should seem to accuse me by reason of silence, and again being enforced by
impacience I endeuered to speak, and feign would have said: Never did I that
fact. And verily the first word, Never* I cried out once or twice somewhat
ha^dsomely, but the residew I could in no wise pronounce, but still remaining
in one voice cried Never, Never, Never: Howbeit I settled my hangyng lips as
round as I could to speak the residew: but why should I further complain of
the cruelty of my fortune, since as I was not much ashamed, by reason that my
servant and my horse was likewise accused with me of the robbery. While I
pondred with my self all these things, a greater care came to my
remembrance, touching the death which the Thieves devised for me and the
maiden, and still as I looked down to my belly, I thought of the poor
Gentlewoman that should be closed within me: and the thief which a little
before had brought the false news against me, drew out of the skirte of his
coat a thousand crowns, which he had rifled away from such as he met, and
cast it into the common treasory. Then he carefully enquired how the residew of
his co^paignions did. As Trasileon Lamathus etc.
To whom it was declared that the most valiant was murdered and slain in diverse
manners, whereupon he persuaded them to remitte all their affairs a certain
season, and to seek for other fellows to be in their places, that by the
exercise of new laddes the terror of their martial band might be reduced to
the old number, assuringe them that such as were unwilling might be
compelled by menaces and threatninges, and such as wear willing might be
encouraged forward with reward, further he said, that there were some, which
(saying the profit which they had) would forsake their base and seruill
estate, and rather be contented to live like tirantes emongst them: moreover he
declared, that for his part he had spoken with a certain tale man, a valiant
co^paignion, but of yo^ge age, stout in body, and courageous in fight, whom
he had fully persuaded to exercise his idle hands, dull with slouthfulnes, to
his greater profit, and (while he might) to receive the bliss of better
fortune, and not to hold out his sturdy arm to beg for a penny, but rather
to take as much gold and silver as he would. Then every one consented, that
he that seemed so worthy to be their compaignio^, should be one of their
company and that they would search for others to make up the residew of the
number, whereupon he went out, and by and by (returninge again) brought in a
tale young man (as This young man was ^ep^lemus the young maidens spouse.
he promised) to whom none of the residew might be compared, for he was higher
then they by the head, and of more bigness in body, his bearde began to burgen,
but he was poorly appareled, in so much that you might see all his belly
naked: As soon as he was entered in, he said, God speed ye souldiars of Mars,
and my faithful compaignions, I pray you make me one of your band, A pre^y
deceiple of Lepolemus.
and I will ensure you that you shall have a man of singular courage and lively
audacitie, for I had rather receive strypes upon my back, then money or gold
in my hands: and as for death (which every man do fear) I pass nothing at
all, yet think you not that I am an abject or a beggar, neither judge you my
virtue and prowess by my ragged clothes, for I have been a Captain of a
great company, and subdued all the country of Macedonie: I am the renoumed
thief Hemus the Thracien, whose name all countries and nations do so greatly
fear: I am the soon of Thereon the notable thief, nourished with human
bloudde, entertained emongst the stoutest: finally I am inheritour and follower
of my Fathers, virtues, yet I lost in a short time all my company, and all my
richesse by one assault, which I made upon a factor of the Prince, which
sometime had been Captain of two hundred men, for fortune was clean against
me: harken and I will tell you the whole matter. A forged lie.
There was a certain manne in the court of the Emperor which had many
offices, and in great favor, who at last by the envy of diverse persons was
banished away and compelled to forsake the court: his wife Platina, a woman of
rare faith and singular shamefastnes, having borne ten children to her
husband, despised al worldly pomp and delicacie, and determined to follow her
husband, and to be a partaker of all his perils and danger, wherefore the cut
of her hear, disguised her self like a man, and took with her al her
treasure, passing thorough the hands of the soldiers and the naked swords
without any fear, whereby she endured many miseries, and was partaker of much
affliction to save the life of her husband, such was her love which she bare
unto him. And when they had escaped many perilous dangers as well by land as
by sea they went to wards Zacynthe to continue there according as fortune had
appointed: But when they arrived on the sea cost of Actiu^ (where we in our
return from Macedonie were rouinge about) when night came they turned into a
house, not far distant from their ship where they lay all night. Then we
entered in and took away all their substance, but verily we were in great
danger, for the good Matron perceyuinge us incontinently by the notes of the
gate, went into the chamber, and called up every man by his name, and likewise
the neighbors that dwelled round about, in so much y^ by reason of the fear
thar every one was in, we hardly escaped away, but this most holy woman,
faithful and true to her husband (as the truth must be declared) returned to
Caesar desiringe his aid and puisance, and demaundinge vengeance of the
injury done to her husband, who granted all her desire: then went my
company to wrack in so much that every man was slain, so great was the
authority and word of the Prince. How be it when all my band was lost and
taken by search of the Emperors army, I only stole away and delivered my
self from the violence of the souldiars, for I clothed my self in a woman's
attire, and mounted upon an Ass that carried barley sheefes, and (passinge
thorough the middle of them all) I escaped away, because every one deemed that
I was a woman, by reason I lacked a bearde. How be it I left not of for all
this, nor did degenerate from the glory of my father, or mine own virtue, but
freshly coming from the blouddy skirmish, and disguised like a woman I invaded
Towns and Castles alone to get some pray. And therwithall he pulled out two
thousand crowns which he had under his coat, saying: Hold here the dowry
which I present unto you, hold eke my person which you shall always find
trusty and faithful if you will willingly receive me: And I will ensure you
that in so doing, within short space I will make and turn this stony house
of yours into Gold: then by and by every one consented to make him their
Captain, and so they gave him better garments and threw away his old. When
he had changed his attire he embraced them one after an other, then placed
they him in the highest rome of the table, and drank unto him in token of good
luck.

How the death of the Ass, and the Gentel woman was staide,

Cap. 25.
AFter supper they began to talk, Apuleius speaks.
and declared unto him the goinge away of the gentlewoman, and how I bare her
upon my back, and what death was ordained for us two. Then he desired to see
her* whereupon the Gentlewoman was brought forth fast bound, whom as soon as
he beheld, he turned him self wringinge his nose and blamed them, saying: I am
not so much a beast or so rash a fellow, A pretty wyle to save his wife.
y^ I would drive you quight from your purpose, but my conscience will not
suffer me to conceal any thing that touches your profit, since as I am
careful for you, how be it if my counsel do displease you, you may at your
own liberty proceed in your enterprise. I doubt not but all Thieves, and
such as have a good judgment, will prefer their own lucre and gain above
all things in the world, and above their vengeance, which purchases damage
to diverse persons. Therefore if you put this Virgin in the Asses belly, you
shall but execute your indignation against her without all manner of profit: but
I would advise you to carry the Virgin to some town and to sell her. And such
a brave girl as she is, may be sold for a great quantity of money: And I my
self know certain bawd Merchants, amongst whom, peradventure some one
will giue-vs great sums of gold for her. This is my opinion touching this
affair: But advise you what you intend to do, for you may rule me in this
case. In this manner the good thief pleaded and defended our cause, being a good
patron to the seely Virgin, and to me poor Ass. But they staide hereupon a
good space with long deliberation, which made my heart (God wot) and spirit
greatly to quale. Howebeit, in the end they consented to his opinion, and by
and by, the maiden was unloosed of her bonds, who saying the young man, and
hearing the name of brothels and bawd Merchants, began to wax joyful, and
smiled with her self. Then began I to deem evil of the generation of women,
when as I saw the maiden (who was appointed to be married to a young gentleman,
and who so greatly desired the same) was now delighted with the talk of a
wicked and filthy brothel house, and other things dishonest. In this sort the
consent and manners of women depe^ded in the judgment of an Ass.

How all the Thieves wear brought in a sleep by their new companion.

Cap. 26.
THen the young man spoke again, saiynge: Masters, why go we not about to
make our prayers to Mars touching this sellinge of the maiden, ^^ere Lepolem^^
draws to his purpose.
and to sake for other compaignio^s. But as far as I see here is no manner of
beast to make sacrifice withal, nor wine sufficient for us to drink. Let me
have (quod he) ten more with me, and we will go to the next castle, to
provide for meat and other things necessary. So he and ten more with him,
went their way: In the mean season the residue made a great fire, and an
altar with grene tirfes, in the honor of Mars. By and by after they came
again, bringing with them bottels of wine, and a great number of beasts,
amongst which there was a big Ram goat, fat, old, and hearie, which
they killed and offered unto Mars. The^ supper was prepared sumptuously: And
the new compaignion said unto the other. You ought to account me not only
your Captain in robbery and fight, but also in your pleasures and iolitie,
whereupon by and by with pleasant there he prepared meat, and trimming up the
house, he set all things in order, and brought the potage and dentie dishes to
the table: But above all he plied them well with great pottes, and iugges of
wine. Sometimes (seeming to fetch somewhat) he would go to the maiden and give
her pieces of meat, which he privily took away, and would drink unto her,
which she willingly took in good part. Moreover he kissed her twice or
thrice, whereof she was well pleased, but I (not well contented thereat) thought
in my self: O wretched maid, Apuleius speaks.
thou have forgotten thy marriage, and do esteem this stranger and bloody
thief above thy husband, which thy parents ordained for thee, now perceive
I well thou have no remorse of conscience, but more delight to tarry and play
the harlot here amongst so many weapons and swoordes, what know thou not
how the other Thieves if they knew thy demeanure would put thee to death as
they had once appointed, and so work my destruction likewise? well now I
perceive thou haste a pleasure in the damage and hurt of other. While I did
angerly devise with my self all these things, I perceived by certain signs
and tokens (not ignorant to so wise an Ass) that he was not the notable thief
Hemus, but rather Lepolemus her husband, The judgment of an Ass.
for after much communication he began to speak more frankely, not fearinge at
all my presence, and said: be of good cheer my sweet freende Charites, for
thou shall have by and by all these thy enemies captive unto thee. Then he
filled wine to the thieves more, and more, and never ceased till as they wear
all overcome with abundance of meat and drink, when as he him self
absteyned and bridled his own appetite: and truly, I did greatly suspect,
least he had mingled in their cups some deadly poison, for incontinently they
all fell down a sleep on the ground one after an other, and lay as though
they had been dead.

How the Gentlewoman was carried home by her husband while the Thieves were
asleep, and how much Apuleius was made of.

Cap. 27.
WHen the Thieves were all a sleep by their great and immoderate drinking,
the young man Lepolemus took the maiden and set her upon my back and went
homeward, when we were come home, all the people of the City (especially her
pare^tes, friends and family) came running forth joyfully, and all the
children and maidens of y^ town, gathered together to see this virgin in great
triu^ph sittyng upon an Ass. The^ I (willinge to show as much joy as I might
as present A pretty jest of an Ass.
occasion served) I set and pricked up my long ears, I ratled my
nosethrilles, and cried stoutly, nay rather I made the town to ringe again with
my shrilling sound* when we were come to her fathers house, she was received
into a chamber honorably: as for me, Lepolemus (accompaigned with a great
number of Citizins) did drive me back again with other horses to y^ cave of
the Thieves, where we found them all a sleep liyng on the ground as we left
them, then they first brought out all the gold, silver, and other treasure of
the house, and laded us withal, which when they had done, they threw many of
the thieves down into the bottom of deep ditches, and the residew they slew
with their swoordes: after this we returned home glad and merry of so great
vengeance upon them, and the richesse which we carried was committed to the
public Treasory: This done, the maid was married to Lepolemus, according to
the law, whom by so much travel he had valia^tly recovered: Then my good
mistress looked about for me, and askinge for me commanded the very same day of
her marriage, that my mau^ger should be filled with barley, and that I should
have hay and Otes abundantly, and she would call me her little Camel. But how
greatly did I curse Fotis in that she transformed me into an Ass, and not into
a Dog, because I saw the dogs had filled their paunches with the relickes
and bones of so worthy a supper, the next day this new wedded woman (my
mistress) did greatly commend me before her parents and husband, for the
kindenes which I had showed unto her, and never leued of until such time as
they promised to reward me with great honors, then they called together al
their friends, and thus it was so concluded, one said that I should be closed
in a stable and never work but continually to be fed and fatted with fine
and chosen barley and beans, and good littor, how be it an other prevailed,
who wishing my liberty persuaded them that it was better for me to run in
the fields emongst the lascivious horses and mares, whereby I might engender
some mules for my mistress, This pleased the Ass.
then he that kept the horse was called for, and I was delivered unto him with
great care, in so much that I was right pleasant and joyous, because I hoped
that I should carry no more fardels or burdens, moreover I thought that when
I should thus be at liberty, in the spring time of the year when the meadows
and fields were green, I should find some Roses in some place, whereby I was
fully persuaded that if my master and mistress did render to me so many thanks
and honors being an Ass, they would much more reward me being turned into
a man: but when he (to whom the charge of me was so straightly committed) had
brought me a good way distant from the City, I perceived no delicate meats
nor no liberty which I should have, Unhappy is he that has an ill mistress.
but by and by his covetous wife and most cursed queen made me a mill Ass,
and (beatinge me with a kidgell full of knottes) would wringe bredde for her
self and her household out of my skin, yet was she not contented to weary me
and make me a drudge with carriage and grinding of her own corn, but I was
hired of her neighbors to bear their sackes likewise, how be if she would not
give me such meat as I should have, nor sufficient to sustain my life
withal, for the barley which I ground for mine own dinner she would fell to
the inhabita^tes by. And after that I had labored all day, she would set
before me at night a little filthy branne, Such scrapinge dames be many now a
days.
nothing clean but full of stones. Being in this calamity yet fortune
worked me other torments, for on a day I was let loose into the f^^ldes to
pasture by the commandment of my master, O how I leaped for joy, how I
neyed to see my self in such liberty, b^t especially since I beheld so many
mares, which I thought should be my wives and concubines, and I espied out and
choose the fairest before I came nighe them, but this my joyful hope turned
into utter destruction, Pleasure oftentimes turns to pain.
for incontinently all the stone Horses which were well fed and made strong
by ease of pasture, and thereby much more puissant then a poor Ass, were
Ielous over me, and (having no regard to the law and order of the God
Jupiter) ran fiercely and terribly against me, one lifted up his fore feet
and kicked me spitefully, an other turned him self and with his hinder heels
spurned me cruelly, the third threatninge with a malicious neyinge dressed his
ears and showing his sharp and white teeth bitte me on every side. In like
sort have I read in Histories how the King of Thrace, The Ass has read
Histories.
would throw his miserable geste to be torn in pieces and devoured of his
wild horses, so niggishe was that Tyrau^t of his prouender that he nourished
them with the bodies of men.

How Apuleius was made a common Ass to fetch home woodde, and how he was
handled by a boy.

Cap. 28.
AFter that I was thus handled by the Horses, I was brought home again to the
mill, but behold, fortune (insatiable of my torments) had devised a new
pain for me, I was appointed to bring home woodde every day from a high hill,
and who should drive me thither and home again, but a boy that was the veriest
hangeman in all the world, who was not contented with the great travel that I
took in climinge up the hill, neither pleased when he saw my hoofes torn and
worn away by sharp flintes, but he beat me cruelly with a great staff, One
sorrow that the b^ye wrought to Apuleius.
in so much that the mary of my boanes did ache for woo, for he would strike me
continually on my right hippe and still in one place, whereby he tare my skin
and made of my wide sore a great hole or trench, or rather a window to look
out at, and although it ran down of blood, yet would he not cease beatinge
me in that place, moreover he laded me with such great trusses and burdens of
woodde that you would think they had been rather prepared for Olyphantes then
for me, and when he perceived that my woodde hanged more of one side then an
other (when he should rather take away the heavy shides, and so ease me or else
lift them up to make them equal with the other) he laid great stones upon
the weaker side to remedy the matter, yet could he not be contented with this
my great misery and immoderate burdens of woodde, but when we came to any
river (as their wear many by the way) he to save his feet from water would
leap upon my loins likewise, which was no small lode upon lode. And if by
adventure I had fell down in any dirtie or myry place, when he should have
pulled me out, either with ropes, or lifted me up by the tail, he would never
healpe me, but laid me on from top to toe with a mighty staff, till he had
left no hear on all my body, no not so much as on mine ears, whereby I was
compelled by force of the blows to stand up.

The same hangeman boy did invent an other torment for me, he gathered a great
many sharp thorns as sharp as needels, and bound them together like a
faggot and tied them at my tail to prick me, then was I afflicted on every
side, for if I had endeavored to run away the thorns would have pricked me,
if I had stood still the boy would have beaten me, and yet the boy beat me
to make me run, whereby I perceived that the hangeman did devise nothing else
save to kill me by some manner of means, and he would swear and threaten to
do me worse harm, and because he might have some occasion to execute his
malicious mind, upon a day (after that I had endeavored to much by my patience)
I lift up my heels and spurned him welfauoredly. Then he invented this
vengeance against me, after that he had well laded me with shrubbes and rubbell
and trussed it round upon my back, he brought me out into the way: then he
stale a burninge coal out of a man's house of the next village and put it into
the middle of the rubbell, the rubbell and shrubbes being very dry, did fall
on a light fire and burned me on every side. I could see no remedy how I
might save my self, and in such a case it was not best for me to stand
still: but fortune was favorable toward me, perhaps to reserve me for more
dangers, for I espied a great hole full of rain water that fell the day
before, thither I ran hastily and plunged my self therein, in such sort
that I quenched the fire and was delivered from that present peril, but the
vile boy to excuse him self declared to all the neighbors and sheapeherdes
about that I willingly tombled in the flere as I passed through the villages.
Then he laughed upon me saiynge: How long shall we nourishe and keep this
fyry Ass in vain.

How Apuleius was accused of lechery by the Boie.

Cap. 29.
A Few days after, this Boie invented an other mischief: For when he had
sold al y^ wood, which I bare, to certain men dwelling in a village by, he led
me homeward unladen: And then he cried that he was not able to rule me, and
that he would not drive me any longer to the hill for woodde, saying: do you
see this slow and dull Ass, who besides all the mischiefs that he has
wrought already, inuenteth daily more and more. For when he espieth any woman
passing by the way, whether she be old or married, or if it be a young child,
he will throw his burden from his back and ronneth fiersly upon the^. And
after yt he has thrown them down, he will stride over them to commit his
buggery and beastly pleasure, moreover he will feign as though he would kiss
them, but he will byte their faces cruelly, which thing may work us great
displeasure, or rather be imputed unto us as a crime: and even now when he
espied an honest maiden passing by the high way, he by and by threw down
his woodde and ran after her: And when he had thrown her upon the ground, he
would have ravished her before the face of all the world, had it not been that
by reason of her criyng out, she was succored and pulled from his heels and
so delivered. And if it had so come to pass that this fearful maiden had been
slain by him, what danger had we been in? By these and like lies, he provoked
the sheepeherdes earnestly against me, which grieved me (God wot) full sore
that said nothing. Then one of the shepeherdes said: Why do we not make
sacrifice of this common adulterouse Ass. My son (quod he) let us kill him
and throw his guts to the dogs, Here they devise to kill the Ass.
and reserve his flesh for the laborers supper. Then let us cast dust upon
his skin, and carry it home to our master, and say that the Wolves has
devoured him. The boie that was my evil accuser, made no delaie but prepared
him self to execute the sentence of the shepeherde, rejoicing at my present
danger, but O how greatly did I then repent that the stripe which I gave him
with my heel had not killed him. Then he drew out his sword and made it
sharp upon a whetstone to slay me, but an other of the shepeherdes began say,
verily it is a great offense to kill so fair an Ass. A friendly enemy to the
Ass.
And so (by accusation of luxury and lascivious wantonness) to lack so
necessary his labor and service, where otherwise if you would cut of his
stones, he might not only be deprived of his courage, but also become gentle,
that we should be delivered from all fear of danger. Moreover, he would be
thereby more fat and better in flesh. For I know my self as well many Asses,
as also most fierce horses, that by reason of their wantonness, have been most
mad and terrible, but (when they wear gelded and cut) they have become very
gentle and tame, and tractable to all use. Wherefore I would counsel you to
geld him. And if you consent thereto, I will by and by, when I go to the next
market fetch mine yrons and tools for the purpose: And I ensure you after y^
I have gelded and cut of his stones, I will deliver him unto you as tame as a
lamb. When I did perceive that I was delivered from death, Apuleius speaks.
and reserved to be gelded, I was greatly sorry, in so much that I thought all
the hinder part of my body and my stones did ache for woo, but I sought about
to kill my self by some manner of means, to the end if I should die, I would die
with unperished members.

How the boy that led Apuleius to the fields, was slain in the woodde.

Cap. 30.
WHile I devised with my self in what manner I might end my life, the roperipe
boie on the next morrow led me to the hill again, and tied me to a boowe of a
great Oak, and in the mean season he took his hatchet and cut woodde to lode
me withal, but behold there crept out of a cave by, a marvelous great Bear,
holdinge out his mighty head, whom when I saw, I was suddenly stroke^ in fear
and (throwing all the strength of my body into my hinder heels) lifted up my
streined head and brake the halter, wherewith I was tied. Then there was no
need to bid me run away, for I scoured not only on foot, but tumbled
over the stones and rocks with my body, til I came into the open fields, to
the intent I would escape away from the terrible Bear, but especially from the
boie y^ was worse then the Bear. Then a certain stranger that passed by y^
way (espiyng me alone as a straie Ass) took me up and rode upon my back,
beating me with a staff (which he bare in h^ hand) through a blind and an
unknown lane, whereat I was nothing displeased, but willingly went forward to
avoid y^ cruel pain of gelding, which y^ shepardes had ordained for me, but
as for y^ stripes I was nothing moved, since I was acustomed to be beaten so
every day: But evil fortune would not suffer me to continue in such estate
long: For the Shepeherdes (looking about for a cow that they had lost, He
falls into Scilla that will avoid Charibdis.
after they had sought in diverse places) fortuned to come upon us unawares, who
when they espied and knew me, they would have taken me by the halter, but he
that rode upon my back resisted the^ saying. Good lord masters, what intend
you to do? will you rob me? Then said the sheepeherdes, what think thou
that we handle thee otherwise then thou deseruest, which have stolen away our
Ass, why do thou not rather tell us where thou have hidden the boie whom
thou have slain? And therewithal they pulled him down to the ground,
beatinge him with their fistes, and spurning him with their feere. Then he
swear unto the^ saying: that he saw no manner of boie, but only found the Ass
loose and straiynge abroad, which he took up to the intent he might have some
reward for the finding of him, and to restore him again to his master. And I
would to god (quod he) y^ this Ass (which verily was never seen) could speak
as a man, to give witness of mine innocence: Then would you be ashamed of the
injury which you have done to me. Thus (reasoning for him self) he nothing
prevailed, for they tied the halter about my neck, and (maugre his face) pulled
me quite away, and led me back again through the wooddes of the hill to y^
place where the boie accustomed to resort. And after that they could find him
in no place, at length they found his body rent and torn in pieces, and his
members dispersed in sondrie places, which I well knew was done by the cruel
Bear, and verily I would have told it if I might have spoken, but (which I
could only do) I greatly reioysed at his death, although it came to late. Then
they gathered together the pieces of his body and buried them. By and by they
laid all the fault to him that was my new master, that took me up by the
way, and (bringing him home fast bound to their houses) purposed on the next
morrow to accuse him of murder, and to lead him before the Justices to have
judgment of death.

How Apuleius was cruelly beaten by the mother of the boy that was slain.

Cap 31.
IN the mean season while the parents of the boy did lament and weep, for
the death of their son. The sheepeherd (according to his promise) came with
his instruments and tools to gelde me, then one of them said: Tushe we little
esteem the mischief which he did yesterday, but now we are contented that to
morrow his stones shall not only be cut of, Apuleius geldinge was delaide.
but also his head. So was it brought to pass that my death was delaide till
the next morrow: but what thanks did I give to that good boie, who (being so
slain) was the cause of my pardon for one short day: Howbeit I had no time
then to rest my self, for the mother of the boy weeping and lamenting for his
death, attyred in mourninge vesture, tare her hear, and beat her breast, and
came presently into the stable, saying: Is it reason that this careless beast
should do nothing all day but hold his head in the manger, filling and
bolling his guts with meat without compassion of my great misery, or
remembrance of the pitiful death of his slain master: and contemninge my
age and infirmity, thinks that I am unable to revenge his mischiefs:
moreover he would persuade me that he were not culpable, in deed it is a
convenient thing to look and plead for safety, when as the conscience does
confess the offense, as thieves and malefactors accustom to do: but O good
Lord y^ cursed beast if thou could utter the co^tentes of thine own mind
whom A foolish woman to lay the fault to a brute beast.
(though he were the veriest fool in all the world) might thou persuade
that this murder was void or without thy fault, when as it lay in thy power
either to keep of the thieves with thy heels or else to bite and tear them
with thy teeth. Could not thou (that so often in his life time did
spurn and kick him) defend him now at the point of death by like mean?
yet at least thou should have taken him upon thy back, and so brought him
from the cruel hands of thieves, where contrary thou rannest away alone
forsakinge thy good master, thy pastor, and conductor. Know y^ not that
such as deny their wholesome help and aid to them which lie in danger of
death, ought to be punished because they have offended against good manners and
the law natural, but I promise thee thou shall not long rejoice at my harms:
thou shall feel y^ smart of thy homicide and offense, I will see what I can
do, and there withal she unloosed her apron, and bound all my feet together,
to the end I might not help my self, then she took a great bar which
accustomed to bar the stable door, and never ceased beatinge of me till she
was so weary y^ the bar fell out of her hands, whereupon she (complayninge
of the soon faintnes of her arms) ran to her fire and brought a fire brande
and thrust it under my tail, burninge me continually till such time as (having
but one remedy) I all arrayed her face and eyes with my dirtie donge, whereby
(what with the stink thereof, and what with the filthiness that fell in her
eyes) she was welnie blind, so I enforced the queen to leave of, otherwise I
had died as Meleager did by the stick, which his mad mother Althea cast
into the fire.

The eight Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How a young man came and declared the miserable death of Lepolemus, and his
wife Charites.

Cap. 32.
About midnight came a young man which seemed to be one of the family The
Ass speaks.
of the good woman Charites, who sometimes endured so much misery and
calamity with me emongst the thieves, who after that he had taken a stool and
satte down by the fire side in the company of the servants, began to
declare many terrible things that had happened unto the house of Charites,
saying: O ye horsekepers, shepeherdes, and cowheardes, you shall understand
that we have lost our good mistress Charites, miserably and by evil adventure,
and to the end you may learn and know all the whole matter, I purpose to tell
you the circumstance of every point, whereby such as are more learned then I
(to whom fortune has ministered more copious style) may painte it out in paper
in form of an History: there was a young gentleman dwellinge in the next
City, borne of good parentage, valiant in prowess, and rich in substance,
but very much given and addict to whore huntyng and continual reueling.
Whereby he fell in company with thieves, These vices are lightly linked
together.
and had his hand ready to the effusion of human bloudde, his name was
Thrasillus.

The matter was this according to the report of every man: He demanded
Charites in marriage, who although he were a man more comely then the residue
that wooed her, Good fame is better then riches.
and also had richesse abundantly, yet because he was of evil fame, and a man
of wicked manners and conversation, he had the repulse and was put of by
Charites, and so she married with Lepolemus: howbeit this young man secretly
loved her, yet moved somewhat at her refusal, he busily serched some means to
work his damnable intent: And (having found occasion and opportunity to
accomplish his purpose, which he had long time concealed) brought to pass,
that the same day that Charites was delivered by the subtle mean and valiant
audacitie of her husband, from the puissance of the Thieves, he mingled him
self emongst the assembly, feigninge that he was glad of the new marriage and
coming home again of the maiden, whereby (by reason that he came of so noble
parents) he was received and entertained into the house, as one of their
chief and principal friends: Here the La^bes made much of the Wolf.
Howbeit under cloak of a faithful welwiller, he dissimuled his mischievous
mind and intent, in continuance of time, by much familiarity, and often
conversation and banketinge together, he fell more and more in favor, like as
we see it fortuneth to lovers, who first do little delight the^ selves in love,
till as by continual acquaintance they kiss and embrase each other.
Thrasillus perceauinge that it was a hard matter to break his mind secretly
to Charites, whereby he was wholly barred from the accomplishme^t of his
luxurious appetite, and on the other side perceauinge that the love of her and
her husband was so strongly linked together, ye the bond between them might
in no wise be disseuered, moreover it was a thing impossible to rauishe her,
although he had consented thereto, yet was he still provoked forward by vehement
lust when as he saw him self unable to bring his purpose to pass. Howbeit at
length the thing which seemed so hard and difficil, through hope of his
fortified love, did now appear easy and facill: but mark I pray you
diligently to what end the furious force of his inordinate desire came. On a
day Lepolemus went to the chase with Thrasillus to hunte for Goats, for his
wife Charites desired him earnestly to meddle with no other beasts, which were
of more fierce and wild nature, when they were come within the chase to a
great thicket fortressed about with briars and thorns, they compassed round
with their dogs, and besette every place with nets, by and by warninge was
given to let loose: The dogs rushed in with such a cry that all the
forest range again with the noyes, but behold there leaped out no Goat, nor
dear, nor gentle Hind, but an horrible and dangerous wild Boar, hard and
thick skinned, bristeled terribly like thorns, fominge at the mouth,
grindinge his teeth and lokinge dyrefully with fitie eyes. The dogs that
first set upon him he tare and rent with his tuskes, and the^ he ran quight
thorough the nets and escaped away: when we saw the fury of this beast, we
were greatly strike^ with fear, and because we never accustomed to chase such
dreadful Boares, and further because we were unarmed and without weapons, we
got and hid our selves under bushes and trees: then Thrasillus having
found opportunity to work his treason, said to Lepolemus, what stand we
here amassed? why show we our selves like dastardes? why leese we so worthy a
pray with our feminiue hearts? let us mount upon our horses and pursue him
incontinently: Take you a hunting staff, and I will take a chasing spear, by
and by they leaped upon their horses and followed the beast. But he returning
against the^ with furious force, pried with his eyes, on whom he might first
assail with his tuskes: Lepolemus stroke the beast first on the back with his
hunting staff. O wicked deed.
Thrasillus faininge to aid and assiste him, came behind, and cut of the
hinder legs of Lepulemus horse, in such sort that he fell down to the ground
with his master: And suddenly the Boar came upon Lepolemus, and furiously tare
and re^t him with his teeth. Howbeit, Thrasillus was not suffised to see him
thus wounded, O more mischeuous fact.
but when he desired his friendly help, he thrust Lepolemus through the right
thighe with his spear, the more because he thought the wou^d of the spear
would be taken for a wound of the Boares teeth: Then he killed the beast
likewise. And when he was thus miserably slain, every one of us came out of
our holes, and went toward our slain master. But although that Thrasillus
was joyful of the death of Lepolemus, Worse then Judas.
whom he did greatly hate, yet he cloked the matter with a sorrowful
countenance, he feigned a dolorous face, he often embrased the body which he
him self slew, he played all the parts of a mourninge person, saving there
fell no tears from his eyes. Thus he resembled us in each point, who verily,
and not without occasion, had cause to lament for our master, laiyng all the
blame of this homicide unto the Boar. Incontinently after, the soroweful news
of the death of Lepolemus, came to the ears of all the family, but especially
to Charites, who after she had hard such pitiful tidinges, as a mad and
raginge woman, ran up and down the streates, criyng and howling lame^tably.
All the citezins gathered together, and such as they met, bare them company
runninge toward the chase. When they came to the slain body of Lepolemus,
Charites threw her self upon him, weping and lamenting greuouslie for his
death, in such sort, that she would have presently ended her life, upon y^
corpse of her slain husband, whom she so entierly loved, had it not been
that her parents and friends did comfort her, and pulled her away. The body
was taken up, and in funeral pomp brought to the city, and buried. In the
mean season, Thrasillus feigned much sorrow for the death of Lepolemus, but in
his heart he was well pleased and joyful. And to cou^terfect the matter, he
would come to Charites and say: O what a loss have I had by y^ death of my
friend, my fellow, my compaignion Lepolemus: O Charites, comfort your self,
pacify your dolor, refrain your weeping, beat not your breasts: And with such
other and like words, and diverse examples he endeavored to suppress her great
sorrow, but he spoke not this for any other intent but to win the heart of y^
woman, and to norish his odious love with filthy delight. The part of a good
woman.
Howbeit, Charites after the burial of her husband, sought y^ means to
follow him, and (not susteining the sorrows wherein she was wrapped) got her
secretly into a chamber and purposed to finish her life there with dolor and
tribulation: But Thrasillus was very importunate, and at length brought to
pass that at the intercession of the parents and friends of Charites, she
somewhat refreshed her fallen members with refectio^ of meat and bayne.
Howbeit, she did it more at y^ commandment of her parents, then for any thing
else: For she could in no wise be merry, nor receive any comfort, but tormented
her self day and night before the image of her husband, which she had made
like unto Bacchus, and rendered unto him divine honors and services. In the
mean season Thrasillus not able to refrain any le^ger, before Charites had
assuaged her dolours, before her troubled mind had pacified her fury, eue^ in
the middle of all her griefs, while she weeped for her husband, while she
tare her garments and rent her hear, demanded her in marriage, and so without
shame he detected the secrets and unspeakable deceites of his heart. But
Charites detested and abhorred his demand and as she had been stricken with
some clappe of thunder, with some storm, or with the lightning of Jupiter, she
presently fell down to the ground all amassed. Howbeit in the end when her
spirits were revived and that she returned to her self, perceauing that
Thrasillus was so importunate, she demanded respite to deliberate and to take
advise on the matter, in the mean season y^ shape of Lepolemus that was slain
so miserably appeared to Charites with a pale and blouddy face, saying: O my
sweet wife (which no other person ca^ say but I) I pray thee for the love
which is between us two, Murder is always reveled.
if there be any memory of me in thy heart, or remembrance of my pitiful
death, marry with any other person, so that y^ marry not with the traitor
Thrasillus, have no conference with him, eat not with him, lie not with him,
avoid the blouddy hand of mine enemy, couple not thy self with a parricide,
for those wounds (the blood whereof thy tears did wash away) were not y^
wou^des of the teeth of the Boar, but the spear of Thrasillus deprived me
from thee. Thus spoke Lepolemus unto his louinge wife, and declared the residew
of the damnable fact: then Charites awaking from sleep began to renew her
dolor, to tear her garments, and to beat her arms with her comely hands,
howbeit she reveled the vision which she saw to no manner of person, but
dissimulinge that she knew no part of the mischief, devised with her self
how she might be revenged on the traitor, and finish her own life to end and
knitte up all sorrow: Incontinently came Thrasillus the detestable demaunder of
sodein pleasure, and weried the closed ears of Charites with talk of marriage,
but she gentely refusinge his communication, and coloring the matter, with a
passing craft in the midst of his earnest desiers, began say: Thrasillus, you
shall understand that yet the face of your brother and my husband, is always
before mine eyes, I smell yet the Cinamome sent of his precious body, I yet
feel Lepolemus alive in my heart, wherefore you shall do well if you grant to
me, miserable woman, necessary time to bewail his death, that after the
residue of a few months, the whole year may be expired, which thing touches
as well my shame as your wholesome profit, least peradventure by our speedy and
quick marriage we should justly raise and provoke the spirit of my husband to
work our destruction. Howbeit Thrasillus was not contented with this promise,
The whote furies of deuelis^. appetites.
but more and more was earnest upon her: In so much y^ she was enforced to
speak to him in this manner: My freende Thrasillus, if thou be so contented
until the whole year be complete and finished, behold here is my body, take
thy pleasure, but in such sort and so secret, that no servant of the house
may perceive it. Then Thrasillus trustinge the false promises of the woman,
and preferring his inordinate pleasure above all things in the world, was
joyful in his heart and looked for night, when as he might have his purpose.
But come y^ about midnight (quod Charites) desguised without company. And do
but hiss at my chamber door, and my noucce shall attend and let thee in:
this counsel pleased Thrasillus meruelously, who (suspecting no harm) did
always look for night, and the hour assigned by Charites: the time was
skarse come, when as (according to her commandment) he desguised him self,
and went straight to the chamber, where he found the nource attendinge for
him, who (by the apointment of her mistress) fed him with slatteringe talk,
and gave him mingled and doled drink in a cup, excusing the absence of her
mistress Charites by reason that she attended on her father being sick, until
such time, that with sweet talk and operation of the wine, he fell in a
sound sleep: now when he lay prostrate on the ground ready to all
adventure, Charites (being called for) came in, and with manly courage and
bold force, stood over this sleepinge murderer, saying: Behold the faithful
compaignion of my husband, behold this valiant hunter: The Gods suffers
no vice unpunished.
behold my dear spouse, this is the hand which shed my bloudde, this is the
heart which has devised so many subtle means to work my destruction, these
be the eyes whom I have ill pleased, behold now they forshowe their own
destiny, sleep careless, dream that thou art in the hands of the
merciful, for I will not hurt thee with thy swoorde or with any other weapon,
God forbid that I should slay thee as thou slewest my husband, but thy eyes
shall fail thee, and thou shalt see no more, then that whereof thou dreamest:
thou shalt think the death of thine enemy more sweet then thy life: thou
shalt see no light, thou shalt lack the aid of a leader, thou shalt not
have me as thou hopest, thou shalt have no delight of my marriage, thou shalt
not die, and yet living thou shalt have no joy, but wander between light
and darkness as an unsure image: thou shalt seek for the hand that pricked
out thy eyes, yet shalt thou not know of whom thou should complain: I
will make sacrafice with the bloudde of thine eyes upon the grave of my
husband, but what gainest thou thorough my delay? Perhaps thou dreamest that
thou embracest me in thine arms, leave of the darkness of sleep, and awake
thou to receive a penal deprivation of thy sight, lift up thy face, regard
thy vengeance and evil fortune, reckon thy misery so pleases thine eyes to a
chaste woman, that thou shalt have blindness to thy compaignion, and an
everlasting remorse of thy miserable conscience. When she had spoken these
words, she took a great nedle from her head and pricked out both his eyes:
which done, she by and by caught the naked swoorde which her husband
Lepolemus accustomed to were, and ran thorough out all the City like a mad
woman, toward the Sepulcher of her husband: Then all we of the house withal
the Citizins, ra^ne incontinently after her, to take the sword out of her
hands, but she claspinge about the tomb of Lepolemus, kept us of with her
naked weapon, and when she perceived that every one of us wept and lamented,
she spoke in this sort: I pray you my friends weep not, nor lament for me,
for I have revenged the death of my husband, I have punished deservedly the
wicked breaker of our marriage, now is it time to seek out my sweet
Lepolemus, and presently with this swoorde to finishe my life. And therewithal
after she had made relation of the whole matter, declared the vision which she
saw, and told by what mean she deceived Thrasillus, thrustinge the swoorde
under her right breast and wallowinge in her own bloudde, at length with manly
courage yielded up the ghost. O deed worthy of remembrance.
Then immediately the friends of miserable Charites, did bury her body within
the same sepulcher. Thrasillus hearing all the matter, and knowinge not by what
means he might end his life, for he thought his swoorde was not sufficient to
revenge so great a crime, at length went to the same sepulcher and cried with a
loud voice, saying: O ye dead spirits whom I have so highly offended receive
me, behold I make sacrifice unto you with my body: which said, he closed y^
sepulcher, purposing to famish him self, and to finishe his life there in
sorrow. These things the young man with pitiful sighs and tears declared
unto the cowheardes and sheepeherdes, which caused them all to weep: but they
fearinge to become subject unto new masters, prepared the^ selves to depart
away.

How Apuleius was led away by the horsekeper, and what dangers he was in.

Cap. 33.
BY and by the Horsekeper, The Ass speaks.
to whom the charge of me was committed, brought forth all his substance and
laded me and other horses withal, and so departed thense: we bare women,
children, pullettes, sparrowes, kiddes, whelps, and other things which were
not able to keep pace with us, and that which I bare upon my back, although
it was a mighty burden, yet seemed it very light, because I was driven away
from him that most terribly had appointed to kill me, when we head passed over a
great mountain full of trees, and were come again into the open fields,
behold we approached nighe to a fair and rich Castle, where it was told
unto us that we wear not able to pass in our journey that night, by reason of
the great number of terrible Woolues, which wear in the country about, so
fierce and cruel, that they put every man in fear, in such sort that they
would invade and set upon such which passed by like thieves, and devour both
the^ and their beasts.

Moreover, we wear advertised that there lay in the way wheare we should
pass, many dead bodies, eaten and torn with Wolves. Wherefore we wear
willed to state theare all night, and on the next morning, to go close and
round together, whereby we might pass and escape all perilles and dangers.
But (notwithstanding this good counsel) our cait^^e driuers wear so covetous
to go forward, and so fearful of pursuit, that they never stayed till the
morninge: But being well nie midnight, they made us trudge in our way a pace:
Then I fearing the great danger which might happen, ran amongst the middle
of the other horses, to thend I might defend and save my poor buttockes from
the Wolves, whereat every man much meruailed to see, that I scoured away
swifter then the other horses: But such was my agilitee not to get me any
praise, but rather for fear. At that time I remembered with my self, that the
valiant horse Pegasus, did ^ie in the air more to avoid the daunder of
dreadful Chimera, then for any thing else. The shepardes which drove us before
the^, wear well armed like warriors: One had a spear, an other had a
shepehooke, some had darts, some clubbes, some gathered up great stones, some
held up their sharp iauelins, and some feared away the Wolves with light
firebrandes. Finally we lacked nothing to make up an army, but only drums and
trumpettes, but when we had passed these dau^^gers not without small fear, we
fortuned to fall into worse, for the Wolves came not upon us, either because of
the great multitude of our company, or else because of our firebrandes, or
peradventure they were gone to some other place, for we could see none, but the
inhabitants of the next villages (supposinge that we were Thieves by reason
of our great multitude,) for the defense of their own substance, and for the
fear they were in, set great and mighty masties upon us, which they had kept
and nourished for the safety of their houses, who compassing us round about,
leaped on every side, tearing us with their teeth, in such sort that they
pulled many of us to the ground, verily it was a pitiful sight to see so many
dogs, some followinge such as flied, some inuadinge such as stood still,
some tearinge those which lay prostrate, but generally there were none which
escaped clear: Behol^e upon this an other danger ensewed, the inhabitants of
the town stood in their garrettes and windows, throwinge great stones upon
our heads, that we could not tell whether it were best for us to avoid the
gapinge mouths of the dogs at hand, or the peril of the stones a far,
emongst whom there was one that hurled a great ^inte upon a woman, which
satte upon my back, who cried out piteously, desiringe her husband to help
her. Then he (cominge to succor and aid his wife) began to speak in this
sort: Alas masters what mean you to trouble us poor laboring me^ so
cruelly? what mean you to revenge your selves upon us, that do you no harm?
what think you to gain by us? you dwell not in caves or dens: you are no
people barborous that you should delight in effusion of human bloudde. At
these words the tempest of stones did cease, and the storm of the dogs
vanished away. Then one (standinge on the top of a great Cipresse tree) spoke
unto us, saying: Think you not masters that we do this, to the intent to
rifle or take away any of your goods, but for the saluegarde of our selves and
family, now a Gods name you may depart away. So we went forward some
wounded with stones, some bitten with dogs, but generally there was none
which escaped free.

How the Shepeherdes determined to abide in a certain woodde to cure their
wounds.

Cap. 34.
WHen we had gonne a good part of our way we came to a certain woodde
environed with great trees, and compassed about with pleasant meadows, whereas
the sheepeherdes appointed to continue a certain space to cure their wounds,
and sores, then they satte down on the ground to refresh their werie minds,
and afterward they sought for medicines to heal their bodies, some washed
away their blood with the water of the runninge river: some stopped their
wounds with sponges and cloutes, in this manner every one provided for his
own safety. In the mean season we perceived an old man, who seemed to be a
sheepeherde by reason of the goats and sheep that fed round about him: A
dreadful place of danger
Then one of our company demanded whether he had any milk, butter, or cheese
to sell. To whom he made answer shaking his head, saying: Do you look for
any meat or drink, or any other refection here? know you not in what place you
be? and therwithal he took his sheep and drove the^ away as fast as he might
possible. This answer made our sheepeherdes greatly to fear that they thought
of nothing else butto enquire what country they wear in: Howbeit, they saw
no manner of person of whom they might demand. At length as they wear thus
in doubt, they ^erceiued an other old man with a staff in his hand, very
werie with travel, who approaching nighe to our company, began to weep and
complain, saying: Alas masters, I pray you succor me miserable caitife, and
restore my neiphewe to me again, that by following a sparrowe that flewe
before him, is fallen into a ditche hereby, and verily I think he is in
danger of death. As for me, I am not able to help him out by reason of my
old age, but you that are so valiant and lusty, may easelie help me herein,
and deliver me my boy, my heir and guide of my life. These words made us
all to pity him: And then the youngest and stoutest of our company, who alone
escaped best the late skyrmishe of dogs and stones, rose up, demau^ding in
what ditche the boie was fallen: Mary (quod he) yonder, and pointinge with his
finger, brought him to a great thicket of busshes and thorn, where they both
entered in. In the mean season, after y^ we had well refreshed our selves and
cured our wounds, we took up our packes, purposing to depart away. And
because we would not go away without the young man our fellow: The
shepehardes whistled and called for him, but when he gave no answer, they sent
one of their company to seek him out, who after a while returned again with
a pale face and sorrowful news, saying: that he saw a terrible Draggon eating
and devouring their compaignio^: and as for the old man, he could see him in
no place. When they hard this (remembering likewise the words of the first
old man that shakes his head and drove away his sheep) they ran away
beatinge us before them, to fly from this desert and pestilent country.

How a woman killed her self, and her child, because her husband haunted
harlottes.

Cap. 35.
AFter that we had passed a great part of our journey we came to a certain
village, where we lay all night, but harken and I will tell you a great
mischief that happened there. You shall understand y^ there was a servant to
whom his master had committed the whole gouerme^t of his house, and was
master of the lodginge where we lay: this servant had married a maiden of the
same house, how be it he was greatly in love with a harlotte of the town, and
accustomed to resort unto her, wherewith his wife was so highly displeased and
became so ielous, that she gathered together all her husbands substance, with
his tails and books of account, and threw them into a light fire, she was
not contented with this, but she took a cord and bound her child which she
had by her husband about her middle, and cast her self hedlonge into a deep
pit: The master taking in evil part the death of these twain, took his
servant which was the cause of this murder by his luxury, and first after
that he had put of all his apparel, he anointed his body with honey, and then
bound him sure to a fig tree, where, in a rotten stock a great number of
Pismares had builded their nestes, the Pismares after they had felt the
sweetness of the honey came upon his body, and by little and little (in
continuance of time) devoured all his flesh, in such sort that there remained
on the tree nothing else save his bace bones: this was declared unto us by the
inhabitants of the village there who greatly sorrowed for the death of this
servant: then we auoidinge likewise from this dreadful lodginge, incontinently
departed away.

How Apuleius was cheapened by diverse persons, and how they looked in his mouth
to know his age.

Cap. 36.
AFter this we came to a fair City very populous, where our sheepeherdes
determined to co^tinew, by reason y^ it seemed a place where they might live
unknown, far from such as should pursue them, and because it was a country
very plentiful of corn and other victualles, where when we had remained the
space of three days, and that I poor Ass, and the other horses were fed
and kept in the Stable to the intent we might seem more saleable, we were
brought out at length to the market, and by and by a crier sounded with his
horn to notify y^ we were to be sold, all my compaignio^ horses were bought
up by gentlemen, butas for me I stood still forsaken of all men. And when many
biers came by and looked in my mouth to know mine age, I was so werie with
opening my jaws that at length (unable to endure any longer) when one came
with a stinking pair of hands, and grated my gommes with his filthy fingers I
bitte them clean of, which thing caused the standers by to forsake me, as
being a fierce and cruel beast: the crier when he had gotten a hoarse voice
with crying, and saw that no man would bie me, began to mock me, saying: To
what end stand we here with this vile Ass, this feeble beast, this slow jade
with woorne hoofes, good for nothing, but to make slues of his skin, why do
we not give him to some body, for he earneth not his hey, in this manner he
made all the standers by to laugh exceedingly, but my evil fortune which was
ever so cruel against me, whom I by travel of so many countries could in
no wise escape, did more and more envy me, with invention of new means to
afflict my poor body, in giving me an other master as spiteful as the rest.
There was an old man, somewhat balde, with long and gray hear, one of the
number of those which go from door to door through out all the villages,
bearing the image of the Goddess Siria, and plaiyng with cymballes to get
the alms of good and charitable folks, this old man came hastily toward
the crier, and demanded where I was bredde, marry (quod he) in Cappadocia:
then he enquired what age I was of, the crier aunsweared as a mathematricien,
which desposed to me my planetes, that I was five years old, and willed the
old man to look in my mouth, for I would not willingly (quod he) incur the
penalty of the law Cornelia in selling a free Citizin for a seruill slave, by
a Gods name this fair beast to ride home on, and about in the country: but
this curious bier did never stinte to question of my qualities, and at length
he demanded whether I were gentle or no: gentle (quod the crier) as gentle as
a Lamb, tractable to al use, he will never bite, he will never kick, but you
would rather think y^ under y^ shape of the Ass, there were some well advised
man, which verily you may easily coniect, for if you would thrust your nose in
his tail you shall perceive how pacient he is: Thus the crier mocked the old
man, but he perceauing his tauntes and iestes, wared very angry, saying: Away
dotinge crier, I pray the omnipotent and omniparent goddess Siria, saint
Sabod, Bellona with her mother Idea, and Venus with Adonis to strike out both
thine eyes that with tauntinge mockes haste scoffed me in this sort, do
thou think that I will put a Goddess upon the back of any fierce beast,
whereby her divine image should be thrown down on the ground, and so I poor
miser should be compelled (tearinge my hear) to look for some Phisicien to
help her? when I hard him speak this, I thought with my self sodeinly to
leap upon him like a mad Ass, to the intent he should not bie me, but
incontinently there came an other Merchant that prevented my thought, and
offered seuentene pence for me: then my master was glad and receiving the
money, delivered me to my new master, who was called Philebus: and he carried
his new servant home, and before he came to his house, he called out his
daughters, saying: behold my daughters what a gentle servant I have bought
for you, then they wear marvelous glad, and coming out pratlinge and
shoutinge for joy, thought verily that he had brought home a fit and
conuenable servant for their purpose, but when they perceived that it was an
Ass, they began to reprove him, saying: that he had not bought a servant for
his mayde^s, but rather an Ass for him self. Howbeit (quod they) keep him
not wholly for your own ridinge, but let us likewise have him at commandment,
therewithal they led me into the stable, and tied me to the mau^ger, there
was a certain young man with a mighty body well skilled in playing on
instruments before the Goddess to get money, who (as soon as he espied me)
entertained me very well, for he filled my rack and maunger with meat, and
spoke merely, saying: O master Ass you are welcome, now you shall take my
office in hand, you are come to supply my rowme, and to ease me of my
miserable labor: But I pray God thou may long live and please my master
well, to the end thou may continually deliver me from so great pain. When I
hard his words, I did prognosticate my misery to come. The day following,
I saw there a great number of persons apparelled in diverse colors, having
painted faces, mytres on their heads, vestimentes colored like saffron,
surplesses of silk, and on their feet yellowe shoes, who attired the Goddess
in a roabe of purple, and put her upon my back. Then they went forth with
their arms naked to their shoulders, bearing with them great swoordes and
mighty axes, and daunsing like mad persons. After that we had passed many
small villages, we fortuned to come to one Britunis house, where at our first
entry, they began to hurl them selves hither and thither, as though they
wear mad. They made a thousand iestes with their feet and their heads:
They would bite them selves: Finally, every one took his weapon and wounded
his arms in diverse places. Amongst whom there was one more mad then the
rest, that fette many deep sighs from the bottom of his heart, as though he
had been ravished in spirit, or replenished with divine power. And after that,
he somewhat returning to him self invented and forged a great lie, saying: that
he had displeased the divine majesty of the Goddess, by doing of something
which was not conuenable to the order of their holy Religion, wherefore he
would do vengeance of him self: And therewithal he took a whippe and
scourged his own body, that the blood issued out abundantly, which thing
caused me greatly to fear to see such wou^des and effusion of blood, least the
same Goddess desiring so much the blood of me^ should likewise delire y^ blood
of an Ass. So used they in old time to offer to Images.
After they were weary with hurling and beating them selves, they sat down. And
behold, the inhabitants came in and offered gold, silver, vessels of wine,
milk, cheese, flower, wheat, and other things: Amongst whom there was one
that brought barley to the Ass that carried the Goddess, but the gredy horsons
thrust al into their sack which they brought for the purpose, and put it upon
my back, to the end I might serve for two purposes, y^ is to say: for the barn
by reason of my corn, and for the temple, by reason of the goddess. In this
sort they wet from place to place robbing all the country over: At length
they came to a certain castle, purposing to make good chere there, where
under color of diuinatio^, they brought to pass that they obtained a fat
sheep of a poor husbandman for the Goddess supper, and to make sacrifice
withal. After that y^ banquet was prepared, they washed their bodies and brought
in a tale young man of the village to suppe with them, who skaree tasted a few
potage when they began to discover their beastly customs and inordinate desire
of unnatural luxury. For they compassed him round about sitting at the table,
and abused the young man contrary to all nature and reason: When I beheld this
horrible fact, I could not but attempt to utter my mind and say, O masters,
but I could pronounce no more but the first letter O, which I roared out so
valiantly, that the young me^ of the town, seeking for a stray Ass that they
had lost the same night, and hearing my voice, whereby they judged y^ I had been
theirs, entered into the house unawares, and found these persons committing
their vile abomination, which when they saw, they declared to all the
inhabita^tes by their unnatural vilanie mocking and laughing at this the pure
and clean chastity of their Religion. In the mean season, Phoebus and his
company, (by reason of the brute which was dispersed throughout all ye Region
there of their beastly wickedness) put all their tromperie upon my back and
departed away about midnight. When we had passed a good part of our journey
before the rising of the Sun, we came into a wide desert, where they co^spired
together to slay me. For after they had taken the Goddess from my back and set
her gingerly upon the ground, they likewise took of my harness, and bound me
surely to an oak, beating me with their whippe, in such sort that all my
body was mortified. Amongst whom there was one that threatened to cut of my
legs with his hatchet, because by my noise I diffamed his chastitee, but the
other regarding more their own profit then my utility, thought best to spare
my life, because I might carry home the Goddess: So they laded me again,
driving me before them with their naked swoordes til they came to a noble
city: where the principal patro^ bearing high reverence unto the Goddess,
came in great devotion before us with Tympanie, cimballes, and other
instruments, and received her and al our company with much sacrifice and
veneration: But there I remember, I thought my self in most danger, for
there was one yt brought to the master of the house, a fide of a fat buck for
a present, which being hanged behind the kytchin door, not far from the
ground, was clean eaten up by a greyhounde that came in: The Cook when he
saw ye venison denoured, lamented and wept pitifully. And because supper time
approached nigh, when as he should be reproved of to much negligence, he took a
halter to ha^ge him self, but his wife perceiving wherabout he went, can
incontinently to him, and taking the halter in both her hands stopped him of
his purpose, saiynge: O husband, are you out of your wits? what intend you
to do? See you not a present remedy before your eyes ministered unto you by
divine providence? I pray you husband follow my counsel, carry this strange
Ass out into some secret place and kill him, which done cut of one of his
sides, and sauce it well like the side of the buck, and set it before your
master. Then the Cook hearing the counsel of his wife, was well pleased to
slay me, to save him self: And to bring his purpose to pass, he went to the
whetstone to sharp his tools accordingly.

The ninth Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How Apuleius saved him self from the Cook by breaking his halter and of
other things that happened.

Cap. 37.
IN this manner the traitorous Cook, prepared him self to slay me: And when he
was ready with his knives to do his feate, I devised with my self how I might
escape the present peril, and I did not long delaie: for incontinentlye I
brake the halter wherewith I was tied, and flinging my heels hither and
thither to save my self, at length I ran hastily into a parlour wheare the
master of the house was feastinge with the priests of the Goddess Siria, and
disquieted all the company, throwinge down their meats and drinks from the
table. The master of the house dismaide at my great disorder, commanded one
of his servants to take me up, and lock me in some strong place to the end
I might disturb them no more. But I little regarded my imprisonment,
consideringe that I was happily delivered from the hands of the traitorous
Cook: Howbeit fortune, or the fatal disposition of the divine providence,
which neither can be avoided by wise counsel, neither yet by any wholesome
remedy invented a new torment, for by and by a young ladde came running into
the parlor, all trembling and declared to the master of the house, that there
was a mad dog running about in the streets, which had done much harm,
for he had bitten many greyhou^des and horses in the Inn by: and he spared
neither man nor beast, for there was one Mytilius a mulettour, Ephestio a
cook, Hyppatauius a chamberlain, and Appolonius a Phisicien, who (thinking to
chase away yc mad dog) were cruelly wounded by him, in so much that many
horses and other beasts infected with the venim of his poisonous teeth became
mad likewise, which thing caused them all at the table greatly to fear,
and thinking that I had been bitten in like sort, came out with spears,
clubbes, and pitchforkes purposing to slay me, and I had undoubtedly been
slain had I not by and by crepte into a chamber, where my master intended to
lodge that night. Then they closed and locked fast the doors about me, and
kept the chamber round, til such time as they thought that the pestilent rage
of madness had killed me, when I was thus shut in the chamber alone, I laid
me down upon the bed to sleep, considering it was long time past, since I
lay and took my rest as a man does, when morninge was come, and that I was
well reposed, I rose up lustely. In y^ mean season they which watched about
the chamber all night reasoned with them selves in this sort, verily (quod
one) I think the Ass be dead, so think I (quod an other) for the outrageous
poiso^ of madness has killed him, but being thus in diverse opinions of a poor
Ass, they looked thorough a creuis, and espied me standinge still, sober and
quiet in the middle of the chamber, then they opened the doors, and came
toward me to prove whether I were gentle or no. Emongst whom there was one,
which in my opinion was sent from heaven to save my life, that willed the other
to set a basen of fair water before me, and thereby they should know whether I
were mad or no, for if I did drink without fear as I accustomed to do it
was a sign that I was whole and in mine Assy wits, where contrary if I did
fly and abhor the taste of the water, it was an evident proof of my madness,
which thing he said y^ he had red in ancient and credible books, whereupon
they took a basin of clear water and presented it before me, but I, as soon as
I perceived the wholesome water of my life, ran incontinently and thrustinge my
head into the basin, dra^ke as though I had been greatly a thirst, then they
stroked me with their hands, and bowed mine ears, and took me by the halter
to prove my patience, but I taking each thing in good part, disproued their
mad presumption by my meekenes and gentle behavior: when I was thus
delivered from this double danger, the next day I was laded again with the
goddess Siria, and other trumpery, and was brought out into the way with
trumpets and cymballes, to beg in the villages, which we passed by according
to our custom. And after that we had gonne thorough a few towns and castles,
we fortuned to come to a certain village, which was builded (as the
inhabita^tes there affirmed) upon the foundation of a famous and ancient
City. And after that we had turned into the next Inn, we hard of a pretty
jest committed in the town there, which I would that you should know likewise.

Of the deceipte of a woman, which made her husband Coocko^le.

Cap. 38.
THere was a man dwelling in y^ town very poor that had naught but that
which he got by the labor and travel of his hands: his wife was a fair
young woman, but very lascivious and given to the appetite and desire of the
flesh: it fortuned on a day that while this poor man was gonne betimes in the
morninge to the field about his business, according as he accustomed to do,
his wives lover secretly came into his house to have his pleasure with her.
And so it chanced that during the time that he and she were busking together,
her husband suspectinge no such matter, returned home praising the chaste
continency of his wife, in y^ he found his doors fast closed, wherefore as
his custom was, he wistled to declare his coming home: the^ his crafty wife
reddy with present shifts caught her lover and covered him under a great tubbe
standing in a corner: and therwithal she opened the door, blaming her husband
in this sort. Co^mest y^ home so every day with empty hands? and bring
nothing to maintain our house? thou have no regard for our profit, neither
prouidest for any meat or drink, where as I poor wretch do nothing day and
night but occupy my self with spinning, and yet my travel will skarse find
the candels which we spend. O how much more happy is my neighbor Daphue, y^
eats and drinks at her pleasure, and passes the time with her amorous
lovers according to her desire.

What is the matter (quod her husband) though our master has made holyday at
the fields, yet think not but y^ I have made provision for our supper, do
thou not see this tubbe that keeps a place here in our house in vain, and
does us no service? behold I have sold it to a good fellow (that is here
present) for five pence, wherefore I pray thee lend me thy hand that I may
deliver him y^ tubbe: His wife (having invented a present shift) laughed on her
husband, saying: what marcha^t I pray you have you brought home hither, to
fetch away my tubbe for five pence, for which I poor woman y^ sit al day
alone in my house have been proffred so often seven: Her husband being well
apaide at her words, demanded what he was that had bought the tubbe: look
(quod she) he is gone under to see where it be sound or no, the^ her lover
which was under the tubbe, began to stir and rustle him self, and because
his words might agree to the words of the woman, he said: Dame will you
have me tell the truth: this tubbe is rotten and krakt as me seems on every
side. And then he turned him self to her husband, saying: I pray you honest
man light a candell, y^ I may make the tubbe clean within, to see if it be for
my purpose or no, for I do not mind to cast away my money wilfully: He, by
and by (being made a very Ox) lighted a ca^dle, saying: I pray you good
brother put not your self to so much pain, let me make the tubbe clean and
ready for you, whereupon he put of his coat and crept under the tubbe to rub
away the filth from the sides. In the mean season this minion lover cast his
wife on the bottom of the tubbe, and had his pleasure with her over his head,
and as he was in the midst of his pastime, he turned his head on this side,
and that side, finding fault with this and with that, til as they had both
ended their business, when as he delivered seven pence for the tubbe: and caused
the good man him self to carry it on his back to his Inn.

How the Priests of the goddess Syria, were taken and put in prison, and
how Apuleius was sold to a Baker.

Cap. 39.
AFter that we had tarried there a few days at the cost and charges of the
whole village, and had gotten much money by our divination, and pronostication
of things to come: The Priests of the Goddess Siria invented a new mean to
pick men's purses, for they had certain lottes, whereon written: So used
feigned Egiptia^s of lat^ years in England*
Coniuncti terram proscindunt boues vt in futurum laeta germinent sara: that is
to say: The oxen tied and yoked together: do plowe the ground to the intent
it may bring forth his increase: And by these kind of lottes they deceived
many of the simple sort: for if one had demanded whether he should have a
good wife or no, they would say that his lotte did testify the same, that he
should be tied and yoked to a good woman, and have increase of children: If one
demanded whether he should by lands and possession, they said that he should
have much ground that should yield his increase: If one demanded whether he
should have a good and prosperous voyage, they said he should have good
success, and it should be for the increase of his profit: If one demanded
whether he should vanquish his enemies, and prevail in pursuit of thieves,
they said that his enemies should be tied and yoked to him: and his pursuit
after thieves should be prosperous. Thus by the tellinge of fortunes they
gathered a great quantity of money, but when they were weary with giving of
answeares, they drove me away before them the next night, thorough a lane
which was more dangerous and stony then the way which we went the night
before: for on ye one side were Quagmyres and foggy marshes, on the other side
were falling trenches and ditches, whereby my legs failed me, in such sort
that I could scarce come to the plain field paths. And behold by and by a
great company of the inhabitants of the town, armed with weapons, and on
horseback ouertoke us, and incontinently arrestinge Philebus and his Priests,
tied them by the necks and beat them cruelly, calling them Thieves and
robbers, and after that they had manakled their hands: Show us (quod they)
the cup of Gold, which (under the color of your solemn Religion) ye have
taken away, and now ye think to escape in the night without punishment for
your fact, by and by one came toward me, and thrusting his hand into the
bosom of the Goddess Siria, brought out the cup which they had stole: How
be it for all their robbery which appeared evident and plain, they would not
be confounded nor abashed, but iestyng and laughinge out the matter, began say:
Is it reason masters that you should thus rigorously entreat us, and threaten
for a small trifling cup, which the mother of the Goddess determined to give
to her sister for a present, howbeit for all their lies and cauillations, they
were carried back to the town and put in prison by the inhabitants, who
taking the cup of gold, and the Goddess which I bare, did put and
consecrate them emongst the treasure of the Temple: the next day I was carried
to the markette to be sold, and my price was set at seven pence, more then
Philebus gave for me. There fortuned to pass by a Baker of the next village,
who after that he had bought a great deal of corn, bought me likewise to
carry it home, and when he had well laded me therewith, he drove me thorough a
thorny and dangerous way to his bakehouse, there I saw a great company of
horses that went in the mill day and night grinding of corn, but least I
should be discouraged at the first, my master entertained me well, for the
first day I did nothing but fare deintely, how be it such mine ease and
felicity did not long endure: for the next day followynge I was tied to the
mill betimes in the morninge with my face covered, to the end in turninge and
windinge so often one way, I should not become giddy but keep a certain
course, but although when I was a man I had seen many such horsemilles, and
knew well enough how they should be turned, yet feigninge my self ignorant
of such kind of toil, I stood still and would not go, whereby I thought I
should be taken from the mill as an Ass unapt, and put to some other light
labor, or else to be driven into the fields to pasture: but my subtlety did
me small good, for by and by when the mill stood still, the servants came
about me, cryinge and beatinge me forward, in such sort that I could not
stay to advise my self, whereby all the company laughed to see so sudden a
change, when a good part of the day was past, that I was not able to endure
any longer, they took of my harness, and tied me to the maunger, but although
my bones were weary, and that I needed to refresh my self with rest and
prouender, yet I was so curious that I did greatly delight to behold the bakers
art, in so much that I could not eat nor drink while I looked on. O good
Lord what a sort of poor slaves were there, some had their skin black and
blew: some had their backs striped with lashes, some were covered with rugged
sackes, some had their members only hidden: some ware such ragged cloutes y^
you might perceive all their naked bodies, some were marked and burned in the
forehedes with hot yrons, some had their hear half clipped, some had locks
on their legs, some were ugly and evil favored, that they could skarse see,
their eyes and faces were so black and dim with smoke, like those which
fight together in the sands, and know not where they strike by reason of
duste: And some had their faces all mealy, but how should I speak of the
horses my compaignions, how they being old and weak, thrust their heads into
the maunger: they had their necks all wounded and worn away: they ratled
their nosethrilles with a continual cough, their sides were bare with their
harness and great travel, their ribs were broken with beatinge, their
hoofes were battred broad with incessant labor, and their skin rugged by
reason of their lanknes: When I saw this dreadful sight, I greatly began to
fear, least I should come to the like state: And consideringe with my self
the good fortune which I was sometime in when I was a man, I greatly lamented
holding down my head, and would eat no meat, but I saw no comfort or
consolation of my evil fortune, sauinge that my mind was somewhat recreated
to hear and understand what every man said, for they neither feared nor
doubted my presence: At that time I remembered how Homer the divine author of
ancient Poetry, described him to be a wise man, which had traueled diverse
countries and na^io^s, wherefore I gave great thakes to my Assy form, in y^ by
y^ mean I had seen the experience of many things, and was become more wise
(not withstanding the great misery and labor which I daily sustained) but I
will tell you a pretty jest, which comes now to my remembrance, to the intent
your ears may be delighted in bearinge the same.

How Apuleius was handled by the Bakers wife, which was a harlotte.

Cap. 40.
THe Baker which bought me was an honest and sober man, but his wife was the
most pestilent woman in all the world, in so much that he endured many
miseries and afflictions with her, so that ^ my self did secretly pity his
estate, and bewail his evil fortune: for she had not one fault alone, but
all the mischiefs that could be devised, she was crabbed, cruel, lascivious,
dronken, obstinate, niggishe, covetous, riotous in filthy expenses, an ennemie
to faith and chastity, a despiser of all the Gods whom other did honor,
one that affirmed that she had a God by her self, whereby she deceived all
men, but especially her poor husband, one that abandoned her body with
continual whoredom: This mischeuous queen hated me in such sort, There is
no malice, above the malice of a woman.
that she commanded every day before she was up, that I should be put in the
mill to grind: and the first thing which she would do in the morninge was
to see me cruelly beaten, and that I should grind when the other beasts did
feed and take rest: when I saw that I was so cruelly handled, she gave me
occasion to learn her conversation and life, for I saw oftentime a young man,
which would priuilyg^e into her chamber, whose face I did greatly desire to
see, but I could not by reason mine eyes were covered every day. And verily if
I had been free and at liberty I would have discovered all her abomination:
she had an old woman, a bawd, a messenger of mischief that daily haunted to
her house, and made good cheer with her, to the utter undoing and
impouerishment of her husband, but I that was greatly offended with the
negligence of Fotis, who made me an Ass, in steed of a bird, did yet comfort
my self by this only mean, in that to the miserable deformity of my shape, I
had long ears, whereby I might here all things that was done: On a day I
hard the old baude say to the Bakers wife: Dame you have chosen (without my
counsel) a young man to your lover, who as me seems is dull, fearful,
without any grace, and dasterdly coucheth at the frowning looks of your odious
husband, whereby you have no delight nor pleasure with him: Thus old baudes
seweth for yo^g knaves.
how far better is the young man Philesiterus, who is comely, beautiful, in
the flower of his youth, liberal, courteous, valiant, and stout against the
diligent pries and watches of your husband, worthy to embrase the woorthiest
dames of this country, and worthy to were a crown of gold, for one part
that he plaide to one that was ielous over his wife: Harken how it was, and
then judge the diversity of these two lovers, know you one Barbarus a
Senator of our town, whom the vulgar people call likewise Scorpion for his
severity of manners. This Barbarus had a gentle woman to his wife, whom he
caused daily to be enclosed within his house with diligent custody, the^ the
Bakers wife said I know her very well, for we two dwelled together in one house:
Then you know (quod the old woman) the whole tale of Philesiterus. No verily
(said she) but I greatly desire to know it: therefore I pray you mother tell
me the whole story. By and by the old woman which knew well to babble,
began to tell as follows.

How Barbarus being ielous over his wife, commanded that she should be kept
close in his house, and what happened.

Cap. 41.
YOu shall understand that on a day this Barbarus preparing him self to ride
abroad, and willing to keep the chastity of his wife (whom he so well loved)
alone to him self called his man Myrmex (whose faith he had tried and proved
in many things) and secretly committed to him the custody of his wife,
willinge him that he should threaten, that if any man did but touch her with
his finger as he passed by, he would not only put him in prison, What is more
worse then a ielous person.
and bind him hand and foot, but also cause him to be put to death, or else
to be famished for lack of sustenaunce, which words he confirmed by Oath of
all the Gods in heaven, and so he departed away: When Barbarus was gone,
Myrmex being greatly astonished at his masters threatninges, would not suffer
his mistress to go abroad, but as she satte all day a spinninge, he was so
careful that he satte by her, when night came he went with her to the
baynes, holdinge her by the garment, so faithful he was to fulfill the
commandment of his master: How be it the beauty of this noble Matron could
not be hidden from the burninge eyes of Philesiterus, who considering her great
chastity, and how she was diligently kept by Myrmex, thought it impossible
to have his purpose, yet (endeuoringe by all kind of means to enterprise the
matter, and remembringe the fragilitie of man, Gold co^quereth all things.
that might be entised and corrupted with money, since as by Gold the adamant
gates may be opened) on a day when he found Myrmex alone he discovered his
love, desiring him to show his favor (otherwise he should certainly die) with
assurance that he need not to fear when as he might privily be let in and
out in the night, without knowledge of any person. When he thought, with these,
and other gentle words, to allure and prick forward the obstinate mind of
Myrmex, he showed him glittering gold in his hand, saying: that he would give
his mistress twenty crounes, and him ten, but Myrmex hearing these words
was greatly troubled, abhorringe in his mind to commit so wicked a
mischief: wherefore he stopped his ears, and turning his head departed away:
howbeit the glistering h^w of these crowns could never out of his mind, but
being at home he seemed to see the money before his eyes, which was so worthy
a pray wherefore poor Myrmex being in diverse opinions could not tell what to
do, for on the one side he considered the promise which he made to his
master, and the punishment which should ensue if he did contrary. On the
other side he thought of the gain, and the passinge pleasure of the crowns of
Gold, in the end the desire of the money did more prevail then the fear of
death, for the beauty of the slourishinge crowns did so stick in his mind,
that where the menaces of his master compelled him to tarry at home, the
pestilent avarice of the Gold egged him out a doors, wherefore putting all
shame aside without further delay, he declared the whole matter to his mistress,
Women easily allured by gifts.
who according to the nature of women, when she hard him speak of so great a
sum, she bound Chastity in a stringe, and gave authorite to Myrmex to rule
her in that case. Myrmex seeing the intent of his mistress, was very glad, and
for great desire of the gold, Here gold brake faith and trust.
he ran hastily to Philesiterus declaring that his mistress was consented to
his mind, wherefore he demanded the gold which he promised: Then
inco^tinentlie Philesiterus delivered him ten crowns: and when night came,
Myrmex brought him disguised into his mistress chamber. About midnight when he
and she wear naked together, making sacrifice unto the Goddess Venus,
behold, her husband (contrary to their expectation) came and knocked at the
door, calling with a loud voice his servant Myrmex: Whose long tariyng,
increased the suspision of his master, in such sort, that he threatened to
beat Myrmex cruelly: but he being troubled with fear, and driven to his
latter shifts, excused the matter, saiynge that he could not find y^ kaie: by
reason it was so dark. In the mean season Philesiterus heatinge the noise at
the door, slipped on his coat, and privily ran out of the chamber. When
Myrmex had opened the door to his master that threatened terribly, and had let
him in, he went into the chamber to his wife: In the mean while Myrmex let out
Philesiterus, and barred the doors fast, and went again to bed. The next
morning, Haste is no^ good.
when Barbarus awaked, he perceived two unknown slippers liynge under his
bed, which Philesiterus had forgotten when he went away. Then he conceived a
great suspicion and jealousy in his mind, howbeit, he would not discover it to
his wife neither to any other person, but putting secretly the slippers in his
bosom, commanded his other servants to bind Myrmex incontinently, and to
bring him bound to the Justice after him, thinking verily that by y^ mean of
the slippers he might boult out the matter. It fortuned that while Barbarus
went toward the Justice in a fury and rage, and Myrmex fast bound, followed
him weeping, not because he was accused before his master, but by reason he
knew his own conscience gilty. Behold, by adventure Philesiterus (goinge
about earnest business) fortuned to meet with them by the way, who fearing the
matter which he committed the night before, and doubting least it should be
known, did suddenly inuente a mean texcuse Myrmex, for he ran upon him and
beat him about the head with his fistes cruelly, saiynge: Ah mischievous
verlet that thou art, and perjured knave. It were a good deed if the Goddess
and thy master here, would put the to death, for thou art worthy to be
imprisoned, and to wear out these irons, that stalest my slippers away when
thou warest at the baynes yester night. Barbarus hearing these words,
returned inco^tinently home, and called his servant Myrmex, co^mau^ding him to
deliver y^ slippers again to y^ right owner.

The old woman had scars finished her tale, when the Bakers wife began say:
Verily she is blessed and most blessed, that has the fruition of so worthy a
lover, but as for me poor miser, I am fallen into y^ hands of a coward, who
is not only aferde of my husband, but also of every clap of the mill, and
dares do nothing before the blind face of yonder scabbed Ass. Then the old
woman answered, I promise you certainly, if you will, you shall have this young
man at your pleasure, and therewithal when night came, A harlot spends the
substance of her husband.
she departed out of her chamber. In the mean season, the Bakers wife made
ready a supper with abundance of wine, and exquisite fare: So that there lacked
nothing but the coming of the young man: For her husband supped at one of her
neighbors house. When time came that my harness should be taken of and that I
should rest my self, I was not so joyful of my liberty, as when y^ veil was
taken from mine eyes, I should see all y^ abhominatio^ of this mischievous
queen. When night was come and the Sun gone down, behold y^ old Baude and
the young man, who seemed to me but a child, by reason he had no bearde, came to
y^ door: The^ y^ Bakers wife kissed him a thousand times, and receiving him
courteously, placed him down at the table: but he had scarce eaten the first
morsel, when y^ good man (contrary to his wifes expectation) returned home,
for she thought he would not have come so sone: But lord how she cursed him,
praiyng God y^ he might break his neck at y^ first entry in. In the mean
season, she caught her lover and thrust him into y^ bynne where she boulted her
flower, and dissimuling the matter, finely came to her husband, demanding why
he came home so soon. I could not abide (quod he) to see so great a mischief
and wicked fact which my neighbors wife committed, but I must run away: Oh
harlot as she is, how she has dishonored her husband. I swear by this
Goddess Ceres, that if I had not seen it with mine eyes, I would never have
believed it. His wife desirous to know the matter, desired him to tell what she
had done: Then he accorded to the request of his wife, As quick of sight
abroad as linx: but blin^^ at home.
and ignorant of the state of his own house, declared the mischaunce of an
other. You shall understand (quod he) that the wife of the Fuller my
compaignion, who seemed to be a wise and chaste woman, regardinge her own
honesty, and the profit of her house, was sound this night with her knave.
For while we went to wash our hands, he and she wear together: Who being
troubled by our presence ran into a corner, where she thrust him into a mew
made with twigges, appointed to lay on clothes to make them white with the
smooke and fume of brimstone. Then she sat down with us at the table to color
the matter: In the mean season the young man covered in the mewe, could not
forbear snysing, by reason of the smooke of the brymstone. The good man
thinking it had been his wife that snysed, cried Christ help: But when he
snysed more and more, he suspected the matter, and willinge to know who it
was, rose from the table, and went to the mewe where he found the young man
well nte dead with smooke. When he understood the whole matter, he was so
inflamed with anger, that he called for a swoorde to kill him: and undoubtedly
he had killed him, had not I restrained his violent hands from his purpose,
assuring him that his enemy would die with the force of the brymstone without
the harm which he should do: Howbeit, my words would not appease his fury,
but as necessitee required, we took the young man well nie chooked, and
carried him out at the doors. In the mean season, I cou^seled his wife to
absent her self at her neighbors houses, til the coler of her husband was
pacified, least he should be moved against her, as he was against the young man.
And so being weary of their supper, I forthwith returned home. Abhorring such
crimes in others (...) they use them selves.
When the Baker had told this tale, his impudent wife began to curse and
abhor the wife of the Fuller, and generally all other wives which habando^
their bodies with any other then with their own husbands, breaking the faith
and bond of marriage, whereby she said they were worthy to be burned alive:
But knowing her own gilty conscience and proper whordom, least her lover
should be hurt, liyng in the bynne, she willed her husband to go to bed,
but he having eaten nothing, said that he would suppe before he went to rest:
wherefore she was compelled maugre her eyes, to set such things on the table
as she had prepared for her lover. But I, considering the great mischief of
this wicked queen, devised with my self how I might reveal the matter to my
master, and by kicking away the cover of the binne (where like a snaile the
young man was couched) to make her whoredom apparent and known, at length I
was aided by y^ providence of God, for there was an old man to whom the
custody of us was committed, that drove me poor Ass, and the other horses
the same time to the water to drink, then had I good occasion ministered to
revenge the injury of my master, for as I passed by I perceived the fingers of
the young man upon the side of the binne, and liftinge up my heels I spurned
of the flesh with the force of my hoofes, whereby he was compelled to cry
out, and to throw down the binne on the ground, Whoredom will be known*
and so the whoredom of the Bakers wife was known and revealed. The Baker
seeing this, was little moved at the dishonestie of his wife, but he took the
young man tremblinge for fear by the hand, and with cold and curteise words
spoke in this sort: Fear not my son nor think that I am so barbarous or
cruel person, that I would sti^^e thee up with the smoke of Sulphur, as our
neighbor accustometh, nor I will not punish thee according to the rigor of the
law Iulia, which commands that adulterers should be put to death: No no, I
will not execute my cruelty against so fair and comely a young man as you be,
but we will divide our pleasure between us, by liynge all three in one bed,
to the end there may be no debate nor dissentio^ between us, but that either
of us may be contented, for I have always lived with my his neck appeared to
her in the night, declaringe the whole circumstance of his death, and how by
inchauntment he was descended to hell, which caused her to think that her
father was dead. After that she had lamented a good space, and was somewhat
comforted by the servants of the house, and when nine days were expired, as
inheritrix to her father, she sold away all the substance of the house,
whereby the goods chaunsed into diverse men's hands.

How Apuleius after the Baker was hanged, was sold to a Gardener, and what
dreadful things happened.

Cap. 42.
THere was a poor gardener emongst ye rest, which bought me for the sum of
fifty pence, which seemed to him a great price, but he thought to gain it
again by the continual travel of my body: The matter requires to tell
likewise, how I was handled in his service. This gardener accustomed to drive
me every morning laded with herbs to the next village, and when he had sold his
herbs, he would mount upon my back and return to the gardein, and while he
dug the ground, and watered the herbs, and went about other business, I did
nothing but repose my self with great ease, but when winter approached, with
sharp hail, rain, and frostes, and I standing always under a hedge side,
was welnie killed up with cold, and my master was so poor that he had no
lodginge for him self, much less he had any litter or place to cover me
withal, for he him self always lay under a little roof, shadowed and covered
with bows. In the morninge when I rose, I found my hoofes shriueled together
with cold, and unable to pass upon the sharp yse, and frostie mire, neither
could I fill my belly with meat as I accustomed to do, for my master and I
supped together and had both one fare: Howbeit it was very sle^der since as we
had nothing else sauinge old and unsavory sallets, which were suffered to grow
for seed, like long broomes, and that had lost all their sweet sape and
juice. Poor fare and poor lodginge in time of necessity is good.
It fortuned on a day that an honest man of the next village was benighted, and
constrained by reason of the rain to lodge (very lagged and weary) in our
garden, where although he was but meanly received, yet it served well enough
considering time and necessity. This honest man to reco^pense our
entertainment, promised to give my master some corn, oil, and two bottels of
wine: wherefore my master not delaiyng the matter, laded me with sackes and
bottels, and rode to the town which was seven miles of, when we came to the
honest man's house, he entertained and feasted my master exceedingly, and it
fortuned while they eat and drank together, as sign of great amity there
chaunsed a strange and dreadful case: Terrible tokens.
for there was a hen which ran kacklinge about the yard, as though she
would have laid an egg: The goodman of the house perceauinge her, said: O
good and profitable pullet that feedest us every day with thy fruicte, thou
seem as though thou would give us some pittance for our dinner; Ho boy
put the pannier in the corner that the hen may lay. Then the boy did as his
master commanded, but the hen forsakinge the pannier came toward her
master, and laid at his feet not an egg which every man knows, but a
chickin with feathers, claws and eyes, which incontinently ran peepinge
after his dame. Such things happen before death and dreadful chau^ses,
By and by, happened a more strange thing which would cause any man to
abhor, under the table where they satte the ground opened, and there
appeared a great well and fountain of bloudde, in so much that the drops
thereof sprinkled about the table: At the same time while they wo^dred at this
dreadful sight, one of the servants came runninge out of the seller, and
told that all the wine was boiled out of the vessels, as though there had
been some great fire under: By and by a Wesell was seen that drew into the
house a dead Serpent, and out of the mouth of a sheepeherdes dog leaped a
live frogge, and immediately after one brought word that a Ram had strangled
the same dog with one bitte: All these things that happened astonished the
good man of the house, and the residewe that were present, in so much they
could not tell what to do, or with what sacrafice to appease the anger of the
Gods. While every man was thus stricken in fear: behold one brought word
to the goodman of the house, The thing which the said strange tokens
foreshewed.
that his three sons who had been brought up in good litrature, and endewed
with good manners were dead, for they three had great acquaintance and ancient
amity with a poor man, which was their neighbor and dwelled hard by the^.
And next unto him dwelled an other young man very rich both in lands and
goods, but bendyng from the race of his progenies dissentions, and rulinge him
self in the town according to his own will. This young royster did mortally
hate this poor man, in so much that he would kill his sheep, steal his
Oxen, Might, ouercometh right.
and spoil his corn and other fruictes, before the time of ripenes, yet was
he not contented with this, but he would encroche upon the poor man's ground
and claim all his heritage as his own: The poor man which was very simple
and fearful, seeinge all his goods taken away by the avarice of the rich,
called together and assembled many of his friends to show them the metes and
bounds of his land, to the end he might have but so much ground of his
fathers heritage as might bury him. Amongst whom he found these three
brethren as friends to help and aid him in his adversity and tribulation:
How be it the presence of these honest Citizins, could in no wise persuade him
to leave his extorte power, no nor yet to cause any temperaunce of his tongue,
but the more they went about with gentle words to tell him his faults, the
more would he frette and fume, swearinge all the Oaths under God, that he
little regarded the presence of the whole City, whereupon incontinently he
commanded his servants to take the poor manne by the ears, and carry him
out of his ground, which greatly offended all the standers by: Then one of
the brethern spoke unto him somewhat boldly, saying: It is but a folly to have
such affiance in your richesse, whereby you should use your tirannie against
the poor, The law redresseth the poor ma^s caus^
when as the law is common for all men, and a redress may be had to suppress
your insolence.

These words chased him more then the burninge oil, or flaming brimstone, or
scourge of whippes, saying: y^ they should be al hanged and their laws too,
before he would be subject to any person: and therewithal he called out his
bandogges, and great mastiffes, which accustomed to eat the karrein and
karkeis of dead beasts in the fields, and to set upon such as pa^ssed by
the way, then he commanded they should be put upon all the assistaunce to
tear them in pieces, who as soon as they hard the hiss of their masters,
ran fiercely upon them, inuading them on every side, in so much that the
more they flied to escape away, the more cruel and terrible were the dogs.
It fortuned amongst all this fearful company, that in running, the youngest
of the three brethren, stumbled at a stone, and fell down to the ground: Then
the dogs came upon him and tare him in pieces with their teethe, whereby he
was compelled to cry out for succor: His other two brethren hearing his
lamentable voice, ran toward him to help him, casting their clokes about
their left arms, took up stones to chase away the dogs, but all was in
vain, for they might see their brother dismembered in every part of his body:
Who liyng at the very point of death, desired his brethren to revenge his death
against the cruel tyrant: And therewithal he gave up the ghost. The other
two brethern perceiving so great a murder, and neglecting their own lives,
like desperate persons dressed them selves against the tyrant, and threw a great
number of stones at him, but the bloody thief exercised to such and like
mischiefs, took a spear and thrust him clean thorough the body: Howbeit he
fell not down to the ground. For the spear that came out at his back ran
into the earth and sustained him up, by and by came one of this Tirantes
seruau^ts the most sturdiest of the rest to help his master, who at his first
coming, took up a stone, and threw at the third brother, but by reason the
stone ran alonge his arm it did not hurt him, which chaunsed otherwise then
all men's expectation was, by and by the young man feigning that his arm was
greatly wounded, spoke these words unto the cruel bloudsucker: Now may
thou, ^hou wretch triumph upon the destruction of all our family, now haste
thou fed thy insatiable cruelty with the blood of three brethern, now
maiste thou rejoice at the fall of us Citizins, yet think not but that how
far so ever thou do remove and extend the bounds of thy land, thou
shall have some neighbor, but how greatly am I sorry in that I have lost mine
arm where withal I minded to cut of thy head, when he had spoken these
words: The furious thief drew out his dagger, and running upon the young man
thought verily to have slain him, but it chaunsed otherwise: For the young man
resisted him stoutly, and in bucklinge together by violence wrested the dagger
out of his hand: which done, he killed the rich thief with his own weapon,
Nothing worse then to fall into the hands of enemies.
and to the intent the young man would escape the hands of the servants,
which came runninge to assiste their master, with the same dagger he cut
his own throat. These things were signified by the strange and dreadful
wonders which fortuned in the house of the good man, who after he had hard
these sorrowful tidinges could in no wise weep, so far was he stricken with
dolor, but presently taking his knife wherewith he cut his cheese and other
meat before, he cut his own throat like wise, in such sort that he fell
upon the board and embrued the table with the streams of his blood in most
miserable manner: Hereby was my master the gardener deprived of his hope, and
paying for his dinner the watery tears of his eyes, mounted upon my back, and
so we went homewarde the same way as we came.

How Apueeius was found by his shadow.

Cap. 43.
AS we passed by the way we met with a tale soldier (for so his habit and
countenance declared) who with proud and arrogant words, spoke to my
master in this sort: Quorium vacuum ducis a suum? My master somewhat astonished
at the strange sightes which he saw before, and ignorant of the latin tongue
rode on and spoke never a word: The soldier unable to refrain his
insolence and offended at his silence, struck him on the shoulders as he satte
upon my back, then my master gently made answer that he understood not
what he said, whereat the Soldier angerly demanded again whither he rode
with his Ass: Mary (quod he) to the next City: but I (quod the Soldier)
have need of his help, to carry the trusses of our Captain from yender
Castle, and therewithal he took me by the halter, and would violently have
taken me away: but my master wipinge away the bloudde of the blow which he
received of the Soldier, desired him gentely and cinily to take some pity
upon him, and to let him depart with his own, swearyng and affirminge that
his slow. Ass, we^nie dead with sickness, could skarse carry a few
handfulles of herbs to the next town, much less he was able to bear any
greater trusses: but when he saw the Soldier would in no wise be entreated,
but ready with his staff to cleave my masters head, my master fell down at
his ^eete, under color to move him to some pity, but when he saw his time,
he took the Soldier by the legs and cast him upon the ground: Then he
buffeted him, thumped him, bitte him, and took a stone and beat his face and
his sides, that he could not turn^ or defend him self, but only threaten
that if ever he rose he would choppe him in pieces. The Gardener when he hard
him say so, drew out his iauelin which he had by his side, and when he had
thrown it away, he knocked and beatte him more cruelly then he did before, in
so much that the Soldier could not tell by what means to save him self,
but by feigninge that he was dead. Then my master took the iauelin and mounted
upon my back, ridinge in all haste to the next village, having no regard
to go to his garden, and when he came thither, he turned into one of his
friends house and declared all the whole matter, desiringe him to save his
life, and to hide him self and his Ass in some secret place, A frie^de in
adversity is better then treasure.
until such time as all danger were paste. Then his freende not forgettinge
the ancient amity between them, entertained him willingly, and drew me up a
pair of steares into a chamber, my master crept into a chest and lay hidden
there with the cover closed fast: The Soldier (as I afterward learned)
rose up as one awaked from a dronken sleep, but he could skarse go by reason
of his wou^des: how be it at length by little and little thorough aid of his
staff he came to the town, but he would not declare the matter to any
person, nor complain to any justice, least he should be accused of cowardice
or dasterdnes, yet in the end he told some of his co^paignions of all the
matter that happened, then they took him, and caused him to be closed in some
secret place, thinkinge that beside the injury which he had received, he
should be accused of y^ breche of his faith, by reason of y^ loss of his
spear, and when they had learned y^ signs of my master, they went to search
him out: at last there was an unfaithful neighbor y^ told them where we were,
then inco^tinently the Soldiers went to the Justice, declaringe that they had
lost by the way a silver goblet of their Capitaines, and that a gardener had
found it, who refusing to redeleuer y^ goblet, was hidden in one of his
friends house: by and by the Magistrates understanding the loss of the
Captain, came to the doors where we were, and commanded our Oste to deliver
my master upon pain of death: Howbeit these threatninges could not enforce
him to confess that he was within his doors, but by reason of his faithful
promise, and for the saluegarde of his friend: he said, that he saw not the
gardener a great while, neither knew where he was: the soldiers said
contrary, whereby to know the verity of the matter, the Magistrates commanded
their Sergeantes and ministers to search every corner of the house, but when
they could find neither gardi^er nor Ass: There was a great contention
between the Soldiers and our Oste, for they said we wear within the house:
and he said no, but I that was very curious to know the matter, when I hard
so great a noyes, put my head out of the window to learn what the stir and
tumulte did signify. It fortuned that one of the soldiers perceived my
shadow, whereupon he began to cry, saying: that he had certainly seen me,
then they were all glad and came up into the chamber and pulled me down like
a prisoner, when they had found me they doubted nothing of the Gardener, but
seekinge about more narrowly, at length they found him couched in a cheste.
And so they brought out the poor Gardener to the Justices, who was committed
immediately to prison, but they could never forbear laughing from the time they
found me by my shadow, whereof is risen a common proverb: The shadow of the
Ass.

The tenth Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How the Soldier drove Apuleius away, and how he came to a Capitaines house:
And what happened there.

Cap. 44.
THe next day how my master the Gardener spedde. I knew not, but the
gentle Soldier, who was well beaten for his cowardice, led me to his
lodging without the contradictio^ of any man: Where he laded me well, and
garnished my body (as seemed to me) like an Ass of arms. For on the one side
I bare a helmet that shined excedingly: On the other side a tergat that
glistered more a thousand fold. And on the top of my burden, he had put a
long spear, which things he placed thus gallantly, not because he was so
expert in war, (for the Gardener proved contrary) but to the end he might
fear those which passed by, when they saw such a similitude of war. When
we had gone a good part of our journey, over the plain and easy fields, we
fortuned to come to a little town, where we lodged at a certain Capitaines
house. And there the Soldier took me to one of the servants, while he him
self went toward his Captain: Who had the charge of a thousand men. And
when we had remained there a few days, I understood of a wicked and
mischeuous fact committed there, A pitiful (...) of a stepdame and her son
in law.
which I have put in wrytinge, to the^de you may know the same.

The master of the house had a son instructed in good litrature, and
ende^^ed with virtuous manners, such a one as you would desire to have the
like, long time before his mother died. And the^ his father married a new
wife, and had an other child of the age of.xij. years. This stepdame was more
excellent in beantie then honesty: For she loved this young man her son in
law, either because she was unchaste by nature, or because she was enforced by
fate of stepmother, to commit so great a mischief. Gentle Reader, thou shall
not read of a fable, but rather a tragedy: This woman when her love began
first to kindle in her heart, could easily resist her desire and inordinate
appetite, by reason of shame and fear, lest her intent should be known: But,
after that it compassed and burned every part of her breast, A thing rooted
deep, can skars he pulled up.
she was compelled to yield unto the raginge flame of Cupid, and under color
of the disease and infirmiti^ of her body, to conceal the wound of her restles
mind. Every man knows well the signs and tokens of love, and the malady
convenient to the same: Her countenance was pale, her eyes sorrowful, her
knees weak, and there was no comfort in her, but continual weepinge and
sobbing, in so much you would have thought that she had some spice of an ague,
saving that she wept vnmeasurably. The Physicians knew not her disease, when
they felt the beating of her veins, the intemperance of her beat, the sobbing
sighs, and her often tossing on every side: No, no, the conning Physicians
knew it not, but a scholar of Venus court might easily co^iect the whole.
After that she had been long time tormented in her affection, and was no more
able to conceal her ardent de^^er, she caused her son to be called for
(which word Son, she would feign put away, if it wear not for shame): Then
he nothing disobedient to the commandment of his mother, with a sad and
modest countenance, came into the chamber of his Stepdame, the mother of his
brother: but she speaking never a word, was in great doubt what she might do,
and could not tell what to say first, by reason of shame. This young man
suspectinge no ill, with humble courtesy demanded the cause of her present
disease. Then she having found an occasion to utter her wicked intent, with
weepinge eyes and covered face, began bouldly to speak unto him in this
manner. Thou, thou, art the original cause of my present dolor: Thou art my
comfort and only health, for those thy comely eyes, are so fastened within my
breast, that unless thou succour^ me, I shall certainly die: Have pity
therefore upon me, be not the occasion of my destruction, neither let thy
conscience reclaim to offend thy father, when as thou shall save the life of
thy mother. Moreover, since as thou do resemble thy fathers shape in every
point, it gives me cause the more to fancy thee: Now is ministered unto thee
time and place: Now haste thou occasion to work thy will, seeing that we are
alone. And it is a common saying:

Never known, never done. This young man troubled in his mind, at so sodein an
ill, although he abhorred to commit so great a crime, yet he would not cast her
of with a present denial, but warely pacified her mind with delaie of
promise. Wherefore he promised her to do all according to her defier: And in
the mean season, he willed his mother to be of good chere, and comfort her
self, till as he might find some convenient time to come unto her, when his
father was ridden forth: Wherwithal he got him away, from the pestilent sight
of his Stepdame. And knowing that this matter touching the ru^ue of all the
whole house, needed the counsel of wise and grave persons, he went
incontinently to a sage old man, and declared the whole circumsta^ce of the
matter. VVisdome lies in hoare headed ^ge.
The old man after long deliberatio^, thought there was no better mean to
avoid y^ storm of cruel fortune to come, then to run away. In the mean
season this wicked woman impacient of her love, and the long delaie of her
son, egged her husband to ride abroad into far countries. And then she
asked the young man the accomplishment of his promise, but he to deliver him
self, entierly from her hands, would find always excuses, till in the end,
she understood by the messengers that came in and out, that he nothing regarded
her. Then the, by how much she loved him before, by so much and more she
hated him now. And by and by, she called one of her servants, ready to all
mischiefs: To whom she declared all her secrets. And there it was concluded
between them two, that the surest way was to kill the young man: Whereupon
this Verlet went inco^tinentlie to buie poison, which he mingled with wine, to
the intent he would give it the young man to drink, and thereby presently to
kill him. But while they were in deliberation how they might offer it unto
him. Behold, here happened a strange adventure. For the young son of the
woman that came from schole at noone (being very thirsty) took the pot
wherein the poison was mingled, and ignorant of the hidden venym drank a good
draught thereof, which was prepared to kill his brother: A woman either loves
thee burningly, or hates the extremely.
Whereby he presently fell down to y^ ground dead. His scholemaister seeing
this sudden chance called his mother, and all the servants of the house with
a loud voice. Incontinently every man declared his opinion, touching the
death of the child: But the cruel woman, the only example of stepmothers
malice was nothing moved by the bitter death of her son, or by her own
conscience of parracide, or by the misfortune of her house, or by the dolor of
her husband but rather devised the destruction of all her family. For by and
by she sent a messanger after her husband to tell him the great misfortune
which happened after his departure. And when he came home the wicked woman
declared that his son had empoisened his brother, because he would not
consent to his will, and told him diverse other lesinges, adding in y^ end
that he threatened to kill her likewise, because she discovered the fact: Then
the unhappy father was stricken with double dolor of the death of his two
children, for on the one side he saw his younger son slain before his eyes,
on the other side he seemed to see y^ elder condemned to die for his offense:
Again where he beheld his wife lamente in such sort, it gave him farther
occasion to hate his son more deadly, but the funeralles of his younger son
were skarse finished, when the old man the father with weeping eyes even at
the return from the grave, went to the Justice and accused his son of the
slaughter of his brother, and how he threatened to slay his wife, whereby the
rather at his weping and great lamentation, he moved all the Magistrates and
people to pity, in so much that without any delay, or further inquisitio^ they
cried all that he should be stonied to death, but the Justices fearinge a
farther inconvenience: to arise by a particular vengeance, To proceed by law
is justice, for law is very justice.
and to the end there might fortune no sedition emongst the people, prayed the
Decurious and other officers of the City, that they might proceed by
examination of witnesses, and with order of Justice according to the ancient
custom, before the giving of any hasty sentence, or judgment without
hearing of the contrary part, like as the barbarous and cruel Tira^ts
accustom to use. Otherwise they should give an ill example to their
successors, this opinion pleased every man, wherefore the Senators and
counselours were called, who being placed in order according to their
dignity, caused the accuser and defender to be brought forth, and by the
example of the Atheman law, and judgment martial, their advocates were
commauned to plead their causes briefly, without preambles or motions of the
people to pity, The Ass speaks.
which were to long a process: And if you demand how I understood all this
matter, you shall understand y^ I hard many declare the same, but to recite what
words y^ accuser used in his inuectiue, what answer the defendour made, the
orations and pleadinges of each party: verily I am not able to do, for I was
fast bound at the maunger, but as I learned and knew by others, I will God
willing declare unto you: So it was ordered y^ after the pleadinges of both
sides was ended, they thought best to try and boulte out the verity by
witnesses, all presumptions and likelyhoodes set a part, and to call in the
servant, who only was reported to know all the matter, by and by the servant
came in, who nothing abashed at y^ fear of so great a judgment, or at the
presence of y^ Judges, or at his own guilty conscience, which he, so finely
feigned but with a bold countenance presented him self before the Justices, and
confirmed the accusation against the young man, saying: O ye Judges, on a day
when this young man lothed and hated his Stepmother he called me, desiring me
to poison his brother, whereby he might revenge him self, and If I would do
it, and keep y^ matter secret, he promised to give me a good reward for my
pains, but when the young man perceived y^ I would not accord to his will, he
threatened to slay me: whereupon he went him self and bought poison, and after
te^pred it with wine, and then gave it me to give to y^ child, which when I
refused, he offered it to his brother with his own hands. When the verlet with a
tre^bling countenance had ended these words, which seemed a likelyhoode of
truth, the judgment was ended: neither was there found any Judge or Counselour
so mercyful to the young man accused as would not judge him culpable, but y^ he
should be put and sown in a skin, with a dog, a cock, a snake, and an
Ape, according to the law against parracides: Thus they used in old time to
put such to death, as had killed any of their kinrede. But that law was
afterward abrogate.
wherefore there wanted nothing, but (as the ancient custom was) to put white
stones and black, into a pot, and to take them out again, to see whether
the young man accused should be acquitted by judgment or condemned, which was
a thing irreuocable. In y^ mean season he was delivered to y^ hands of the
executioner. But there arose a sage and ancient Physician, a man of good
conscience and credit thorough out all the City, y^ stopped the mouth of y^
pot wherein y^ stones were cast, saying: I am right glad ye reverend
Judges, y^ I am a man of name and estimation emongst you, whereby I am accounted
such a one as will not suffer any person to be put to death by false and untrue
accusations, consideringe there has been no homicide or murder committed by
this young man in this case, Judges are sworn to execute Justice.
neither you (being sworn to judge uprightly) to be misinformed and abused by
invented lies and tales: For I cannot but declare and open my conscience, least
I should be found to bear small honor and faith to the Gods: wherefore I
pray you give ear, and I will show you the whole truth of the matter: you
shall understand y^ this servant which has merited to be hanged, came one of
these days to speak with me, promising to give me a hundred crounes, if I
would give him a present poison, which would cause a man to die suddenly,
saying: that he would have it for one that was sick of an incurable disease,
to the end he might be delivered from all his torment, but I smelling his
crafty and subtle fetch, and fearinge least he would work some mischief
withal, gave him a drink: but to the intent I might clear my self from al
danger y^ might happen, I would not presently take the money, which he offered:
but least any one of the crowns should lack weight or be found cou^trefaite,
I willed him to seal the purse wherein they were put with his manuell sign,
whereby the next day we might go together to y^ goldsmithe to try them, which
he did, wherefore understanding that he was brought present before you this day,
I hastily commanded one of my servants to fetch the purse which he had
sealed, and here I bring it unto you to see whether he will deny his own
sign or no:and you may easily coniect that his words are untrue, which he
alleged against the young man touching the biynge of the poison, consideringe
he bought the poison him self. When the Physician had spoken these words you
might perceive how the traiterous knave changed his color, how he swette for
fear, how he trembled in every part of his body: (...)uses thieves to do,
when evident proufes are showen.
And how he set one leg upon an other, scratchyng his head, and grindinge his
teeth, whereby there was no person but would judge him culpable. In the end
when he was somewhat returned to his former subtlety, he began to deny all
that was said, and stoutely affirmed that the Physician did lie. But the
Physician perceauinge that he was rayled at and his words denied, did never
cease to confirm his sayings and to disprove the verlet, til such time as the
officers by the commandment of the Judges, bound his hands and brought out
the seal, wherewith he had sealed the purse, which augmented the suspicion
which was conceived of him first. Howbeit neither the fear of the whele or any
other torment (according to the use of the Grecians) which wear ready
prepared, no nor yet the fire could enforce him to confess the matter, so
obstinate and grounded was he in his mischievous mind, but the Physician
perceauing that the menaces of those torments did nothing prevail, began say: I
cannot suffer or abide that this young man who is innocent, should against all
law and conscience be punished and condemned to die, and the other which is
culpable should escape so easily, and after mock and floute at your judgment:
For I will give you an evident proof and argument of this present crime, you
shall understand that when this caytife demanded of me a present and strong
poison, consideringe that it was not my part to give occasion of any others
death, The office of a Phisician is to cute and not to kill, as I have hard
tell many Phisicia^s of speculation have done, before they have come to
practice.
but rather to cure and save sick persons by mean of medicines: And on the
other side, fearinge least if I should deny his request I might minister a
further cause of his mischief, either that he would bie poison of some other,
or else return and work his wicked intent with a swoorde or some dangerous
weapon, I gave him no poison but a doling drink of Mandragora, which is of
such force that it will cause any man to sleep as though he wear dead: Neither
is it any meruell if this most desperate man, who is certainly assured to be
put to death, ordained by an ancient custom, can suffer or abide these facill
and easy torments: but if it be so that the child has received the drink
as I tempred it with mine own hands, he is yet alive and does but sleep, and
after his sleep he shall return to life again: but if he be dead in deed,
then may you further enquire of y^ causes of his death: The opinion of this
ancient Physician was found good, and every man had a desire to go to the
sepulcher where y^ child was laid, there was none of y^ Justices, none of any
reputation of the town, nor any of the common people, but went to see this
strange sight: Emongst the^ al, the father of the child removed with his own
hands the stone of the sepulcher, and found his son rising up after his dead
and Soporiferous sleep, whom when he beheld he embrased him in his arms, and
presented him before y^ people with great joy and consolation, and as he was
wrapped and bound in his grave, so he brought him before the judges, whereupon
the wickedness of the servant, and the treason of the stepdame was plainly
discovered, and the verity of the matter reveled, whereby the woman was
perpetually exiled, Sorrow into gladness, the women mentioned in the wars
that the Romans had against the Carthaginie^ses, were so glad when they saw
their sons alive, who were reported to be dead, that their hearts bra^^e a
sonder, and so died for joy.
the servant hanged on a gallows, and the Physician had the crounes which was
prepared to bie the poison: behold how the fortune of y^ old man was changed,
who thinking to be deprived of all his race and posterity, was in one moment
made the father of two children. But as for me I was ruled and handled by
fortune, according to her pleasure.

How Apuleius was sold to two brethern, whereof one was a Baker, and the
other a Cook, and how finely and deintily he fared.

Cap 45.
THe Soldier which paid never a penny for me, by the commandment of his
Captain, was sent unto Rome to carry letters to the great Prince, and
general of the Camp, and before he went he sold me for eleven pence, to two
of his co^paignions, being servants to a man of woorship, whereof one was a
Baker y^ baked sweet bread and delicates: the other a Cook, which dressed
fine and excellent meats for his master, these two lived in common, and would
drive me from place to place to carry such things as was necessary, in so
much that I was received by these two, as a third brother and compaignion,
and I thought I was never better placed then with them: For when night came y^
supper was done and their business ended, they would bring many good morsels
into their chamber for the^ selves: One would bring pigges, chickins, fish, and
other good meats, the other fine bread, pasties, tartes, custardes, and other
delicate ionckettes dipped in honey. And when they had shut their chamber
door and went to the baynes: (O Lord) how I would fill my guts with those
goodly dishes: Neither was I so much a fool, or so very an Ass, to leave the
deintie meats and grind my teeth upon hard hey. In this sort I continued a
great space, for I played the honest Ass, taking but a little of one dishe,
and a little of an other, whereby no man mistrusted me. In the end I was more
hardier and began to devour the whole messes, of the sweetest delicates,
which caused the Baker and the Cook to suspect, how be it they never
mistrusted me, but searched about to apprehe^de the thief: At length they
began to accuse one an other of theft, and to set the dishes and morsels of
meat in order, one by an other, because they would learn what was taken away,
whereby one of the^ was compelled to say thus to his fellow: is it reason to
break promise and faith in this sort, by stealinge away the best meat, and
to sell it to augment thy good, and yet nevertheless to have thy part of the
residew that is left, if our partnershippe do mislike thee, we will be
parteners and brothers in other things, but in this we will break of: for I
perceive that the great loss which I sustain will at length be a cause of
great discord between us: The^ answered the other, verily I praise thy great
consta^cie and subtilnes, in that (when thou have secretly taken away the
meat) do begin to compain first, whereas I by long space of time have
suffered thee, because I would not seem to accuse my brother of theft, but I
am right glad in that we are fallen into commnnication of this matter, least
by our silence like contention might arise between us, as fortuned between
Ethe^^les and his brother, when they had reasoned together in this sort: they
swoore both earnestly that neither of them stale or took away any jot of the
meat, wherefore they concluded to search out the thief by all kind of
means. For they could not imagine or think that the Ass, who stood alone
there would eat any such meats, neither could they think that myce or
slies, were so ravenous as to devour whole dishes of meat, like the birds
Harpies which carried away y^ meats of Phineus king of Archadia. In the mean
season while I was fed with deintie morselles I gathered together my flesh,
my skin waxed soft, my hear began to shine, and I was gallant on every
part, but such fair and comely shape of my body was cause of my dishonor,
for the Baker and the Cook merueled to see me so slike and fine, considering I
did eat no hay at all: Wherefore on a time at their accustomed hour they
went to the baynes and locked their chamber door. It fortuned that ear they
departed away, they espied me thorough a hole how I fell roundly to my
victuales: Then they merueled greatly, and little esteeminge the loss of their
meat laughed exceedingly, calling y^ servants of the house, to show them
the greedy gorge and appetite of the Ass. Their laughinge was so immoderate,
that the master of the house hard them, and demanded the cause of their
laughter, and when he understood all the matter, he looked thorough y^ hole
likewise, wherewith he took such a delectation that he commanded the door to
be opened, that he might see him at his pleasure. Then I beholding every man
laugh, was nothing abashed, but rather more bold, whereby I never rested
eating, til such time as the master of y^ house commanded me to be brought
into his parler as a novelty, and theere caused al kinds of meats, which
were never touched to be set on the table, which (although I had eaten
sufficiently before, yet to win the further favor of the master of the
house) I did greedely devour, and made a clean riddance of the delicate
meats. And to prove my nature wholly, they gave me such meat as every Ass
does greatly abhor: for they put before me biefe and vinegre, bi^des and
pepper, fish and vergisse, in the mean season, they that beheld me at the
table did nothing but laugh: Then one of the seruau^ts of the house said to his
master, I pray you sir give him some drink to his supper: Mary (quod he) I
think thou say true: For so it may be that to his meat, he would drink
likewise a cup of wine. No boy, wash yonder pot, and fill it with wine,
which done carry it to the Ass, and say that I have drunk to him. Then all
the standers by looked on, to see what would come to pass, but I (as soon as I
beheld the cup) stayed not long, but gathering my lips together, supped up
all the wine at one draught: The master being right joyful hereat, caused the
Baker and the Cook, which had bought me to come before him, to whom he
delivered four times as much for me as they paid, which done he committed me
to one of his rich libertines, and charged him to look well to me, and that I
should lack nothing, who obayed his masters commandment in every point:
And to the end he would crepe further into his favor, he taught me a
thousand qualities. First he instructed me to sit at y^ table upon my tail,
and how I should leap and dance holding up my former feet, moreover he
taught me how I should answer when any body spoke unto me, with nodding my
head, which was a strange and marvelous thing, and if I did lack drink, I
should look still upon the pot. All which things I did willingly bring to
pass, and obeyed his doctrine: howbeit I could have done al these things
without his teaching, but I feared greatly least in showing my self conning
without a master, I should portende some great and strange wonder, and thereby
be thrown out to wild beasts. But my fame was spredde about in every place,
and the qualities which I could do, in so much y^ my master was renoumed
thorough out all the country by reason of me. For every man would say:
Behold the gentleman that has an Ass, that will eat and drink with him,
that will dance, and understanding what is said to him, will show his
fantasy by signs. But first I will tell you (which I should have done before)
who my master was, and of what country, his name was Thiasus, he was borne at
Corinth, which is the principal town of al Achaia, he had passed many offices
of honor, till he had taken upon him the degree Quinquenuall, according as
his birth and dignity required, who to show his woorthines, and to purchase
the benevolence of every person, appointed public joys and triumphs, to
endure the space of three days, and to bring his endeavor to pass, he came
into Thessalie to bie excellent beasts, and valiant fighters for the purpose.

How a certain Matron fell in love with Apuleius, and how he had his pleasure
with her, and what other things happened.

Cap. 46.
WHen he had bought such things ss was necessary, he would not return home
into his country in chariottes, or wagons, neither would he ride upon
Thessalian horses, or gennettes of france, or spanishe mules, which be most
excellent that can be found, but caused me to be garnished and trimmed with
trappers and bardes of gold, with brave harness, with purple coueringes, with
a bridle of silver, with pictured clothes, and with shrillinge belles, and in
this manner he code upon me lovingly, speaking and entreating me with gentle
words, but above all things he did greatly rejoice, in that I was his
servant to bear him upon my back, and his compaignion to feed with him at
the table: After long time when we had traueled as well by sea as land, and
fortuned to arrive at Corinth, the people of the town came about us on every
side, not so much to do honor unto Thiasus as to see me: For my fame was so
greatly spredde there, y^ I gained my master much money, and when the people
was desirous to see me play qualities, they caused the gates te be shut, and
such as ent^ed in should pay money, by means whereof, I was a profitable
compaignion to them every day: There fortuned to be emongst the assembly a
noble and rich Matron, that conceived much delight to behold me, in so much
that she was amorous of me, and could find no remedy to her passions and
disordinate appetite, but continually desired to have her pleasure with me, as
Pasiphae had with a Bull. In the end she promised a great reward to my keeper
for the custody of me one night, who for gain of a little money acccorded to
her desire, and when I had supped in a parler with my master, we departed away
and went into our chamber, where we found the fair matron, who had tarried a
great space for our coming: I am not able to recite unto you how al things
there were prepared, there wear four Eunuques that laid a bed of down on
the ground with bolsters accordingly for us to lie on, the couerlette was of
clothe of Gold, and the pillowes soft and tender, whereon the delicate Matron
had accustomed to lay her head, then the Eunuques not mindinge to delay any
longer the pleasure of their Mistress, closed the doors of the chamber and
departed away, within the chamber wear lamps that gave a clear light all the
place over: Then she put of all her garments to her naked skin, and taking
the lamp that stood next to her, began to annointe all her body with
baulme, and mine likewise, but especially my nose, which done she kissed me,
not as they accustom to do at the stews, or in brothell houses, or in the
courtisant schools for gain of money, but purely, sincerly, and with great
affection, castinge out these and like louinge words: Thou art he whom I
love, thou art he whom I only desire, without thee I cannot live, and other
like preamble of talk, as women can use well inoughe, when they mind to show
or declare their burninge passions and great affection of love: Then she took
me by the halter and cast me upon the bed, which was nothing strange unto
me, consideringe that she was so beautiful a Matron, and I so well bolen out
with wine, and perfumed with balm, whereby I was readely prepared for the
purpose: But nothing grieved me so much, as to think how I should with my huge
and great legs embrase so fair a matro^, or how I should touch her fine,
deintie, and silke^ skin, with my hard hoofes, or how it was possible to
kiss her soft, her pretty and ruddie lips, with my monstrous mouth and
stony teeth, or how she, who was so young and tender, could be able to receive
me. And I (verily thought) if I should hurt the woman by any kind of mean, I
should be thrown out to the wild beasts: But in the mean season she kissed
me, and looked on me with burninge eyes, saying: I hold thee my cony, I hold
thee my nops, my sparowe, and therewithal she eftsoon embrased my body round
about, and had her pleasure with me, whereby I thought the mother of
Minotaurus, did not causeless quench her inordinat de^ier with a Bull. When
night was passed, Here I have lef^ out certain lines propter honestatem.
with much joy and small sleep: The matron went before day to my keeper, to
bargain with him for an other night, which he willingly granted, partly for
gain of money, and partly to find new pastime for my master. Who after he
was informed of all y^ history of my luxury, was right glad, and rewarded my
keeper well for his peines, minding to show before the face of all the people
what I could do: but because they would not suffer the matron to abide such
shame, by reason of her dignity, and because they could find no other that
would endeavor so great a reproach. At length they obtained for money, a poor
woman, which was condemned to be eaten of wild beasts, with whom I should
openly have to do. But first I will tell you what a tale I hard, concerning
this woman. This woman had a husband, whose father minding to ride forth,
commanded his wife which he left at home great with child, that if she wear
delivered of a daughter, it should incontinently be killed.

When the time of her delivery came, it fortuned that she had a daughter, whom
she would not suffer to be slain, by reason of the natural affection which she
bare unto her child, but secretly committed her to one of her neighbors to
nource. And when her husband returned home, she declared unto him, that she
was delivered of a daughter, whom as he commanded, she had caused to be put
to death. But when this child came to age, and ready to be married: The mother
knew not by what means she should endow her daughter, but that her husband
should understand and perceive it. Wherefore she discovered the matter to her
son, who was the husband of this woman, condemned to be eaten of wild
beasts: For she greatly feared, lest he should unawares, fancy or fall in love
with his own sister. The young man understanding the whole matter (to please
and gratify his mother) went immediately to the yo^g maide^, keeping the matter
secret in his heart, for fear of inconvenience and (lamenting to see his sister
forsaken, both of mother and father) incontinently after, endowed her with part
of his own goods, and would have married her to one of his especial and
trusty friends: But although he brought this to pass very secretly and sagely,
yet in the end cruel and envious fortune, sowed great sedition in his house.
For his wife, who was now condemned to beasts, waxed ielous of her husband,
and began to suspect the young woman as a harlot and common queen, in so much
that she invented all manner of means to dispatche her out of the way. And in
the end, she invented this kind of mischief: She privily stale away her
husbands ringe, and went into the country, where as she commanded one of her
trusty servants, to take y^ ringe and to carry it to the maiden. To whom he
should declare y^ her brother did pray her to come into y^ country to him, and
that she should come alone without any other person. And to the^d she should not
delay but come with all speed, he should deliver her the ringe, which should be
a sufficient testimony of his message. The maide^, as soon as she had received
y^ ring of her brother, being very willing and desirous to obey his
commandment: (For she knew no otherwise but that he had sent for her) went in all haste as y^ messenger willed her to do. But when she was come to the snare
and engine which was prepared for her: The mischeuous woman, like one that were
mad, and possessed with some il spirit, scourged her first with rods from top
to too, and when y^ poor maide^ called for help with a loud voice to her
brother, y^ wicked harlot (weening y^ she had invented and feigned y^ matter)
took a burning fireband and thrust it into her secret place, whereby she died
miserably. The husband of this maiden, but especialy her brother, advertised of
her death, came to y^ place where she was slain, and after great lame^tation
and weping, they caused her to be buried honorably. The yongman her brother,
taking in ill part y^ miserable deeth of his sister, as it was convenient he
should, conceived so great dolor within his mind, and was stricken with so
pestilent fury of bitter anguishe, that he fell into the burning passions, of
a dangerous ague, whereby he seemed in such necessity, y^ he needed to have
some speedy remedy to save his life. The woman y^ slew the maide^, having lost
y^ name of wife together with her faith, went to a traitorous Phisitio^, who had
killed a great many persons in his days, and promised him fifty pieces of gold
if he would give her a present poiso^ to kill her husband out of hand, but in
presence of her husband, she feigned that it was necessary for him, to receive
a certain kind of drink, which y^ masters and doctors of physic, do
call a sacred potion, to the intent he might purge choler, and skowre the
interior parts of his body. But the Physician, in steed of that drink,
prepared a mortal and deadly poison, and when he had tempred it accordingly,
he took the pot in presence of all the family, and other neighbors and
friends of the sick young man, and offered it unto the patient. But the bold
and hardy woman, to the end she might accomplish her wicked intent, and also
gain the money which she had promised the Physician, staide the pot with her
hand, saying: I pray you master Physician, minister not this drink unto my
dear husband, until such time as you have drunk some part thereof your
self: For what know I, whether you have mingled any poison in the drink or
no, wherein I pray you not to be offended: For I know that you are a man of
wisdom and learning, but this I do to the intent the conscience and love that I
bear to the health and saluegarde of my husband, may be apparent. The
Physician being greatly troubled at the wickedness of this mischievous woman, as
void of all council and leisure to consider on the matter, and least he might
give any cause of suspicion to the standers by, or show any scruple of his
gilty conscience, by reason of long delaie, took the pott in his hand, and
presently drunk a good draught thereof, which done, the young man having no
mistrust, drunk up the residue. The Physician would have gone immediately home
to receive a contrepoison, to expel and drive out the first poison: But the
wicked woman perseuering in her mischief, would not suffer him to depart one
foot, until such time as y^ poison began to work in him, and then by much
prayer and intercession, she licensed him to go home: By the way the poison
invaded the intrailes and bowels of the whole body of the Physician, in such
sort that with great pain he came to his own house, where he had skarse time
to speak to his wife, and to will her to receive the promised salary of the
death of two persons, but he yielded up y^ ghost: And the other young man
lived not long after, but likewise died, emongst the feigned and deceitful
tears of his cursed wife. A few days after, when the young man was buried, and
the funeralles ended, the Phisicians wife demanded of her the fifty pieces of
gold, which she promised her husband for the drink, whereat the ill disposed
woman, with resemblance of honesty, answered her with gentle words, and
promised to give her the fistie pieces of gold, if she would fetch her a
little of that same drink, to proceed and make an end of all her enterprise.
The Physicians wife, partly to win the further favor of this rich woman,
and partly to gain the money, ran inco^tinently home, and brought her the
whole pot of poison, which when she saw, having now occasion to execute her
further malice, began to stretche out her bloody hands to murder, she had a
da^ghter by her husband (that was poisoned) who according to order of law,
was appointed heir of all the lands and goods of her father, but this woman
knowing that the mothers, succeed their children and receive all their goods
after their death, purposed to show her self a like parent to her child, as
she was a wife to her husband, whereupon she prepared a dinner with her own
hands, and empoisoned both the wife of the Physician and her own daughter:
The child being young and tender died incontinently, by force of the drink,
but the Physicians wife being stout and of strong complexion, feelinge the
poison t^ill down into her body doubted the matter, and thereupon knowing of
certainty that she had received her baine, ran forthwith to the Judges
house, that what with her cries and exclamatio^s, she raised up the people of
the town, and promisinge them to reveal and show diverse wicked and
mischeuous acts, caused that the doors and gates of the Judge were opened,
when she came in, she declared from the beginning to the end, the
abomination of this woman, but she had skarse ended her tale, when openinge
her falinge lips, and grindinge her teeth together, she fell down dead before
the face of the judge, who incontinently to try the truth of the matter,
caused the cursed woman and her servants to be pulled out of the house, and
enforced by pain of torment to confess the verity, which being known,
this mischievous woman, far less then she deserved, but because there could
be no more cruel a death invented for the quality of her offense, was
condemned to be caten of wild beasts: behold with this woman was I appointed
to have to do before the face of all the people, but I being wrapped in great
anguishe, and enuiynge the day of the triu^phe, when we two should so abandon
our selves together, devised rather to (...) my self, then to pollute my body
with this mischeuous harlot, and so for ever to remain deffamed, but it was
impossible for me to do, considering that I lacked hands, and was not able to
hold a knife in my hoofes: howbeit standing in a pretty cabyn, I reioysed in my
self to see that spring time was come, and that all things flourished, and that
I was in good hope to find some roses, to render me to my human shape. When
the day of the triumph came, I was led with great pomp and magnificence to
the appointed place, whither when I was brought, I first saw the preamble of
the triumph, dedicated with dau^sers and merry tauntyng iestes, Here the
tri^uph is expressed.
and I in the mean season, was placed before the gate of the Theater, whereas
on the one side, I saw the green and fresh grass growinge before the entry
thereof, whereon I greatly desired to feed: On the other side I conceived a
great delectation to see when the Theater gates were opened, how al things was
finely prepared and set forth: For there I might see young children and
maidens in the flower of their youth, of excellent beauty, and attyred
gorgeously, daunsing and moving in comely order, according to the order of
Grecia, for sometime they would dance in length, sometime round together,
sometime divide the^ selves in four parts, and sometime lose hands on every
side, but when the trumpet gave warnyng y^ every man should retire to his
place: Then began the triumph to appear. First there was a hill of woodde, not
much unlike that which the Poet Homer called Idea, for it was garnished about
with all sort of green verdu^es and lively trees, from the top whereof
ra^ne down a clear and fresh fountain, nourishinge the waters below, about
which woodde were many yo^g and tender Goats, pluckyng and feeding deintily on
the budding trees, then came a young man a sheepeherde representinge Paris,
richly arraied with vestmentes of Barbary, having a mitre of gold upon his
head, and seeming as though he kept y^ goats. After him ensewed an other young
man all naked, saving y^ his left shoulder was covered with a rich cloak, and
his head shininge with glisteringe hears, and hangyng down, through which
you might perceive two little wings, whereby you might conjecture that he was
Mercury with his rod called Caduceus, he bare in his right hand an apple of
gold, and with a seemly gate went toward him that represented Paris, and
after that he had delivered him the apple, he made a sign signifiyng that
Jupiter had commanded him so to do, when he had done his message, he departed
away: And by and by, behold there approached a fair and comely maiden, not much
unlike to Juno, for she had a Diadem of gold upon her head, and in her hand
she bare a regal Scepter: then followed an other resemblinge Pallas, for she
had on her head a shining sallett, whereon was bound a garlande made of Olive
branches, having in one hand a targette or shilde, and in the other a spear
as though she would fight: then came an other, which passed the other in
beauty, and represented the goddess Venus, with the color of Ambrosia, when
she was a maiden, and to the end she would show her perfect beauty, she
appeared all naked, saving that her fine and deintie skin was covered with a
thin smock, which the wind blewe hither and thither, to testify the youth
and flower of the age of the Dame, her color was of two sorts, for her body
was white, as descended from heaven, and her smock was blewishe as arrived
from the sea: After every one of the virgins which seemed Goddesses, followed
certain waytinge servants, Castor and Pollux went behind Juno, having on
their heads helmettes covered with stars. This virgin Juno sowned a feewte,
which she bare in her hand, and moved her self toward the sheepeherd Paris,
showyng by honest signs and tokens, and promisinge that he should be Lord of
all Asia, if he would judge her the fairest of the three, and to give her the
apple of gold: The other maiden which seemed by her armor to be Pallas, was
accompaigned with two young men, armed and brandishinge their naked swoordes in
their hands, whereof one was named Terror, and the other Fear, behind them
approached one soundinge his trumpet to provoke and stir men to battle, this
maiden began to dance and shake her head, throwyng her fierce and terrible
eyes upon Paris, and promising that if it pleased him, to give her the victory
of beawtie, she would make him the most strong and victorious man alive. Then
came Venus and presented her self in the middle of the Theater, with much
favor of all the people, for she was accompaigned with a great number of youth,
whereby you would have judged them to be all Cupidoes, either to have flowen
from heaven, or else from the river of the sea, for they had wings, arrows,
and the residew of their habit according in each point, and they bare in their
hands, torches lighted, as though it had been a day of marriage, then came in a
great multitude of fair maidens: On the one side were the most comely Graces:
on the other side the most beautiful Hours, carriyng garlandes and loose
flowers, and making great honor to the Goddess of pleasure, the flewtes, and
pypes yielded out the sweet sound of Lidians, whereby they pleased the minds
of the sta^ders by exceedingly, but the more pleasinge Venus moved forward
more and more, and shakinge her head, answered by her motion and gesture, to
the sound of the instruments: For sometimes she would wink gentely,
sometimes threaten and look asperly, and sometime dance only with her eyes:
As Soon as she was come before the Judge, she made a sign and token to give him
the most fairest spouse of all the world, if he would prefer her above the
residew of the Goddesses, then the young Phrigian sheepeherde Paris, The offer
of love, passed kingdoms and treasure.
with a willinge mind delivered the Golden apple to Venus, which was the
Victory of beawtie. Why do ye meruell ye Orators, ye Lawiers, and Advocates,
if many of our Judges now a days sell their judgments for money, when as in
the beginning of the world, one only Grace corrupted the sentence between
God and men, and that one rusticall judge and sheepeherde, appointed by the
counsel of the great Jupiter, sold his judgment for a little pleasure, which
was the cause afterward of the ruin of all his progeny: by like manner of
mean was sentence given between the noble Greeks: For the noble and valiant
personage Palamades was convicted and atteinted of treason, by false persuasion
and accusation, and Ulysses being but of base condition, was preferred in
Martial prowess above great Ajax, what judgment was there likewise emongst
the Atheman lawyers, sage and expert in all sciences, was not Socrates who was
preferred by the God Apollo above all the wisemen of the world, by envy and
malice of wicked persons, empoysoned with the herb Cicuta, as one that
corrupted the youth of the country, whom always he kept under by
correction: For we see now a days many excellent Philosophers greatly desire
to follow his sect, and by perpetual study to volue and reuolue his works,
but t^ the end I may not be reproved of indignation, by any one that might
say, what shall we suffer an Ass to play the Philosopher? I will return to my
former purpose. After the judgment of Paris was ended, Juno and Pallas
departed away angerly, showynge by their gesture that they would revenge them
selves on Paris, but Venus that was right pleased and glad in her heart,
daunsed about the Theater with much joy. This done from the top of the hill
through a privy spoute, ra^ne a floudde of the color of Saffran, which fell
upon the Goats, and changed their white hear into yellow, with a soote odor
to all the^ of the Theater. By and by after, by certain engines, the ground
opened and swalowed up the hill of woodde: and then behold there came a man of
arms through the middle of y^ multitude, demanding by the consent of the
people, the woman who was condemned to the beasts, and appointed for me to
have to do withal: our bed was finely and bravely prepared, and covered
with silk and other things necessary, but I beside the shame to commit this
horrible fact, and to pollute my body with this wicked harlot, did greatly fear
the danger of death: For I thought in my self, that when she and I were
together, the fauage beast appointed to devour the woman, was not so
instructed and taught, or would so temper his greedines, as y^ he would tear
her in pieces liyng under me, and spare me with a regard of mine innoce^cie.
Wherefore I was more careful for the saluegarde of my life, the^ for the shame
that I should abide, but in the mean season while my master made reddy the
bed, and all the residew did greatly delight to see the hunting and
pleasantnes of the triumph, I began to think and devise for my self, and
when I perceived that no man had regard to me, that was so tame and gentle an
Ass, I stole out of the gate that was next me, and then I ran away with all
my force, and came to Cenchris, which is the most famous town of all the
Carthaginiens, borderinge upon the seas called Ageum and Saronicum, where is a
great and mighty haven frequented with many a sundry nation. There because I
would avoid the multitude of people, I went to a secret place of the sea
cost, where I lay me down upon the sand to ease and refreshe my self, for
the day was paste and the Sun gone down, and I liyng in this sort on the
ground did fall in a sound sleep.

The eleventh Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How Apuleius by Roses and prayer, returned to his human shape.

Cap. 47.
WHen midnight came, that I had slept my first sleep, I awaked with sodein
fear, and saw the Moon shininge bright, as when she is at the full, and
seeming as though she leaped out of the Sea. Then I thought with my self that,
that was the most secret time, when the Goddess Ceres had most puisance and
force, considering that all human things be governed by her providence: And
not only all beasts private and tame, but also all wild and savage beasts
be under her protection: And consideringe that all bodies in the heavens, the
earth, and the seas be by her encresinge motions increased, and by her
diminishinge motions diminished: as weary of all my cruel fortune and
calamity, I found good hope and sovereign remedy, though it were very late,
to be delivered from all my misery, by invocation and prayer to the excellent
beauty of the Goddess: whom I saw shininge before mine eyes, wherefore
shaking of mine Assy and drowsy sleep I arose with a joyful face, and moved
by a great affection to purify my self, I plonged my head seven times into
the water of the sea, which number of senen is co^uenable and agreeable to holy
and divine things, as the worthy and sage philosopher Pythagoras has
declared. Then with a weeping contenau^ce, I made this orayson to the puissant
Goddess, saiynge: O blessed queen of heaven, The Asses prayer to the Moon.
whether thou be the Dame Ceres which art the original and motherly nource of
al fruictful things in the earth, who after the findinge of thy daughter
Proserpina, through the great joy which thou did presently conceive,
made the barrein and vnfruictful ground to be plowed and sown, and now thou
inhabitest in the land of Eleusie, or whether thou be the celestial Venus, who
in the beginning of the world did cople together all kind of things with
an engendered love, and by an eternal propagation of human kind, art now
woorshipped within the Temples of the ysle Paphos, thou which art the sister
of the god Phoebus, who nourishest so many people by the generation of beasts,
and art now adored at the sacred places of Ephesis, thou which art called
horrible Proserpina, by reason of the deadly houlinges which y^ yeldest, that
have power to stop and put away the inuasio^ of hegges and ghostes which
appear unto men, and to keep them down in y^ closures of the earth: thou
which art woorshipped in diverse manners, and do luminate all the borders of
the earth by thy feminine shape, thou which nourishest all the fruictes of
the world by thy vigor and force, with what so ever name or fashion it is
lawful to call upon thee, I pray thee to end my great travel and misery, and
deliver me from the wretched fortune which has so long time pursued me.
Grant peace and rest if it please thee to my adversities, for I have endured
to to much labor and peril. Remove from me the shape of mine Ass, and render
me to my pristine estate: and if I have offended in any point thy divine
Majesty let me rather die then live, for I am full weary of my life. When I had
ended this orayson, and discovered my plaintes to the Goddess, I fortuned to
fall sleep and by and by appeared to me a divine and venerable face,
woorshipped even of the Gods them selves: Then by little and little I seemed to
see the whole figure of her body, mountinge out of the sea and standinge
before me: wherefore I purpose to describe her divine semblau^ce, if y^ poverty
of my human speech will suffer me, or her divine power give me eloquence
thereto. First she had a great abondance of hear, disparsed and scattred about
her neck, on y^ crown of her head she bare many garla^des enterlaced with
flowers, in the middle of her forehead, was a compass in fashion of a glass,
or resembling y^ light of the moon, in one of her hands she bare serpents,
in the other blades of corn, her vestme^t was of fine silk yelding diverse
colors, sometime white, sometime yelow, sometime rosy, sometime flamy, and
sometime (which troubled my spirit sore) dark and obscure covered with a black
robe in manner of a shield, and pleatted in most subtle fashion, at the
skirtes of her garment, y^ weltes appeared comely, where as here and there y^
stars glimpsed, and in the middle of them was placed y^ Moon, which shone
like a flame of fire, round about y^ robe was a coron or garlande made with
flowers and fruictes: In her right hand she had a timbrel of brass which gave
a pleasant found, in her left hand she bare a cup of gold, out of the
mouth whereof the serpent Aspis lifted up his head, with a swellinge throat,
her odoriferous feet were covered with shoes enterlaced and wrought with
victorious palm. Thus the divine shape breathing out the pleasant spice of
fertile Arabia, dayned not with her divine voice to utter these words unto me:
Behold Lucius I am come, The words of the God desse, to the Ass.
thy weeping and prayers has moved me to succor thee, I am she that is the
natural mother of all things, mistress and gouernesse of all the Elements, the
initiall progeny of worlds, chief of the powers divine, Queen of heaven, the
principal of the Gods celestial, the light of the Goddesses, at my will the
Planettes of the air, the wholesome winds of the Seas, and the silences of Hell
be disposed, my name, my divinity, is adored thoroughout all the world, in
diverse manners, in variable customs, and in many names, for the Phrigiens call
me the mother of the Gods: The Atheniens, Minerue: the Cipriens, Venus: the
Candians, Diana: the Sicilians, Proserpina: the Eleusians, Ceres: some Juno,
other Bellona, other Hecate: and principally the Ethiopians which dwell in the
Orient, and the Egiptians which are excellent in all kind of ancient
doctrine, and by their propre ceremonies accustom to woorshippe me, do call
me Queen Isis: Behold I am come to take pity of thy fortune and tribulation,
behold I am present to favor and aid thee, leave of thy wepinge and
lamentation, put away al thy sorrow, for behold the healthful day which is
ordained by my providence, therefore be ready and attentife to my
commandment, the day which shall come after this night, is dedicate to my
service by an eternal Religion, my priests and ministers, do accustom after
the tempests of the Sea be ceased, to offer in my name a new ship, as a
first fruicte of their navigations, I command thee, not to profane or
despise the sacrifice in any wise, for the great Priest shall carry this day
following in procession by my exhortation a garlande of Roses next to the
timbrell of his right hand: Follow y^ my procession emongst the people, and
when thou come to the priest, make as though thou would kiss his hand,
but snatch at the roses, whereby I will put away the skin and shape of an Ass,
The only help of the Ass.
which kind of beast I have long time abhorred and despised, but above all
things beware thou doubt not nor fear of auy of those things as hard and
difficill to be brought to pass, for in this same hour y^ I am come to thee,
I have commanded the Priest by a vision what he shall do, and all the people
by my commandment shall be compelled to give thee place and say nothing,
moreover think not y^ emongst so fair and joyful ceremonies. and in so good a
company, that any person shall abhor thy ilfauored and deforme figure, or
that any man shall be so hardy, as to blame and reprove thy sudden restoration
to human shape, whereby they should gather or conceive any sinister opinion,
and know thou this of certainty that the residew of thy life until the hour of
death shall be bound and subject to me: And think it not an injury to be
always seruiseable toward me, since as by my mean and benefit thou shall
become a man: thou shall live blessed in this world, thou shalt live glorious
by my guide and protection, and when thou descendest to hell, where thou shall
see me in that subterre^ place, shininge (as thou see me now) in the darkness
of Acheron, and reigninge in the deep profu^ditte of Stix, thou shall woorship
me as one that has been favorable to thee, and if I perceive that thou art
obedient to my commandment, addict to my religion, and merit my divine
grace, know thou that I will prolonge thy days above the time that the fates
have appointed, and the celestial planetes ordained. When the divine image had
spoken these words, she vanished away: By and by, when I awaked I arose,
having the members of my body mixed with fear, joy, and sweat, and merueiled
at the clear presence of the puissaunt goddess, and being sprincled with the
water of the Sea, I recounted orderly her admonitions and divine
commandments. Sone after, the darkness chased away, and the clear and
golden Sun arose, when as behold, I saw the streates replenished with
people, going in a religious sort, and in great triumph. All things seemed
that day to be joyful, as well all manner of beasts, and the very houses, as
also the very day it self seemed to rejoice. For after the horefrost, ensued
the whote and temperat Sun, whereby the little birds wening that the spring
time had been come, did chirp and sing in their steven melodiously: The mother
of stars, the parent of times and mistres of all ye world: The fruitful
trees reioysed at their fertility: The barrein and sterrill were contented at
their shadow, rendering sweet and pleasant shrilles: The seas were quiet from
wyndes and tempests: The heaven had chased away the clouds, and appeared
fair and clear with his propre light. Behold, then more and more appeared
the pompes and processions, attired in regal manner, and singing joyfully: One
was girded about the middle like a man of arms: An other bare a spear, and
had a cloak and high shoes as a hunter: an other was attired in a roobe of
silk, and sockes of gold, having his hear laid out, and dressed in form of
a woman: There was an other which ware legharnes, and bare a target, a salette,
and a spear, like a martial soldier: After him marched one attired in
purple, with vergers before him like a Magistrate: After him follows one with
a mantell, a staff, a pair of pautofles, and with a graie bearde, signifiyng
a Philosopher: After him went one with lyme, betokening a fowler, An other with
hooks, declaringe a fisher. I saw there a meek and tame bear, which in
matron habit was carried on a stole: An Ape with a bonnet on his head, and
covered with lawne resemblinge a sheepeherde, and bearing a cup of gold in
his hand: An Ass which had wings glewed to his back, and went after an old
man, whereby you would judge, the one to be Pegasus, and the other Bellephoron.
Amongst these pleasures and populer delectations, which wandered hither and
thither. You might see the pampe of the Goddess triu^phantlie march forward:
The women attired in white vestmentes, and reioysinge in that they bare
garlandes and flowers upon their heads, bespred the ways with herbs, which
they bare in their aprons, where this regal and devout procession should
pass. Other carried glasses on their backs, to testify obeisaunce and honor
to the Goddess which came after. Other bare combs of Iuorie, and declared by
their gesture and motions of their arms, that they were ordained and reddy to
dress the Goddess. Other dropped in the ways as they went, baulme and other
precious oyntmentes: Then came a great number, as well of men as of women, with
candles, torches, and other lights, doing honor to y^ celestial goddess:
After tht sounded the musical armonie of instruments: Then came a fair
company of youth, apareled in white vestimentes, singinge both meter and verse,
with a co^ly grace which some studious Poet had made in honor of the Muses.
In the mean season, arrived ye blowers of tru^pettes, which were dedicate unto
Serapis, and to the temple before them, were officers and bedles, preparing
rome for the goddess to pass. Then came the great company of men and women,
which had taken divine orders, whose garments glistned all the streets over.
The weme^ had their hear anointed, and their heads covered with linne^: but
the men had their crowns shaven, which were the terren stars of the
goddess, holdinge in their hands instruments of brass, silver, and gold,
which rendered a pleasant sound. The principal priests, which were appareled with
white surplesses hanging down to yt ground, bare yt relickes of yt puisant
goddess. One carried in his hand a light, not unlike to those which we used in
our houses, saving yt in the middle thereof appeared a bole which rendered a
more bright flame. The second attired like the other, bare in his hands an
altar, which the goddess her self named the succor of nations. The third
held up a tree of palm, with leaves of gold, and the verge of Mercury. The
fourth showed out a token of equity by his left hand, which was deformed in
every place, signifiyng thereby more equity then by the right hand. The same
priest carried a round vessel of gold, in form of a cap. The fifte bare a
Van, wroughte with springes of gold, and an other carried a vessel for wine: By
and by after, the goddess followed a foot as men do, and specially Mercury,
the messenger of the Goddess infernal and supernall, with his face sometime
black, sometime fair, liftinge up the head of the dog Ambis, and bearing in
his left hand his verge, and in his right hand, the branch of a palm tree,
after whom followed a cow with an upright gate, representinge the figure of
the great Goddess, and he that guyded her, marched on with much gravity. And
other carried after the secrets of their religion, closed in a coffer. There
was one that bare on his stomach the figure of his God, not formed like any
beast, bird, savage thing, or human shape, but made by a new invention,
whereby was signified that such a religion should not be discovered, or reveled
to any person. There was a vessel wrought with a round bottom, having on the
one side pictures figured like unto the manner of the Egiptians, and on the
other side was an ear, whereupon stood the serpent Aspis, holdinge out his
skaly neck. Finally, came he which was appointed to my good fortune, according
to the promise of ye goddess. For the great priest which bare the
restoration of my human shape, by the commandment of the goddess,
approached more and more, bearing in his left hand the timbrell, and in the
other a garland of roses to give me, to the end I might be delivered from cruel
fortune, which was always mine enemy, after the sufferance of so much
calamity and poine, and after the endurance of so many perilles: Then I, not
runninge hastily, by reason of sudden joy, lest I should disturb the quiet
procession with mine importunity: But going softly through the press of
people, which gave me place on every side, went after the priest. The priest
being admonished the night before, as I might well perceive, stood still, and
holding out his hand, thrust out the garlande of roses into my mouth, which I
(tre^bling) devoured with a great affection: And as soon as I had eaten the^, I
was not deceived of the promise made unto me. For my deforme and Assy face
abated, and first the rugged hear of my body fell of, my thick skyn waxed soft
and tender, the hoofes of my feet changed into toes, my hands returned
again, my neck grew short, my head and mouth became round, my long ears
were made little, my great and stony teeth waxed less like the teeth of men,
and my tail which combred me most, appeared no where, the^ the people began
to meruell, and the religious honored the Goddess for so evident a miracle,
they wondered at the visions which they saw in the night, and the facility of
my reformation, whereby they rendered testimony of so great a benefit which I
received of the Goddess, when I saw my self in such estate, I stood still a
good space and said nothing, for I could not tell what to say, nor what word
I should first speak, nor what thanks I should render to the Goddess, but
the great priest understanding all my fortune and misery by divine
advertisement, commanded that one should give me garments to cover me:
Howbeit as soon as I was transformed from an Ass to my human shape, I hid
the priuities of my body with my hands as shame and necessity compelled me:
Then one of the company put of his upper robe, and put it on my back, which
done: the Priest loking upon me with a sweet and benign voice, ganne say in
this sort: O my freende Lucius, after the endurance of so many labors, and the
escape of so many tempests of fortune, thou art now at length come to the
port and haue^ of rest and mercy: Neither did thy noble lignage, thy
dignity, neither thy doctrine any thing prevail, but that thou have endured
so many seruill pleasures, by a little folly of thy youthfulness, whereby thou
have had a sinister reward of thy unprosperous curiosity, but howsoever the
blindenes of fortune tormented thee in diverse dangers: So it is that now
unawares to her, thou art come to this present felicity, let fortune go, and
fume with fury in an other place, let her find some other matter to execute
her cruelty, for fortune has no puisance against them which serve and honor
our Goddess, for what auailed the thieves? the beasts savage? thy great
servitude? the ill and dangerous ways? the long passages? the fear of death
every day? know thou that now thou art salve, and under the protection of her,
who by her clear light does lighten the other Gods: wherefore rejoice, and
take a conuenable countenance to thy white habit, follow the pomp of this
devout and honorable procession, to the end ye such which be not devout to the
Goddess, may see and acknowledge their error. Behold Lucius thou art
delivered from so great miseries, by the providence of the Goddess Isis,
rejoice therefore and triumph of the victory of fortune, to the end thou may
live more salve and sure, make thy self one of this holy order, dedicate thy
mind to the obsequie of our religion, and take upon thee a voluntary yoke of
ministry: And when thou beginnest to serve and honor the Goddess, then shall
thou feel the fruicte of thy liberty: After that the great Priest had
prophesied in this manner, with often brethinges, he made a conclusion of his
words: Then I went emo^gst the company of the rest and followed the
procession: Every one of the people knew me, and pointinge at me with their
fingers, said in this sort: behold him who is this day transformed into a
man by the puissance of the sovereign Goddess, verily he is blessed and most
blessed that has merited so great grace from heaven, as by the innocency of
his former life, and as it were by a new regeneration is reserved to the
obsequie of the Goddess. In the mean season by little and little we approached
nighe unto the sea coaste, even to that place where I lay the night before
being an Ass. There, after the images and relics were orderly disposed, the
great Priest compassed about with diverse pictures according to the fashion of
the Egiptians, did dedicate and consecrate with certain prayers a fair ship
made very cunningly, and purified the same with a torch, an egg, and sulphur,
the sail was of white linen cloth, whereon was written certain letters, which
testified the navigations to be prosperous, the maste was of a great length made
of a pine tree, round, and very excellent with a shining top, ye cabin was
covered over with couerings of gold, and all the ship was made of Citron
tree very fair, then all the people as well religious as profane took a great
number of Vannes replenished with odors and pleasant smelles, and threw them
into the sea mingled with milk, until the ship was filled up with large
gifts and prosperous devotions, when as with a pleasant wind it launched out
into the deep: but when they had lost the sight of the ship, every man
carried again that which he brought, and went toward the Temple in like pomp
and order as they came to the sea side. When we were come to the Temple, the
great Priest and those which were deputed to carry the divine figures, but
specially those which had long time been worshippers of the Religion, went
into the secret chamber of the Goddess, where they put and placed the Images
according to their order. This done one of the company which was a Scribe or
interpretour of letters, who in form of a preacher, stood up in a chair
before the place of the holy college, and began to read out of a book, and to
enterpret to the great Prince, the Senate, and to all the noble order of
Cheualry, and generally to all the Roman people, and to all such as be under
the puissance and jurisdiction of Rome, these words following, Populis missio.
(...), which signified y^ end of their divine service, and that it was lawful
for every man to depart, whereat all the people gave a great shoute, and
replenished with much joy, bare all kind of herbs and garlandes of flowers
home to their houses, kissing and embrasing the steps where the Goddess
passed: howbeit I could not do as the rest, for my mind would not suffer me to
depart one foot away, so earnest and attentife was I to behold the beauty
of the Goddess, with remembrance likewise of my great travel and misery,
which I had endured.

How the Parents and friends of Apuleius, hard news that he was alive and
in health.

Cap. 48.
IN the mean season news was carried into my country (as swifte as the
flight of birds, or as the blaste of winds) of the grace and benefit which
I received of the goddess, and of my fortune worthy to be had in memory. Then
my parents, friends, and servants of our house, understanding that I was
not dead as they were falsely informed, came toward me with great diligence
to see me, as a man raised from death to life: And I likewise which did never
think to see them again, was as joyful as they, acceptinge and taking in
good part, their honest gifts and oblations which they gave, to the intent I
might bie such things as was necessary for my body: After that I had made
relation unto them of all my pristine misery, and present joys, I went again
before the face of the Goddess, and hired me a house within the cloisture of
the temple, to the end I might continually be ready to the service of the
Goddess, and ordinarily frequent the company of the priests, whereby I would
wholly become devout to the Goddess, and an inseparable woorshipper of her
divine name: It fortuned that the Goddess appeared to me oftentimes in the
night, perswadinge and commaundinge me to take the order of her religion, but I
although I was endewed with a desirous good will, yet the reverend fear of the
same withhelde me, consideringe that her obeysaunce was hard and difficill,
the chastetie of the Priests intolerable, and the life frail and subject to
many inco^ueniences, being thus in doubt I refrained my self from all those
things, as seeming impossible: On a night the great Priest appeared unto me
presenting his lap full of treasure, and when I demanded what it signified,
he answered that it was sent me from the country of Thessaly, and that a
servant of mine named Candidus was arrived like wise: when I was awaked, I
mused in my self what this visto^ should porte^de, considering I never had any
servant called by that name: but whatsoever it did signify, this I verily
thought that it was a fore show of gain and prosperous chance: while I was
thus astonished I went to the Temple, and tarried there till the openinge of the
gates, then I went in, and began to pray before the face of the Goddess, the
Priest prepared and set the divine things on every Aultour, and pulled out of
the fountain the holy vessel with solemn supplication. Then they began to
singe the mattens of the morning, testifiyng thereby the hour of the pryme. By
and by behold arrived my servants which I had left in the country, when
Fotis by error made me an Ass, bringyng with the^ my horse, recovered by her
through certain signs and tokens which he had upon his back. Then I
perceived the enterpretatio^ of my dream, by reason that beside the promise
of gain, my white horse was restored to me, which was signified by the
argument of my servant Candidus. This done I retired to the service of the
Goddess in hope of greater benefits, considering I had received a sign and
token, whereby my courage increased every day more and more to take upon me the
orders and Sacraments of the Temple: In so much that I oftentimes co^muned
with the Priest, desiringe him greatly to give me the first degree of the
Religion, but he which was a man of gravity, and well renoumed in y^ order of
priesthood, differd my affection from day to day with comfort of better hope,
as parents commonly bridle the desires of their children, when they attempt or
endeavor any unprofitable thing, saying: yt the day, when any one should be
admitted into their order, is appointed by the Goddess, the Priest which
should minister the sacrifice, is chosen by her providence, and the necessary
charges of the ceremouies, is allotted by her commandment, all which things
he willed me to atte^de with marvelous patience, and that I should beware
either of to much hastines or to great slacknes, consideringe that there was
like danger, if being called I should delay, or not called I should be
hasty: moreover he said, that there was none of his company either of so
desperate a mind, or so rash and hardy as to enterprise any thing without
the commandment of the Goddess, whereby he should commit a deadly offense,
considering that it was in her power to dampne and save all persons, and if any
were at the point of death and in the way to damnation, so that he were capable
to receive the secrets of the Goddess, it was in her power by divine
providence to reduce him to the pathe of health, as by a certain kind of
regeneration: Finaly he said that I must attend the celestial precept,
although it was evident and plain that the Goddess had already vouchsaued to
call and appointe me to her ministry, and to will me to refrain from profane
and unlawful meats, as those priests which were already received, to ye end I
might come more apt and clean to the knowledge of ye secrets of the
religion. Then I was obedient unto these words, and attentife with meek
quietness, and probable taciturnitie, I daily served at the temple: in the end
the holesom gentleness of y^ goddess did nothing deceive me, for in a night
she appeared to me in a vision, declaryng y^ the day was come which I had
wished for so long, she told me what provision and charges I should be at, and
how that she had appointed her principal priest Mithra to be a minister with me
in my sacrifices. When I had hard these divine commandments I greatly
reioysed, and arose before day to speak with the great priest, whom I fortuned
to epsy cominge out of his chamber: Then I saluted him, and thought with my
self to ask and demand his counsel with a bold courage, but as soon as he
perceived me, he began first to say: O Lucius now know I well yt thou are
most happy and blessed, whom the divine goddess does so greatly accept with
mercy, why do y^ delay: Behold the day which thou did desire, when as
thou shall receive at my hands y^ order of religion, and know y^ most pure
secrets of the goddess, whereupon the old man took me by the hand, and led
me to the gate of the great temple, where at his first entry he made a
sole^pne celebratio^, and after yt the morning sacrifice was ended, he brought
out of the secret place of the temple certain books, partly written with
unknown charecters, and partly peincted with figures of beasts, declarings
briefly every sentence, with tops and tails turned round in fashion of a
wheel, which were wholly strange and impossible to be read of the profane
people: There he enterpreted to me such things as were necessary to the use
and preparation of mine order. This done, I gave in charge to certain of my
compaignions to bie liberaly what so ever was needful and convenient, then he
brought me to the next baynes, acco^paned with all the religious sort, and
demaundinge perdon of the Gods, washed me and purified my body according to
ye custom: After this when noone approached he brought me back again to the
Temple, and presented me before the face of the Goddess, giuinge a charge of
certain secret things unlawful to be uttered, and commanding me, and
generally all the rest, to fast by the space of ten continual days, without
eating of any beast, or drinking of any wine, which things I observed with a
marvelous continency. Then behold the day approached, when as the sacrifice
should be done, and when night came there arrived on every coast a great
multitude of Priests, who according to their order offered me many presents
and gifts, then was all the Laity and profane people commanded to depart,
and when they had put on my back a linne^ robe, they brought me to the most
secret and sacred place of the Temple. You would peraue^ture demand, you
studious reader, what was said and done there, verily I would tell you if it
were lawful for me to tell, you should know if it were convenient for you to
here, but both thy ears and my tongue shall incur the like pain of rash
curiosity: Howbeit I will content thy mind for this present time, which
peradventure is somewhat religious and given to some devotion, listen therefore
and believe it to be true: thou shall understand that I approached nere unto
Hell, eue^ to the gates of Proserpina, and after that I was ravished throughout
all the Elements, I returned to my proper place: About midnight I saw the
son shine, I saw likewise the Gods celestial, and Gods infernal, before
whom I presented my self and woorshipped them: behold now have I told thee,
which although thou have hard, yet it is necessary that you conceal it, for
this have I declared without offense, for the understanding of the profane.
When morninge came and that the solempnities were finished, I came forth
sanctified with twelve ^toles and in a religious habit, whereof I am not
forbidden to speak, consideringe that many persons saw me at that time: there
I was commanded to stand upon a seat of woodde which stood in the middle
of the temple, before the figure and remembrance of the Goddess, my vestment
was of fine linen, covered and embrodered with flowers, I had a precious cope
upon my shoulders hanginge down to the ground, whereon were beasts wrought
of diverse colors, as Indian Dragons, and Hyperborian Gryphones, whom in form
of brides the other world does engender, the Priests commonly call such a
habit, a celestial Stole: in my right hand I carried a light torche, and a
garlande of flowers upon my head, with Palm leaves stroutinge out on every
side: I was adorned like unto the Sun, and made in fashion of an Image, in
such sort that all the people compassed about to behold me: Then they
began to solemnise the feast of my nativity, and the new procession with
sumptuous bankets and delicate meats: the third day was likewise celebrate
with like ceremonies, with a religious dinner, and with all the consummation of
the order, when I had continued there a good space I conceived a marvelous
pleasure and consolation in beholding ordinarily the Image of the goddess, who
at length admonished me to depart homewarde, not without rendringe of thanks,
which although were not sufficient, yet they were according to my power: How
be it I could uneath be persuaded to depart, before I had fallen prostrate
before the face of y^ Goddess, and wiped her steps with my face, whereby I
began so greatly to weep and sighe, that my words were interrupted, and as
devouring my prayer I began to say in this sort: O holy and blessed Dame, the
perpetual comfort of human kind, who by thy bounty and grace nourishest
all the world, and bear a great affection to the adversities of the
miserable as a loving mother, thou take no rest, neither art thou idle at
any time in giuinge thy benefits, and succoringe all men as well on land as
sea, thou art she that put away all storms and dangers from man's life by
thy right hand, whereby likewise thou restraynest the fatal dispositions,
appeasest the great tempests of fortunes, and keep back the course of the
stars, the Gods supernall does honor thee: the Gods infernal has thee in
reverence: thou enuironest all the world, thou give light to the Sun, thou
gouernest the world, thou treadest down the power of Hell: By thy mean the
times return, the Planets rejoice, the Elements serve: at thy commandment
the winds do blow, the clouds increase, the seeds prosper, and the
fruictes prevail, the birds of the air, the beasts of the hill, the
Serpents of the den, and the fishes of the sea, do tremble at thy majesty,
but my spirit is not able to give thee sufficient praise, my patrimony is
unable to satisfy thy sacrifice, my voice has no power to utter that which I
think, no if I had a thousand mouths and so many tongues: How be it as a
good religious person, and according to my estate, I will always keep thee
in remembrance, and close thee within my breast. When I had ended mine orayson,
I went to embrase the great Priest Mithra my spiritual Father and to
demand his pardon, considering I was unable to recompense the good which he
had done me: After great greetinges and thanks I departed from him to visitte
my parents and friends. And within a while after by the exhortation of the
Goddess, I made up my packquette and took shippyng toward ye City of Rome,
where, with a prosperous wind I arrived about the twelfe day of December. And
the greatest desire which I had there was daily to make my prayers to y^
sovereign Goddess Isis, who by reason of the place where her temple was
builded, was called Ca^pensis, and continually adored of the people of Rome:
Her minister and woorshipper was I howbeit I was a stranger to her Church, and
unknown to her religion there: When the year was ended, and that the Goddess
warned me again to receive this new order and consecration, I merueled greatly
what it should signify, and what should happen, considering that I was a
sacred person already. But it fortuned yt while I partly reasoned with my
self, and partly examined ye thing with the Priests and Bishops, there came
a new and marvelous thought to my mind, that is to say: I was only religious
to ye goddess Isis, but not sacred to the religion of great Osiris the
sovereign Father of all the Gods, between whom, although there was a
religious unity and concord, yet there was a great difference of order and
ceremony. And because it was necessary that I should likewise be a minister
unto Osiris, there was no long delay: For in the night after appeared unto me
one of that order, covered with linen robes, holding in his hands spears
wrapped in yu^e, and other things not convenient to declare, which he left in
my chamber, and sittinge in my seat, (...) to me such things as were
necessary for the sumptuons bankette of mine entry. And to the end I might
know him again, he showed me how the ankle of his left foot was somewhat
maimed, which caused him a little to halte. After that I did manifestly know
the will of the God Osiris, when Mattins was ended, I went from one to an
other to find him out which had the haltinge mark of his foot, according
as I learned by my vision, at length I found it true: for I perceived one of
the company of the Priests who had not only the token of his foot, but the
stature and habit of his body, resemblyng in every point as he appeared in the
night, he was called Asinius Marcellus, Asinius by taking away the letter i. is
made Asinus.
a name not much disagreynge from my transformation, by and by I we^nte to
him, which knew well enough all the matter, as being monished by like precept
in the night: for the night before as he dressed the flowers and garlandes
about the head of yt God Osiris, he understood by the mouth of his Image,
which told the predestinations of all men, how he had sent a poor man of
Madaura, to whom he should minister his sacraments, to the end y^ he should
receive a reward by divine providence, and the other glory, for his virtuous
studies, when I saw my self thus deputed unto religion, my desire was stopped
by reason of poverty, for I had spente a great part of my goods in travel
and peregrination, but most of all in the city of Rome, whereby my low estate
withdrewe me a great while: In the end, being oftentimes stirred forward, not
without great trouble of mind, I was co^streined to sell my roabe for a little
money: howbeit, sufficient for all my affairs. Then the Priest spoke unto me,
saying: How is it that for a little pleasure thou art not aferde to sell thy
vestimentes, and entering into so great ceremonies, do fear to fall into
poverty* prepare thy self, and abstain from all animal meats, as beasts
and fish. In the mean season I did frequent the sacrifices of Serapis, which
were done in y^ night, which thing gave me great comfort to my peregrination,
and ministered unto me more plentiful living, considering I gained some money
in hau^ting to the court, by reason of my lattin tongue. Immediately after, I
was eftsoon called and admonished by the god Osiris, to receive a third order
of Religion. Then I was greatly astonished, because I could not tell what this
new vision signified, or what the intent of the Celestial Gods was,
doubting least the former Priests had given me ill council, and fearinge that
they had not faithfully enstructed me, being in this manner as it were
incensed. The God Osiris, appeared to me the night! following, and giving me
admonition, saiynge: There is no occasion why thou should be aferd with so
often order of Religion, as though there were somewhat omitted, but that thou
should rather rejoice, since as it has pleased ye Gods to call thee three
times, when as there was never yet any person that achieved to the order but
once: Wherefore thou may think thy self most happy for so great benefits.
And know thou that the Religion which thou must now receive, is right
necessary, if thou mean to persevere in the woorshipping of the Goddess and to
make solempnitie on the festiual day with thy blessed habit, which thing
shall be a glory and renoume to thee. After this sort the divine majesty
persuaded me in my sleep, whereupon by and by I went toward the Priest, and
declared all that which I had seen, then I fasted the space of ten days
according to the custom, and of mine own proper will I abstained longer then I
was commanded: And verily I did nothing repent of the pain which I had
taken, and of the charges which I was at, considering that the divine
providence had given me such an order that I gained much money in pleadinge of
causes: Finally after a few days the great God Osiris appeared to me in the
night, not desguised in any other form but in his own essence, co^maundinge
me that I should be an Advocate in the court, and not fear the sclaunder and
envy of ill persons, which bare me stomach and grudge by reason of my
doctrine, which I had gotten by much labor: moreover he would not that I
should be any longer of the number of his Priests, but he allotted me to be
one of the Decurious and Senators: and after he appointed me a place within
the ancient Pallaice, which was erected in the time of Silla, whereas I
executed mine office in great joy with a shaven crown.

FINIS.
The Table of the first Book of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Ass.
How Apuleius ridinge into Thessalie, fortuned to fall into company with
two strangers, that reasoned together of the mighty power of Witches. Cap.
1. fol. 1. How Apulcius told to the two strangers, what he savv a Iuglar
do in Athe^s. Cap. 2. fol. 1. How Socrates in his return from Macedonie to
Larissa, was spoiled and robbed, and how he fell acquainted with one Meroe,
a VVitch. Cap. 3. fol. 3. How Meroe the VVitche turned diverse persons into
miserable Beasts. Cap. 4. How Socrates and Aristomenus slept together in one
chamber, and how they were handled by Witches. Cap. 5. fol. 5. How
Apuleius came to a City called Hipate, and was lodged in one Malos house, and
brought him letters from Demea of Corinth. Cap. 6. fol. 9. How Apuleius
goeinge to bie Fish met with his compaignion Pithias. Cap. 7. fol. 10.
The second Book.
How Apuleius fortuned to meet with his cofin Byrrhena. Cap. 8. fol. 12.
How Apuleius fell into love with Fotis. Cap. 9. fol. 14. How Birrhena sent
victualles unto Apuleius, and how he talked with Milo of Diophanes, and how
he lay with Fotis. Cap. 10. fol. 16. How Apuleius supped with Birrhena, and
what a strange tale Bellephoron told at the table. Cap. 11. fol. 18.
The third Book.
How Apuleius was taken and put in prison for Murder. Cap. 12. fol. 24.
How Apuleius was accused by an old man, and how he ansvveared for him
self. Cap. 13. fol. 24. How Apuleius was accused by two women, and how
the slain bodies were found blovven bladders. Cap. 14. fol. 26. How Fotis
told to Apuleius, what VVitchecrafte her Mistress did use. Cap. 15. fol. 28.
How Fotis brought Apuleius to see her Mistress Enchaunt. Cap. 16. fol. 31.
How Apuleius thinkinge to be turned into a Bird, was turned in to an Ass,
and how he was led away by Thieves. Cap. 17. fol. 32.
The fourth Book.
How Apuleius thinking to go to eat Roses, was cruelly beaten by a Gardener
and chased by Dogs. ca. 18. fol. 34. How Apuleius was prevented of his
purpose, and how the Thieves came to their den. Cap. 19. fol. 35. How
Thrasileon was disguised in a Bears skin, and how he was handled. Cap.
20. fol. 39. How the Thieves stole away a Gentelvvoman, and brought her to
their den. Cap. 21. fol. 41. The most pleasant and delectable tale of the
Marriage of Cupide and Psyches. Cap. 22. fol. 45. How Apuleius carried away
the Gentlevvoman, and how they were taken again by the Thieves, and what a
kind of death was invented for the^. Cap. 23. fol. 63.
The seventh Book.
How he that was left behind at Hippata to bring nevves concerning the
robbery of Milos house, came home and declared to his compaignio^s that all the
fault was laid to one Apuleius charge. Cap. 24. fol. 66. How the death of the
Ass, and the Gentelvvoman was staide. Cap. 25. fol. 69. How all the Thieves
wear brought in a sleep by their nevve companion. Cap. 26. fol. 70. How the
Ge^tlevvoma^ was carried home by her husband while the Thieves were a
sleep, and how much Apuleius was made of. Cap. 27. fol. 71. How Apuleius
was made a common Ass to fetch home vvoodde, and how he was handled by a
boy. Cap. 28. fol. 72. How Apuleius was accused of lechery by the Boy.
Cap. 29. fol. 74. How the Boy that led Apuleius to the fields, was
slain in the vvoodde. Cap. 30. fol. 75. How Apuleius was cruelly beaten by
the mother of the boy that was slain. Cap. 31. fol. 76.
The eight Book.
How a young man came and declared the miserable death of Lepolemus, and his
wife Charites. Cap. 32. fol. 77. How Apuleius was led away by the
horsekeper, and what dangers he was in. Cap. 33. fol. 81. How the
Shepeherdes determined to abide in a certain vvoodde to cure their wounds.
Cap. 34. fol. 83. How a woman killed her self, and her child, because her
husband haunted harlottes. Cap. 35. fol. 84. How Apuleius was cheapened by
diverse persons, and how they looked in his mouth to know his age. Cap. 36.
fol. 84.
The ninth Book.
How Apuleius saved him self from the Cook by breakinge his halter, and of
other things that happened. Cap. 37. fol. 87. Of the deceipte of a woman,
which made her husband Coockolde. Cap. 38. fol. 89. How the Priests of the
goddess Syria, were taken and put in prison, and how Apuleius was sold to
a Baker. Cap. 39. fol. 90. How Apuleius was handled by the Bakers wife,
which was a harlotte. Cap. 40. fol. 92. How Barbasus being ielous over his
wife, commanded that she should be kept close in his house, and what
happened. Cap. 41. fol. 93. How Apuleius after the Baker was hanged, was
sold to a Gardener, and what dreadful things happened. Ca. 42. fol. 97. How
Apuleius was found die his shadovv. Cap. 43. fol. 100.
The tenth Book.
How the Soldier drove Apuleius away, and how he came to a Capitains
house: and what happened there. Cap. 44. fol. 102. How Apuleius was sold to
two brethern, whereof one was a Baker, and the other a Cook, and how
finely and deintily he fared. Cap. 45. fol. 106. How a certain Matron fell in
love with Apuleius, and how he had his pleasure with her, and what other
things happened. Cap. 46. fol. 109.
The eleventh Book.
How Apuleius by Roses and prayer, returned to his human shape. Cap. 47.
fol. 115. How the Parents and friends of Apuleius, hard nevves that he was
alive and in health. Cap. 48. fol. 121.
FINIS.

