MATILDA.

The fair and chaste Daughter of the Lord Robert Fitzwater.

THE TRVE GLORY OF THE NOBLE HOUSE OF SUSSEX.

Phoebus erit nostri princeps, et carminis author.

AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts, for N. L. and John Busby. 1594.

To the noble and virtuous Gentlewoman, worthy of all honor, Mistres Lucie
Harrington, Daughter to the Honorable Gentleman, Sir JOHN HARRINGTON, Knight.
YOUR rarest virtues, (honorable Mistres LVCIE,) have made me, amongst many
other competent Judges of your worth, both to love and admire you: but the
exceeding kind affection (which I know) the House of POWLES-WORTH do bear
you, (a Family whereunto I must confess, I am both in love and duty more
deuote then to any other) has moved me, for a more particular proof of that
honor which both they and I are willing to do you, to dedicate my Poem to
your protection.

Vouchsafe therefore noble Mistres LVCIE, your self being in full measure,
adorned with the like excellent gifts, both of body and mind: graciously to
patronize MATILDA. A mirror of so rare chastity, as neither the fair
speeches, nor rich rewards of a King, nor death in self, could ever remove
from her own chaste thoughts: or from that due regard which she had of her
neuer-stained honor. Your gracious and courteous acceptance of these my labors,
may encourage me hereafter, to publish some work of greater worth, under
your Name and protection, to whom I wish all happiness.

Yours in all humble service, Michaell Drayton.

To the Honorable Gentlemen of England, true favorers of Poesy.
LEarned and honorable Gentlemen, whose kind and favorable acceptance of my
late discourse of the life and death of Peirs Gaueston, has emboldened me, to
publish this tragical History of my Matilda, which otherwise, the fond
censures of the sottish and absurd ignorant had altogether discouraged me: (of
those detractors I mean,) who without judgment of reading, have rashly and
injuriously wronged the most rare and excellent men who have written in this
age wherein we live. They themselves, either wanting the use of those tongues,
which as the keys of knowledge unlock the treasury of most rarest invention,
or else their dull eyes, so ouer-clowded with mistie ignorance, as never able to
look into celestial secrets of divine Poesy, thereby to discern the right
and true method of a perfect and exquisite Poem.

And yet, such is the folly and shameless impudency of some, (as we see
every day,) which in their wanton and adultrate conceits, bring forth such ugly
Monsters, as a modest and sober eye, can hardly abide to view their
deformities. Then it is no marvel though the divine Muses, take so small
delight in our Clime, finding their sweet and pleasant fields, which should be
holy and sacred, defiled, and polluted, with such loathsome ordure. And although
there be many, furnished with sundry sorts of good learning, yet wanting that
divine touch and heavenly instinct which gives life to invention, do basely
disgrace that, wherein their own experience tells them, they be altogether
ignorant. But only to you, excellently qualified, and rare accomplished
Gentlemen, the true heirs of the Muses, I consecrate my labors, whose wise
and discreet censures, have heretofore made known to me, the true perfection
of your own honorable dispositions: and only to you Matilda commits her
short discourse.

Michaell Drayton.

The vision of Matilda.
ME thought I saw upon Matildas Tomb,
Her woeful ghost, which Fame did now awake,
And craved her passage from Earths hollow womb,
To view this Legend, written for her sake;
No sooner she her sacred Name had seen,
Whom her kind friend had chose to grace her story,
But wiping her chaste tears from her sad eyes,
She seemed to triumph, in her double glory.
Glory she might, that his admired Muse,
Had with such method framed her just complaint:
But proud she was, that reason made him choose,
To patronize the same to such a Saint:
In whom her rarest virtues might be shown,
Though Poets skill should fail to make them known.
H. G. Esquire.

THY learned Poem (Friend) I will not praise,
Nor will commend Matildas chastity,
She by thy Muse, her fame from grave does raise,
And hie conceit, thy lines does dignifie.
But that in this, the honor thou do give,
To that sweet Maid in whose unspotted mind,
Matildas rarest virtues yet do live,
As two so like the world can hardly find.
Fair Lucie with Matilda but compare,
In all regards of perfect modesty,
And see how like in every good they are,
And then thy choice with judgment ratify.
And I who know the worth of thy fit choice,
Approve it good, both with my pen and voice.
Anonimos.

Tears in your eyes, and passions in your hearts,
With mournful grace vouchsafe Matildas story:
The subject sad, a King to act the parts
Of his own shame, to others endless glory.
But such is sin, where lawless lust is reigning,
Sweet to the taste, till all turns to infection,
When count is cast, a reckoning is remaining,
Which must be paid, but not at our election.
Perrill and Grief, the interest of Pleasure,
Spending the stock that Danger long was gayning,
Makes soul and body banckrupt of that treasure,
Which vainly spent, what helps our fond complaining?
O that my lines could so the Author grace,
As well his virtues merit praise and place.
R. L. Esquire.

To M. Drayton.
I Like thy work, and do allow thy wit,
And praise thy choice in patronizing it:
Yet more, that thou the honor do impart,
To Lucies praise, a Maid of such desert.
Who for her rarest virtues does exceed,
Nor never age a better wit did breed.
A blessed Impe, sprung from a noble race,
Admired for gyfts, and beautified with grace;
A Phoenix deck, yet not with plumes of gold,
But with true Iemmes of heavens eternal mould.
Then happy man in thy Matildas fame,
Happy Matilda in rare Lucies name,
Devise of wit, by Graces only graced,
Adorned skill, in virtue highly placed,
Yet subject, wit, and skill be all to few,
In chaste Matilda, sor rare Lucies due.
VV. G. Esquire.

MATILDA.
IF to this time some sacred Muse retain,
Those choice regards by perfect virtue taught,
And in her chaste and virgine-humble vain,
Does kindly cherrish one pure Maiden thought,
In whom my death has but true pity wrought,
By her I crave my life may be reueald,
Which black oblivion has too long conceald.
Or on the earth if mercy may be found,
Or if remorce may touch the hearts of men,
Or eyes may lend me tears to wash my wound,
Or passion be expressed by mortal pen,
Yet may I hope of some compassion then:
Three hundredth years by all men over past,
Now sinding one to pity me at last.
You blessed Impes of heavenly chastity,
You sacred Vestalls, Angels only glory,
Right presidents of imortalitie,
Only to you I consecrate my story.
It shall suffice for me if you be sorry.
If you alone shall deigne to grace his verse,
Which serves for odours to perfume my hearse.
Let your delicious heauen-distilling tears,
Soften the earth to send me from her womb,
With Conquerors Laurel crown my golden hairs,
With flowery garlands beautify my tomb,
Be you the Heralds to proclaim me room,
With sable Cypress mask your lovely eyes,
Mourning my death with doleful Elegies.
Fair Rosamond, of all so highly graced,
Recorded in the lasting Book of Fame,
And in our Sainted Legendarie placed,
By him who strives to stellifie her name,
Yet will some Matrons say she was to blame.
Though all the world bewitched with his ryme,
Yet all his skill cannot excuse her crime.
Lucrece, of whom proud Rome has boasted long,
Lately revived to live another age,
And here ariu'd to tell of Tarquins wrong,
Her chaste denial, and the Tyrants rage,
Acting her passions on our stately stage.
She is remembered, all forgetting me,
Yet I as fair and chaste, as ere was she.
Shores wife is in her wanton humor soothed,
And modern Poets, still applaud her praise,
Our famous Elstreds wrinckled brows are smoothed,
Called from her grave to see these latter days,
And happy's he, their glory highest can raise.
Thus looser wantons, still are praisd of many,
Vice often finds friends, but virtue seldom any.
O fair Charites, Jove's most dear delight,
O lend me now one heauen-inchanting lay,
And you rare Nymphs which please Apollos sight,
Bring spreading Palm and neuer-dying Bay,
With Olive branches strew the pleasant way:
And with your Viols sound one pleasing strain,
To aid his Muse, and raise his humble vain.
And thou o Beta, Sovereign of his thought,
Englands Diana, let him think on thee,
By thy perfections let his Muse be taught,
And in his breast so deep imprinted be,
That he may write of sacred Chastity:
Though not like Collin in thy Britomart,
Yet loves as much, although he wants his art.
O my dread Sovereign, rare and princely Maid,
From whose pure eyes the world deriues her light,
In Angels robes with majesty arayd,
In whom true virtue is defined aright:
O let these lines be gracious in thy sight,
In whom alone, as in a perfect glass,
All may discern how chaste Matilda was.
To brag of birth, or noblesse, were but vain,
Although I might compare me with the best:
To challenge that our Auncesters did gain,
A royal mind such folly does detest,
Which I omit and here set down myrest:
Of virtuous life I mean to boast alone,
Our birth is theirs, our virtues are our own.
A shame to fetch our long descent from Kings,
And from great Jove derive our pedigree,
The brave atchiuements of a hundred things,
Breathing vain boastes the world to terrify,
If we our selves do blot with infamy,
And stain that blood and honor which is theirs:
Men cannot leave their virtues to their heirs.
The Heaven became a Midwife at my birth,
A kind Lucina, gently helping Nature:
Some sacred power then present on the earth,
Foretelling rare perfection in a creature,
As all men judged by so divine a feature:
Yet as my beauty seemed to ravish all,
Virtue made beauty more angelical.
Upon my brow, sat Honor in her pride,
Tables containing heavens diuinest law,
Whose snowie margent quoted on each side,
With such delights as all men's hearts could draw,
My thoughts (as Tutors) kept mine eyes in awe,
From their rare Sunbeams darting forth such rays,
As well the work might show the Arts-mans praise.
These Cherubins, the Tree of life do keep,
These Dragons, watch the fair Hesperian fruit,
These fiery Serpents, guard the golden sheep,
These fixed stars, their rays like lightning shute,
At whose approach the wise were stricken mute.
These eyes, which only could true virtues measure,
Ordained by Nature to preserve her treasure.
My words were graceful, pleasing to the wise,
My speech retayning modest decency,
Not fondly vain, nor foolishlie precize,
But sweetly tuned, with such a simphony,
Moving all hearers with the harmony.
Gracing my tale with such an Emphasis,
As never Music could delight like this.
My face the sun, adorning beauties sky,
The Book where heaven her wonders did enrole,
A stately Pharus to each wandering eye,
And like a Siren could enchaunt the soul,
Which had the power the proudest to control.
To whom this gift my Maker had assigned,
That there, all eyes like southsayers diuined.
Natures fair Ensign, royally displayed,
Map of Elisium, Eden without night,
Ermins wherein rich Phoebus is arai'd,
Right prospectiue, reflecting heavenly light,
Hart-wounding arrow, pearcing with the sight.
Bright mornings luster, Jove's high exaltation,
Load-starre of love, rare Card of admiration.
True type of honor, fine dilicious varry,
The richest coat that ever beauty bare,
Pure colors, which the heavens do only carry,
O uncouth blazon, so exceeding rare,
O curious lymming, passing all compare,
First at my birth assigned unto me,
By that great King of heavenly Heraldrie.
From hence my praise began to prove her wing,
Which to the heaven could carry up my fame,
Of all my glory now began the spring,
Through every Coast this still enlarged my name,
From hence the cause of all my sorrows came:
Thus to this Hydra are we subject still,
Who dares to speak, not caring good or ill.
This jealous Monster has a thousand eyes,
Her ayrie body has as many wings:
Now on the earth, then up to heaven she flies,
And here and there with every wind she flings,
From every Coast her rumors forth she brings;
Nothing so secret but to her appears,
And apt to credit every thing she hears.
Foul blabbing tel-tale, secrets soon bewrayer,
Thou ayre-bred Echo, whisperer of lies:
Shril-sounding trumpet, trueths unkind betrayer,
False larum bell, awaking dead-mens eyes,
Uncertain rumor, wandering in the skies:
Fond prattling Parrat, telling all thou hear,
Often furthest of when as thou should ^ be nearest.
The Princes ears are open to report,
There Is skill in blazing beauty to a King;
To censure, is the subject of the Court,
From thence Fame carries, thither Fame does bring,
There, to each word a thousand ecchos ring:
A Lottery, where most loose, but few do win,
Few love Religion, many follow sin.
Lo, here at first my beauty played her prize,
Here where my virtues seldom prized be,
Yet that which most seemed wondered of the wise,
Confined by virtue, cleerelie made me see,
What dangers were attending still on me:
Which most desired, for why esteemed most rare,
Gaurded I kept with most especial care.
This, whole possessed the thoughts of princely John,
This, on his hart-strings Angels music made,
This, was the subject which he wrought upon,
That deep impression which could never fade,
Reason which might sufficiently persuade:
Hence sprung that grief, which never gave him rest,
This was the spirit wher-with he was possessed.
This, had commission to cammaund his Crown,
In all his course, conducted by this star,
This, with a smile could clear each cloudie frown,
This, conquered him, which conquered all in war,
This, calmed his thoughts in every bloody jar,
This, taught his eyes their due attendance still,
This, held the raines which ruled his princely will.
Controuling Love, proud Fortunes busy Factor,
The gaul of wit, sad Melancholies school,
Hart-killing corsiue, golden times detractor,
Life-fretting canker, mischiefs poisoned tool,
The Idiots idol, but the wise man's fool:
A foe to friendship, enemy to truth,
The wrong misleader of our pleasing youth.
My virtuous father, famous then in Court,
Who lived in pomp, and Lorded with the best,
Whose mind was troubled with this strange report,
As one enshrining honor in his breast,
And as a man who ever loved me best:
Foresaw the danger of such secret spies,
Who still attended on the Princes eyes.
And he, who in the Kings own bosom slept,
Experience taught his deepest thoughts to sound,
Yet in his breast, the same he secret kept,
Nor would disclose the thing which he had found,
Who being hurt must needs conceal his wound.
For why he knew, it was a dangerous thing,
In rule, or Love, but once to cross a king.
And finding lust had kindled all this fire,
And his affections in extremes consisted,
He greatly feared his youthful vain desire,
Might grow impatient, being once resisted:
Yet in his humor, since he still persisted,
With me his child, thought fittest to persuade,
Ere further he into the deep durst wade.
Sweet gyrle (quoth he) the glory of my life,
The blessed and sole object of mine eyes,
For whom the Heavens with Nature fell at strife,
On whom the hope of all my fortune lies,
Whose youth, my age with comfort still supplies.
Whose very sight my drouping heart does raise,
And does prolong thy aged fathers days.
Thou see, a world upon thy youth awaite,
That Paradise, where all delights do grow,
Thy peerlesse Beauty made so fair a bait,
The Bursse where Nature sets her ware to show,
Where blushing Roses, sleep in beds of snow.
The heavens have fringed thy forehead with their gold;
That glass where heaven her-selfe may well behold.
All gaze at Comets, choysest things be best,
The rarest pearls are ever dearest prized,
Seldom wants guests, where Beauty bids the feast,
Men's eyes with wonders never are suffised,
At fairest signs, best welcome is surmised.
The shrine of Love, does seldom offerings want.
Nor with such counsel, Clyents never scant.
Honor is grounded on the tickle Ice,
The purest Lawne, most apt for every spot,
The path to hell, does seem a paradise,
Vices be noted, verues often forgot,
Thy fame once foild, incurable the blot.
Thy name defaced, if touched with any stain,
And once supplanted, never grows again.
The Lechors tongue is never void of guile,
Nor Crocodile wants tears to win his pray,
The subtil'st Temptor has the sweetest style,
With rarest music Sirens soon'st betray.
Assection, will like fire himself bewray.
Time offers still each hour to do amiss,
And greatest dangers, promise greatest bliss.
Deceit, still with a thousand sleights is fraught,
Art, has a world of secrets in her power,
Who hopes a Conquest, leaves no means unsought,
Soft golden drops once pierced the brazen tower,
Care and Suspicion is fair Beauties dower.
Guile, (like a Traitor) ever goes disguised,
Lust, often is filled, but never is sufficed.
This wanton Prince, whose soul does swim in vice,
Whose lawless youth time never has restrained,
He leaves no means vnprou'd, which may entice,
The rytes of wedlock wantonly profained;
His hands with blood of innocents distained.
This Lion, would thy chastity devour,
Which kept by Virtue, lies not in his power.
Laciuious will, the senses does abuse,
Birth is no shadow unto tyranny,
No scepter serves dishonor to excuse,
Nor kingly veil can cover villainy,
Fame is not subject to authority.
No plaster heales a deadly poisoned sore,
No secret hid, where slander keeps the door.
No subtle plea reuokes dishonors error,
No law can quite, where Fame is once endited,
No armor proof against the conscience terror,
Against open shame, no Text can well be cyted,
The blow once given, cannot be euited.
If once the fire be to the powder got,
It Is then too late to seek to fly the shot.
His youthful love, is like a sudden fire,
Whose heat extreme, of force decay it must,
The cause, proceeding from his lewd desire,
Is quickly out, and sooner turned to dust,
Yet frets the life, as iron frets with rust.
Sin in a chain, leads on her sister Shame,
And both in Gives, fast fettered to Defame.
The stately Eagle on his pitch does stand,
And from the maine the fearful foul does smite,
Yet scorns to touch it lying on the land,
When he has felt the sweet of his delight,
But leaves the same a pray to every Kite.
With much we surfer, plenty makes us poor,
The wretched Indian spurns the golden Ore.
Kings use their Loves, as garments they have worn,
VVeake stomachs loath, if once but fully fed,
The Saint once stolen, who does the shrine adorn?
Or what is Nectar if it once be shed?
What Princes wealth can prize thy Maidenhead?
Which should be held as precious as thy breath,
Which once dissolved of force ensues death.
Lo, here he makes a period with his tears,
Which from his eyes now make a sudden breach,
By which the weight of all his speech appears,
In words so grave as seemed still to preach,
This Idioma with such power does teach.
Whose tuned cadence does such rules impart,
As deeply fixed each sentence in my heart.
O sacred counsel, true hart-suppling balm,
Soule-curing plaster, time preserving bliss,
Water of life in every sudden qualme,
The heavens rich storehouse, where all treasure is,
True guide, by whom foul Errors den we miss.
Night-burning Beacon, watch against mishaps,
Foresight, avoiding many after claps.
The King deluded in his love the whise,
His soul tormented in this quenchlesse fire,
With flattering hope his senses does beguile,
Quickening the coals unto his fond desire;
Affection grown too headstrong to retire,
Controules his silence, hating to be mute,
And still does urge him to commence his suit.
Thus carried on by his unbridled thought,
He leaves no bait vnprou'd that might allure,
Deceit, a school of common sleights has taught,
Desire, has philters which desires procure,
Lust, puts the most unlawful things in ure:
Nor yet in limmets ever could be bounded,
Till he himself, himself has quite confounded.
But still perceiving all devices fail,
His trains in Court yet never took effect,
Now with his tongue determined to assail,
And to this end does all his thoughs direct,
Too much abused by his vain suspect:
To further days, no longer would be posted,
But finding time, me bravely thus accosted.
Goddess (quoth he) when Nature thee engrayned,
With colors fetched from heavens eternal spring,
Little thought she, herself she could have stained.
Or grace the world with so divine a thing.
But as a gift to gratify a King,
Sealed thee this Charter, dated at thy birth,
To be the fairest that ever lived on earth.
Lock not thy treasure, heaven does give the store,
A thousand Graces at thine eyes are fed,
Thy bosom, is the Angels secret door,
Thy breast, the pillowes of fair Venus bed:
Regardes of honor on thy brows are red.
Thy cheeks, the banquet where sweet Love does feast,
The royal Pawn of Beauties interest.
Thy lyps, the Bath where sorrows wounds are healed,
Where Abstinence keeps Virtue in a diet,
And in thy wit, all wonders are revealed,
Wisdoms grown welthy, lives there at quiet:
Thy modest eye controules Loves wanton riot.
Thine eye, that planet clearer then the seven,
Whose radient splendor lights the world to heaven.
From thy sweet looks such streams of lightning glide,
As through the eyes do wound the very heart,
Killing, and curing, as they are applide,
Hurting, and healing, like Achilles Dart:
Which to the world do heavenly things impart.
And thou alone, the spirit of all delight,
Which like the sun, ioy'st all things with thy sight.
Could heaven allow wher-with to lim thee forth,
Or earth afford things of esteem to praise thee,
Were words sufficient to express thy worth,
Or could invention to thy glory raise thee,
Could Art devise a weight whereby to paize thee:
But thy surpassing exeellence is such,
As eyes may gaze, but nothing else may tuch.
He is thy King, who is become thy subject,
Thy sovereign Lord, who only seeks thy love,
Thy beauty is his eyes commanding object,
Who for thy sake, a thousand deaths would prove:
Sweet Maid let prayers, some compassion move.
Let Wolves, and Bears, be cruel in their kinds,
But women meek, and have relenting minds.
Love forced the Gods, to things for Gods vnmeer,
Behold a Monarch kneeling to a maid,
Apollo, prostrate at his Daphnes feet,
Great Atlas bows, on whom the heaven is staide;
Thy Jove his Scepter on thy lap has laid,
Thou in his throne do sit as Chancellor,
And he become thy daily Orator.
Look on these brows, the perfect Map of care,
The truest mirror of my misery,
In wrinckled lines where sorrows written are,
Where Time still reads on Loves Anotomy,
My bloodlesse veins with greefes Phlebotomy:
A stanchlesse heart, dead-wounded, ever bleeding,
On whom that nere-fild vulture Love sits feeding.
Pity this soule-euaporating smoke,
The purest incense of most perfect zeal,
These deep-fetcht sighs, co^founding words half spoke,
Where swoln-ey'd passion does herself reveal:
That ragefull fire, no reason can conceal.
Where torments last, and joys are still diluded,
Where all infernal torture is included.
Behold, the brim-full Cesterns of these eyes,
With surging Tides of brackist tears frequented,
Where foodlesse Hope, still hunger-staruen lies,
In burning Pooles eternally tormented:
Which to betray, my heart at first consented.
Where as the spirit of woe, has ever being,
Blinded in tears, yet in tears only seeing.
Shine thou, like Cynthia under mine estate,
Thy tresses decked with Ariadnes Crown,
In pomp redubbling costly Iunos rate,
And cloud the world in sable with a frown:
Advance thy friends, and throw the mighty down.
Be thou admired through all this famous I Will,
Thy name enrol'd with neuer-dated style.
Great troops of Ladies shall attend my Gerle,
Thou on thy brave tryumphing Chariot borne,
Thy drink shall be dissolved orient Pearl,
Thy princely Cup of rarest Unicorn:
Then live at ease, and laugh the world to scorn.
And if our music cannot like thine ears,
Thy Jove shall fetch thee music from the Spheres.
Thy name, as my Empreza will I bear,
My well tuned rymes, shall glory in thy praise,
Upon my Crown, thy favors will I wear,
Figuring thy love a thousand sundry ways:
My power shall be thy shield at all assaies.
And thou my Saint, Kings offering to thy shrine,
Wondering thy beauty, as a thing divine.
What if my Queen, Detractor of our bliss,
Thee by her hundreth-eyed Heardsman keep,
I Will bring to pass, she shall her purpose miss,
My Mercury shall lull him till he sleep;
Love ever laughs, when Jealousy does weep.
My providence, shall keep her stomach under,
She may raise storms, but Jove does rule the thu^der.
Thus having broke the Ice from whence might spring,
Sweet streams of love in calm and fairer time,
And afterward, might joyful tidings bring,
The staire begun by which he thought to clyme,
Hoping due hours, now he had set the chyme;
Lea^^s me, not knowing now which way to turn me,
vvarm'd with the fire, which unawares might burn me.
Forthwith began strange factions in my thought,
And in my soul a sudden mutiny,
Fear and Desire, a doubtful combat fought,
The title stands upon extremity:
My force was great, and strong mine enemy;
Till Resolution, seeing all begun,
Sent Succors in, by whom the field was won.
As thus mine honor in the Balance hung,
Betwixt the worlds preferment and my fame,
These in mine ears, like Sirens sweetly sung,
That wisely still forewarned me of shame:
Till Grace divine from highest heaven came.
Now must I loose the prize, or win the Crown,
Till Virtue (current) lastly way'd me down.
The time is come I must receive my trial,
His protestations subtly accuse me,
My Chastity sticks still to her denial,
His promises false witness do abuse me,
My Conscience called, yet clearly does excuse me.
And those pure thoughts, enshrined in my breast,
By verdict quit me, being on the Quest.
And Wisdoms now forewarned me of treason,
That in the Court, I lived a Lions pray,
My tender youth in this contagious season,
Still feared infection, following day by day:
My Barck unsafe on this tempestious Sea.
My Chastity in danger every hour,
No succor near to shroud me from the shower.
With Resolution, hap what might be-tide,
I leave the Court, the Spring of all my woe,
That Court, which gloried in my Beauties pride,
That Beauty, which my Fortune made my foe,
To Baynards-Castell secretly I go.
Where, with his train, my noble Father lay,
Whose gracious counsel was my only stay.
There, might my thoughts keep holy day a while,
And sing a farewell to my sorrows past,
With all delights I might the time beguile,
Attayn'd my wished liberty at last,
No fearful vision made me now aghast.
But like a Bird escapt her Keepers charge,
Glydes through the air with wings displayed at large.
And hoping health thus cured of these qualmes,
My heart in this fair harbor rides at ease,
The tempest past, expecting quiet calmes,
My Ship thus floting on these blisfull Seas,
A sudden storm my Ankor-hold does raise:
And from the shore does hoyse me to the maine,
Where I (poor soul) my shipwreck must sustain.
And lo, the Autumn of my joys approach,
Whilst yet my spring began so fair to flourish,
Black way-ward VVinter, sets her storms abroch,
And kills the sap which all my hopes did nourish.
Fortune once kind, grows crabbed now and currish.
In my straight path, she lays a mighty beam.
And in my course, she thwarts me with the stream.
The King who saw his love unkindly crossed,
And by effect the cause had fully found,
Since he the harvest of his hope had lost,
Now on revenge his deepest thoughts does ground:
Desperate to kill, receiving his deaths wound.
In reasons bounds strives but in vain to hold,
Headstrong desire, too proud to be controld.
Like the brave Courser struggling with the raines,
His foming mouth controld with Canons check,
With lofty bounds his skillful Ryder strains,
Scorning to yield his stately crested neck:
Nor of the bloody pearcing spurs does reck.
The King now warmed in this glorious fire,
Thus roughly plungeth in his vain desire.
Henceforth devising to disperse the Cloud,
Which ever hung betwixt him and the light:
His love not current, nor to be allowed,
Whilst thus my Father held me in his sight,
Something amiss, his VVatch went never right.
Of force he must this Sentinel remove,
If he in time would hope to win my love.
Ten thousand mischiefs now he sets abroch,
Treasons, invasions, civil mutiny,
Black ignominy, slanderous reproach,
Rebellion, outrage, vile conspiracy,
Opening the intralls of all villainy.
Causing my Lord, thereof to be accused,
By Traitors, such as he with gyfts abused.
Foul Envy thou, the partial Judge of right,
Son of Deceit, borne of that harlot Hate,
Nursed in Hell, a vile and ugly spright,
Feeding on Slander, cherrish'd with Debate:
Never contented with thine own estate.
Deeming alike the wicked and the good,
Whose words be gall, whose actions end in blood.
His service done to this ungrateful King,
His worth, his valor, his gentilitie:
What good so-euer might from virtue spring,
Or could proceed from true Nobility,
All buried now in dark obscurity.
His virtuous life, in doubtful question brought,
Which euer-more for fame and honor sought.
Thou hateful Monster, base Ingratitude,
Souls mortal poison, deadly-killing wound,
Deceitful Serpent, seeking to dilude,
Black loathsome ditch, where all desert is drowned,
Vile Pestilence, which all things do confound;
At first to none other end,
But to grieve those whom nothing could offend.
Such as too well perceived the Kings intent,
In whom remayn'd yet any spark of grace,
Pitying a poor distressed innocent,
Their safety still depending on my ease,
These in my wrongs participate a place.
These, bound in friendship, and alied in blood,
Fast to my Father in the quarrel stood.
But as a Lion in the wilds of Thrace,
With darts and arrows gauled at the bay,
Kills man and beast incountring in the Chase,
And down on heaps, the fearful Herds does lay,
His armed paws each where does make his way:
Thus by his power, the King does now surprise,
Such as in arms resist his tyrannies.
And given over to his vile desire,
The spectakle of loathsome sin and shame,
Our strong-built Castles now he sets on fire,
And (like proud Nero) warmes him by the flame.
VVasting themselves, augmenting his defame.
Which like bright Beacons, blaze in every eye,
Warning all other of his tyranny.
Our friends and followers thus are beaten down,
Whom every slave and pesant dare revile,
And all reputed Traitors to the Crown,
Imprisoned some, some forced into exile;
Yet worst of all, (remediless the while,)
My Father sent a banished man to France,
And here perforce must leave me to my chance.
On shyp-bord now, with hands reared to the skies,
(All sighed and wept, could sigh nor weep no more,)
He turns his sad eclipsed tearefull eyes,
As retrograde unto the blessed shore;
Rich I Will (quoth he,) once Garner of my store,
Taken from me by yonder Tyrants theft,
And I as poor as ere was Irus left.
It Is not my wealth, that, I esteem as light,
Nor yet my Country, though so dear to me,
But thou alone Matilda, my delight,
My life, my soul, all my felicity,
Left as a pray, vile Monster unto thee.
Yet my laments are wasted all in vain,
And to these winds and billows must complain.
But now the Wolf is got into my fold,
God help the Lamb that is in the Lions power;
Alas poor Maid, thus art thou bought and sold,
Prepared for the slaughter every hour,
This Minataure must all my hopes devour.
Yet forced by Fortune to endure this woe,
And unrevenged unto my grave shall go.
Within the furrows of my aged brows,
My joys must their untimely burial have,
This fatal Tomb proud Fortune them alowes,
Which thus withholds me from my wished grave.
The heavens are deaf although I justly crave.
My tears with grief are frozen in mine eyes,
Yet God, nor man, regards my miseries.
Thrice famous Roman, (fortunate to me,)
By whose own hands thy dearest child was slain,
Delivered so from slavish tyranny,
But living, mine dishonored shall remain,
Blotting my Name with an immortal stain;
Whose black reproach, for ever shall endure.
"Ah vile disease that never time can cure.
Even as the kind sleep-breaking Nightingale,
(The cruel Merlin ceaz'd her little one,)
Unto the Thickets tells a woeful tale,
VVearying the woods with her continual moan.
This poor Byrd chirpeth, he poor Lord does groan.
She weeps all night, by day complains he,
She for her young one, he laments for me.
Look how the Sea, the Tide once being past,
Whose surges strove the continent to climb,
And bounding back unto the Gulf at last,
Upon the Sands does leave a clammie slime,
Tears in his cheeks, such gutters worn in time.
VVash'd with the floods of his stil-troubled brain,
His eyes brim-full, as furrows after rain.
And thus my Father unawares betrayed,
A thousand sorrows me at once assail;
What might I do, a silly helpless maid,
Tossed and turmoyl'd in this tempestious gale?
These boisterous flawes have broken down my sail.
My succors thus (like shadows) now are gone,
Not one remains to whom to make my moan.
Now, like a Roe, before the hounds imbost,
When ouer-toyl'd his swiftnes does aslake,
Forsakes the Plains, to which he trusted most,
And to the covert does himself betake,
Where dubbling still, creepes on from brake to brake;
Thus do I fly before the Princes face,
Who day and night pursues me still in chase.
The Coast is clear, suspicious eyes at rest,
And all things fadge which further his desire:
Now royal hope keeps revels in his breast,
The coals are quick, and Fancy blows the fire:
His love expects his long deserved hire.
No cloud discerned to hinder this his sun,
The watch discharged, he hopes the town is won.
The Princes arms are strecht from shore to shore,
Kings sleeping, see with eyes of other men,
Craft finds a key to open every door,
What might I do, or what auailes me then?
The silly Lamb lives in the Lions den.
Loves wakefull eyes (too soon alas) discry'd me,
And found me, where I surest thought to hide me.
My Jove, like Jove now seeks me to invade,
And roysting comes, in thunderbolts and rain,
A Beast, a Byrd, a Satyr in the shade,
A flood, a fire, a Serpent and a Swain,
Camelion-like, as fitt'st my love to gain.
Now like great Phoebus in his golden Carre,
And then like Mars, the fearful God of war.
He makes the Air to woo me whilst I talk,
The VVind to whistle many a pleasant Dittie,
The dainty Grass make music as I walk,
The pretty Flowers to move me still to pity:
All senseless things with reason seeming witty.
Before mine eyes he ever does appear,
And if I call, still aunswers, I am here.
My steps are told, my paths by Spies are noted,
Mine eyes by Night-spells shut within the watch,
My words are way'd by ielous Love that doted,
And at my thoughts, Ill-meaning still does catch:
Into my counselles Treason draws the latch.
And at my gates, Suspicion still does ward,
Sorrow my handmaid, Falsehood on my guard.
He weeps his words, but words could win no tears,
"The rain does cease or ere the Floods do rise,
His woeful words his tongue awhile forbeares.
Then does he, his hearts arrant with his eyes:
His eyes ecclipz'd, he then with sighs supplies.
Sighs fail, with smiles he then bewrayes his pain,
Smiling, he weeps, yet weeping, laughes again.
Look how the Peacock ruffes his flaunting tail,
And struts under his mooned Canapie,
And how he quiuers with his plumed sail;
Yet when his Lead-pale legs he haps to see,
With shame abates his painted iolitie.
The King, as proud as Peacock in my love,
Yet droupes again, when words nor tears could move.
My breast, of Flint, a rock impenitrable,
My heart, that stone which never tool could perce,
My thoughts, a center, and unsearchable,
My words, judgment, which Law could not reuerse,
My frowns, such clouds, as no joy could disperse,
Tygars are tamed with patience and with skill,
All things made subject, but a woman's will.
The King like one sick of a strange disease,
Whose cruel pain no physic can assuage,
Nor plaster can his torments once appease,
Boiling his intrales, with such hellish rage,
With his own knife his horror does engage.
Thus desperate, he, fore-thinks to end this strife,
Or else by poison take away my life
But first, with lines he bravely sits on,
Words steeped in syrop of Ambrosia,
Sweet method, sauored with invention,
What can be said that Lovers cannot say?
Desire can make a Doctor in a day.
Each sentence seemed a sweet inchannting charm
A Trumpet sounding gentle Loves alarm.
With rare hart-curing Phrigian harmony,
He tunes his strings, as not a trebble iarres,
His strains so pleasant and melodious be,
As might appease the heat of fearful wars:
Distilling balm to cure the deepest scarres
His pen, dilates his hearts Apology,
And shows my sins, by loves Theology.
What curious thing did Nature ere bring forth,
What glistering star that yields his silver shine,
To which he does not now compare my worth?
Or what is there, that is mortal or divine?
What sublimation does not refine?
Or what rare thing was ever yet devised,
That unto me, he has not lightly prized?
Now mounts he up with lofty strains of love,
Then to sad veins his pliant Muse does bow,
His humors serving, as his passions move:
And as the Tides, the numbers ebb and flow;
His hopes now wither, then again they grow.
Painting his grief, in hope to quench desire,
But inck to love, like oil unto the fire.
And now of one he had himself advised,
Both red and practiced in this wretched Art,
Within whose brain all mischiefs were comprised,
Whose words were venom, and his tongue a Darte:
And this is he must act this damned part.
To him the King, my poisoning does commit,
Who had before made trial of his wit.
Another Dagon, was this miscreant,
A devil, walking in a human shape,
Foul Dagon, borne true virtue to supplant,
For whom the infernal pit of Hell does gape:
Image of pride, of villainy and rape,
Be thou abhord of all posterity,
And let thy vile dishonor never dye.
By him to Dunmow, he these lines conuayde,
A Monestarie Iuga had begun,
Iuga, sometime a holy Vestall maid,
At whose great charge this Monument was done,
Where I had vowed to live a holy Nun.
And in my Cloister, kept amongst the rest,
Which in this place virginity professed.
Now he which had this bloody act in charge,
Thither repaires, with letters from the King,
Whose black Commission was but all too large,
To execute so base and vile a thing:
This messenger which now my death does bring,
To add fit matter to my tragike story,
Finds means to board me in my oratorie.
With courtly congies gently greeting me,
Gives me the packet which the King had sent me,
Receive fair Maid, these Letters here (quoth he,)
The faithful earnest of that good is meant thee:
But craving that which never shall repent thee.
His lines be love, the Letters writ in blood,
Then make no doubt the warrant passing good.
Kindly accept a Princes kingly offer,
It Is more then folly if thou do refuse it:
Never has Fortune made a fairer profer,
The gift too great, if fondly thou abuse it,
Nor any reason serves to excuse it.
Be not a foe unto thine own good hap,
Refusing treasure thrown into thy lap.
If thou be wise, hold this as ominus,
The heavens not like disposed every hour:
The stars be still predominant in us,
Fortune not always forth her bags does pour,
Nor every cloud does rain a golden shower.
Occasion's winged, and ever flies fast,
Coming, she smyles, and frowns once being past.
VVrong not thy self, nor yet the world deprive,
Of that rare good which Nature freely lent,
Think thou by such base nygardize to thrive,
In sparing that which never will be spent?
And that is worst, in age shall thee repent.
Playing the Churl, to hoord up Beauties pelf,
And live, and dye, and all unto thy self.
Yet, were this all (quoth he,) as would it were,
But there is more, which needs I must reveal:
Behold the poison he has sent thee here,
Which on my life I dare not to conceal,
Thus is the King determined to deal.
I, only wait upon thy resolution,
To win thy love, or see thy execution.
Leave off these humors, be not singular,
Make not an Idol of thine own perfection,
Prize not this word ( Virginity) so dear,
Seem not so Saint-like, moved with no affection.
Beauty brings perrill, wanting safe protection.
Forswear this drousie melancholy Cell,
Was never Gerle could grace a Court so well.
This fear first sprung from foolish superstition,
Which fond conceit into our ears has blown,
Which we receive from old folks by tradition,
And as a weed to choke our joys is grown:
Reason roots out what Error erst has sown.
A gentle jest to fright poor babes withal,
Like to a Bug-beare, painted on a wall.
Tush, these be triuiall toys of reputation,
Whose Ceremonies have the world infected,
Held in regard but only for a fashion,
Which frivolous, the wiser have neglected:
And but as Dreams of doting age respected.
Whose spleen-sick humors on their galls were fed,
Thinking all true which they imagined.
Dispatch, (quoth he) lo, here is pen and inck,
Here make the Prince assurance of thy love,
Or else prepare thee to thy fatal drink,
Which is of force thy Fever to remove:
Which (ah pore fondling) thou too soon may prove.
And if thy will be so fast chayn'd to thee,
Let thine own hands the Executioners be.
And is (quoth I) the Princes pleasure thus?
You are deceived, he does but this to try me,
I know my Lord is kind and gracious,
He thinks my sex and weakness will discry me;
I hope the King will deal more kindly by me.
Those blessed hands, which never did but good,
Will not be stained with virgins guiltless blood.
His thoughts be pure, as Crystal, without spot,
He is wisdom, honor, valor, chastity:
What excellence is there that he is not?
Or what may be, by him which cannot be?
He Is Virtues right superlatiue degree.
From his affections, never shall proceed,
One little thought of this so vile a deed.
Kings be the Gods Vizegerents here on earth,
The Gods have power, Kings from that power have might,
Kings should excel in virtue as in birth,
Gods punish wrongs, and Kings should maintain right,
They be the Suns from which we borrow light.
And they as Kings, should still in justice strive,
With Gods, from who^ their beings they derive.
Enraged with this, (in greefes extremity,)
Minion, (quoth he,) it is now no time to prate,
Dispatch, or else I Will drench you presently,
Of this, nor that, I stand not to debate.
Expects thou love where thou reward'st with hate?
I pass not I, how ere thou like the motion,
Have done at once, and quickly take the Potion.
This sudden terror makes me pause for breath,
Till sighing out at length this sad reply:
If it be so, welcome to me my death,
This is the utmost of extremity,
And yet when all is done, I can but die.
His will be done, since he will have it so,
And welcome Death, the end of all my woe.
And thou my Deaths-man, slave unto his lust,
Th'executioner of his lawless will,
In whom the Tyrant does repose such trust,
Detract no time, his murdering mind fulfill;
Do what thou dare, the worst thou can but kill.
And tell the Tyrant this when I am dead,
I loathed his beastly and adulterous bed.
Nor let the King thy Master ever think,
A virtuous Maid so cowardly and base,
As to be frighted with a poisoned drink,
And live an abject in the worlds disgrace:
All eyes with shame to gaze me in the face.
That ages which heer-after shall succeed,
Shall hold me hateful for so vile a deed.
Is this the greatest gift he could bestow?
Is this the Jewel, wher-with he does present me?
I am his friend, what gives he to his foe,
If this in token of his love be sent me?
Remediless I am, it must content me.
Yet afterward, a proverb this shall prove,
The gift King John bestowed upon his Love.
Then of this conquest let thy Sovereign boast,
And make report with shame what he has done:
A thing more easy then subdue an Host,
Or conquer Kingdoms, as his Father won;
O hapless Sire, of this unhappy Son.
And he more shame shall carry to his grave,
Then Fortune honors to his Father gave.
Thus spoke my mind, (as women use to do,)
Hoping thereby som-what to ease my heart,
But words I found, did but increase my woe,
Augment his rage, not mittigate my smart;
And now comes in the reckoning ere we part.
And now my valor must be tried, or never,
Or famous now, or infamous for ever.
Taking the poison from his deadly hand,
Unto the King caroust my latest draught;
Go wretch (quoth I) now let him understand,
He has obtayn'd what he so long has sought;
Though with my blood, my fame I deerlie bought.
And though my youth he basely have betrayed,
Yet witness Heaven, I lived and dyed a Maid.
Then why repine I, since he thinks it meet,
He is my Sovereign, and my life is his,
Death is not bitter, spyc'd with such a sweet,
Which leads the way to everlasting blis;
He Is all my joy, he all my glory is.
He is the tuch by whom my gold is tried,
Only by him my death is sanctified.
For could my life have given life to me,
My youths fair flower, yet blooming, had not dyed,
Then how should this but meritorious be,
When by my death, my life is sanctified?
Could ever thing more fitly be applied?
In this is love, in this his care I find,
My Lord is just, my Lord is only kind.
Then let these tears, th'Elixars of my love,
Be to his soul a pure preservative,
And let my prayers, be of such force to move,
That by my death, my Sovereign may survive:
And from his reign, let Fame herself derive
His glory, like the Suns translucent rays,
And as the heaven, eternal be his days.
This mortal poison, now begins to rage,
And spreads his vigor thorough all my veins,
There is no physic can my grief aswage,
Such is the torment which my heart destraines,
Boiling my intrales in most hellish pains.
And Nature, weakened of her wonted force,
Must yield to death, which now has no remorce.
And those pure thoughts, which once I choisly fed,
Now when pale death my senses does surprise,
I offer here upon my dying bed,
This precious, sweet, perfumed sacrifice:
Hallowed in my almighty Makers eyes.
Which from this Alter, lends me heavenly light,
Guiding my soul amid this darkesome night.
My glorious life, my spotless Chastity.
Now at this hour be all the joys I have,
These be the wings by which my fame shall fly,
In memory, these shall my Name engraue;
These, from oblivion shall mine honor save.
With Laurel, these my brows shall coronize,
And make me live to all posterities.
Our fond preferments, are but childrens toys,
And as a shadow, all our pleasures pass,
As years increase, so wayning are our joys,
And beauty crazed, like a broken glass:
A pretty tale of that which never was.
All things decay, yet Virtue shall not dye,
This only gives us immortality.
My soul, thus from her prison set at large,
And gently freed from this poluted room,
This prize vnloden from this loathsome Barge,
(Such is the Heavens inevitable doom:)
My body laid at Dunmow in my Toombe.
Thus Baynards-Castle boastes my blessed birth,
And Dunmow kindly wraps me in her earth.
Now scarcely was my breathless body cold,
But every where my tragedy was spread:
And Fame, abroad in every Coast had told,
My resolution, being lately dead:
The glorious wonder of all woman-head.
And to my Father flies with this report,
Who lived an Exile in the French-Kings Court.
His grief, too great to be bewailed with tears,
Words, insufficient to express his woe,
His soul, assaulted with a thousand fears,
As many, sundry passions come and go;
His thoughts, uncertain, wandering to and froe.
At length, this fearful ecstasy ore-past,
Groans from his soul this passion at the last.
O Heavens (quoth he) why was I borne accursed?
This only comfort to mine age was left:
But to despite me, you have done your worst,
And me of all my worldly joys bereft:
I quite undone by your deceitful theft.
This was the Jewel I esteemed most,
And loosing this, now all my treasurs lost.
Ye powers Divine, if you be clean and chaste,
In whom alone consists eternity,
Why suffer you, your own to be disgra'st,
Subject to death and black impuritie?
If in your shield be no security?
If so for Virtue these rewards be due?
Who shall adore, or who shall honor you?
What meant you, first to give her vital breath,
Or make the world proud by her blessed birth,
Predestinating this untimely death,
And of her presence to deprive the earth?
O fruitless age, now starved with Virtues dearth.
Or if you longed to have her company,
O why by poison would you let her die?
O Soil, with drops of mercy once bedewed,
When just men were instauled in thy throne,
But now with blood of Innocents imbrew'd,
Stayning the glory of fair Albion,
O lustful Monster, o accursed John.
O heavens, to whom should men for justice cry,
When Kings themselves thus reign by tyranny?
O give me wings Revenge, I will ascend
And fetch her soul again out of their power;
From them proceeded this untimely end,
Who took her hence before her dying hour.
And raised that clowd which rayn'd this bloody shower.
And from the grave I Will dig her body up,
Which had her bane by that vile poisoned cup.
O pardon Heavens these sacriligious words,
This irreligious open blasphemy:
My wretched soul no better now affords,
Such is the passion of mine agony,
My desperate case in this extremity.
You harbor those which ever like you best,
With blessed Angels let her spirit rest.
No, no, I Will practice by some secret art,
How to infect his pure life-breathing air,
Or else I Will sheath my poyniard in his heart,
Or with strong poison I Will annoint his Chair:
Or by inchauntment, will his days impair.
O no, revenge to God alone belongs,
And it is he which must revenge my wrongs.
O heavens, perforce we must attend your time,
Our succors must awaite upon you still,
In your just waights you balance every crime,
For us you know what is good, and what is ill;
Who understands your deep and secret skill?
In you alone our destinies consist,
Then who is he which can your power resist?
O, could my sighs again but give thee breath,
Or were my tears such balm as could restore thee,
Or could my life redeem thee from this death,
Or were my prayers, but inuocations worthy:
Sighs, tears, life, prayers, were all to little for thee.
But since the heaven, thus of my child disposes,
Ah me, thy Tomb now all my joys incloseth.
O what a wonder shall thy valor bring?
What admiration to posterity?
What rare examples from thy virtues spring?
O what a glory to thy Progeny,
To be engrau'd in lasting memory,
When as applauding Fame in every Coast,
Shall thus in honor of Fitzwaters boast?
England, when peace upon thy shores shall flourish,
And that pure Maiden sit upon thy Throne,
Which in her bosom shall the Muses nourish,
Whose glorious fame shall through the world be blown,
(O, blessed I Will, thrice happy Albion;)
Then let thy Poets in their stately rymes,
Sing forth her praises to succeeding times.
By this, the Kings vile bloody rage is past,
And gentle time his choler does digest,
The fire consumes his substance at the last,
The grief asswag'd which did his spirit molest:
That fiend cast out wherewith he was possessed.
And now he feels this horror in his soul,
When loathsome shame his actions does control.
Black hell-bred-humor of revenging sin,
By whose inticements, murder we commit,
The end unthought of, rashly we begin,
Letting our passion overrule our wit:
Missing the mark, which most we aim to hit.
Clogging our souls with such a mass of care,
As casts us down often times into Despair.
Traitor to Virtue, Reprobate (quoth he,)
As for a King, no more usurp the name:
Stain to all honor, and gentilitie,
Marked in the face with th'yron of Defame:
The Picture of all infamy and shame.
Dispis'd of men, abhorred in every place,
Hate to thy self, the very worlds disgrace.
When all thy race shall be in triumph set,
Their royal conquests and atchiuements done,
Henry thy Father, brave Plantagenet,
Thy conquering Brother, Lion-hart, his Son:
The Crowns, and spoils, these famous Champions won;
This still shall be in thy dishonor said,
Lo, this was John, the murderer of a Maid.
This act enrold in Book of black Defame,
Where, men of death and tragic murders reed,
Recorded in the Register of shame,
In lines whose letters freshlie ever bleed,
Where all the world shall wonder my misdeed.
And quote the place, (thus ever) passing by,
Note here King John's vile damned tyranny.
Her blood exhaled from earth unto the sky,
A fearful Meteor still hangs ore my head,
Stayning the heavens with her Vermilion dye,
Changing the Suns bright rays to gorie red,
Prognosticating death and fearful dread;
Her soul, with houling, and reuengfull steven,
Shreeking before the gates of highest Heaven.
Whose sacred Counsel, now in judgment set,
And She, before them stands to plead her case,
Her drearie words in bloody tears are wet,
The evidence appears before my face,
And I condemned a catife wanting grace;
Justice cries out upon this sinful deed,
And to my death the fatal stars proceed.
Earth, swallow me, and hide me in thy womb,
O let my shame in thy deep Center dwell,
VVrap up this murder in thy wretched Tomb,
Let tender Mercy stop the gates of hell:
And with sweet drops this furious heat expel.
O let Repentance, just revenge appease,
And let my soul, in torment find some ease.
O, no, her tears are now become a flood,
And as they rise, increasing mine offense;
And now the shedding of her guiltless blood,
Even like a Cankar, gnawes my Conscience,
O, there is my grief, my pain proceeds from thence.
Yet never time wears out this filthy stain,
And I dishonored ever shall remain.
Then do I vow a solemn Pilgrimage,
Before my wretched miserable end;
This done, betake me to some Hermitage,
Where I the remnant of my days will spend:
Where Alms and Prayer I ever will attend.
And on the Tomb at last, where thou do lie,
When all is done, I Will lay me down and dye.
And for his Penance, lastly he devised,
Monthly to Dunmow would he take his way,
And in a simple Palmers weed disguised,
With deep devotion kneel him down to pray:
Kissing the place, whereas my body lay.
Washing my Tomb, with his repentant tears,
And being wet, yet dried it with his hayres.
And now, before my spirit depart from hence,
O let me see the Muses own delight:
Idea, mirror of all patience,
Whose sacred Temples are with Garlands dight;
O let my soul be blessed in her sight.
Which so adorns this poor world with her birth,
As where she is, still makes a Heaven on earth.
O let me once behold her blessed eyes,
Those two sweet Suns which make eternal spring,
Which banish drouping Night out of the skies,
In whose sweet bosom quiers of Angels sing:
To whom the Muses all their treasures bring.
Her breast, Mineruas ever hallowed shrine,
Whose sainted thoughts are sacred and divine.
Slide still sweet Ankor on thy silver Sands,
Play dainty Music when she walks by thee,
With liquid Pearl wash those pure Lilly hands,
And all thy Bancks with Laurel shaddowed be,
And let sweet Ardens Nightingales with glee,
Record to her in many a pleasing strain,
Whilst all the Nymphs attend upon her train.
FINIS.

