A True Report of t^^ Araignment, trial, conviction, and ^^^demnation, of a
Popish Priest, named ^^bert Drewrie, at the Sessions house in the old ^^^lie,
on Friday and Wednesday, the 20. and 24. o^ ^^bruary: the extraordinary great
grace and merc^^ offered him, and his stubborn, traytorous, and wilful
refusal.

Also the trial and death of Humph^^^ Lloyd, for maliciously murdering one of
the Guard.

And lastly the execution of the said Robert Dr^^^^ drawn in his Priestly
habit, and as he was a Benedictine (...) on Thursdaie following to Tiborne,
where he was hanged and quartered.

LONDON, Printed for Iefferie Chorlton, and are to be sold a^ (...) shop
adjoining to the great North door of Paul's. 1607.

A true Report of the Apprehension, Examination, Araignment, trial,
conviction, and condemnation of Robert Drewrie, a Seminary priest, and a Friar,
of the order of Saint Benedict: at the Sessions house in the old Baily, on
Friday and Wednesday, the 20. and 25. of February. And lastly, his execution at
Tyborne, on Thursday following, etc.
IN a case deserving so well to be spoken off, concerning injury to Gods
glory, and apparent wrong of our Country (ouerrun with too many men of such
dangerous quality:) I thought it the duty of an honest Subject, to say
somewhat, so far as truth would warrant me, because slander and detraction
are no mean enemies to such manner of proceedings.

Robert Drewrie being apprehended by his majesty's Messengers at the white
Friars, and afterward brought before the right reuered Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of London: declared himself there, as Garnet his Master had done
before, Multorum nominum, to be a man of many names, but yet no one of them
being good. For as no less then six several names would serve Garnets turn,
so this man had three to shadow him by, (Viz:) Drewrie, Brown, and Hamden, but
Drewry was the last in his own delivering, and appearing to be his true name
indeed.

His aunswers werr equivocal, and very confused, denying his Priesthood, and
seeming so cunning, as if no hold were to be taken of him. But he being better
known to the state then himself imagined, and his many dangerous practices
sufficiently discovered and scanned: after such private examinations as were
thought convenient, time was appointed for his public trial, which followed
as heareafter shallbe declared.

On Friday, being the 20. day of February, in the forenoone, my Lord Mayor,
Master Recorder, and other of his Majesty's Justices of the peace, sitting at
the Sessions house in the old Baily, by virtue of his highness commission of
Oyre and Terminer, for Goal delivery, for London, and the County of
Middlesexe: Robert Drewrie Priest, and a Friar of the Benedictine Order, was
brought before the Bench. His Enditement, according to form of Law in that
case made and provided, was openly read unto him: whereunto he pleaded not
guilty, but (for his trial) did put himself upon God and his Country, then
was a very sufficient Jury impannelled for him, to whom (in effect) these
speeches were delivered.

Robert Drewrie the Prisoner standing at the Bar, had traytorously, wilfully,
and in contempt of the Statute made to the contrary, departed our of this
land, wherein he was borne, and at Valcdolid in Spain, (where by Parsons
means, a Seminary for English Students was erected, as the like were at Rome
and Rhemes) had bin kind a Priest by the Bishop of Leon, by authority
derived from the Pope. Sithence which time, he had returned back into this
land, to reconcsle, seduce, and withdraw his majesty's subjects, from their
natural duty, love, and allegiance, to a foreign service and obedience.

Having liberty granted to speak, and answer for himself what he could,
Robert Drewrie very shallowly sought to insinuate, that if it were treason in
him to be a Priest, then it was the like in Saint Augustine, S. Bernard, and
other reverend Fathers of the Church, who received their Priesthood by
authority from God, and so did he presume to have done the like, for the
salvation of his own Soul, and many others beside, which purposely he came
hither to do, acording to his office and function. His silly suggestion was
presently reproved, that notwithstanding the great difference beetweene his
Priest-hoode, and that of the Fathers before named, yet Priesthood solie was
not imputed to him for Treason, for that profession, (though neither liked nor
^^lowed by us) he might use and exercise in the (...) beyond the Seas, keeping
himself there, but (...) here within his majesty's Kingdom, where (...) he,
and all other of his rank, did very well kno^ and therefore could not plead
any ignorance there (...) that sundry good and sufficient laws heeretof^^
made, had enacted it to be treason, for any (...) borne to forsake his native
duty, and being (...) Priest by authority derived from the Pope, to (...) home
again into this land, and (in mere conten^ of the King and his la^es) to
reconcile, seduce, (...) alienate loyal Subjects hearts, from love, just ^^gard
and duty to their Sovereign, and sub^^^ting them in obedience to a foreign
gouernme^^ Drewrie made answer, he could not, neither (...) he deny, but that
he came hither to exercise the ^^fice of a Priest, according as he had already
do^^ in winning of souls: but he would not admit, (...) he had seduced any, or
in any sort diswaded th^^ but only for the good of their souls. Being
af^^^ward urged with his majesty's great mercy, (...) had to him and all other
of his coat, granted (...) general pardon, and why he did not (according
(...) the Proclamation) depart the land when it wa^ expressly commanded: he
made answer, that he (...) means, when it was proved to him: that only did
the King allow such convenient tras^^ting, but also enabled them with money, and
th^^^fore his stay, could not be otherwise, but meere^^ traytorous contempt of
the kings laws: wh^^^ to he could make no reply.

Then diverse traitorous and dangerous Papers were shown, which had bin taken
in his custody, and whereof he would gladly have acquitted himself, but that
they were manifestly proved to be his. One of them seemed to be Parsons
opinion, concerning the oath in the late made Statute, which he utterly
disalowed any Catholic to take, appearing to have used the Popes censure
therein, whereupon the Bull or Brief to that purpose seems to take effect.

The others were also of traytrous nature, tending to the abuse and corrupting
of poor simple souls, and stealing all duty and allegiance from them. There
were likewise two Letters openly read, the one from certain Priests,
Prisoners sometimes in the Clinke, to the Archpriest master Blackwell,
requiring his judgment in matters, when they labored and hoped for
tolleration in Religion: The other was Master Blackwels answer thereto, both
which though he would have cunningly avoided, yet it appeared what reckoning he
made of them.

When he had answered for himself so much as he could, relying still upon his
Priesthood, and urging that to be the cheifest matter of his offense, though
many times the contrary was delivered to him: the Jury passed upon him,
found him guilty of high Treason, whereupon he was sent away till the time of
Judgment: which because it was not til Wednesday following, it shall not be
much differing from our purpose, to handle and say somewhat in the mean while,
concerning the trial and conviction of Humphrey Lloyde, endicted there upon
Wilful Murder, having slain Master Thomas Morris, one of the ordinary yeamen
of his May Guarde, not long before in Chauncery-Lane.

Upon Sunday in the afternoon being the 18. of January, the forenamed Humphry
Lloyd and Thomas Morris, meeting together in Aldersgate street, in the
company of certain other of their friends, went into the half Moon Tavern
to drink, where they had no plenty of such Wine, as to cause distemper, or
otherwise (that way) to procure impatience.

But it was delivered in evidence that some speeches concerning Religion passed
beetweene them, wherein Morris touched Lloyd to be a dissembler, as neither hot
nor cold, but if any thing at all, it was (indeed) best affected to Popery, as
afterward it plainly appeared. It happened that the lie was retorted between
them, which urged Morris to cast a cup of Wine in Lloyds face, and Lloyd
thereupon threw a Roll of bread at the head of Morris. A further and more
dangerous strife had presently ensued, but that honest friends on both sides
being present, did so discreetely deal with them, that they grew friends
again, drank to one another and no hart-burning outwardly perceived: till at
the length, Lloyd renewing remembrance of the former speeches, a more heavier
falling out had thereon happened, but that the friends, as before pacified them
again, but yet menacing words passed from either, Morris threatening to be ^uen
with Lloyds bald pate, and Lloyd would try acquittance with the others
Cods-heade, so that they parted with terms of enmity.

On the Wednesday next ensuing, Lloyde and a Gentleman in a white colored
cloak, standing talking together at Lincolns Inn gate, it happened Morris and a
friend of his with him to pass by: the friend saluted Lloyd, as Lloyd did
the like by him. And very soon after, the Gentleman in the white cloak, that
had stood talking with Lloyd, being sent by him as it apeared, followed
Morris, as Lloyd likewise, and rounding him in the ear, which the friend then
with Morris could not hear. he perceived an alteration in the countenauce of
Morris, and the like in Lloyd, wh^^^ by this time was come to them, which he
being desirous to remove, as standing an equal friend to them both, desired
them, if any thing were amiss between them, to (...) him persuade a friendly
agreement, and no to grow into any uncivil behavior in the open street, to
the wounding of their credit and reputation, as also what danger might
otherwise ensue, was doubtful to be gathred. Lloyd made answer, that he was
goo^ friends with his Cozen Morris, and loved hi^ as deerly as any in England.
Whereto Mo^ris instantly replied: will thou never lead thy dissembling? Do
thou pretend to lo^^ me so dearly, and have even now sent me challenge by
this man? Lloyd immediate returned him this answer, that if he had (...) sent
him a challenge, he was come in person to answer it, and would perform it,
the^ or any where else: thus his malicious inte^^ very plainly appeared. What
other word passed between them, I know not, neith^^ could they be heard by
any standers by, (...) forthwith they drew out both their We^pons,
notwithstanding all entreaty to ye contrary: And indeed Lloyd did draw to
soo^ to express his bloody and vnquencheab^^ malice, for he soon gave to
Morris his death wound: whereupon he fell down presentl^ notspeaking one word.

And to witness the more his cruel and bloody hatred, he struck twice or
thrice at him when he was down, cutting him over the head, and otherwise
wounding him, yet he pleaded, that he did all this, but in his own defense.

All this which has bin breefelie reported being much more circumstantially
delivered in evidence, and by oath approved to his face: he sought to extenuate
his offense by very shalow speeches, utterly impertinent, and most against
himself. in due consideraon of his frivolous allegations. For he had bin a man
of more dangerous quality, then was conceined in his present trial, having
tasted the Kings most gracious mercy, and had been borne withal beyond his
deserving.

It was also told him, how far he had waded in VVatsons treason, and was
also a partaker in the Gunne-powder plotte, sending shot and powder also to
them in wales, in all which, the mercy of his Majesty had looked more mildly
upon him, then himself could desire, or any way deserve. But the Justice of
heaven very manifestly appeared, that so false and hollow a heart, sullied with
the detested guilt of treason, must now in a wilful and malicious act of blood
and murder, declare it self to the whole world, and the upright censure of
Law, this way deprive him of life, that had felt mercy before in a heavier
offense. Here is also to be noted that as the quarrel first happened on talk of
popish Religion, so now Lloyd discouers him in his colors. For though it was
told him, that he had very confidently delivered himself to be otherwise, and
which himself was not able to deny: yet now Drewrie the Priest (after his
judgment) passing away by him in the Docket, gave him a public noted
absolution with his hand crossing him, and using some close speeches,
whereupon, thinking this sufficient to wash off his stayne o^ Murder: he
forthwith openly confessed, tha^ he is a Catholic, so he had bin always and so
he would die, as if that very nam^ should give fame to his foul fact, and
where he died a murderer, his own idle supposition of Popish absolution
should make him now to die in the case of a Martyr, and for his conscience.

When he was drawn in the Carte (with others toward execution, and all the
Carts being stayed before Saint Sepulchers Church, where the most Christian
and charitable deed of Master Dooue, at every such time is worthily performed,
to move prayer and compassion in men's hearts, for such (...): All the while that
the man spoke Lloyd stopte his ears, not willing to hear any thing, but if
any Roman Catholics were near, he desired such to pray for him. And so at
Tyborne he did in like manner, calling to Roman Catholics to pray with him
and for him, but no other prayers would he accept of. But the Law having
censured him, and Justice likewise being past upon him: what else remains to
be thought or said of him, let it be so charitably as such a case requires,
and as becomes all honest Christians. Evermore remembering, that flesh and
blood is subject to frailty, and he that boasts most of strength, may
soonest fall and be deceived: therefore let us measure other men's infirmities,
by a considerate care of whatour own may be, and committing all to him that is
the only judge of al, desire his heavenly help and assistance never to suffer
us to be led into the like temtations. Let us now remember where we left
before, and return to the matter concerning the Priest.

In this time of respit since his condemnation, bethinking himself, (belike)
of his present dangerous condition: he solicited sundry great Persons by his
Letters, entreating all possible favor to be allowed him. Among the rest, he
wrote to Sir Henry Montague, Recorder of London, requiring to have some private
speech with him. The Gentleman being of a milce and merciful inclination,
willing to do good to any, but much more to one at the point of such peril:
upon Monday morning, sent for Drewrie down into the Sessions house garden to
him, where urging to know, what favor he requested, and alleging the kings
great and gracious mercy to any that expressed themselves to be his loving
Subjects, and would take the oath of duty and obedience to him: Drewrie made
voluntary tender of himself, that he would take the oath, acknowledging the
greatness of his majesty's mercy, and humbly required, that the like grace might
be affoorded to his Brother William Dauies the other Priest, that was
condemned with him. Master Recorder conceived very well of this his
submission, and was in his mind persuaded, that if he had put him to the oath
presently, without any refusal he would have taken it. But he (as an upright
Iusticer) very wisely considering, that his fact being openly known, and the
people acquainted with his dangerons practices, his public submission and
taking the oath would the better witness his obedience and submission, and
prove much more pleasing then any thing done in private, deferred it till the
time of more conueniency, so Drewrie departed up to his Chamber again, being
used with all kind and gentle respect.

The extraordinary great grace and mercy offered at the Sessions House, to
Roberd Drewrie and William Dauies Pristes, on wednesday the 25. of February,
and lastly the sentence of death pronounced against them.
ACcording to the custom in such cases observed, the trial and condemnation
of Robert Drewrie, passing as has been already declared on the Friday before:
On Wednesday following, being the five and twentieth day of February, the
Prisoner was brought to the Bar again. Where it being told him, that he had
been already araigned upon high treason, and had pleaded thereto not guilty,
but for his trial, had put himself upon GOD and his Country, the Country had
found and delivered him up guilty: it now remained to hear what he could say
for himself, why judgment of death should not be pronounced against him.

He replied as he had done before, that he took himself not to be convicted
of Treason, but only for his Priest-hoode, which if the Law made treason, he
had nothing to say, but appealed to the Kings grace and mercy.

Hereupon his voluntary offer, to take Oath on the Monday before was
rehearsed to him. And it was further told him, that now it was apparently
perceived how collorably he cloaked his private and pernicious dealing,
answering by equivocation, and setting down one thing under his own hand,
then afterward speaking dyrectly against the same. For proof whereof his own
Letter written sithence the time of his condemnation, to a Person of great
honor was there read, and as much thereof as concerned the present occasion
then in hand, was the more insisted upon. Wherein (if my memory fail me not)
it appeared, that he had bin required, to set down his censure and opinion
according as himself did best gather and conceive thereof, concerning the Oath
of legalty and alegiance mentioned in the late tatute: whereunto (as I
remember) his answer was thus: I freelye confess, that (in my opinion) every
honest and good Catholic, may lawfully and safely take it. Immediately,
because he had made such a free confession, of the Oaths lawfulnes, and
safety in taking, himself was willed to take the Oath, which he had thus
censured: to let ye world perceive now publicly, whether his hand and heart
held true correspondence together, and whether he were so honest and good a
Catholic, as but to express the loyalty of a Subject, and give Caesar his
due. Now plainly appeared both what he and such of his profession inwardly are,
for he plainly refused to take ye Oath, having the Book delivered into his
own hands, and willed to take and aledge what exceptions he could against any
part or particle of the Oath, his answer was, that he did but deliver his
opinion of the Oath, what any good or honest Catholic, might do, excluding
himself out of any such titles: neither (quoth he) can it be any way
aduantageable to me, being condemned as I am, and therefore I have no reason to
take it. But then to meet justly with such cuning dissembling, and
equiuocating, and to discover such apparent falsehood: that no less admired,
then most worthy Gentleman, sir Henry Mountague, Knight, Recorder of the City
of London, as he had many times before, so still he continued, in displaying
the subtle slights of so dangerous a person, and what hurt ensued to the state
by such as he was. To drive him now from these idle suggestions, and to lay
open the kings most Royal Mercy, though not so much (as in Truth it deserved
yet sufficiently able to convince such impudence: he told him, that he was a
poor Minister of Justice under his Majesty, and had such true acquaintance
with his euer-royall and merciful inclination, that hearty sorrow or repentance
in an offender, no sooner could be discerned, but he was even as ready to
give pardon and forgiveness, and rather did superabound in grace, then seek
after blood, and therefore willed him to let all the people there perceive,
whether he would accept of this proffered grace or no. Nay more, because every
one was not acquainted with the Oath contained in the Statute, and (perchance)
might conceit otherwise thereof, then in equity it deserved, the Clearke was
commanded to read it there publicly, and himself to except against it
whatsoever he could allege. The Clerk accordingly began as follows, reading
it destinctly, as it is in the Book.

The Oath of every true and honest subject.

I A.B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my conscience, before God and the world; that our Sovereign Lord king
James, is lawful and rightful king of this realm, and of al other his
Majesty's Domions and Countries: And that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by
any authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means, with any
other, has any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's kingdoms, or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to
invade or anoy him, or his countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of
their alegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to
any of them, to bear Arms, raise tumult, or to offer violence or hurt to his
Majesty's royal Person, state, or government, or to any of his Majesty's
subjects within his majesty's Dominions.

Also, I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration or
sentence of excommunication, or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his successors, or by any Authority derived or
pretended to be derived from him or his See, against the said king, his
heirs or Successors, or any absolution of the said subjects from their
obedience: I will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his heirs
and successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power,
against al conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his
or their persons, their crown and dignity, by reason or color of any such
sentence or declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor, to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty his heirs and successors, al
Treasons and Traterous conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be against
him or any of them.

And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure,
as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine and position, that Princes
which be Excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered
by their subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and faithful authority to be lawfully
ministered to me, and do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the
contrary. And al these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and
swear, according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense, and understanding to the same words, without
Equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And I do
make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and truly, upon
the true faith of a Christian, so help me GOD.

This Oath, which no good subject will refuse to take, having been very
audibly read, well near in the perfect hearing of every one there present, he
was required to allege or infer against any part thereof what he could. But
he insisting vainly, as he had done before, that he had but given his opinion
thereof for others, and refusing utterly to take it himself, gave evident and
manifest testimony, that such Priests as himself was, were not included in ye
rank of honest or good Catholics, but apparent Traitors to the King and
state, in saying one thing, and doing the contrary, in making an outward show
of duty and obedience under hand writing, and reserving a traytorous intention
in their close bosom Wherein the gross deceiving and abusing of too many
ouer-credulous souls (being falsely persuaded of such men, otherwise the^ they
are indeed) is very much to be pitied and lamented: for they do but judge by
ye exterious habit of smooth sanctity and holiness and not by the close
seducing of them and their souls. Religion is the Cloak cast over intended
treason, and holy protestations hide hollow hearted practices, more deuillish
then (in plain meaning) can easily be doubted, and far more dangerous, then
weak capacities are able to discover, as very excellently and elegantly, was
there plainly approved.

Another allegation also (as impertinent) did Drewrie make, in saying: that a
French Priest, or a Spanish Priest, coming into this land, to exercise their
function at either of their Lord Ambassadors, or otherwise, they might in like
manner be termed traitors: whereat all the bystanders were even ready to
hiss him, Knowing very well, and as it was with good discretion answered him,
that such priests, neither were, or could be reckoned subjects to this state,
nor were they enabled to deal in such dangerous manner with our people,
wanting our language, and credit in such a case to countenance them, as (by
their slye insinuating) they being borne subjects, and credited more then
beseemed, did too much prevail by. And as freely might such Ambassadors have
men of spiritual office about them, being of their own country, as ours are
allowed the like, within their Masters Dominions. So that still he would have
maintained that Priesthood, and not the treacherous complotting and practices of
Priests, in his understanding, was to be held for Treason. The same grace and
favor which had been before extended to Drewrie, in as ample measure was
offered to Dauies the other Priest, and he was demanded whether he would take
the Oath or no. He replied that he was a poor simple ignorant man, and could
hardly censure what thereto belonged. For there were many learned Priests,
whose judgments (in this case) he would first know, and then perhaps he might
be otherwise altered. Wherein appears, yt one only Romish rule and
observation, is a lesson or direction to them all, and the Bulls or Breues of
the Pope, are more regarded and respected by them, then the native loyalty and
obedience, they owe to their King and Country. But mercy has been ouermild
too long, and won no such grace from, as justly was expected, but rather has
armed them with more boldness and insolence, then either is fit in them to
offer, or stands with the wisdom of so great a state to endure: For, Nunquid
colligunt de spinis ruas, (...) de tribulis ficus? Do o Men gather Grapes of
Thorns, or Figs of Thistles?

When no further good, either by testimony of their own shame, or even
Father-like and most kind persuasions, could be wrought upon either of them:
first a most grave, learned, and indicious admonition was made unto them,
containing breefely the many and extraordinary great graces of the kings
Majesty toward men of their condition, and how after granting them first
his free and general pardon, he never left off, but pursued them still with
all favors that could be devised, as not desiring the death of any one, but
rather to live quietly, like a godly, peaceful, and religious King: not
enacting any new or severe Laws against such dangerous Persons, but ratyfieng
and confirming them that he found at his coming, which Queen Elizabeth (of
ever happy memory) compulsiuely was compelled and enforced to make against
them. And yet the Justice of those Laws, which had been of seven and twenty
years continuance before, his Majesty did forbear to execute: and finding
many, whose lives lay under the forfeit of the law, not only did he remitte
them in grace, but likewise gave his free pardon to all: Sending so many as
were in durance away at his own cost and charge, and publishing the like offer
to all other, that would except of so kind a benifit: as loath to meddle with
their blood, that were enemies to his life, and desirous to win them by mercy,
if they were not too monstrous. Nor has he sentenced any Priest with death
since his coming to the Crown, but such as were men of most dangerous
quality, and had their hands over deep in most barbarous and inhumaine
treasons. But when neither persuasions, sufferances, nor Proclamations will
serve, to keep such dangerous men out of the land, but even in spite of the
King and his Laws they will needs come over, and put in practice their
treacherous deuyses: mercy (of necessity) must give way to justice, and pity
prevail no longer, when grace is despised.

The many and excelent parts contained in Master Recorders learned and elegant
speech, I am not able to set down, and therefore do humbly crave favor, for
but glauncing as these few: which though they come far short of their just
merrite, yet let my good will excuse al imperfections. Being come to the very
iumpe of giving judgment, Drewrie demanded, if (as yet) he might have favor
to speak, and (most honorably) it was answered that he might, for ye kings mercy
was never too late: therefore he was willed, not to trifle the time in
frivolous speeches, but if he would yet take the Oath, do it. and afterward
speak what further he would, which made all the standers by, even confounded
with amazement, that Grace should be so abundantly offered unto such froward
and wilful refusers. Drewrie would not yield to take the Oath, whereupon the
sentence of death was pronounced against them both. To be conveyed thence to
the place from whence they came, and there to be laid upon an hurddle, and so
drawn to the place of execution, where they should hang til they were half
dead, then to have their secrets cut off, and with their intrailes thrown
into the fire before their faces, their heads to be seuerd from their bodies,
which severally should be divided into four quarters, and afterward disposed
at his Majesty's pleasure, in mean while, the Lord to take mercy upon their
souls, and so they were sent back to prison again.

A brief Report of the execution of Robert Drewrie, drawn on a Hurddle in his
Fryer-Benedictine habbet to Tyborne, on Thursday the 25. of February.
ON the next morning, being Thursday, an hurdle being brought to Newgate,
Robert Drewrie (hoping yet for life) and not thinking to die, as by the sequel
it plainly appeard, having put on after the manner of the Benedictine Friars
beyond the Seas, a new suit of aparrell, being made of black stuff, new
shoes, stockings, and Garters, and a black new stuff Priests gown or Cassock
being, buttond down before by Loops and buttons, two and two together to the
very foot, a new cornerd cap on his head, and under it a fair wrought night
cap: was in this manner drawn alonge to Tyborne, where being by the
executioner prepared for death, he was brought up into the cart, and using such
idle speeches, as he had don often before, that he dyed not for Treason, but
for his Priesthood, he was willed to deal more justly, and not to abuse the
world now at his death, in uttering that which was a manifest lie and
untruth. He made answer, that in all his life time, he had not told a lie, and
then after a short pause, added, not willingly. There were certain papers shown
at Tyborn, which had bin found about him, of very dangerous and Traitorous
nature. And among them also was his Benedictine faculty under Seal,
expressing what power and authority he had from the Pope, to make men, women,
and Children here, of his order: what Indulgences and Pardons he could grant
them, both in this life, and for multitude of years after their death,
preserving them both from Purgatory, and warranting their entrance (by the
Popes keys) into heaven. He confessed himself to be a Roman Catholic, and
a Priest, and desired all Roman Catholics to pray with him, and for him.
And often looking about him, as hopinge there was some mercy for him, for fear
appeared very plainly in him, when he felt the Cart to go (...) under him,
and his expectation to be deceived, he caught fast hold with his left hand on
the ^alter above his head, and very hardly was enforced to let it go, but held
so for a pretty while. If this were not an aparant hope of life, I refer it to
better Judgments then mine own. He hung til he was quite dead, and afterward
his body was quartered.

FINIS.

