THE EARNEST OF OUR INHERITANCE: TOGETHER WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE NEW HEAVEN
and of the New earth, and a demonstration of the glorious Resurrection of the
body in the same substance.

Preached at Paul's Cross the second day of August. 1612.

By THOMAS DRAXE Bachelour of Divinity.

BY WISDOM^PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY^


AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for George Norton. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LEARNED AND RELIGIOUS Lord, WILLIAM Lord PAGET, grace,
peace; and all happiness both temporal and eternal.
ALbeit (most noble Sir) the doctrine of the restitution of this whole
universe, and the renouation of the principal creatures therein contained, may
be thought to be curious, intricate, doubtful, and to minister occasion of
scorn, or error to the ignorant and those that are carnally minded; and
albeit the doctrine of the glorious resurrection of the bodies of the Saints in
the same matter and substance, be doubted of, by the curious; denied by
infidells; and impugned by diverse Heretics and Atheists, yet both these
doctrines and assertions, whereof the latter is an Article and maine foundation
of Faith, are plainly proved by plentiful and pregnant testimonies of
Scripture, euinced by evidence of Arguments, and subscribed unto by consent of
the best Divines both ancient and modern. That there shall be, at the second
coming of our Lord Jesus (which shall not be before Rome be ruinated, and the
dispersed Jews generally converted to Christianity) a glorious restorement
and reformation of the world: Of these visible heavens, with their lights,
eyes, stars: and of the earth, and (in all probability) of all such, plants,
trees, beasts, birds, herbs, which were created by God in the six days, and
which shall be found remaining at the day of the Lord, it is sufficiently
proved in this present Sermon. Yet that I may give your Lordship some taste and
touch, these places and arguments immediately following, are forcible, and duly
to be considered. First, there shall be a new (outward) heaven, and a new
earth, (new I say for quality Isay 65. 17. 2. Pet. 3. 13.
but not for substance) wherein dwells righteousness, (that is) righteous men,
yet by intercourse, and not by any continual residence. Secondly Saint Paul
says (...) that is, we know, that every creature groaneth after this glorious
liberty, Romans 8. 22.
therefore the Apostle takes this restitution as a thing granted. Thirdly, the
creatures shall be changed, namely into a better form, ergo they shall not
be eternally abolished. Fourthly, the inward supernatural and constant desire
of the creatures, to be fully and finally freed from vanity and the bondage of
manifold abuses, and withal (in their manner and proportion) to be restored
into the glorious liberty of Gods children, does euince as much. Fifthly,
sin, the corrupting cause of the creatures, shall at the last judgment wholly
cease, therefore the corruption and abuse of the creature; shall then likewise
cease. Sixthly, God who is the God of order, and not the author of confusion,
will at length, rectify and reform whatsoever has bin and is, disordered and
deformed. Seventhly, Christ our mighty Savior, the second Adam, and the Lord
from heaven heavenly must and shall cure every wound, that the first Adam, and
that sin and Satan have inflicted. Eighthly, the Apostle proves the
certainty of eternal life, by the secret desire of the creature after this
time; wherein it shall be gloriously renewed. Ninthly, Gods elect must, and
shall wholly recover the dominion over other creatures, which by Adams fall, they
have (in great part) lost, and then the mecke shall (in their manner) inherit
the Earth, and none but they, but now for Matthew. 5. ver. 5.
the most part, Tyrants, and Gods enemies usurpingly possess it. Lastly, (to
omit the general consent of later and most worthy Writers) Saint Theodoret,
Ambrose, Oecumenius etc. hold and acknowledge this particular restitution.
Neither must it be thought that the Creatures renewed shall engender, or
multiply; for as there is, and shall be no engendring, nor multiplication of
the A Parable.
Saints in heaven (notwithstanding the distinction of male and female shall
remain;) so shall there be no multiplication, much less in infinitum, of
plants, beasts, birds, in the renewed earth. Touching the use and end of the
creatures, they shall serve to set forth Gods power, wisdom, mercy, goodness,
and shall serve for the Saints delight and contemplation, and not otherwise.
And as for all other cauils and objections of any moment. I suppose I have
sufficiently answered them in the book.

Now that the bodies of Gods children (though for the present vile, mortal,
deformed, miserable etc, shall at the last day arise again in power, glory,
incorruption, and that in the same substance with all their parts and
dimensions, in few words I thus demonstrate. First, the Scriptures of the old
and new Testament do abundantly declare it.

Secondly, sundry types and figures of the old law, and the rising of diverse
Saints, both in the old and also the new Testament, (at least) to a temporal
life, are good inducements hereunto. Thirdly, the Saints bodies, being the
Temples of the holy Ghost, and being redeemed by Christ, as well as their
souls, must of necessity be glorified, as well as their souls. Fourthly,
the resurrection is grounded upon Gods almightines, and Matthew. 22. 20.
upon his infallible promises. Fifthly, Christ our head, to whom we must be
made conformable, arose again in the same body and substance that Phil. 3. 20.
he died in; therefore our bodies shall in like sort, arise again. Lastly
(not to exceed the skantling of an Epistle) the bodies of the Saints must come
to judgment, as well as their souls; and therefore they must needs rise
again. Concerning the sundry and sweet comforts that the holy meditation of
the Resurrection affords us. I have distinctly laid them forth in the
Treatise. Wherefore the matter being so useful, so desirously heard in the
greatest auditorie, and worthy of an honorable and judicious Patron, I have
upon just causes, and due deliberation presumed to entitle it to your Honor,
and to commend it to your patronage: For first, to whom should the dedication
of it, of better right appertain then to a noble Caedar in Gods Church: A
Mecenas of learned men, a Shield of Justice, a sincere Israelite, and to one
that in Staffordshire shines, as the Sun amongst the lesser Stars.

Secondly, your Lordship is known to be very learned, and studious and a
diligent hearer of your painful and godly preaching Minister Master Macham:
Lastly, it has pleased the right Reverend father in God, and my singular good
Lord, the Bishop of Couentry and Lichfieild, in his respective compassion
toward me, to procure for me, and seat me in the vicaredge of Coll-wich, a
few miles distant from your Honors dwelling house, and therefore I would be
glad to have so noble a protector near me. And thus, most humbly requesting
your Lordships favor, and gracious acceptance of these my meditations, I
betake your blessed Lordship, together with your most virtuous, and zealously
religious Lady, unto the continual tuition, and heavenly government of the
Almighty.

Your Honors in all duty and service, ready at command, THOMAS DRAXE Vicar of
Coll-wich.

THE EARNEST OF OUR INHERITANCE.
ROMANS 8. CHAP. V. 22. 23. 22 For we know that the whole (or every) creature,
groaneth and trauelleth together in pain, until now. 23 And not only they,
but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit (even we our
selves) groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption (to wit) the
redemption of our bodies.
THE Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, wherein is enclosed the Quintessence
and perfection of saving Doctrine, may not unfitly be compared to the Paradise
of God, the place of all pleasure and happiness: the 8. Chapter, which like a
conduit pipe conueyeth unto the Church, the waters of life, may be likened to
the tree of life, (i. the Sacrament and instrument of it,) in the midst of
the Garden, and this my text in regard of the spiritual nourishment and Souls
Physic that it ministers (as it were) a goodly branch of this blessed tree,
whose fruit serves for food, and whose (very) leaves, for shade and medicine.

And this Parcel of Scripture, is so ample and copious, that like the river of
Eden, that watered the Garden, it does divide it self into four heads, or
parts.

For first the Apostle in the beginning of the Chapter, unto the first verse,
absolueth his large and long dispute of our Redemption and Justification by
Christ and Faith in him only.

Secondly, from the first verse unto the eighteenth, he by powerful and
perswasiue arguments exhorts the Romans to holiness and newnes of life.

Thirdly, from the 18. unto the 31. verse, he by sundry, sound and
substantial reasons, does arm, comfort, and confirm them against the
manifold miseries, and troubles of this life.

Lastly, from the 31. verse unto the end of the Chapter, he concludes his
doctrine, partly by a brave challenge of all adversary power, and partly by way
of Triumph and exclamation.

Touching the coherence and dependence of my Text, with the verses immediately
going before, we are to understand that the Apostle in the eighteenth verse of
this Chapter, affirms that the excellency of eternal glory, does (whether
we respect quantity, quality, or continuance) far exceed and surmount the
afflictions of this present life. In the three verses next ensuing, he proves
the certeinty of the same Glory, by the secret instinct and earnest desire of
the (reasonable and brutish) Creature; yea of the whole Universe: which like a
spy out of a watch tower, or like to a Captive, that does (...), (i) put it
head out of a grate, and carefully expect the coming of the deliverer, does
desire and wait for the manifestation of Gods children, when it shall be freed
from the bondage of corruption and abuse, and be restored into it former purity
and perfection, (and in it proportion and degree) be made partaker of their
glory: and in the two and twentieth verse, he repeateth, and further
explaneth the Creatures desire and waiting for it restitution; and in the three
and twentieth verse, he enforces the certainty of immortality, by the inward
groaning, and serious expectation of Gods children, for their redemption and
salvation: and the scope and drift of the Apostle in this place is, by the
joint and mutual groaning and expectation both of the creature, and also of
Gods children, to demonstrate the assuredness of the glory to be revealed.

Touching the order and Method of the Apostle in my Text, we have a double
description, first of the Creature, secondly of Gods children. In the Creature
to be restored, three things are to be noted, first, the generality of it,
Every Creature, secondly, the earnest and careful desire, and waiting of it,
groaneth and trauelleth in pain together, lastly, the extent, or continuance
of this groaning and traveling, until now. In Gods Elect, who are in the
three and twentieth verse described, three points are like wise to be observed.
First their spiritual and saving graces, whereby they know themselves to be
Gods children, and whereby they are distinguished from heathens, from
hypocrites, heretics, and all profane and vntegenerate persons: in these
words, which have the first fruits of the spirit. Secondly their deep desire,
and hopeful expectation, arising from the above named graces in these terms,
groaning within our selves and waiting for, etc. Lastly, the object and end of
their desire and hope, epitomized in this word Adoption, which the Apostle by
interpretation, calls the redemption of the body, to wit, the final and full
deliverance of it, from mortality, death, and all the miseries of this
temporary life, and thus much our blessed Savior intimates when and were he
says, when ye see these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift
up your heads, for Luke 21 28. Ephesians. 1.
your redemption draws nigh. Now it remains that I lay down, and prove,
and apply the special doctrines lessons and observations, that this Scripture
naturally yields and presents to our considerations. But that I may work
upon a sure foundation, and build upon a sure ground, and proceed orderly, I
am first, (so far forth as I conceive it either manifestly revealed in Gods
word, or (at least) in some particulars very probably to be gathered out of it)
to remove all rubs out of the way, and to determine what this (...), that is,
every creature is; whether that it is generally, or specially to be
understood; and what, or which this creature is, (or creatures are): and in the
handling hereof, I will deal and proceed, first negatiuely, showing what
creatures shall Incipiendum a facilioribus.
not be restored, and delivered, and then Positiuely and affirmatively: by
resolving what creatures shall undoubtedly be delivered and restored, and what
also in likelihood, and the judgment of probability only, shall be repaired
and renewed.

Therefore from the number of the creatures that do groan and travel in
pain together, after, and for their deliverance and restorement, are to be
abstracted and deducted these Creatures, whose special kinds follow.

First, the blessed and sinlesse Angels: for they are not capable of, much
less, subject to such bondage of corruption and abuse, but do always behold
the face of God the Father which is in Heaven. Indeed, they so long Matthew. 18.
10.
as they attend upon, and minister unto the Saints in earth, have not that
perfection of glory and joy, which they shall have, when they shall be
discharged of this Ministry, and shall be in rest and contemplation, but yet
they are not made subject to vanity, nor in any bondage of corruption: and what
if they, as they rejoice of the conversion of a sinner, so they (in a sort)
mourn for, and labor Luke 15. 10.
under so great perverseness and frowardness of Gods children, whereof they
are beholders; may be said to groan and travail in pain: yet this groaning
and traveling, is not in regard of their essence and nature, Beza. 2.
which admits no blemish or abuse, but only in respect of their office and
Ministry.

Secondly, the Devils; and all evil spirits, whom God has reserved in
everlasting Chains under darkness, Iud. Epist. v. 6.
unto the judgment of the great day, and that have no possibility of any
better condition, are in no wise to be rancked in this number: they daily
expect a time of torment, but not of triumph; and they do not condole Matthew.
8. 29.
with Gods children but continually seek to devour them.

Thirdly, the Reprobates, or so many as God has in his eternal counsel
rejected, cannot liere be employed: for none of the reprobate persons groan or
sympathise with Gods children; and to none of these belongs deliverance, but
to all of them, is damnation; decreed, denounced, prepared.

Fourthly, from this number, are distinguished and deducted the very Elect of
mankind: for first, this word Creature, in the Scriptures does not signify
mankind unless some other word, or words be added to it. Secondly, the Elect
only have the denomination of the Sons of God, and so has not the creature;
Thirdly, in my Text, the Elect of God are discerned and severed from the
Creature, by the discretiue conjunction (...), but, and by the graces of
salvation which the Apostle calls the first fruits of the Spirit, and
Lastly, by the expectation verse. 23.
of the Resurrection and redemption of their body. Now these graces and this
hoped for resurrection are proper to the Elect only, and does not at all
appertain to the Creature.

Fifthly, horns and thistles, briars and brambles, weeds and nettles, etc:
are none of the Creatures that are by S. Genesis 3. 18.
Paulmeant, or, intended: for, instantly upon man's transgression and fall, the
earth being cursed for his sin, brought forth all these evil things.

Sixthly, all creatures that have their being from an equivocal, mixed and
confused generation, and not from the proper male and female, and therefore
are, in kind and name diverse and different, as Mules, Wolfe-dogs,
Wolfe-birches, and all monstrous creatures come not into the number of the
Creatures, to which deliverance and renouation is promised.

Seventhly, all Creatures that have their beginning from, and are bred of
corruption and putrefaction, as frogs, flies, worms, mouldes, mise, crickets,
bats, barnacles, have no part in this restitution.

Eighthly, the Ocean, and all seas, for there shall be no more sea, and
consequently no seafish: take away the subject, take away the adiunct: and
take away the proper Apoc. 21. 1. Sublato vel negato subiecto proprio,
tolluntur vel nega^tur adiuncta.
element, and then take away the creature that lives in it.

Ninthly, all those (or such) plants, beasts, fowls, that either are already
dead and dissolved, or, that afterward, and at Christ his second coming shall
be found deed and without life, are to be deducted out of this number.

Lastly, amongst other things, all houses, buildings, cities, towns, villages,
monuments, inventions and devises of man shall be utterly dissolved, for the
earth and the works 2. Pet. 3. 10. Metaph. C. 3. magis dicimus illum scire rem,
quiscit eam affirmative quam qui negative.
therein (whereof these are parts) shall be utterly burnt with fire. Now
because affirmative knowledge, whereby a thing is known positiuely, is far
better, then negative knowledge, whereby a thing is known priuatiuely, and
confusedly, let us, with warrant of Scripture, and weight of reason (according
to our skantling,) see and set down what is the Creature that groaneth and
trauaileth in pain together unto this day, and shall at length be restored.

First, whether we render these words, (...), the whole Creature, and so take
it collectiuely, for a magnitude, or a continued quantity, in which sense the
word (...) is not seldom used, as Matthew. 2. 3. etc. and Mark 2. 13. or
according to the current of Scripture, and geneall consent of most
interpreters, ancient and modern, take it for every particular, or, the
general of every particular: then it must needs be granted, that the whole
universe shall continue: the four elements shall be purified, renewed, made
more subtle and be (in all likelihood) eternally preserved in this happy
estate.

It is most manifest and apparent out of Scripture, that Isaiae. 66. 22. 2.
Pet. 3. 10. Apoc. 21. 1.
there shall be a new heaven: i. a new or renewed, starrie, ayrie, visible and
external heaven, (for this heaven only and not the third heaven is subjected
to the bondage of corruption) and a new earth, and certain it is, that these
have from the beginning to our time continued groaning and travailing in pain
for their deliverance. Or let us take (...), either collectiuely, for the whole
frame of the world, or, distributiuely for every kind, many kinds, or (at
least) some kinds of creatures, then the Sun, Moon and Stars, those eyes,
lights, and lamp of heaven, are to be restored to a better state and
condition, and that upon these grounds following. First, we under (...),
comprehending the maine parts and principal creatures, then the Sun, Moon,
stars with their Orbs, must necessarily be herein included and understood.
For they have never since their first creation ceased to be, and have from man's
fall, continued in groaning, and painful travail, and so shall continue unto
the consummation of the world.

Secondly, the Sun and Moon (and by the same reason, the stars) shall at the
last day receive a manifold addition of brightness and glory; for the Sun
shall be seven times more glorious (then it is now) and the Moon Isaiae. 30.
26.
shall be as glorious as the Sun; which place of Scripture, as it has his
allegorical interpretation, in regard of the (begun) reformation of the
Christian Church, so it shall be literally fulfilled, when the Church and other
creatures shall be perfited: as might be instanced and euidenced by many
Scriptures of the like nature and extent.

Lastly, the perpetuity of Christ his (spiritual) Kingdom, is shadowed and
set forth by the continuance of the Sun and Moon: his throne shall be as
the Sun, Psalm. 89. verse. 36. 37. Psalm. 72. verse. 5. verse 7. verse. 17.
and (it) shall be established for evermore as the Moon, Gods children shall
fear him so long as the Sun and Moon endures: and Christ his name shall
endure so long as the Sun Ergo, these creatures shall be restored, and so
continue without decay, or corruption. But if the Sun, Moon and stars
shall be glorified, and so continue, then it may be demanded to what use they
shall Objection.
serve? I answer, that they shall cease from all motion, (for they shall have
a perfect rest or iubily,) and they shall not serve for signs seasons and for
days and years, nor Genesis 1. verse. 14.
to distinguish times, (for there shall be no more time, neither night nor
darkness, Summer nor Winter, nor shall they be any more used as instruments
to impart and communicate light to the world: for God by his special Apoc. 21.
ver. 23.
presence shall enlighten the new heaven and the new earth, and the Saints very
bodies shall be as light as the Sun, not needing any Sun, Moon or
starre-light. There shall be no need of, or, such use of any creature, when
we shall enjoy the creator himself. But they shall remain as most glorious
and lightsome bodies, and as so many monuments of Gods eternal power,
wisdom and goodness, the beholding and contemplation whereof, shall not only
affect and wonderfully delight the Saints, but also occasionably stir and
provoke them to extol and magnify the creator.

Touching the continuance and reparation of such plants, beasts, fowls, as
shall have a life and being, at the glorious appearing of our Lord, it seems
very probable (if not demonstrable,) by these testimonies of Scripture and
arguments ensuing. Vbi multa concurrunt verisimilia, facile est credendum:
Aristot. Matthew. 4. 23. Matthew. 7. 31.


First, this particle ((...)) is commonly and usually (in the new Testament
specially) taken for a discontinued quantity, and for specials and
particulars, as for example sake Christ healed (...). that is, every sickness
and every disease amongst the people: every sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men: Godwill have all, that is, (some of every kind, calling,
condition) 1. Tim. 2. 4.
men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth* and God is not
willing that any should perish, but all should come to repentance, and why may
it not be understood in this my text? especially seeing amongst the 2. Pet. 3.
9.
Ancient. Saint Ambrose, Oecumenius, Theodoret. etc, and amongst later writers,
most noble and famous Divines, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Oleuian, Tossanus, Faius,
Cooper that learned Scottish Britain, and Pererius, extend Ad insensata et
inanimata. Iren. lib. 5. c. 30. H. l. 12. lib. de Trinitate.
this restitution and reformation, not only to things and creatures that are
senseless and without soul: as does Irenaeus and Hilarie: and also Beza,
Bucan, Rollocke. But also to the very beasts and birds themselves.

Secondly, Gods children that do, and have in this mortal life recovered by
regeneration, the title and interest in, and to all the creatures: the light
whereof they wholly lost by Adams fall, and the dominion in great part (they must
semblably at the last day recover and obtain the full Lordship and dominion
over them: then they shall accord Isa. 11. 6. 7. 8.
together (as they did at their first creation) and be subject unto man: if
Adam being Lord (under God) of the earthly Paradise, had (for the time) the
rule and command of them, how much more shall men the heir of the heavenly
Paradise and of the new heaven, and the new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness (that is, righteous Bucan.
and just men) have the eternal dominion over them? at such times, and in such
manner, as God shall appoint: especially, seeing that we in Christ, not only
recover that we lost in Adam (I mean so much as shall make for our eternal
happiness) but are gainers, and improve our estate many ways?

Thirdly the Saints shall (at the day of the Lord) inherit the earth, wherein
most of them, for the present, Matthew. 5. 5.
have no free hold, nor actual possession, yea, they shall reign on the
earth, to wit by enter course and in manner Apoc. 5. 10.
that God shall see good, yet their ordinary place of residence Apoc. 14. 4.
and rest shall be the highest heaven, the throne of God, and the promised
kingdom; which they shall eternally 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Mat. 25. ver. 34
inherit.

Lastly, shall these outward and visible heavens, and their transparent lights
and ge^mes, the Sun, Moon, stars, etc. be renewed and shall the renewed
earth be wholly dispossessed and deprived of their necessary and convenient
ornaments and furniture? Is there not reason (or at least) great probability
as well for this, as for that? But plants, birds, beasts, etc. shall serve no
longer for Objection.
man's necessity, or to help his infirmity, for there shall be no use of
them, for labor, lodging, building, meat, drink, apparel, physic, Ergo
these ends and uses ceasing, the creatures must, and shall likewise cease. I
answer: Answer.
The argument follows not: for though their natural, ends, and uses which
served for man's infirmity shall cease: yet their spiritual and principal
ends, to wit, the setting forth of Gods glory: the matter of man's delight,
and the exercise of his meditation and thankfulness, may and shall continue
and abide. These ends are the perfection of the creatures in which they shall
rest. The soundness of this my answer may more plainly appear by these
particulars following: The brazen Serpent that Moses, by Gods commandment set
up in the wilderness (if we respect the supernatural Number. 21. 9.
next and special end of it) was to be a sign of cure unto the Israelites,
that as many of them as were stung by fiery Serpents, might look upon the
brazen serpent and live and withal to be a figure of Christ, by whom alone we
John 3. 4.
are cured and healed of the deadly sting and poison of sin and condemnation,
and though it was no sign of cure nor figure of Christ, any longer (for ought
we read) then the Jews were in the wilderness, yet it remained as a Monument
of Gods merciful goodness, until Ezechiah his time, who, when it was
perverted to Idolatry, did in (an heroicke zeal) break it into 2. King. 18.
pieces.

Christ our head at, and after his resurrection retained, and now being (in
heaven) glorified, has, and retains, all the parts and dimentions of a true
humane body, John. 20. 17. 20. 27.
as, hands, feet, flesh, sinews, bones, blood, sides: natural parts. Now
that which is affirmed of, and verified in Christ his natural body, has his
truth, and accomplishment in all his (Mystical.) members: The tongue, nose, the
mouth, stomach, belly, and diverse other parts of man's body, shall want all
such former uses as served for man's infirmities and natures necessities; but
shall have spiritual uses, and shall remain, as parts of the whole, without
which, it cannot consist, or be perfect. Many Hearses, have their arms,
flags, and diverse captains have their armor hanging over their tombs, for
monuments: but it will be objected, that plants, birds, beasts, 2. Objection.
have not continued groaning and traveling in pain from the beginning of
their bondage until now, much less, to the worlds end, and therefore none of
them are to be restored; Answer: It may be sufficient, that Christ our Lord
Answer.
find one generation of them groaning and traveling in pain together, at his
coming; and then he may, or will (as he is a free and absolute agent) renew
and continue all the particulars, or (at least) the generals of every
special, plant, beast, foul: as shall seem good to his heavenly wisdom.
But the full and certain truth hereof shall be revealed unto us in the last
day: and therefore it is not good to approach nearer this holy flame of Gods
Altiora te ne quaesieris.
secrets, least we be therewith consumed, nor diue any deeper into this
bottomless depth for fear of drowning; we herein must not be over curious,
but be wise to sobriety: and specially labor to know those things that more
concern us, and that are more evidently discovered unto us, that we and our
children may do them. Thus much therefore let it suffice to have disputed of
this difficult Deuteronomy. 29. 14.
question; having therefore opened with the Key of interpretation, the chest
wherein the treasure of doctrine and exhortation is contained, let us now view
the treasure (id est) gather the chiefest and choicest heads of doctrine, which
are ample and useful, and hereunto let us specially bend and apply our hearts
and ears.

We know that every creature groaneth and trauelleth together in pain until
now.
OVt of the whole verse, iontly and generally considered, I gather and observe,
that at Christ his glorious Generalia sunt simpliciora et intellectui notiora.
Observe. Esaias 66. 22. 2. Pet. 3. 13.
appearing, the world shall be repaired and all things shall be made new, and
the creatures, whereof I formerly entreated, shall be restored to their first
and original integrity (if not to a better condition.) There shall be a new
heaven and a new earth wherein shall dwell righteousness. And what if the
(...), (i) the outward hew and habit, form and fashion, and the corruptible
qualities of the world shall pass, and be scoured away by the fire of the
last judgment, yet the matter and substance shall remain 1. Cor. 7. 3.
(but purified, renewed, and refined) for the Scripture in no place says that
the substance shall perish. The Heavens in deed shall pass away with a noise
(or rustling) or 1. Pet. 3. 10. Apoc. 6 14.
shrink together like a skroule of parchment: The elements (like lead) shall
melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt
up, yet the world shall not be consumed to nothing, but only transchanged into
a new form and converted to a sabbaticall and better use: God out of the very
ashes of it, will produce Psalm. 102 27.
a new world: The truth here of may by a familiar similitude be made more light
some and easy to be conceived: as when the gold or silver is cast into, and
so tried in the fire, the substance remains, but the dross perishes: A
similitude.
so in the last day, the fire of the judgment shall consume and abolish the
corruptible and drossie qualities of the creature, but the substance (being
subtilised and refined) shall abide and continue.

The first reason.
The Apostle takes it for a matter known to, and confessed of the Romans, for
he says (...), for we, that is, I and you know; (namely by Gods word which is
more steadfast and sure then the earths foundation) and where the same word in
other places of Scripture is used, it imports a certain and demonstratiue
knowledge, as 2. Cor. 5. 1. 1. John 3. 4. and chap. 5. v. 18. and 19.

The second reason.
God that has put this secret desire, restless motion, and inward groaning
into the Creature; for it restitution and end, which does determine it desire
and operation, cannot, and will not be frustrate of his end: for he cannot
repent, and no creature can alter, hinder or prevent Deus et natura, nihil
facit frustra.
him of his purpose: and therefore the Creatures shall at length be perfectly
restored. And hereupon the creature so fervently desires it deliverance and
restoration: For as the nedell of a Dial being touched with A similitude.
the Loadstone, moves Northwards, and never rests, nor stands still,
until it come to that point: So the Creature by a secret and inward motion and
instinct, never cease it motion, until it have attained unto it end.

The third reason.
God that is not (the author) of confusion but the God of order, and that has
already begun, and daily does 1. Cor. 14. 33.
continue, go on with, and perfect this promised reformation, spiritually, in
the Church and in the members thereof, will also at length both begin and
finish it (at one moment) in the Creature: The creatures vanity and bondage
has not been always, neither shall it so continue: For when man's sin that
caused and occasioned it, shall be (at the last day) wholly blotted out and
abolished, then of necessity must the creatures bondage of Sublata a causa
proxima) tollitur effectus.
corruption and abuse which is the effect of it, cease.

The fourth reason.
Christ our all sufficient Savior that strong man, that binds and spoileth
Satan, and that puts and will Matthew. 12. 29.
(further) put Satan, death, and all his enemies under his feet, that daily
does repair his image (of grace and holiness) 1. Cor. 15. 25. 26.
in us; purifieth our hearts by faith, and will undoubtedly deliver our bodies
from the grave: will heal every wound that sin and Satan has caused and
inflicted: (Otherwise he would not appear to be so perfect and omnipotent a
Savior and deliverer, as he is) but the creatures vanity and bondage, is one
of these wounds and one of the Devils works, which Christ came into the world
for to dissolve. 1. John. 3. 8.


The fifth reason.
The spiritual Marriage that is on earth concluded and contracted betwixt the
Lamb and his spousesse, Apoc. 19. 7.
Christ and the Church, shall be eternally consummate and solemnized in
Heaven: And then the Creatures, their attendants, seruitors and followers,
shall (in their measure and proportion) be partakers of their Magnificence,
Oleuianus.
Glory and Majesty: no otherwise then at the marriage of a mighty Monarchs
son, all the Court and every person, officer, attendant, according to his
place, office and dignity, is gay and glorious.

The first use.
If the fillie and harmless creature, that so far forth as it is not by a
superior power ouerruled, retains the order in which it was created, and
that is made subject to Vanity, not willingly, but by reason of God, who for
the punishment of man's transgression has thus subjected verse 20.
it, must be notwithstanding (by fire) refined, altered, changed, and be rid
from the dregs and dross of corruption? How much more then, ought we that have
so infinitely sinned, and that have been the occasioners of the creatures
vanity and bondage, be renewed in the spirit of our minds, become new creatures,
repair our decaies and cast off the old man which is corrupt through the
deceitful Ephesians. 4. 22 23
lusts, and put on that new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and holiness? Otherwise we have no part in Christ, if we be not new creatures
we shall John. 13. 8. Math. 18. 4.
never enter into the kingdom of Heaven, and when the creature shall be
restored, we shall be condemned.

The second use.
Seeing the world, and all the creatures therein contained, are by reason of
man's sin, so blemished and corrupted and bained, so fading and fleeting, so
full of vanitic and abuse, and daily tend to ruin and destruction, let us not
set up our rest here, much less seek certainty in uncertainty, purity in
infection, life in death, and eternity in mortality. Nothing does give that
which Nihil dat quod non habet. Non est plus in effectu quam suit in causa.
it has not, neither is there more in the effect, then was in the cause; The
world has not blessedness in it, neither inhaesiue nor effectiue, that is,
neither in it, nor by effect, and operation: wherefore, (if we will rise with
Christ) let us seek the things that are above, and mind them, but let us not
affect the things of the world. Here we are strangers and pilgrims, and have
no abiding City, therefore let us seek one to come, and let us by the
preservatives Col. 2. 1. No fancy. Hebr. 13. 14.
of grace strive to keep our selves unspotted and untainted of the world:
Christ our treasure is in heaven, therefore let our hearts be there also, and
seeing that the Matthew. 6. 19.
time is short, let they that have wives be as though they had none: they that
weep as though they wept not: and 1. Cor. 7. 29. 30.
they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as though
they passessed not, and they that use this Bern. Cui Christus incipit
dulcescere. mundus amarescat, necesse est.
world, as though not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away:
to whom Christ begins to become sweet, to him the world must needs grow
bitter and distasteful.

Groaneth and trauelleth in pain.
Here the Apostle by a figure called Prosopopeia, whereby life and sense is
ascribed to things without life and sense, brings in the Creature groaning,
as a man that is heavy laden with a burden, whereof he desires to be eased;
and also traveling in pain, like a woman great with child, near her hour,
and there upon Apoc. 12. 2.
cries and is pained to be delivered: from which metaphorical and
Emphaticall words, I note and observe, Obser.
that man's sin has so corrupted, enthralled, perverted, and daily paineth
the creature, that it, weary of this intolerable bondage does in it kind,
make pitiful complaint unto God, and groaneth for it deliverance, and if God
should open the mouth of it, as he did the mouth of Balaams ass, it would
expostulate and reason the case with Man, and say master, what have I done,
that thou have thus corrupted me; and tormented Number. 22. 30.
me so many times, am not I thy servant which thou have used and employed
since the first time until this day?

The first reason.
The Creature knows (in it kind and manner) that it shall never be freed, nor
finally delivered from this bondage and abuse, until sin be wholly rooted
and removed out of man's bones, nature, and bowels, which shall not come to
pass, before the day of judgment, which is the day of the restitution of all
things, and the day of regeneration, when every member of Christ shall Acts 3.
19.
be finally and wholly delivered and purged from all sins: and hereupon the
creature is so pained and so pants, verse. 20. Hebr. 9. 28.
and so earnestly continues in desiring and carefully waits for this time.

The second reason.
The Creature is (in a sort) sensitive, of, and takes notice of it miserable
and mortal condition: of it weakening and decay in it virtues and powers: of it
manifold abuse and bondage: and how it tends to ruin and death, as in the
several parts, so in the whole; The parts are alterable, ergo the whole, that
receives his being from the parts, cannot be perpetual: and it knows that
the older it is, the worser, the weaker and more ruruinous, it must needs be:
All things are the worse for wearing. The Spring, Summer, and Autumn of the
world is past, and the Winter and Decrepite age is begun: for now we may truly
affirm, that the evil dates are, and the years approach, wherein we shall
say we have had no pleasure in them. But now because the vanity, Eccles. 12.
decay and tottering state of the whole, will more sensibly and evidently
appear by the vanity, decay and ruin of the parts, let us a little insist in
the particularising hereof.

First therefore, the Sun, Moon, Stars, those eyes and lights and Gemmes of
Heaven, are much altered and mightily decayed in their light, strength, virtue,
influence, and are often in their times made Gods instruments and executioners
to correct and chastise us: thus the stars in their courses and regions
(effectiue) fought against Sisera. The Sun and Moon have their frequent and
fearful Judge. 5. 20. Instrumentales causae sunt pluuiarum, ventorum,
grandinis, tempestatum.
Eclipses: the sun has his Maculas or spots (as Mathematicians observe) from
Ptolomeys day unto our time, is worn and wasted in his course, and nearer the
earth by some 9976 Germane miles: the Moon has her changes and wanes, and is
often changed into blood.

Secondly, the air with his several quarters and regions is much corrupted,
distempered, and suffers many alterations, and is made hurtful and noy some
to man, birds, beasts. The air is sundry times darkened, ouercast, infected
with a contagious quality, and (now and then) strange, ominous and prodigious
sights and apparitions are discerned in it: As, new suns, new moons, armies
of men fighting. Comets and blazing stars, etc. From the upper region of the
air, and the distemper of it proceed immoderate droughts (as late and
lamentable experience has verified) in England; and scorching heats whereby
the grass and herb is burnt and singed, beasts famished, mortality caused,
and much hurt done: from thence are heard and seen sometimes prodigious
rattling and roaring thundrings and lightnings: In the middle region of the air
are not seldom seen black foggy and Exodus 19.
dark clouds and from thence descend (sometimes) such immoderate and excessive
rain as if Heaven and earth should go asunder, and as if the world should be
again drowned: yea, (sometimes) the air raineth down milk, blood, fishes,
frogs, iron, wool, crosses, engendered by Magirus. Arist. lib. 4. de genesis
animalium.
a violent generation, the Suns heat working upon the pliablenes of matter, or
at least drawn thither by the violence and vehemence of the winds, and so fall
down upon the earth: From the lowest region of the air, are sometimes caused
and descend such tempests of hayle as beat down corn, yea and destroy man
and beast: and thence come such cruel, long continued and killing frosts, as
nips fruit in the head and blossom: and destroy fish, birds and other
creatures. Thirdly, the earth is many ways accursed, weakened, corrupted,
deformed in it self, and in it waters, plants, beasts, herbs: etc. Sundry
parts of it lie waste and without inhabitants. It is cursed with barrennes in
sundry parts, and slow in bringing forth good fruit, but it is fertile and
fruitful in thorns, briars, brambles, nettles, thistles, weeds, vermin: It
is shaken by earthquakes, yea and (in some places) sunk, or removed: it is not
seldom by fires, heats, inundations of waters and sea-breakes, spoiled and
corrupted: it brings forth (sometimes) monstrous and prodigious birthes: and
sends out dangerous, yea and deadly dampes: The rivers and streams are (now
and then) dried up, or else change their channels, and alter their courses.
Lastly, there is a mortality in plants and beasts, and they continually are
weakened and decay in their beauty, goodness and other virtues. Fourthly, the
Sea has his ebbing and flowing, whereof Aristotle The Sea.
could assign no reason (or cause:) it is often so troubled, boisterous and
tempestuous, that it sinketh and drowneth both men and ships: It continually
alters his course, eats into the earth, incroacheth upon the continent and
maine land, and gaining one way, loses an other: For if it ouerflow certain
islands, towns, cities, villages: yet it makes other islands in it bosom, so
that Cities and towns are built where the Sea erst flowed. Lastly, there is a
daily change, decay, alteration, climactericall year and fatal period, not
only in men, in apparel, buildings; but also in States, Empires, Kingdoms:
All these have their beginning, their endings, their risings, their settings,
their infancy, youth, flourishing and best time, and their drooping and
decaying old age: In a word, the world and all the parts of it, are in a
secret, daily and unrecoverable consumption.

The third Reason.
The last reason and cause that enforeeth the Creature so grievously to groan,
and with such terror to travail in pain, to be delivered, is a three-folde
abuse, that by reason of man's disobedience and rebellion it is subject to:
First, not only amongst the rude Pagans and Romans 1. 23. 25. Act. 7. 41. 42.
Apoc. 9. 20.
infidels, but also amongst (those) nominall and equivocal Christians the
Romanists, the Creature is made the matter and instrument of the grossest
idolatry: whereby the Divine Majesty is wholly estranged from it, and they are
laid open to all temporary and eternal plagues and punishments: The purity of
Gods service and Idols, can never stand together: where there are Images
(worshipped) there is no (true) religion says Lactantius: For Vbi imago ibi
nulla religio.
in the substantial worship of God, we must from the Canonical Scriptures,
have a Command for it, for every particular: otherwise our service is a will
worship and after the vain traditions of men. Secondly, the creature is
constrained to be the executioner of (the) wicked Matthew. 15. 9.
men's malice, against Gods children: hereupon the loathsome prison and
doleful dungeon keeps them in bondage; the fire burns, the Sea and waters
drown: the sword kills, and the wild beasts deuoureth them. Lastly, the
Creature, full sore against it will and stomach (for the time) serves and
ministers unto Gods enemies: For the Sun shines upon them, as well as the
good, the rain makes their ground fruitful, Luke 6.
the air affords them breath, the water matter of drink, the hemp, flax,
sheep and silkeworme, yields them cloth and garments, the earth whiles they
live, serves them with meat, drink and places of habitation, and when they
die, it affords unto their corpse a burying place. But at the day of the Lord
and thenceforward, they shall all with an universality of consent, concur
and conspire to work their torment.

The first use.
If the sinnelesse creature, so groan under the burden of our sin, which
has made it so much miserable, and if it so wonderfully does hope, desire and
weight for it deliverance, then how much more ought we, that by our sins,
are made so odious and loathsome, to God and all his creatures: to cry out and
say O miserable men ^ho shall deliver us from this body of sin? O therewise
we are more blockish and brutish then the very Creature: Romans 7. 24.
and it shall (as the dumb A^^^ rebuked Balaam the wisard, for his folly)
check us for our senselessenesse; and if the creature so covet and expect it
restitution by the very instinct of nature, or (perhaps) by supernatural
motion; then how much more should we, that have received the light of reason,
yea and of grace, and expect certainly the light of glory, and that are so
fettered and clogged and laden with sin and misery; deeply desire and
vnweariedly wait for our redemption and deliverance? According to the
superexcellent and incomparable object of our hope, so should our hope and
desire be. Otherwise, we make it more then manifest, that we have no faith, no
hope, no comfort, no promise, and the very creature shall rise up against us
in judgment, and condemn us:

The second use.
If the creatures originally made and ordained for our service, benefit and
good, occasionally at any time, prejudice, annoye, hurt or endammage us, in
our persons, family, goods, or outward estate, let us not be wrath against,
much less transfer the fault upon them (for they are but Gods ministers
servants, officers, to maintain his quarrel, correct his children and to take
vengeance on his enemies) but let us descend into our selves, consider the
plague in our hearts, blame and condemn our selves, and figuratively apply
that confession of David to our selves and say, it is we that have sinned, and
have committed evil, but these creatures? what 2. Chro. 24. 17.
have they done? and withal at such times, when God does correct us by them,
let us run unto God, let us by serious and seasonable repentance, pacific his
displeasure, and invoke and implore his mercy and help, then God will hear
in heaven, be merciful unto us, and work perfect peace betwixt us, and the
creature.

The third use.
If we would not increase the creatures groans and torments, nor cause them
(in it manner) to cry out and exclaim, yea and to prefer a bill of
enditement unto the just judge against us; let us then never (at least for the
time to come) abuse, pervert and misapplie them to any Idolatrous or
superstitious use* or, to hurt and hinder (much less to ruinate and undo) our
neighbor, or to serve our unlawful and inordinate lusts whether of pride and
pleasure, gluttony and drunkenness, or of wrath and revenge, etc. For then
the just Lord will punish our enormous abuse, and will either deprive us of the
use of the creatures, or make them his instruments and rods to scourge and
plague us.

Groan together, trauail in pain together, namely, with us.
THese words groan and travail in pain together, have a relation unto man,
with whom they suffer and sympathise, whence I draw this instruction and
conclusion, namely, that there is a certain secret sympathy, fellow feeling,
mutual affection and agreement of nature, between the creature and Gods
children: which simpathie and agreement is not only and ordinarily discovered
by their (natural) effects, as by the shaking and trembling of the earth,
eclipses of the Sun and Moon, whizzing and singing of the winds, roaring of
the Seas, serviceableness and dutifulness of the creatures as when the dogs
licked Lazarus his soars: but also sometimes by rare, unusual, and miraculous
motions, Luke 16.
effects and actions.

Instances hereof we have in the hard rock that Moses smote with his rod
which powered forth water for Gods people in great abundance: In the red Sea,
that shrunk aside: and in the flood Jordan that yielded back, Exodus 14. 16.
and 22. Ios. 3. 16. 17. Ios. 3. 10. 12. 13. 2. King. 20. 10.
and made a way and passage for the children of Israel: namely, the red Sea
made a way into the wilderness, and the river Jorden into the land of Canaan:
In the Sun that at the prayer of Joshua stood still a whole day, until he and
the Israelites were avenged of the Amorites: In the Sun: that at the prayers
of Esaias and Ezechias, went back ten degrees: In the ravenous Ravens that
brought Elias bread and flesh in the Morning, and in the Evening: In 1. King.
17. 6.
the fire that would not hurt Sadrach, Meshach and Abednago: In the hungry
Lions that would not devour Daniel Dan. 3. 26.
the Prophet: In the veil of the Temple, that at Christ his Dan. 6. 22. 23.
Matthew. 27. 55.
death, rent into two pieces: In the earth that then quaked: And in the rocks
that claue asunder: and at the point of Christ his second coming, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars shall darken by degrees: and the powers of heaven, that is, the
four Elements, and the worlds foundation Luke 21. 26.
shall be shaken.

The first reason.
If there be a natural and mutual, (though secret and inward in respect of
causes unknown) sympathy and mutual affection between the creatures
themselves, why A'Pari.
then may not there be the like, (though more supernatural) betwixt the
creatures and man? But there is such a sympathy and secret compassion and
affinity of nature, betwixt the Creatures themselves for the Loadstone by a
secret and vertuall power draws iron unto it: the Marigold opens and
shuts with the Sun and follows the course of it: the North east wind
draws unto it clouds: the iett (or amber) pulls to it straw: the fish
Remora, sucke-stone or Sea Lamprey, sticking to the Keele of the ship, does
stay and stop the course of it: the wild Bull tied to a fig tree grows tame,
and by this sympathy the vines and Elmes rejoice to dwell together.

The second reason.
They are (as it were) our sworn servants, they are our confederates, allies
and good friends and kind neighbors, and ready to do us any office and
service, therefore they rejoice with and applaud us, when it fares well with
us: and do condole, mourn and suffer with us, when it goes ill with us, or
when we are any way hardly bestead.

The first use.
Diverse have doubted (yet without any great reason) whether that there are any
Antipodes, that is, people directly under us, whose feet in respect of
situation go against our feet, but they have less reason to doubt whether
that there by any Antipathites, that is, Men that are opposite to men and
contrarily affected: For the world, yea (...): Timones.
and our little world of great Britain, abounds with such, who though they
have the form and shape of men, yet in regard of their vncompassionate nature,
they are rather monsters then men, and rather fiends then friends: of which I
will give some taste and some general instances. First then, by this doctrine are
condemned the merciles brood and devilish generation of Papists, Jesuits,
Seminary Papists.
Priests, and the like, whose faith is fact on, whose religion is rebellion,
and whose badge is blood: these cry poison, poison, kill, kill, crucify,
crucify, these moldy pioners, and sulphurious hell hounds, cry raze the
Parliament, house, raze it to the ground: these seduce and pervert many hundred
of the Kings Majesty his liege Subjects. O what massacres have they not made
Psalm. 137. 7.
in France, Italy, America, have they not embrued and bathed themselves in the
Blood* of the Prophets and of the Saints, and of all Protestant and perfect
Christians that have been slain in Europe? Have not they their masses in
sundry places of the Kingdom? O where is become the zeal of Magistrates
civil and Ecclesiastical in many places, that should prevent and restrain
our English Papists from resorting thither. God grant that every one may timely
beware of their sugared seducements, damnable doctrine, and pestilent practices,
that they be Papists.
not partakers in their sin, and that they receive not of their plagues: and
God stir up the hearts, and kindle the zeal* of all that be in authority,
and whom it specially concerns, to look to the Maine chance, to take Apoc.
18. 4.
these Foxes that devour the Vines, to tie up these mad dogs: to cut off this
dead flesh, and to dispatch these worrying wolves: otherwise, if too much
conniuence (be still) used, the tares will ouerspread and ouergrow the good
corn: the Wolves will devour the Lambs, the Cant. 2. 15.
Foxes will destroy the vines: And the Papists (which God forfend) will get the
start of us. Severity in the due execution of Law herein, Non crudelitas sed
pro Deo pietas, is not cruelty (as some mis-intitle it,) but zeal for God, and
a public or common evil has need of a common remedy: Secondly, to this
number of Apathites, Antipathites, or perverse minded people, belong the great
Nimrods of our time, whether Knights, Gentlemen, or others, that have within
this twenty or thirty years last past, hedged in, and enclosed, (for their
private use and advantage) common grounds, fields, pastures, and have withal
(for it must needs follow) decayed and ^^populated many hundred buroughs,
towneships, Villages. Hereby the Kingdom is weakened, the Kings most excellent
Majesty's subjects are in their number decreased: Tillage decayed: In any
dearth of grain the multitude sterued, or hard bestead: and the tenants turned
out to shift for themselves, or to feed on the bare Commons: Hospitality
marred, pride professed, sheep empastured, but men impouerished. The fathers
get their enclosures by oppression, and the heirs and successors will make no
restitution: what will be the end and issue? God will and does curse and
cross these canniball enclosers, in their states, persons, stocks, and
posterities: and of illgotten goods the third Heir shall have no fruition. God
grant that authority may herein respectively tender the poor, and reform the
common abuse, and God grant unto the poor and oppressed, patience, and give
them grace by prayers and tears, to commend their cause to God, who will in
time right and revenge them. Thirdly, hereby the Lawyers are reproved: who
having Arist. 2. lib. de anima. Omniu^ animalium certissimum tactum habet homo.
such an Attractiue hand and silver touch, are but faint in their poor Clients
cause, except they feel him: the better monied that the Client is, the better
is his matter. Do not many of you undertake more causes then you have time to
follow? And do you not take fees of diverse, for whom you have either no
leisure or at the least no pleasure to speak and plead? Where is your
Christian compassion become, and who will plead your cause, or intercede for
you at the last day before the great judge of Heaven and earth? Do you, if you
perceive that your Clients cause is naught, and that he is like to be cast in
the suite, plainly tell him the truth, and charitably advise him what course
he were best to take? Nay do not some of you keep your Clients, (especially)
if it be a Chancery matter; in a long and tedious suit for your own advantage,
as some vncompassionate and unconscionable Physicians, keep their rich
Patients in long cure, for their further gain and profit? In the name of God,
think seriously of these faults, amend them, let the fear of God be before
your eyes: take no reward against the innocent, pity the poor, look to the
cause rather then the client, and have no respect of persons 2. Chro. 19. 17.
in judgment, then shall you prosper and do well.

Heereunto (if time would permit) I might add and adioyne the greedy
engrossing Merchant who has not only, his dark lights, and his mingled
wares, whereby he deceives many, but most of all beguileth his own soul, but
like a Monopolist sells his wares at an unreasonable rate and reckoning:
where o Man is thy mercy Apostrophe.
to thy poor brother? where is thy sympathy and compassion? Mark the end and
be wise, remember that ill gotten goods do not long prosper, and that he that
shows no (mercy) shall have judgment without mercy. Lastly, of Iac. 2. 13.
this rank and rabble of merciless men, the griping and biting usurer, the
Church deuowring and the Church robbing Latron; I would have said Patron, sed
lapsa est lingua; the Market-Badger, the Corne-Munger and Corne-hoorder, and
the pitiless and sheepe-pining dumb dog, and the idle, lazy, unprofitable
non-resident, these are one of sort and suit, and never a barrel the better
herring: God amend them al (if it be his will) and grant that when they lie open
to law, it may be duly excuted upon, them and against them, to Gods honor and
to the good example of others.

USES OF EXHORTATION.
The second use.
LEt us in no wise curse, banne, lame or misuse any of the poor Creatures,
knowing that if there be any defect or untowardness in their nature; or any
want of duty and observance in them, toward us, our sin has been and is the
cause and occasion of it: and if the poor dumb Creature, (bird or beast) be
in any pain and misery, let us not joy, nor sport our selves in it pains and
torments, but rather be sorry for it, and be grieved for our own sins, which
the filly and sinlesse creature smarteth for. And in this action let us imitate
and follow the example of the sons of Kings and great Nobles, who when they
see any of their Schoolefellowes, A similitude.
Playfellows, or attendants, beaten and scourged for their default and offense,
take it as greenously, and as much to heart, as if they were corrected and
chastised in their own proper persons.

The third Use.
Let us from the very Creature learn to be merciful and compassionate one
toward an other: Let us not be wolves one to another, but instruments and
examples of good: Let us feeling members of that mystical body whose head is
Christ, rejoice with them that rejoice, and mourn with them that mourn: let
us condole and suffer Romans 12. Matthew. 25. 35. Verse 36. Gregor. in Moralibus.
Tanto quisque perfectior est, quanto perfectius alienos sentit dolores. Hier.
Epist. ae Nepot: Non memini me legisse mala morte mortuum, qui libenter opera
Charitatis exercuit. Habet enim multos intercessores, et impossible multorum
preces non exaudiri.
with our persecuted brethren in any Kingdom, Country, place: Let us pray for
them, and (if opportunity serve) counsel, comfort and relieve the bowels of
Christ. Finally, if Christ be hungry in his (true) members, let us give him
meat: if he thirst let us give him drink: if he be a stranger let us take
him in: if he be naked let us cloth him: If he be sick, let us visit him: and
if he be in prison, let us come unto him: For every man is so much the more
complete, the more perfectly that he feels an other man's sorrow, then shall
we in this world, and at the day of judgment, find mercy at Gods hands; and if
any of ours be in need and distress, God will for our sakes and his promise
sake, stir and raise them up friends: and will be merciful unto them: I will
conclude with that saying of S. Jerome: I to my remembrance (says he) never
read, that he died an evil death that willingly practiced the works of
Charity. For he has many intercessors, and it cannot be but that the prayers
of many (Saints) should be heard.

Until now.
IN this place the Apostle does illustrate and sets forth the Creatures
desire and hope, by the Circumstance of time, and so successively, shall
continue groaning and traveling in pain together, unto the end of the world,
whence we are taught, by their example, not to be disheartened in our long
continued and tedious afflictions, but to practice patience and long
sufferance, and to wait in hope for our full and final deliverance.

The first Reason.
Because that we are more drawn with examples, then moved with
Commandments, and do rather heed and practice presidents then regard
precepts, the Merciful God tendering our infirmity, has for our help and
imitation, made the Creature a guide and example unto us, in so much that if we
suffer the Creature herein to out-stride, and outstrip us, we are altogether
inexcusable.

The second reason.
In a common Calamity, and in suffering for any good Mitior est paena quanto
communior ipsa est.
cause, the more company, the greater comfort, by how much more common the
suffering is, by so much more easy and tolerable it is: we have then no (just)
cause to complain with Elias, that we are left alone, nor with 1. Kings 19.
14.
the Jews in Jeremy his lamentations, to demand, whether that there is any
sorrow like unto ours which is done Lamen. 1. 12.
unto us: nor curiously with Peter, to say what shall become of John, What
shall this man do? Nay, (if we respect the date and term of time) our
afflictions are but momentany, being compared with those of the Creatures: Ioh.
21.
For some of them have groaned and traveled in pain, five thousand and
(almost) six hundred years: and it is more rare then usual, if we continue
groaning fourscore years: For not one (I am persuaded) of ten, or of many,
attaineth unto that length of years: and therefore we have the more cause,
more quietly and contentedly to undergo them.

The third reason.
The longer that our afflictions are, the lighter and lesser they are: the
sharper that they are, the shorter will they be: No violent thing is
perpetual: if our affliction be Nullum violentum est perpetuum.
caused by persequutors and oppressors, then God will not let the rod and
scepter of the wicked to rest long upon us, least we tired by their tyranny,
should put forth our Psalm. 125. 3.
hands unto wickedness, and if it come by any other means, God (such is his
indulgence and faithfulness) will not suffer us to be tempted above that we be
able, but 1. Cor. 10. 13. Psalm. 103. 14.
will even give an issue with the temptation, our misery is the object that
moves God to show mercy: he knows whereof we be made, and he remembers that
we are but dust; and therefore the more privy that we are of our own
impiety, and the more sensible that we are of our own sinfulness, the more
ready and resolute will God be to show mercy.

The use.
First, The long patience and waiting of the creatures for their restorement:
and their long attendance and patient desire to be delivered from the bondage
of corruption, serves to check and condemn the graceless Gallants and the
swearing Swaggerers and thriftlesse Tobackonists of our time, whether men of
sort, or otherwise so abhorring holy assemblies, and distasting all practice of
piety; who meeting in Tauernes and gaming-houses, and that often at
unseasonable times, fall a drinking and dicing so long: that the liquor being
in and the wit out, the blood up, and the devil at their elbow, fall to
wrangling and quarreling, challenging and stabbing one an other: In so much
that many loose both their lives and their souls, and lands and livings at one
instant: and the murderers, though they escape man's judgment, are plagued and
pursued with the furies of an evil conscience, and the vengeance of God
follows them at heels. These men will put up no wrongs, but offer them;
patience never grew in their garden: but rankor and wrath possesses their
hearts. O ye merciless murderers that will show no mercy, nor if (perhaps)
you be wronged will make God, the law and the Magistrate your auengers: but
you will revenge your own quarrel, and that without ground, reason or
moderation: The very brutish and reasonlesse creatures that do so patiently
put up so many wrongs and indignities offered them and call and cry only unto
God for help and deliverance, shall at the latter day, rise up in judgment
against you, and condemn you, and in the mean time leave you without all
excuse.

Secondly, it serves to reprove and condemn our 2. Use.
fainth eartednesse in trouble, and our repining and impatient Spirits: every
trial does trouble us, ouerie menace does amate us: every (Church) tempest
makes us (for very fear) to cry save us Lord, we perish, yea, every cross
Matthew. 8. 25.
does cast us down: Surely, if we faint in the day of our adversity, our
strength is not great, nor our hope lively? wherefore let the very creatures
example put life and Spirit into us: and let it be a shame for us (who are the
Sons of God, not only by creation; but also by redemption, and that are
heirs apparent of heaven) to let the poor and brutish Creature so greatly to
exceed and excel us in long suffering and patient expectance for a better
condition. Let therefore the approach of the Lords coming to us by death, or,
the general judgment; and the due and deep meditation of the infinite weight
of glory prepared for us, keep us from falling and fainting; let it kindle
and provoke our desire and longing after it, and make us steadfast and
immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as we
Hebr. 10. 37.
know; that yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come and
will not tarry, and that our labor is not in 1. Cor. 15. 58.
vain in the Lord, Shall the husbandman wait for the precious fruit of the
earth, and have long patience for it, until he receive the first and latter
rain? And shall not we Iam. 5. 7.
much more patiently and thirstingly, expect the fruitful shewers of Gods
preventing and confirming grace, and settle our hearts for the coming of our
Lord, when the Angels shall reap us down, and carry us as sheaues of Matthew.
13.
good wheat into Gods barn? The Lord, grant us, faith, hope and patience, and
give us the hearts and wills to use all the holy means, whereby they may be
quickened, increased and confirmed. Amen.

But also we our selves, which have the first fruits of the Spirit.
IN this metaphore of (the) first fruits the Apostle alludeth to the custom
and practice of the Jews in the time of the old Testament, who (that they
might testify their obedience to Gods commandments, make proof of their
thankfulness, and procure a blessing to the rest of their fruits) did offer
their first fruits unto God: by the performance of which duty, they were
assured to receive and enjoy the residue, in due season: So Gods children
referring, dedicating and converting the first fruits of grace, which they
have received from God, to his honor and glory; conceive and entertain
certain hope, that they shall at length receive the accomplishment of them,
and with all eternal bliss and glory: now in that the Apostle does here
describe Gods children by their gifts and graces, which he calls the first
fruits of the spirit, and which are the earnest of their immortality, we
learn that every child of God, must in this Observe.
life, truly have and be possessed (in some competent measure) with the graces
of Salvation: They are, or must be partakers of spiritual blessings in
heavenly things: Every member of Christ must have his measure of grace Romans
12. 3. Ephesians. 4 7.
and faith.

They must know the truth, that is, according to godliness: and know the
mysteries of Gods kingdom, they must 1. Tim. 2. 4. Matthew. 13. 15. Apoc. 7. 11.
12. Hebr. 10. 22.
have the Spirit of prayer and thanksgiving: They must be sprinkled in their
hearts from an ill conscience: their bodies washed with pure water: they must
love the brethren, because they are Gods adopted children: they must with 1.
John 3. 14.
godly sorrow bewail their manifold sins, and from 2. Cor. 10.
the bottom of their heart, repent of the^: They must be rooted, grounded and
established in faith, and have that lively hope Colloss. 2. 6. Romans 5. 5.
that makes them not ashamed: and (not to be tedious) they must every one of
them in his proportion and according to his means, calling, employments, have
the first fruits of love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meckenesse, temperance: and as Saint Peter Galat. 5. 22. and. 23.
reckons and numbreth them, faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience,
godliness, brotherly kindness, charity: 2. Pet. 1. 6. and. 7.
etc. These and the like, spiritual graces and endowments are the breathings
and impressions of Gods spirit: Exorn.
and the rebound or reflection of the beams of the sun of righteousness upon
us: these are the bright, white and shining garments where with the lambs
spouse and bride is clad and attired: these are the Myrrh, Aloes, Cassia,
incense and powders of the Merchant, wherewith the Saints are perfumed: These
are the bracelets, Ouches, pretions stones, Rings and Jewels, wherewith Christ
his Church is beautified and adorned: and the hidden treasure wherewith they
are enriched.

The first reason.
Except, we partake of these graces, we are no members of Christ: we have no
part, interest and portion in him: and shall never inherit the kingdom of
heaven, nor see Gods face in glory: Christ is the Son of righteousness: if
we receive no light from him, we remain in deadly darkness: He is the
welspring and fountain of John. 4. 14.
grace, from whom if we by the buckets of faith draw not the waters of life
from it, we are but dry and dead sticks: Christ is the head of his members,
and does impart and communicate spiritual sense, life and motion to them,
which if we receive not from him, we are no members of his: because we are not
quickened by his Spirit.

Lastly, if we remain in our pure naturals, and are not newborn of water and
the holy spirit, Christ will not acknowledge us, for any of his, but disclaim
and renounce us: For, as the Eagle does not take notice of, nor acknowledge her
young ones for her own, so long as they are naked, implumed and without
feathers: so in Similitude.
like manner, Christ Jesus our Lord, does not take nor acknowledge any for his
members, all the while that they are in their natural corruption, and are
without the wings of faith, and the feathers of Gods grace.

The second reason.
Gods children must (even in this mortality) be by these graces separated and
essentially, discerned and distinguished, from all mere naturals and civil
men, from all heathens, hypocrites, heretics, and from all that are only
Politicians, Linguists, and those that have the laudable knowledge of all the
liberal Arts and sciences: For common and natural gifts, and those that the
reprobates may partake of as well as the Elect (common gifts Communia non
distinguunt.
I say) make not the formal and essential difference between them, but those
that are proper and peculiar to the Elect: to wit, the gifts and graces of
justification and Ephesians. 4. 24.
sanctification: For hereby Gods Image, which consists in knowledge, in true
holiness and righteousness, is renewed Col. 3. 10.
and repaired in them.

The third reason.
Gods children before that they can be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, must be washed from Col. 1. 12.
their sins and sanctified by faith in the Lord Jesus, and they must live
justly, godly, and soberly in this present Tit. 2. 11. 12.
world, that they may be made mere for it: for as the kingdom of heaven is
prepared for them, so they must be Apoc. 19. 7.
prepared for it.

The first use.
Let us not rest in, nor content our selves with the natural gifts of
civility, policy, or that we are good Artists, Philosophers, linguists: for
the common gifts; though in themselves, and for substance they are good, yet in
all those who are destitute of faith and sanctification, they are sinful and
polluted, and are as rotten rags, and a body without a soul (or spirit.) Tit.
1. 14.


Neither let us content our selves with a temporary and fleeting faith, with a
Pharasaicall, seeming, and hypocritical Matthew. 5. 17.
holiness, or with a bare taste of the heavenly gifts, and with an outward
reformation of manners when Hebrews 6. 5.
the heart is not changed, nor the affections sanctified: For, God that is
true, sincere and holy in his nature, and all his attributes, and that
requires truth in the inward parts and will be served in spirit and truth,
will not accept Psalm. 51. 6.
of these for current payment: Those persons have no Oil in their lamps, nor
light in their works, nor are not ready for the Marriage, and therefore shall
be shut out Mat. 25. 3. and. 10
from it, and those wanting the wedding garment of faith and holiness, shall
be cast bound hand and foot into utter darkness: But let us, though with
loss of all that we have, purchase the field wherein this hid treasure lies,
Matthew. 13. 44. and 46.
and buy this inestimable pearl of grace: and conscionably use and plie all
holy means, both to gain these graces, and to increase and confirm them.

Let us therefore not (as many do) content our selves with a dombe, ignorant
and vnteaching ministry, where that is wanting that serves* usually to work
effectually upon our consciences, and be get us unto God, and build us up in
faith (for if the blind lead the blind, Matthew. 13. 14.
both must needs (without Gods extraordinary mercy) fall into the pit of
eternal destruction) but because Romans 10. 14.
(ordinarily) faith only comes by bearing of the word Romans 4. 15.
preached, and increases daily by it, (...) also by the administration of the
sacraments and prayers, let us be devout and 1. Cor. 10. 1.
diligent in the use of all these blessed means, and then Romans 10. 13.
carefully frequenting Sermons, and using all the other exercises of religion,
God will bless his own ordinance, Mat. 7. 7. and. 8.
and confer grace upon us, and having begun this good work^ in us: will
perform it unto the day of Phil. 1. 6.
Christ. Phil. 1. 6.


The first fruits of the spirit.
THe Apostle does not say that we have received the perfect, full and whole
fruits (for those we shall receive at the harvest of the great day) but
alluding to the usage of Gods people in the time of the old Testament, says,
that we have the first fruits (Id est) certain sheaues (or rather ears) of
corn, in respect of the whole harvest; and Observe.
certain small clusters, in comparison of the whole vintage; whence it is
apparent, that Gods children, though they have the truth of grace in their
hearts and all the parts of it: yet they are not complete, or accomplished in
grace, Ea quae scimus, sunt minima respectu earum, quae ignoramus. Ariflot.
and have not the fullness, nor all the degrees of it: If we regard quantity,
there is more ignorance of heavenly things in them, then knowledge, more sin
then sanctity, and more rebellion then obedience: the gifts and graces of God
in them; are but (as it were) certain beams of the Sun of righteousness,
certain grains of gold, in comparison of the whole mine and mountain, and
certain drops of the water of life, in regard of the maine Ocean of Gods grace.

The first reason.
From a partial (or imperfect) cause, cannot proceed a total and full effect
(for there is not more in the effect then was in the cause) but the next and
immediate causes of their thoughts, words, actions, to wit, the enlightening of
their, minds, and the change and sanctification of their wills and affections,
are but partial, they are begun, and in motion, and in the way toward
perfection, but they are not yet perfect: for their knowledge and understandings
are mixed with ignorance: their wills and affections with rebellion: their faith
with unbelief: their hope with doubting: and so their thoughts, words, actions
are soiled and defiled with sin: in so much that Romans 7. 15. In ijs damnatu^
peccatum sed non extinctam.
what they would do? they do not, but what they hate, that they do! Sin is
condemned in them, but not destroyed; lessened, but not abolished, weakened,
but not wholly wasted.

The second reason.
Our spiritual birth, and the growth of it (ordinarily) follows the order of
our natural birth: for in sundry places of Scripture, it is compared and
resembled to it: but our natural birth, is not perfitted all at once, but by
Gal. 4. 19.
times and degrees, and when the child is brought forth, it does not forthwith
attain unto his ripeness and perfect state and stature: but has his infancy,
his childhood, his youth, and then it full strength and perfect man: And thus it
fares with our new birth and new man: It has his forming and framing, his
growth and increase, and shall aspird unto the pitch and point of it full age
before Ezech. 47.
the judgment day: They are in their way, but not yet at Ephesians. 4. 13.
their iourneies end and rest. 1. Cor. 13. 10. 12


The third reason.
They (during this mortality) are not fitted for it; nor worthy to receive
it, and therefore God will have them The children of God, during this
mortality, are not capable of absolute perfection.
exercised before that he put them into full possession of absolute
perfection: and that partly, by reason of their shallow apprehension of grace
offered, and partly by reason of their diverse decays, losses, arreareges. For,
first, Gods children (though vessels of grace, and of gould and silver, serving
for honorable uses) are but like narrowmouthed 2. Tim. 2. 20. 21
pots, and cannot at once receive all the grace that is by the ministry of
the word offered, but by little and little receive it, and here that Rule of
the Philosopher: has his place viz, whatsoever is received, that same
Quicquidirecipitur, recipitur secundam modum recipientis et non recepti.
is received, according to the measure of the receiver and not of the thing
received. The law is spiritual, and does require spiritual and perfect
obedience, but they are carnal that is, full of sins, slips, imperfections;
Secondly, their passions lead them hither and thither; Thirdly, their manifold
temptations, are like so many rubs and hubs, blocks, and stones, in their
ways: where at they est soon stumble, and are let in their journey and
especially they in the (daily) combat betwixt the flesh and the Gal. 5. 16. and
17.
spirit, though at length they prevail, yet they receive many foiles and
falls, and often (for the time) lose somewhat of that they formerly had, and are
troubled and terrified in conscience. An example hereof, we have in Jacob,
when he all the night wrestled with the Angel (Jesus Christ) for, as the
Angel, when Jacob wrestled with him, touched, loosed and vnionted the hollow
of his thigh; in so much that he halted all his life after it, and Gen 32. 24
and 25
yet notwithstanding by reason of his importunity, he Pezelius in Genesin.
prevailed: So Gods children (even the stoutest and strongest of them) receive
(for their correction and humiliation) in the spiritual combat and conflict,
some loss and lamenesse, and some hurt and wound: yet (because God will perfect
his power in Infirmity) they are more 2. Cor. 12. 9. 10.
then conqeurours, through Christ that loves them. Neither Romans 8. 37.
must Gods purpose and proceedings herein seem strange, and much less
offensive. For his will is, that there shall be a notable and remarkable
difference between mortality and immortality, betwixt the childhood of his
Church in this life, and the perfect manly estate of it in the next: I say
betwixt the Church warring in earth, and it triumphing in heaven,

The first use.
Hence is discovered the conceived vanity and vaunting vein of many that are
but nouices, petites, and incipients in Christ his school, who being but low
shrubs imagine that they are tall Cedars: being but windy bladders conceit
themselves to be full of all the Spirit: having hardly gotten the true
beginnings of piety and purity, bear themselves in hand, that they have the
perfection and pith of it. These men measure not themselves by their inward
state, whereof they are ignorant, but by their outward appearance: They measure
themselves by themselves, which is a partial and Lesbian rule, but not by the
touch stone and standard of Gods word: And hereupon these empty caskets, and
these tinckling Cymbals make the greater sound, but in the wind and tempest of
trial and trouble (these) leaves and chafe will be scattered, and at the
coming of the Lord (if not before) they shall be unmasked and uncased, and
their nakedness shall appear to, and their shame be seen of all men. Apoc.
16. 15.


The second Use.
Secondly, these are also, by the authority of this doctrine, taxed and
reproved, who confounding all things, veil and hide all want and absence of
grace in themselves, under the curtain and color of imperfection, as though
there were no difference between blindness and dim sight, between nakedness
and apparel, betwixt life and death, betwixt bondage and liberty, Qui non
distinguit, destruit artem.
something and nothing: here it is true, he that makes no distinction,
overthrows Art: and they that cannot, nor will make no difference betwixt
light and darkness, natural gifts and spiritual, and between presence of
grace and want of it, do put out the eyes of faith and make all sins equal,
and so destroy all Divinity: These peevish persons wittingly and wilfully
seduce their own souls: and their fond excuses will not hold out water, but
fail them in death, and at the day of judgment leave them without excuse.

The third use.
Here is matter of endless comfort for all them, that have the sound
beginnings, and parts of saving grace, and that are careful and constant by
the use of all good means, namely by hearing of Sermons, receiving of the
Sacraments, the use and practice of prayer and thanksgiving, reading of the
Scriptures and of all learned Divines, disputes and treatises: by holy
conferences; and by conscionable walking in their civil and Christian
callings, to cherish and strengthen the same. God will accept them for the
better, and not the greater parts: he will more esteem them for the graces of
the spirit, then dislike or distaste them for their corruptions: if they be
Matthew. 12. 20.
no stronger then bruised reeds, Christ will not break them: and if their
faith do but smoke, he will not quench it: He accepts in them, the desire
for the deed: and will in his due time finish the spiritual building begun in
them: his grace is sufficient for them, and he will perfect 2. Cor. 12. 9.
his power in their manifold infirmities.

Groan within our selves.
OVt of these words, Groan within our selves, this instruction offreth and
presents it self to our consideration, Obser.
namely, that the very inward sighs and groanings in Gods children, are
certain and infallible signs, Psalm. 51.
and testimonies of their Adoption, and are much respected of God: They are the
(...) (i) peculiar affections in Gods Children. Isai. 38. 14. Exodus 3. 9. Act.
7. 34. Ioh. 11. 33. 38.
Nehemias, David, the Children of God in their captivity in Egypt, Moses:
Exodus 14. 15. Anna, Ezechias, Paul, yea and our Lord Jesus himself are in the
Scriptures noted and ennoble for their sighs and groanings.

The first reason.
The inward groans: (which often times break out into outward passions) are a
part of Gods spiritual worship, whereby they are distinguished from al
hypocrites, whose service and holiness is only outward: for they proceed from
a broken and contrite heart, and are special Psalm. 51. 15.
effects of Gods spirit, which he cannot but highly esteem of.

The second Reason.
They are weary and heavy Laden: they feel their sins like a Millstone to
press them down: they labor under the burden of their manifold falls, and
faylings: they see in what danger they stand: and how mightily the Divine
Majesty is, or may be offended: No known sin seems light to them: they
strive to shake it off, and would feign be eased of it: For it breaks their
hearts, and forces them to cry out with blessed Paul, O miserable man, who
shall deliver us from this body of sin? But Romans 7. 24.
contrariwise the wicked make but a jest and sport of Prou. 4. 16.
sin, It is meat and drink to them: And they receive it into their souls
and bodies, as the Gallant and swaggerer does his Indian weed, that is, his
idle, idol, Tobacco: It seems honey in the taste, but it is more bitter then
wormwood and gall in the trial.

The third reason.
The eclipse of syncerity: decay of piety: freezing of charity: the oppression
of the innocent, the encroaching of superstition: the intolerable breach of
the Sabbath, and Inundation of Atheism and profanenes, do compel their hearts
to melt and to mourn for the abom inations that are done in the land, and when
they see and hear the Ezech. 9. 4.
wicked conversation of the ungodly, to vex their righteteous souls from day
to day: They as good subjects cannot abide that their Heavenly King: as good
servants that their Heavenly Master: and as dutiful and loving sons that
their Heavenly Father, should be so blasphemed, dishonored, offended, and
provoked to anger.

The fourth reason.
The manifold troubles, and persecutions of the ministers and members of Christ
of all sorts and in (all) places, where sin and Satan reigns, do draw fighes
from their hearts, tears from their eyes, and complaints from their months!
They are grieved, troubled: yea and martyred (in affection) to see Gods dear
servants so indignely handled! Hence they cry, help Lord: and up Lord, let
not man prevail: and how long Lord holy and Psalm. 12. 1. Apoc. 6. 10.
true? And remember the enemy and the auenger. They know that it cannot go
well with the whole, when it fares so ill with the parts. But the enemies of
God, whose badge and cognizance is cruelty and pitiless compassion, rejoice
at their troubles, make merry, and send gifts one to another: their song is,
down with them, down with them: but their sins are scored up: and they
fulfill the measure of their sins: and their damnation Apoc. 11. 10.
steepeth not. And though God comes with woollen feet, yet he strikes with
iron hands: and the slower that his vengeance is, the more severe will it be
when it is to be executed.

The first use. (...).

Here we have very just cause and occasion to weep for, and to bewail the
more then stony hardness of our senseless and dead hearts, that when so many
occasions and objects of groaning are daily offered, yet our hearts will not
come down, send forth groanings, nor distill into tears: surely, surely, our
hearts are harder the^ the Adamant: for though neither fire not iron, can
separate nor Leu. Lemni. de gemmis. Lib. 2. c. 15.
dissolve the parts of it, yet the hot and fresh blood of a goat does cause it
to yield, and to dissolve. Our hearts are harder then the Rock that Moses did
smite with his Number. 20. 11.
rod, for when he smote it, it powered forth abundance of water: But neither
mercies nor miseries, rods nor rewards, can draw groanings from our hearts, nor
sin, tears from our eyes: wherefore let us most humbly and heartily entreat
the Lord, to give us a new heart, and to put a new spirit into us, to take away
the stony heart out of our Eze chapter 36. 26.
bowels, and to give us an heart of flesh; that may melt at Gods judgments as
Josias his heart did, and that may yield it self pliable and frameable to God,
by his Spirit, to work upon.

The second use. (...).

If we in our griefs, agonies, distresses and extremities, can but groan and
cry inwardly unto God for counsel, Exodus 14. 15.
ease and deliverance (though with our tongues we cannot tell how to speak or
pray: as we would and should; nay, if Tyrants and persecutors, should cut our
tongues out of our heads: Let us not be dismayed, nor discouraged, but comfort
and cheer our hearts: God that has taught us by his Spirit, thus to groan,
and that knows and approoueth what his own Spirit desires and coueteth,
takes notice of these Groans, accepts of them, and will hear and deliver
the oppressed: Psalm. 12. 5.
These proceed from a broken and contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 17.
which sacrifices God despises not: but most affectionately tendreth: but woe
to those wicked ones that by their oppression, and by their scandalous life and
injurious dealing, cause Gods children to groan and grieve: they here in
touch the apple of Gods own eye: and better Zach. 2.
were it for them that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and that they
were drowned in the depth Math. 18. 6.
of the Sea, then thus to offend one of Gods children.

Waiting for the adoption.
THe word Adoption has a threefold signification: first it is (sometimes)
taken for the Adoption of Election, whereby we are (Gods) Sons in his
eternal Ephesians. 1. 4.
decree and counsel: Secondly, for the Adoption of Justification, for as soon
as we actually believe in Christ, we are actually made the Sons of God:
Lastly, (as in S. Lukes Gospel, and also in this place) it is used for the
Ioh. 1. 12. Luke. 21. 28. Obser.
Adoption of glorification. From this last notion and sense, I draw this
collection: It is a proper mark and Character of Gods Children to desire,
hope, and wait for their glorification and full Salvation. They wait for their
Masters Luke. 12. 36. Tit. 2. 13. Phil. 2. 20. Apoc. 22. 20. 2. Cor. 5. 2 and
5. Matthew 25. 10.
return from the wedding: They look for the blessed hope, and for the
glorious apearance of the Lord Jesus: They pray for the coming of Christ: They
sigh for it; And prepare themselves against that day.

The first reason.
It is the nature and property of hope with patience to Romans 8. 25.
wait for that which is promised and not seen: and so much the more carefully
to attend it, as the thing hoped for, draws nearer to his date, and
accomplishment: For this hope is built upon the powerful and unchangeable
Promise of God in the Scripture; yea, and upon his Hebr. 6. 19.
oath, and it is the anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, to stay the
ship of their conscience, that it be not carried away by the storms and
tempests of troubles: wherefore where there is no desire and expectation, for
full redemption, there is no hope, no faith, no comfort, no religion.

The second reason.
They are Soiourners, Strangers and pilgrims in this Psalm. 119. Genesis 47. 9.
Hebr. 13. 13.
present world, they have no settled seat, nor abiding-Citie here, but they
seek one to come: and in this their pilgrimage, partly, the view of their own
sins, and of the abominations of the world, and partly, the manifold, yea
and remediless wrongs and indignities, that they here undergo, and do make
them loath this wretched life: and to long and look for a better, where 2.
These. 1. 6. 7.
they shall rest from all their labors, and enjoy fullness of pleasures at
Gods right hand for evermore.

The third reason.
The contemplation and serious consideration of the more then excellent weight
of the eternal glory that shall be revealed in their souls and bodies, and
also of that most blessed and immediate fellowship and communion, that the
Saints shall have mutually, not only one with another, but also with the whole
Trinity (that is) with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, does put an edge
and life to their desires; and increases their hopeful expectation. If no
workman works for naught, but Nullus efficiens agit temere, sed omnis
propter sinem certum agit.
every one looks to some certain end: If the hired servant waits for his
days wages: if the husbandman for the precious fruits of the earth, If the
traveler desires the end of his journey that he may rest: and the soldier
have respect to the victory and unto the spoil: Then how much more should we
that tarry for such a Kingdom, exercise and stir up our hope and patience?

Qu. But why do many of Gods children more fear Quaest.
the last Judgment then desire it?

Ans. First, they by reason of the dregs of corruption, Ans.
do not sufficiently distaste the world: Secondly, many of them are babes and
nouices in Christianity: Thirdly by the violence of some tentations.

The first use.
Fearful and (almost) forlorn, unhappy, yea and hopeless is the estate and
condition of many, yea even of those that live in the body and bosom of the
Church, whose thoughts, meditations and desires are taken up only with earthly
profits and pleasures: They set up their rest here and so live, as if there
were no general resurrection, and neither Heaven for reward, nor hell for
punishment to be expected: They, falsely imagine, that there is a certainty in
uncertainty, they make the World their paradise, and as for the glory to be
revealed, they believe it not, and therefore they hope not for it, and shall
never be partakers of it.

The second use.
Let this be a caution unto us, that we make not the outward state and
condition of Gods children in this life the rule, squire, and touchstone of
their hope and happiness, (for the^ we measure them with a Lesbian rule, and
weigh Vita eius qui secundum Euangelium vixerit, est continua Crux et
Martyrium. Col. 3. 3. 1. John 3. 2.
them in a false balance) their present life is but a toylesome and
troublesome pilgrimage, and a painful (yet no popish) purgatory, yea a
continual Cresse and Martyrdom: their life of glory is hid with God in
Christ, it does not yet appear, neither to themselves nor others what they
shall be though they walk by faith, and not by sight: Finally, they, though
Gods good Corn, yet they are so hid in the mountains of the worlds chafe,
that few of them are known (in person and face) and by experimental
knowledge, one to another, but let us measure, esteem and judge of them by
their blessed hope: by their 1. Cor. 4. 18. Psalm. 37. Apoc. 14. 13.
title to eternity, and by their glorious state to come; for then they shall be
enstated and put into the possession of Heaven: where there is the absence of
all evil, and fullness of joy and glory unspeakable for evermore.

The third use.
Let the hopeful expectation of this promised and prepared glory, make us
patient in all perplexities, comfortable in Crosses, and firm and forward in
every good work: For, we serve the most honorable and bountiful Lord and
Master of all others: who procures and rejoices in the prosperity of his
servants: and will (especially in the life to come) such is his favor and
mercy, abundantly and everlastingly reward our sufferings and our well doings:
If the due consideration hereof Omne opus leave fieri solet, cum eius praemium
cogitatur, et spes praemij est solatiu^ laboris.
will not put life, spirt and courage into us, what will do it? Every work
(says Jerome) is wont to be accounted light, when we think on the reward of
it; and the hope of reward, is the comfort of the labor.

The redemption of our Body.
BY Redemption of our body, is not in this place meant, the price and ransom of
it, for Christ our Savior paid it to God his Father in our behalf, above
1600. years ago: but in this place, as in that of Luke cap. 21. 28. It
signifies the full and final effect and consummation of it, to wit, the
regeneration and glorification of the body: whence I note that God does observe
a certain orderly and graduall proceeding in accomplishing our Obser.
Adoption and Redemption: the Adoption (or Sonneship) of election goes before
the Adoption of justification, and that of Justification, goes (in time)
before the Adoption of glorification.

The first reason.
The soul first sinned in harkening and assenting unto Satan's suggestion, and
the body afterward sinned in being the instrument to put it in execution;
therefore the wise and merciful Lord, does in this life begin and forward the
regeneration of our souls: but the regeneration and glorification of our
bodies, (whether we respect their substance or properties,) is reserved to the
day of judgment: the body may (in a sort) be said to be regenerate and is
truly regenerate and sanctified in this life, but that is only in the holy
dispose, use and application Romans 6. 13. 14.
of the whole and the several parts: but not in the substance and qualities,
for the senses are not hereby refined; nor the body kept from decay, death,
mortality and temporal misery.

The second reason.
God in the work of our redemption will make a notable and manifest difference
beeweene Christ his first and his second coming: Christ, at his first coming,
paid our perfect ransom, and then did, and daily does by degrees, renew and
repair our souls: But at his second coming, he will not only absolutely and
eternally free our soul^s from all sin: but also deliver our body from the
very remainders of it, and from all misery and mutabilitie: and hereby make it
like unto his glorious body: and in this last acception and sense the day of
the Lord is called the day of the regeneration: and Matthew. 19. 28. Luke 14. 14.
the resurrection of the just.

The use.
Let us in the work of our Salvation, imitate Gods order and proceeding, let
us first get, confirm and increase the true knowledge of God, and true
holiness and righteousness: for then we renew Gods image in us, which Adam
lost: and then let us yield our (bodily) members as instruments of
righteousness unto God, and carefully endeavor to subject them in obedience to
our regenerate souls: then God will in the time appointed, complete the
regeneration of our souls: and will raise Ioh. 40.
up our bodies in glory. Blessed and holy is he that has his part in the
first resurrection, on such the second death has Apoc. 20. 6.
no power: but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, etc.

The adoption (i) the redemption of the body.
HEre the Apostle interprets himself, and expounds Adoption to be the
Redemption of the body, by whose example, and by warrant of many places of
Scripture, wherein one and the same verse expounds it self (specially in
David's Psalms) I might (to the consounding of the lying heretical Papists)
show that it was not Gods purpose to make the Scriptures so hard to be
understood, as they would bear the world in hand: but I purpose only to
prosecure the maine points, and to follow the Apostle his scope and drift: Here
then the comfortable doctrine of the glorious resurrection of the body is
avouched and auerred; which because it is so maine and fundamental an Article
of faith and salvation; and has been and is so much impugned by Heretics and
Atheists: I purpose to prove the doctrine of it, the more largely, and
distinctly. I will therefore stand upon, and soundly and succinctly prove
these four points following: First, that the Saints bodies shall rise again:
Secondly, that they in matter, number, kind, substance, Eadem numero sunt
eade^ specie.
shall rise the same that they were before, and no other: Thirdly, I will show
in what stature they are likely to arise: Fourthly, I will lay open the
principal properties and qualities of a glorified body: Lastly, I will make a
brief apply of the whole Doctrine.

The Redemption of the body.
FIrst, that there shall be a general resurrection of the bodies both of the
just and unjust, it is plain and demonstrable Obseru.
by Scripture of them that sleep in the dust (says holy Daniel) some shall
awake to everlasting life, and Dan. c. 12. 7.
some to shame and perpetual contempt. Saint Paul before Felix professes his
hope toward God, viz. that there John. 5. 28.
shall be a resurrection of the dead both of the just and unjust. Act 24. 15.
The Lord by his Prophet Isay says thus. Thy dead men shall live, with my
body they shall arise. Saint John in his Esaias 26. 19.
Apocalips saw the dead both great and small stand before God: and the sea,
death and hell to deliver and give up their Apoc. 20. 12. 13.
dead. Now, that the bodies of the Elect and Saints, to whom only the glorious
and blessed resurrection is proper and peculiar shall arise, thus it by
Scripture appears: Saint Luke appropriateth ye resurrection to the Luke 14.
14.
just: Saint John says that they that have done good shall come forth unto the
resurrection of life: and that Christ will raise up, at the last day, them that
come to him (by faith) Christ in regard of the Saints his mystical members, is
the death of death, and the graves destruction, he has taken away the sting
and condemnation of Hos. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 55.
death, and the victory of the grave, Job says that he shall see his redeemer
(not his condemner) with the same eyes: the flesh of the Saints rest in hope;
namely, that hope which they conceive whiles that they live in earth. Lastly,
Psalm. 16. 9.
the bodies of the Saints (though sown in corruption, yet they shall be
raised in incorruption: 1. Cor. 15. 42. 43
though sown in dishonor, they shall be raised in glory: though sown in
weakness, they shall be raised Question.
in power. But it may be demanded if the bodies both of the just and unjust
shall in differently rise again; then what shall be the difference?

Ans. There (as may be gathered out of the Testimonies Answer.
alleged, and by the reasons that prove the Resurrection, and by the
properties of a glorified body whereby it is distinguished from the bodies of
the Reprobats) is (or shall be) a threefold difference: First, the bodies of
Causis.
the Saints, which only are Christ's members, shall arise by Christ his quickening
virtue and power; but the bodies of Reprobates shall arise only by the power
of Gods curse, to wit, in the day that thou shall eat (of the forbidden Genesis
2. 17.
fruit) thou shall die the death (to wit temporal and eternal) and by the
power of Christ as the judge, effectually summoning them to appear before him,
that Gods threatening may be accomplished in, and upon them. Secondly, the
Saints bodies shall arise glorious: 2. Informa seu modo. Dan. 12. 2.
but the bodies of the Reprobates, shall arise in shame and disglorie. Lastly,
they differ in the end, for the bodies of the Saints shall arise to eternal
life, but the bodies of In fine.
the wicked to eternal torment, that, God his glorious mercy may be fully
manifested in the one, and his glorious justice in the other.

The first reason.
God to whom nothing is impossible, that in the beginning Luke 1. 37. Phil. 3.
21. Matthew. 22. 22.
brought forth and fashioned all things of nothing, can and will raise up their
bodies out of the same matter: by that word, whereby he created all things, by
Aug. Qui potuit formare nouam Creaturam, non poterit reparare mortuam? Cyrill.
Qui potuit id quod non erat, producere vt aliquid esset, id quod iam est, cum
reciderit, restituere nonne potest?
the same he will repair all things: he that did the greater work, cannot he
do the lesser? For, it is far more hard, to create that which before was
not, the^ to repair (or restore) that which was. He that could fashion a new
creature: shall not he be able, to repair it when it is dead? he that could
bring forth that which was not, that it might be some thing, cannot he restore
that which now is, when it is fallen?

The second reason.
Christ our head, being the first fruits of them that sleep, and the pawn of
our resurrection, did in his true humane body rise again, and therefore the
Saints his 1. Cor. 15. 20.
members shall rise again, for that which was performed and fulfilled in
Christ the head, must also (in proportion and in due time) be performed and
fulfilled in the members; for he rose in our room and stead, and for us his
Cassiod Est in Christo homine vniuscuiusque nostru^ caro et sanguis: vbi ergo
portio mea regnat, regnare me credo: vbi dominatur sa^guis meus, ibi dominari
me sentio: vbi glorificatur Caro mea, ibi me gloriosum esse cognosco.
body felt no corruption, and therefore ours shall not feel eternal! He has
(as a pawn) carried our flesh into heaven, therefore we shall ascend after
him, but this cannot come to pass before that our bodies be raised. Cassidore
says well: There is in Christ (as he is man) the flesh and blood of each of
us: therefore where my portion reigns I think I reign: where my blood has
dominion, there I find that I have dominion: and where my flesh is glorified,
there I know my self to be glorious.

The third reason.
Christ has by his death and obedience redeemed their bodies as well as their
souls: therefore they must needs rise again, or else Gods purpose, Christ
his passion 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20.
in that behalf had been forcelesse and fruitless, and our Salvation not
perfect, but unaccomplished.

The fourth reason.
The continued and continual groans of the Saints for their full Salvation,
and their fervent desire and expectation of it; does infer the resurrection:
For these are rare fruits of Gods sanctifying Spirit: but Gods Spirit Deus et
natura, (immo Deus et gratia) nibil facit frustra.
cannot be frustrate of his end and scope, nor the Saints of their desire and
expectation.

The fifth reason.
There shall be a day of judgment wherein all men in their whole persons, viz.
in their souls and bodies must appear before the judgment seat of Christ;
and there receive a due reward or punishment, therefore there Act. 17. 31. 2.
Cor. 5. 10. Sublatis destinatis ad finem tollitur finis.
must needs be a rising again of the bodies: take away the subject and
object, and take away the end.

The sixth reason.
One absurdity being granted, many follow. Now if there be no resurrection;
then God should not, and Arist. (...).
could not be omnipotent: his promise should be of no virtue and vigor: the
inseperable union betwixt Christ his body and ours, dissolved: the blessed
ministry of the word and Sacraments; all practice of pity, repentance,
justice, charity, yea all confession, suffering and martyrdom. yea, and the
very death, Resurrection and ascension of 1. Cor. 15. 17. 18
our blessed Lord and Savior should be all in vain and to no purpose: yea,
and we dead in our sins. 19


The seventh reason.
We in the volume of Gods book have many types, figures and resemblances
hereof: viz. In Enoch and Elias Enochus et Elias duo Candidati immortalitatis.
Genesis 5. 24. Hebr. 11. 15. 2. King. 2. 9. 1. King. 17. 22. 2. King. 4. 16. 33.
Ezec. 37. 8
(though instantly transchanged) rapt alive into heaven, the one before the law
was written, and the other in the time of the law: In the widow of Sarepta her
son raised to life by Elias his prayers: in the Synamites child raised by
Elizaeus: In the dead soldier that being cast among, and touching Elizaeus his
dead bones, revived: In the dead bones (whereof we read in Ezechiel) that began
to shake and come together, bone to his bone, and to be covered with sinews,
flesh and skin, and that being breathed on by the four winds revived and
stood upon their 10 Matthew. 9 25. Luke 7. 15.
feet: In Iairus his daughter: In the widows Son of Naim: And in Lazarus,
all raised up to a temporal life by our Lord and Savior: and most eminently,
in the bodies of diverse Saints, which by virtue of Christ his resurrection,
Ioh. 11. 43. 44. Matthew. 27. 53.
and to evidence it the more, rose out of their graves, and walked up and down
in Jerusalem, and appeared to many; touching whom it is most likely, that as
they rose with Christ, so when Christ ascended, it is likely (or thought) that
they ascended with him: For, they Aug. in sermon de pass. Horum corpora, sicut
cum Domino resurrexeru^t, ita cum co ascendente, et^am ipsa ascendisse
creduntur. Hebr. 11 19. Numb. 17. 8. Mat. 12, 39. 40.
rose to this end to manifest the quickening virtue of his resurrection, There
unto as resemblances may be added, the sparing of Isaac that should have been
slain and sacrificed: From death Abraham received him in a figure. Secondly,
Aarons dry rod, or stick, that budded and blossomed: and the deliverance of
Jonas out of the whales belly, wherein he had been three days and three
nights, captiuated and enclosed.

The eighth reason.
Types and enducements in nature, from whence we may conceive some
possibility of the Resurrection, are (or may be) these, and the like: First,
Kernels and seeds of any kind cast into, and buried in the earth, where in 1.
Cor. 15. 36. 37 38.
they seem for the time to die; appear and spring out of the earth and grow
to a perfect body: Secondly, plants, trees, herbs: that in the winter are (as
it were) dead and have no appearance of life (in them) but in the Spring Matthew.
24. 32. Perkin. upon the creed. p. 424. Ambros. Doceat nos phaenix exemplo
suo, resurrectionem credere, que sieve exemplo, rationis perceptione sibi
insignia resurrectionis instaurat.
when the Sap ascends from the roots upward, they grow tender, bud and
blossom: and in their kind, bring forth, leaves, flowers, fruits: Thirdly,
swallows, worms, flies, who lying dead in the winter, do in the spring time,
by virtue of the Suns heat, revive: Fourthly, and singularly, in the Phaenix
of Arabia: of whom Philosophers and Divines have written, that when she has
passed, or outlined (the space of) six hundred years, she gathers Cynamon,
Casia and other sweet woods, and makes her self a case, covert, or neast,
which being set on fire by the Suns heat, she burns her self, and out of
her ashes a new Phaenix arises whereby she is renewed, and her kind preserved.
Pomp. Mel. desitu orbis lib. 3. c. 9.

Yea and it is very probable and agreeable, that a Dion. in Hist.
Phaenix being seen before the last year of Nero, did signify the
Resurrection of Christ, and of all the believers, after they had from heaven
received life from death.

That the bodies of the Saints, shall arise again the same that they were
before, in mattet, substance, number, with the same parts and members, the same
flesh, skin, Obseru. 2.
veins, blood, bones, sine was, head, eyes, ears, hands and feet, sides, and
not new bodies be created, as the Maniches hold; Albeit the former Scriptures
and reasons which euinced the resurrection, may sufficiently prove; yet that
the truth may more evidently appear, I add and adioyne these Testimonies and
arguments following. Blessed Job says, that his redeemer lives, and that he
shall see him with the same and with no other eyes. The grave shall open, and
the bodies shall come forth, ergo the same bodies and no other shall arise. The
same body that is sown Job. 19. 25. John 5. 29.
in corruption, in weakness, in dishonor, shall arise again in
incorruption, power, and honor: Lastly the godly daily, and (especially) in
death commit themselves unto God, 1. Cor. 15. 42. 43
as unto a faithful Creator: Ergo, he will as well (in time) raise up their
bodies, as he then receives their Souls, otherwise he could not be faithful.
The certainty hereof we may in some sort conceive by a familiar comparison. As
diverse seeds, or corns cast and mingled together in the earth, do at the
length, spring out of it, grow to a perfect body, and each in his kind bring
forth proper and A similitude.
distinct fruit: so the seeds of the bodies of the Saints, though cast into
the earth and there consumed, mingled and confounded together; shall be raised
and rise again in distinct members and parts, the same that they were before,
that they died.

The first reason.
That which rises again first fell (for to fall and rise Hicronimus.
Argumentum a relatis.
(again) are relatiues, the one whereof does consist of the mutual affection
of the other) but these our natural bodies, first sell by death, Ergo, they
and no other, shall rise again.

The second reason.
Christ his body arose, the same, that it was before in Luke 24. 39. Similia
sunt quorum qualitas est vna.
matter and Substance: he was seen to have the same eyes, mouth, palate,
feet, sides, hands, blood, body, with all the essential parts of a true
body, and with length, breadth, visibilitie, localitie; and therefore our
bodies, must arise the same for substance which they were before: for his
resurrection is the picture and pattern of ours: and our vile bodies must be
fashioned like to his glorious body.

The third reason.
The corruptible qualities of the body, to wit their baseness, vileness,
weakness, deformity, mortality, shall Axioma. Accidentia substantiam non
constituunt, licet e principijs subiecti sui essentialibus fluant. Keckerm.
Log. 184.
only be abolished, and glorious qualities come in place: Ergo, the substance
and essential parts shall abide and remain.

The fourth reason.
The regeneration of the soul and body is of the same nature and property:
but the regeneration of the soul, does not alter and change the substance of
it, but only reform the sinful quality: so at the last day the regeneration
Parium est eadem ratio.
(or glorification) of the body shall not destroy and nullify the substance
of it, but only all innouate and change the corruptible qualities.

The fifth reason.
It is most agreeable to Gods impartial justice, that the Saints should be
rewarded not in an other body, but Genesis 18. 25.
in that body which had wrought righteousness; and that the reprobates should
be punished not in an other body that never sinned, but in their own which
had been the instrument of all abominations. God is a righteous Psalm. 62. 12.
just judge, who will render to every man (First to every Psalm. 62. 12.
Revel. 22. 12. Romans 2. 6.
soul and body: for the person of a man consists of both of them) according
to his works.

The sixth reason.
The Creator infinitely exceeds all and every of his Creatures, in wisdom,
power, skill. But a cunning and skillful Goldsmith can by his Art and skill
single, sunder and distinguish, gold, silver, copper, pewter, brass and other
A similitude from a goldsmith.
mettalls, whether in the same mountain mingled, or, accidentally melted and
confounded together; and some out of one metal can draw an other: and shall
not, and cannot much more God almighty, find out each man's substance, and
distinguish it from the dust of beasts, and from the dust of other men, and out
of it produce and form a perfect and glorious body?

But much of man's substance is devoured of beasts, and turned into their
nature, or devoured of man himself Objection.
(for the Canniballs ordinarily eat one another) how then can it arise the
same again in substance.

Ans. Nothing is impossible to God, who can and will Answer.
find out each man's proper substance: and what if some of it be lost, yet God
can supply the rest by his power, and multiply it, as he multiplied the bone
and flesh where of Eve was formed. Again, it is sufficient that every Perkins
creed p. 425.
man then have so much substance of his own, as shall make his body to be
entire and perfect; all superfluetie being removed.

The third Member.
Touching the stature in which the Saints bodies shall Observe.
arise, though the Scripture has not defined nor expressed it, yet by these
grounds following it seems most probable (if not certain) that they shall
arise in man's estate, or, in full and perfect stature. First, our first parents
Adam Lucan. Loc. co^. page 422.
and Eve, were created with bodies of perfect stature, Ergo. both their and our
repaired bodies, shall be such. Again, Christ the second Adam, arose from
death to life in his perfect and best age. And therefore, we the members who
(in body as well as soul) must attain unto the measure of the fullness of
Christ, must so arise. Thirdly, the resurrection is (as it were) a new
Creation. Aug. de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 22. c. 16 17. 18. Ephesians. 4. 13. Genesis 2. 25.
Apoc. 1. 6.
Ergo, it must be like to the first, and therefore good and perfect. Fourthly,
our bodies, must in (all) things (the more then excellent difference betwixt
the heaven and members being excepted) be made like unto (though not equal to)
Christ his glorious body, but his body arose in full stature: Ergo, ours shall
like wise thus arise. Fifthly, the Saints bodies must have their just
proportion and decent form: otherwise they could not be perfect and entire.
Sixthly, if infants must rise infants, then old men must rise old men; but
there is no distinction, or difference of age in heaven. Lastly, the tradition
and judgment of the Churches holding this opinion is not to be contemned.

The fourth member.
Touching the properties and qualities of a glorified Observe. Phil. 3. 21.
body: I, first answer (generally) that the bodies of the Saints, shall be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, the glory whereof, when our Lord
extraordinarily appeared in it to Saint Paul, did exceed the glory of the
Sun, otherwise Paul could not have discerned it, and noted Act. 22. 6.
it; Particularly, I answer thus: and content my self to express the
principal qualities of a glorified body.

First, their bodies shall be immortal, because their reward is eternal, and
because Christ shall then wholly destroy sin and death the cause of mortality.

Secondly, they shall be incorruptible, for they have lost none of their
substance, and need no repair.

Thirdly, they are impassible and incapable of any evil, grief or pain, yet
capable and partakers of all joy Apoc. 13. 13.
and holiness.

Fourthly, they shall be goodly, seemly, beautiful: If beauty so much
commend the body in earth, and if it be commended so much in the Scriptures,
then it shall be much more beautiful in Heaven, when it shall Ephesians. 5. 17.
have all perfections in perfection, and have no spot or wrinckle.

Fifthly, their bodies shall be (at least in all likelihood) shining bodies, for
they shall be glorious, whereof shining 1. Cor. 15. 40.
is a part (or kind) the righteous shall shine, not only as the brightness of
the firmament, and as the stars; but as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father: this Dan. 12. 3. Matthew. 13. 43.
glory shall arise from the vision, chiefly of God and the aspect and
continual presence of the Lord Jesus: Glimpses, tastes and resemblances
hereof, we have in Moses face, which when he had been conversant with God 40.
days in the mount, did shine so brightly, that the Exodus 34. 29. 2. Cor. 3. 13.
Children of Israel could not steadfastly look on him. Secondly, in diverse and
glorious apparitions of Angels: when the Angel of the Lord appeared to the
Shepherds, it is said that the glory of the Lord shone round about them: The
Angel of the Lord that at Christ his resurrection Luke 2 9.
rolled away the stone, had his countenance like lightning and his raiment
white as snow. Lastly, in our blessed Matthew. 28. 3.
Savior whose face in the transsiguration did shine as the Sun: his raiment
did shine as the Light, and was so white Matthew. 17. 2. Luke 9. 29. Mark 9. 3.
as no fuller on earth could white them.

Sixthly, they shall not be natural bodies, but spiritual that is spiritual
in quality, but not in substance; for otherwise they should cease to be
bodies. The bodies shall be spiritual in a threefold sense, First in that
they shall be wholly sreed from all earthly and drossie corruption: all the
senses shall be more pure and subtle: And the Martyr. 2. Reg. 2.
affections shall (so much as the truth of nature will permit) be refined:
Secondly, because they shall be no more vpheld and maintained by earthly means
and helps, but be preserved by Spiritual means: that is, by the power of his
(holy) Spirit; what use (herein) shall there be of the Creature, when the Lord
of glory is in place? and in Matthew. 22.
these two respects (especially) they are (...) that is, equal to the Angels:
Thirdly, because, they shall never rebel against, but be always subject and
obedient to the regenerate soul.

Seventhly, their bodies being clarified and refined, shall be light, agile,
nimble, able (like the body of our Lord) to walk upon the waters, and by
their proper nature 1 Thessalonians. 4, 17.
and motion, as well to ascend as to descend: For a Act. 1. 6.
glorified body can with celeritie and speed move and remove upward and
downward.

Lastly (to insist no longer in these particulars) they shall be (by way of
excellency) vessels of honor, meet for the Lords use, and filled with all joy
and blessedness. 2. Tim. 2. 21.
Thus much of the doctrine of the general resurrection, now let us come to the
uses, whether of consutation, consolation, or exhortation.

The first use.
By warrant and force of this doctrine, are refuted and fall to the ground,
diverse pestilent and damnable errors and heresies.

First, of the heathens, yea and of their chiefest Philosophers: Arist. lib. 2.
de genesis et. corrupt.
who not knowing the ways and word of God, utterly deny that the body being
once dead, can arise again the same, in number, substance and kind.

Secondly, of the Sadduces in Christ his time, and sithence, of the Sardinian
heretics, the Archonites and Maniches, and diverse Heretics and Atheists of
our times, who peremptorily held, and hold that the body rises not again.

Thirdly, of those, who in their absurdity, hold and defend that the body at
the general resurrection shall be essentially turned into a Spirit, and so
loses his bodily substance: but this palpable error may be thus refelled.

First, if the bodies at the resurrection become Spirits then they cease to be
sensible, visible, touchable: but Christ's body when it rose again, lost none
of these properties, Ioh. 20.
and therefore how can ours?

Secondly, if the bodies of the Saints be turned into Spirits, then they cease
to be bodies, and how can they rise again?

Thirdly, the body being turned into a Soul, or Spirit, the same or a diverse,
then the Saints should consist Deletio proprietatum est natura negatio.
Keckerm. 2. Cor. 14. 33.
of a double Spirit, the one natural, the other accidental, and it should
follow that the body (being) should be no more a body: For, take away the
proprieties of the body, and take away the body.

Lastly, God should not be the author of order, but of confusion, but this is
flatly against the Scripture.

The first use (of the doctrine) of consolation.
The advised and serious consideration of this doctrine (...).
serves wonderfully to cheer and comfort all Psalm. 16. 9.
Christians; for the day of the resurrection is the time of their refreshing,
and of perfect restitution and a year of Act. 3. 19.
Iubily, and the day of our bodies ascent into heaven: wherefore, let us prepare
our selves, to meet the Lord at this day: and amend our lives and turn, that
our sins may be blotted out, when the times refreshment, shall come from Act.
3. 19.
the presence of the Lord.

The second use (of consolation.)
If we believe the doctrine of the resurrection, we must not immoderately
weep, or mourn for our friends departed, or for the death of most worthy and
1. These. 4. 13.
blessed instruments in Church and commonwealth: For they die not (to speak
properly) but fleepe a while in the earth, and afterward the body shall awake
and ascend to glory: they are not perished but posted before: we and they,
living and dying in faith and obedience, shall one Non sunt amissi sed
praemissi.
day meet together in the Palace and parliament of heaven, and there, by our
mutual conuersement, increase one an others comfort.

The third use consolatarie.
The musing and holy meditation. of this doctrine serves to arm and harten
Gods children against all the afflictions of body and mind, and against all
evils both private and public: For, First: they are light, tolerable, 2. Cor.
3. 17.
finite, temporaris: secondly, an exceeding weight of glory does follow, and
succeed them: Thirdly; David, Psalm. 16. 9. Apoc. 14. 13.
Job. c. 19. 25. the servants of God, that in the days of Antiochus, were
racked and tormented. Lastly, our Lord Hebr. 11. 35.
himself, did comfort themselves against death and trouble by the doctrine of
the bodies resurraction.

The fourth use consolatorie. Act. 2. 26.

This doctrine does minister reviving comfort against the fear of death: For,
First, the sting, poison, and condemnation Mors intermistit vitam non eripit.
of death is taken away from all true believers: it does interrupt our life for
a season, but it does not extinguish it. Secondly, it does strippe us of the
rags of Sin, and misery, and inuest us with the glorious robes 2. Cor. 5. 1.
of Christ his righteousness, It is the gate of heaven, and a speedy passage
to eternal life: Lastly, our souls after their dissolution from the bodies,
incontinently are carried Luke 16.
by the blessed Angels into heaven, and our bodies though eaten of the worms,
and consumed to ashes, shall in due time, be raised up from the death, reunited
to our bodies, and be everlastingly glorified.

Uses of exhortation.
Let the consideration of the bodies resurrection, be a bridle to restrain and
refrain us, from all manner of Sin. For we must all of us, come to judgment
and give a (strict) account of all that we have done in this life, 2. Cor. 5.
10.
whether it be good, or evil: and let it be a spur, or mean to further and
forward us, to the performance of all duties of piety, justice, charity,
whiles we have time and space, and (with Saint Paul) to exercise our selves to
have always a conscience void of offense toward God and Act 24. 16.
toward man.

The second use (exhortatorie.)
Seeing that we desire, groan, and look for the glorious resurrection of our
bodies; we must not apply and divert them to sin and profaneness; to
surfeiting and Romans 13. 13.
drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, pride and vanity, wrong and
oppression, but addict and consecrate them wholly and perpetually, to Gods
service and holy uses: that they may be the temples of the holy Ghost to dwell
in, and vessels of honor in this world: and that they may be vessels of glory
in the life to come, and not vessels of wrath prepared to destuction; which God
almighty grant: Amen.

The third use (exhortatorie.)
Let us honor the Saints bodies, and honorably bury them; and let us suffer
no indignity to be offered to their dead bodies, or places, where they are
buried, for they are members of Christ, and shall arise again in glory.

Thus we have heard the renouation of the world with his specialls: the groan
of the creatures, the hope and expectation of Gods children, their gift, and
graces: and the certentie of the glorious resurrection of the body, together
with the use of the doctrine. Now the God of heaven, give us grace so to be
renewed here in this world, so to simpathise and suffer with the Creature, and
specially, with Gods children, and the Lord so furnish us with saving grace,
that we waiting for, the glorious resurrection, and preparing our selves
against that day, may in this life have the earnest of eternity, and
afterward the full possession of it, which God almighty bring to pass, for
our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the father and God the holy Ghost,
three persons and one only God, be given and ascribed all honor, glory,
power and praise in the Church, from this time forth, for evermore.

Amen.
(...).
FINIS.

