ENGLANDS HEROICAL Epistles.

By Michaell Drayton.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for N. Ling, and are to be sold at his shop at the
West door of Poules. 1597.

To the Reader.
Seeing these Epistles are now at length made public, it is imagined that I
ought to be accountable to the world of my private meaning, chiefly for mine
own discharge, least being mistaken, I fall in hazard of a just and universal
reprehension, for -- Itae nugae seria ducent In mala derisum semel exceptumque
sinistre.

Three points are especially therefore to be explaned. First, why I entitle
this work Englands heroical Epistles; then why I observe not the persons
dignity in the dedication; lastly, why I have annexed notes to every Epistles
end. For the first, the title I hope carries reason in it self, for that the
most and greatest persons berein were English, or else, that their loves were
obtained in England. And though (heroical) be properly understood of
demigods, as of Hercules and Aeneas, whose Parents were said to be the one
celestial, the other mortal, yet is it also transferred to them who for the
greatness of mind come near to Gods. For to be borne of a celestial Incubus,
is nothing else but to have a great and mighty spirit, far above the earthly
weakness of men, in which sense Ovid (whose imitator I partly profess to be)
does also use heroical. For the second, seeing none to whom I have dedicated
any two Epistles, but have their states ouer-matched by them who are made to
speak in the Epistles, how ever the order is in dedication, yet in respect of
their degrees in my devotion, and the cause before recited, I hope they suffer
no disparagement, seeing every one is the first in their particular interest,
having in some sort, sorted the complexion of the Epistles, to the character
of their judgments to whom I dedicate them; excepting only the blamefulnes of
the persons passion, in those points wherein the passion is blameful. Lastly,
such manifest difference being betwixt every one of the^, where or howsoever
they be marshaled, how can I be justly appeached of vnaduisement. For the
third, because the work might in truth be judged brainish, if nothing but
amorous humor were handled therein, I have inter-wouen matters historical,
which vnexplaned, might defraud the mind of much content; as for example, in
Queen Margarits Epistle to William de la Pole,

My Daizie flower, which once perfumed the air,

Margarite in french signifies a Dazie, which for the allusion to her name,
this Queen did give for her devise: and this as others more, have seemed to
me not unworthy the explaning. Now, though no doubt I had need to excuse
other things beside, yet these most especially, the rest Iouer-passe to eschew
tedious recital, or to speak as malicious envy may, for that in truth I
ouer-see them. If they be as harmelesly taken as I meant them, it shall
suffice to have only tonched the cause of the title, of the dedications, and
of the notes, whereby emboldned to publish the residue, (these not being
accounted in men's opinions (...)) I shall not lastly be afraid to believe and
acknowledge thee a gentle Reader.

M. D.

To M. Michaell Drayton.
HOw can he write that broken has his pen,
Has rent his paper, thrown his Ink away,
Detests the world, and company of men,
Because they grow more hateful day by day.
Yet with these broken relics, mated mind,
And what a iustly-greeued-thought can say:
I give the world to know, I nere could find,
A work more like to live a longer day.
Go verse, an object for the proudest eye,
Disdain those which disdain to read thee over,
Tell them they know not how they should descry,
The secret passions of a witty lover.
For they are such as none but those shall know,
Whom beauty schools to hold the blind Boys bow.
Once I had vowed (o who can all voweskeepe)
Henceforth to smother my unlucky Muse;
Yet for thy sake she started out of sleep,
Yet now she dies. Then do as kinsfolk use;
Close up the eyes of my now-dying-stile,
As I have opened thy sweet babes ere-while.
E. Sc.
Gent. Duris decus omen.
To the excellent Lady Lucie, Countess of Bedford.
MAdam, after all the admired wits of this excellent age, which have labored
in the sad complaints of fair and unfortunate Rosamond, and by the excellence
of invention, have sounded the depth of her sundry passions: I present to your
Ladyship this Epistle of hers to King Henry, whom I may rather call her lover
then beloved. Here must your Ladyship behold variablenes in resolution: woes
constantly grounded: laments abruptly broken off: much confidence, no
certainty, words begetting tears, tears confounding matter, large complaints
in little papers: and many deformed cares, in one vniformed Epistell. I strive
not to affect singularity, yet would feign fly imitation, and prostrate mine
own wants to other men's perfections. Your judicial eye must model forth what
my pen has laid together: much would she say to a King, much would I say to
a Countess, but that the method of my Epistle must conclude the modesty of
hers: which I wish may recommend my ever vowed service to your honor.

Michaell Drayton.

The Epistle of Rosamond to King Henry the second.
* The Argument.
Henry the second of that name, King of England, the son of Geffrey
Plantaginet, Earl of Aniou, and Maude the Empress, having by long suit and
princely gifts, won (to his unlawful desire) fair Rosamond, the daughter of
the Lord Walter Clyfford, and to avoid the danger of Ellinor his iealious
Queen, had caused a Labyrinth to be made within his palace at VVoodstocke; in
the center whereof, he had lodged his beauteous paramore. Whilst the King is
absent in his wars in Normandy, this poor distressed Lady, enclosed in this
solitary place, tucht with remorse of conscience, writes unto the King of her
distress and miserable estate, urging him by all means and persuasions, to
clear himself of this infamy, and her of the grief of mind, by taking away
her wretched life.

IF yet thine eyes (great Henry) may endure
These tainted lines, drawn with a hand impure,
Which feign would blush, but fear keeps blushes back,
And therefore suited in dispayring black,
This in loves name, o that these lypps might crave,
But that sweet name (vile I) profaned have;
Punish my fault, or pity mine estate,
Read it for love, if not for love, for hate.
If with my shame thine eyes thou feign would feed,
Here let them surfeit, on my shame to reed;
This scribled paper which I send to thee,
If noted rightly, does resemble me:
As this pure ground, whereon these letters stand,
So pure was I, ere stained by thy hand;
Ere I was blotted with this foul offense,
So clear and spotless was mine innocence:
Now like these marks, which taint this hateful scroule,
Such the black sins, which spotte my leprous soul.
O Henry why, by loss thus should thou win?
To get by conquest? to enrich with sin?
Why on my name this slander do thou bring,
To make my fault renowned by a King?
Fame never stoopes to things but mean and poor,
The more our greatness, makes our fault the more.
Lights on the ground, themselves do lessen far,
But in the air, each small spark seems a star.
Why on a woman's frailetie would thou lay
This subtle plot, mine honor to betray?
Or thy unlawful pleasure should thou buy
with vile expense of kingly majesty?
It Was not my mind consented to this ill,
Then had I been transported by my will,
For what my body was enforst to do,
(Heaven knows) my soul did not consent unto;
For through mine eyes, had she her liking seen,
Such as my love, such had my lover been.
True love is simple, like his mother Truth,
Kindly affection, youth to love with youth;
No sharper corsiue to our blooming years,
Then the cold badge of vvinter=blasted hairs.
Thy kingly power makes to withstand thy foes,
But can not keep back age, with time it grows;
Though honor our ambitious sex does please,
Yet in that honor, age a foul disease.
Nature has her free course in all, and then,
Age is alike in Kings, and other men,
Which all the world will to my shame impute
That I my self did basely prostitute;
And say, that gold was suell to the fire,
Gray hairs in youth not kindling green desire.
O no; that wicked woman wrought by thee,
My temptor was to that forbidden tree;
That subtle serpent, that seducing devil,
which bad me taste the fruit of good and evil:
That Circe, by whose magic I was charmed,
And to this monstrous shape am thus transformed;
That viperous hagge, the foe to her own kind,
That wicked spirit, unto the weaker mind:
Our frailties plague, our natures only curse,
Hells deep'st damnation, the worst evils worse.
But Henry, how can thou affect me thus,
T'vvhom thy remembrance now is odious?
My hapless name, with Henry's name I found
Cut in the glass with Henry's Diamond:
That glass from thence fainc would I take away,
But then I fear the air would me betray;
Then do I strive to wash it out with tears,
But then the same more evident appears.
Then do I cover it with my guilty hand,
which that names witness does against me stand:
Once did I sin, which memory does cherrish,
Once I offended, but I ever perrish.
What grief can be, but time does make it less?
But infamy time never can suppress.
Sometimes to pass the tedious irksome hours,
I clymbe the top of Woodstocks mounting towers,
Where in a Turret secretly I lie
To view from far such as do travail by,
Whether (me thinks) all cast their eyes at me,
As through the stones my shame did make them see,
And with such hate the harmles walls do view,
As unto death their eyes would me pursue.
The married women curse my hateful life,
Which wrong a lawful bed, a Queen, a wife;
The maidens wish I buried quick may die,
The loathsome stain to their virginity.
Well knew'st thou what a monster I would be,
When thou did build this Labyrinth for me,
Whose strange Meanders turning every way,
Be like the course wherein my youth did stray:
Only a Clue to guide me out and in,
But yet still walk I, circuler in sin.
As in the Tarras here this other day
My maid and I did pass the time away,
Among many pictures which we passed by,
The silly girl at length hapt to epsy
Chaste Lucrece picture, and desires to know
What she should be herself that murdered so;
Why girl (quoth I) this is that Roman dame:
Not able then to tell the rest for shame,
My tougue does mine own guiltines betray;
With that I send the prattling girl away,
Least when my lisping guilty tongue should hault,
My looks should be the Index to my fault.
As that life blood which from the heart is sent,
In beauties field pitching his Crimson Tent,
In lovely sanguine suits the Lilly cheek,
Whilst it but for a resting place does seek;
And changing oftentimes with sweet delight,
Conuerts the white to red, the red to white.
The lovely blush, the palenes does distaine,
The palenes makes the blush more fair again:
Thus in my breast a thousand thoughts I carry,
which in my passion diversely do varry.
When as the sun hales toward the western slade,
And the trees shadows three times greater made,
Forth go I to a little Current near,
Which like a wanton trayle creepes here and there,
Where with mine angle casting in my bait,
The little fishes (dreading the deceit)
with fearful nibbling fly th'inticing gin,
By nature taught what danger lies therein.
Things reasonlesse thus warnd by nature be,
Yet I deuourd the bait was laid for me;
Thinking thereon, and breaking into groans,
The bubling spring which trypps upon the stones
Chides me away, least sitting but too nie,
I should pollute that native purity.
Rose of the World, so does import my name,
Shame of the world, my life has made the same;
And to th'vnchast this name shall given be,
Of Rosamond, derived from sin and me.
The Clyffords take from me that name of theirs,
Famous for virtue many hundred years.
They blot my birth with hateful bastardie,
That I sprang not from their Nobility;
They my alliance utterly refuse,
Nor will a strumpet shall their name abuse.
Here in the Garden, wrought by curious hands,
Naked Diana in the fountain stands,
with all her Nimphs got round about to hide her,
As when Acteon had by chance espvde her:
This sacred image I no sooner viewed,
But as that meta morphosd man pursued
By his own hounds: so by my thoughts am I,
which chase me still, which way so ere I fly.
Touching the grass, the honny-dropping dew,
which falls in tears before my limber shue,
Upon my foot consumes in weeping still,
As it would say, Why went thou unto ill?
Thus to no place in safety can I go
But every thing (...) give me cause of woe.
In that fair Casket of such wondrous cost
Thou sent'st the night before mine honor lost,
Amimone was wrought, a harmless maid,
By Neptune that adulterous God betrayed;
She prostrate at his feet begging with prayers,
wringing her hands, her eyes swollen up with tears;
This was not the entrapping bait of men,
But by thy virtue gently warning then;
To show to me for what intent it, came,
Least I therein should ever keep my shame.
And in this Casket (ill I see it now)
Was loues-loue l-o turned into a Cow.
Yet was she kept with Argus hundred eyes,
So wakefull still be lunos iealousies;
By this I well might have forewarned been,
To Have cleerd my self to thy suspecting Queen,
who with more hundred eyes attends me
Then had poor Argus single eyes to see.
In this thou righthe imitatest love,
Into a beast thou have transformd thyloue.
Nay worser far; (degenerate from kind)
A monster, both in body and in mind.
The waxen Taper which I burn by night,
with his dull vapory dimnes mocks my sight;
As though the dampe which hinders his clear flame,
Came from my breath, in that night of my shame,
When it did burn as darkness ugly eye
when shot the star of my virginity.
And if a star but by the glass appear,
I straight entreat it not to look in here;
I am already hateful to the light,
It is enough, betray me not to night.
Then since my shame so much belongs to thee,
Rid me of that, by only murdring me;
And let it justly to my charge be laid
Thy royal person I would have betrayed:
Thou shall not need by circumstance t'accuse me,
If I deny it, let the heavens refuse me.
My life's a blemish which does cloud thy name,
Take it away, and clear shall shine thy fame:
Yield to my suit, if over pity moved thee,
In this show mercy, as I ever loved thee.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Well knew thou what a monster I would be,
When thou did build this Labyrinth for me.
IN the Cretean Labyrinth a monster was enclosed, called a Minotaur, the
history whereof is well known, but the Labyrinth was framed by Daedalus, w so
many intricate ways, y being entered, one could either hardly or never return,
being in manner of a maze, save that it was larger, the ways being walld in on
every side, out of the which Theseus by Ariadnes help (lending him a clue of
thread) escaped. Some report that it was a house, having one half beneath the
ground, another above, the chamber doors therein so deceitfully enwrapped, and
made to open so many sundry ways, that it was held a matter almost impossible
to return.

Some have held it to have been an Allegory of man's life, true it is, that the
comparison will hold, for what liker to a Labyrinth then the maze of life? But
it is affirmed by antiquity that there was indeed such a building, though
Daedalus being a name applied to the workmans excellency, make it suspected;
for Daedalus is nothing else but ingenious, or artificial. Hereupon it is used
among the ancient Poets for any thing curiously wrought.

Rosamonds Labyrinth, whose ruins together with her well being paued with
square stone in the bottom, and also her tower from which the (...) did run,
(are yet remaining,) was altogether under ground, being vanlts arched and waled
with brick and stone, almost inextricably wound one within another, by which if
at any time her lodging were laid about by the Queen, she might easily avoid
perrill imminent, and if need be, by secret issues take the air abroad, many
furlongs round about Wodstocke in Oxfordshire, wherein it was situated. Thus
much for Rosamands Labyrinth.

Whose strange Meanders turned every way.
Maeander is a river in Lycia, a Province of Natolia or Asia minor, famous for
the sinuositie and often turning thereof, rifing from certain hills in
Maeonia, hereupon are intricate turnings by a transsumptiue and Metonimicall
kind of speech, called Maeanders, sor this river did so strangely path it
self, that the foot seemed to touch the head.

Rose of the world, so does import my name,
Shame of the world my life has made the same.
It might be reported, how at Godstow where this Rose of the world was
sumptuously interred, a certain Bishop in the visitation of his diocese,
caused the monument which had been erected to (...) honor, utterly to be
demolished, but be that severe chastisement of Rosamond then dead at this time
also ouerpassed, least she should seem to be the Shame of the world.

Henry to Rosamond.
WHen first the Post arrived in my Tent,
And brought the Letters Rosamond had sent,
Think from his lips, but what sweet (...) came,
when in mine ear he softly breathed thy name,
Straight I enjoin him of thy health to tell,
Longing to hear my Rosamond did well;
With new enquiries then I cut him short
when of the same he gladly would report,
That with the earnest have my tongue often tryps,
Catching the words half spoke out of his lyps:
This told, yet more I urge him to reveal,
To loose no time whilst I vnript the seal.
The more I read, still do I err the more,
As though mistaking somewhat said before.
Missing the point, the doubtful sense is broken,
Speaking again, what I before had spoken;
Still in a swound, my heart reuiues, and faints,
Twixt hopes, dispaires, twixt smiles, and deep complaints.
As these sad accents sort in my desires,
Smooth calmes, rough storms, sharp frosts, and raging fires,
Put on with boldness, and put back with fears,
My tongue with curses, when mine eyes with tears.
O how my heart at that black line did tremble,
That blotted paper should thy self resemble;
O were there paper but near half so white,
The Gods thereon their sacred Laws would write
With pens of Angels wings, and for their inck,
That heavenly Nectar, their immortal drink.
Maiestick courage strives to have suppressed
This fearful passion stirred up in my breast,
But still in vain the same I go about,
My heart must break within, or woes break out.
Am I at home pursued with private hate,
And war comes raging to my Palace gate?
Is meager Envy stabbing at my throne,
Treason attending when I walk alone?
And am I branded with the curse of Rome,
And stand condemned by dreadful counsels dombe?
And by the pride of my rebellious son,
Rich Normandy with Armies overrun?
Fatal my birth, unfortunate my life,
Unkind my children, most unkind my wife.
Grief, cares, old age suspicion to torment me,
Nothing on earth to quiet or content me;
So many woes, so many plagues to find,
Sickness of body, discontent of mind;
Hopes left, helps reft, life wronged, joy interdicted,
Banished, distressed, forsaken, and afflicted:
Of all relief has Fortune quite bereft me?
Only my love unto my comfort left me.
And is one beauty thought so great a thing?
To mittigate the sorrows of a King?
Barred of that choice the vulgar often prove,
Have we (then they), less privilege in love?
Is it a King, the woeful widow hears?
Is it a King, dryes up the Orphans tears?
Is it a King, regards the Clyants cry?
Gives life to him by justice domb'd to die?
Is it his care, the Commonwealth that keeps,
As does the nurse her babie whilst it sleeps?
And that poor King, of all these hopes prevented,
Unhard, vnhelp'd, vnpittied, unlamented.
Yet let me be with poverty oppressed,
Of earthly blessings robbed, and dispossessed,
Let me be scorned, rejected, and reuild,
From kingdom, country, and from Court exild,
Let the worlds curse upon me still remain,
And let the last bring on the first again;
All miseries that wretched man may wound,
Leave for my comfort; only Rosamond,
For thee swift Time her speedy course does stay,
At thy command the Destinies obey;
Pity is dead, that comes not from thine eyes,
And at thy feet, even mercy prostrate lies;
If I were feeble, rhumaticke, or cold,
These were true signs that I were waxed old,
But I can march all day in massy steel,
Nor yet my arms vnweeldie weight do feel,
Nor waked by night, with bruze or bloody wou^d,
The Tent my bed, no pillow but the ground;
For very age had I layne bedrid long,
One smile of thine again could make me young.
Were there in Art a power but so divine
As is in that sweet Angell-tongue of thine,
That great Inchauntresse which once took such pains,
To force young blood in Aesons withered veins,
And from groves, mountains, meadows, marshe and fen,
Brought all the simples were ordaind for men,
And of those plants; those herbs, those flowers, those weeds,
Used the roots, the leaves, the juice, the seeds,
And in this powerful potion that she makes,
Puts blood of men, of beasts, of birds, of snakes,
Never had needed to have gone so far,
To seek the soyles where all those simples are,
One accent from thy lypps, the blood more warmes,
Then all her philtres, exorcismes, and charms.
Thy presence has repaired in one day,
What many years and sorrows did decay,
And made fresh beauties fairest branches spring
From wrinckled furrows of Times ruining.
Even as the hungry winter-starued earth
When she by nature labors toward her birth;
Still as the day upon the dark world creepes,
One blossom forth after another peepes,
Till the small flower whose root is now unbound,
Gets from the frostie prison of the ground,
Spreading the leaves unto the powerful noone,
Decked in fresh colors, smiles upon the sun.
Never unquiet care lodged in that breast,
Where but one thought of Rosamond did rest;
Nor thirst, nor travail, which on war attend,
Ere brought the long day to desired end;
Nor yet did pale Fear, or lean Famine live,
where hope of thee, did any comfort give.
Ah what injustice then is this of thee,
That thus the guiltless do condemn for me?
When only she (by means of my offense)
Redeemes thy pureness, and thy innocence,
When to our wills perforce obey they must,
That just in them, whatere in us unjust;
Of what we do, not them account we make,
Thysserues for all; they do it for our sake,
And what to work a Princes will may merit,
Has deep'st impression in a gentle spirit:
Our powerful wills drawn by attractiue beauty,
They to our wills armed by subiectiue duty.
And true affection does no bound reteane,
For this is sure, firm love had never mean;
And whilst the cause by reason is disputed,
Reason itself, by love is most confuted.
Ift be my name that does thee so offend,
No more my self shall be mine own names friend;
And ift be that which thou do only hate,
That name, in my name, lastly has his date.
Say it is accursed, and fatal, and dispraise it,
If written blot it, if engraven, raze it.
Say that of all names it is a name of woe,
Once a Kings name, but now it is not so.
And when all this is done, I know twill grieve thee,
And therefore (sweet) why should I now believe thee?
Nor should thou think those eyes with envy lower,
which passing by thee, gaze up to thy tower,
But rather praise thine own which be so clear,
Which from the Turret like two stars appear;
And in their moouings, like a Crystal glass,
Make such reflection unto all that pass,
Above the sun does shine, beneath thine eyes,
As though two suns at once, shined in two skies.
The little stream which by thy tower does glide,
Where often thou spend'st the weary evening tide,
To view thee well his course would gladly stay,
As loath from thee to part so soon away;
And with salutes thy self would gladly greet,
And offer up those small drops at thy feet,
But finding that the envious banks restrain it,
To'xcuse it self does in this sort complain it,
And therefore this sad bubling murmur keeps,
And in this sort within the channel weeps.
And as thou do into the water look,
The fish which see thy shadow in the brook,
Forget to feed, and all amazed lie,
So daunted with the luster of thine eye.
And that sweet name which thou so much do wrong,
In time shall be some famous Poets song;
And with the very sweetness of that name
Lions and Tygars, men shall learn to tame.
The careful mother from her pensive breast
with Rosamond shall bring her babe to rest;
The little birds, (by men's continual sound)
Shall learn to speak, and prattle Rosamond;
And when in April they begin to sing,
with Rosamond shall welcome in the spring;
And she in whom all rarities are found,
Shall still be said to be a Rosamond.
The little flowers which dropping honied dew,
which (as thou writ'st) do weep upon thy shue,
Not for thy fault (sweet Rosamond) do moan,
But weep for grief, that thou so soon art gone,
For if thy foot tuch Hemlocke as it goes,
That Hemlock's made more sweeter then the Rose,
Of love or Neptune how they did betray,
Nor speak of 1-0, or Amimone,
When she for whom Jove once became a Bull,
Compared with thee, had been a tawny trull;
He a white Bull, and she a whiter Cow,
Yet he, nor she, nere half so white as thou.
Long since (thou know) my care provided for
To lodge thee safe from iealious Ellinor;
The Labyrinths conueyance guides thee so,
(which only Vahan thou and I do know)
If she do guard thee with a hundred eyes,
I have an hundred subtle Mercuries
To watch that Argus, which my love does keep,
Until eye, after eye, fall all to sleep.
Those stars look in by night, look in to see,
Wondering what star here on the earth should be.
As often the Moon amidst the silent night,
Has come to joy us with her friendly light,
And by the Curtain helped mine eye to see
What envious night and darkness hid from me;
when I have wished that she might ever stay,
And other worlds might still enjoy the day.
What should I say? words, tears, and sighs be spent,
And want of time does further helps prevent;
My Camp resounds with fear sull shocks of war,
Yet in my breast the worser conflicts are;
Yet is my signal to the battles sound,
The blessed name of beauteous Rosamond.
Accursed be that heart, that tongue, that breath,
Should think, should speak, or whisper of thy death.
For in one smyle, or lower from thy sweet eye,
Consists my life, my hope, my victory.
Sweet Woodstock, where my Rosamond does rest,
Blessed in her, in whom thy King is blessed;
For though in France a while my body be,
(Sweet Paradise) my heart remains in thee.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Am I at home pursued with private hate,
And war comes raging to my Palace gate?
RObert Earl of Leicester, who took part with young king Henry, entered into
England with an Army of 3. thousand Flemmings, and spoiled the Countries of
Norfolk and Suffolk, being succored by many of the Kings private enemies.

And am I branded with the curse of Room?
King Henry the second, the first Plantaginet, accused for the death of Thomas
Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, slain in the Cathedral Church, was accursed
by Pope Alexander, although he vrgd sufficient proof of his innocence in the
same, and offered to take upon him any penance, so he might escape the curse
and interdiction of the Realm.

And by the pride of my rebellious son,
Rich Normandy with Armies overrun.
Henry the young King, whom King Henry had caused to be crowned in his life,
(as he hoped) both for his own good and the good of his subjects, which
indeed turned to his own sorrow, and the trouble of the whole Realm, for he
rebelled against him, and raising a power, by the means of Jews King of
France, and William King of Scots who took part with him, invaded (...).

Unkind my children, most unkind my wife.
Never King more unfortunate then King Henry in the disobedience of his
children; first Henry, then Geffery, then Richard, then John, all at one time
or other, first or last, unnaturally rebelled against him; then the iealoufie
of Ellinor his Queen, who suspected his love to Rosamond: which grecuous
troubles, the devout of those times, attrybuted to happen unto him justly, for
refusing to take upon him the government of Jerusalem, offered unto him by the
Patriarck there, which Country was mightily afflicted by the Souldane.

Which only Vahan thou and I do know.
This Vahan was a Knight whom the King exceedingly loved, who kept the Palace
at Woodstocke, and much of the Kings jewels and treasure, to whom the King
committed many of his secrets, and in whom he reposed such trust, that he
durst commit his love into his charge.

FINIS.
TO HIS SINGVLER good Lord, the Lord Mount-eagle.
MY very good Lord, let me not need by tedious protestation to expostulate
the long conceived desire I have had to honor you: your own noble inclination
can best conceive, what greater testimony could be demonstrate: and I had
rather abreuiate what I would say, then by saying too much, to give doubtful
construction, of undoubted well meaning. Let this my Epistles be one staire or
little degree, whereby I may ascend into the entrance of your good opinion, as
one whom I have chose, amongst the number of mine honorable friends, whose
patronage may give protection to my new adventured Poesy. Thus leaving your
honor to your hopeful fortunes, and my Muse to your gracious acceptance, I
wish you all happiness.

Michaell Drayton.

King John to Matilda.
* The Argument.
After that King John had assaied by all means possible, to win the fair and
chaste Matilda, to his unchaste and unlawful bed, and by unjust courses and
false accusation had banished the Lord Robert Fitzwater her noble Father, and
many other of his alies, who justly withstood the desire of this wanton King,
seeking the dishonor of his fair and virtuous daughter this chaste Lady still
solicited by this lascivious King, flies unto Dunmowe in Essex, where in a
Nunnarie she becomes a Nun, whether the King (still persisting in his suit),
solicits her by this Epistle; her reply confirms her vowed and inuinsible
chastity, making known to the King her pure unspotted thoughts.

WHen these my Letters come unto thy view,
Think them not forced, or faind, or strange, or new;
Thou know no way, no means, no course exempted,
Left now unsought, vnprou'd, or vnatempted,
All rules, regards, all secrets, helps of Art,
What knowledge, wit, experience can impart;
And in the old worlds Ceremonies doted,
Good days for love, times, hours, and minutes noted:
And where Art left, love teaches more to find,
By signs in presence to express the mind.
Often has mine eye, told thine eye, beauty grieved it,
And begd but for one look to have releeu'd it:
And still with thine eyes motion, mine eye moved,
Laboring for mercy; telling how it loved.
If blushed, I blushed, thy cheek pale, pale was mine,
My red, thy red, my whitenes answered thine;
If sighed, I sighed, alike both passion prove,
But thy sigh is for grief, my sigh for love;
If a word past, that insufficient were,
To help that word, mine eye let forth a tear,
And if that tear did dull or senseless prove,
My heart would fetch a sigh, to make it move.
Often in thy face, one favor from the rest
I singled forth that likes my fancy best;
This likes me most, another likes me more,
A third exceeding both those liked before:
Then one that does derive all wonder thence,
Then one whose rarenes passes excellence.
Whilst I behold thy Globe-like rouling eye,
Thy lovely cheek (me thinks) stands smiling by,
And tells me, those but shadows and supposes,
And bids me thither come and gather Roses;
Looking on that, thy brow does call to me,
To come to it, if wonders I will see.
Now have I done, and now thy dimpled chin
Again does tell me I but new begin,
And bids me yet to look upon thy lip,
Least wondering least, the greatest I ouerslip.
My gazing eye, on this and this does ceaze,
which surfets, yet cannot desire appease.
Then like I brown, (olouely brown thy hair)
Only in brownenes, beauty dwells there.
Then love I black, thine eye-ball black as Iet,
Then clear, that ball is there in Crystal set,
Then white, but snow, nor swan, nor Iuorie please,
Then are thy teeth more whiter then all these:
In brown, in black, in pureness, and in white,
All love, all sweets, all rarenes, all delight;
Thus thou vile thief, my stolen heart hence do carry,
And now thou flyest into sanctuary;
Fie peevish girl, ungrateful unto nature,
Did she to this end, frame thee such a creature
That thou her glory should increase thereby,
And thou alone do scorn society?
Why heaven, made beauty like her self to view,
Not to be locked up, in a smokie Mew,
A rosy-taynted feature is heavens gold
which all men joy to touch, all to behold.
It was enacted when the world begun
That so rare beauty should not live a Nun.
But if this vow thou needs wilt undertake,
O were mine arms a Cloister for thy sake,
Still may his pains for ever be augmented,
This superstition that at first invented
Ill might he thrive, that brought this custom hither,
That holy people might not live together,
A happy time, a good world was it then,
when holy women, lived with holy men,
But Kings in this, yet priuiledg'd may be,
I Will be a Monk, so I may live with thee.
Who would not rise to ring the mornings knell,
When thy sweet lips might be the sacring bell?
Or what is he, not willingly would fast,
That on those lips, might feast his lips at last,
who unto Mattens, early would not rise?
That might read by the light of thy fair eyes?
On worldly pleasure, who would ever look?
That had thy curles his beads, thy brows his book?
Were thou the cross, to thee who would not creep
And wish the cross, still in his arms to keep,
Sweet girl, i will take this holy habit on me,
Of mere devotion that is come upon me,
Holy Matilda thou the Saint of mine,
I Will be thy Servant, and my bed thy shrine,
when I do offer, be thy breast the Alter,
And when I pray thy mouth shall be my Psalter,
The beads that we will bid shall be sweet kisses,
which we will number, if one pleasure mifses,
And when an Auic comes, to say Amen,
we will begin, and tell them over again.
Now all good fortune, give me happy thrift,
As I should joy t'absolue thee after shrift.
But see how much I do my self beguile,
And do mistake thy meaning all this while,
Thou took'st this vow to equal my desire
Because thou would have me to be a Friar,
And that we two, should comfort one another,
A holy Sister, and a holy Brother,
Thou as a Votresse unto me alone,
She is most chaste, that is but enjoyed of one.
Yea: now thy true devotion do I find,
And sure in this I much commend thy mind:
Else here thou do but ill insample give,
And in a Nunry here thou should not live
Is It possible the house that thou art in
Should not be tucht, (though with a venial sin)
when such a she-Priest comes her mass to say,
Twenty to one, they all forget to pray.
Well may we wish, they would their hearts amend,
when we be witness, that their eyes offend,
All creatures have desires, or else some lie,
Let them think so that will, so will not I.
Do thou not think our Ancestors were wise,
That these religious Cells did first devise?
As Hospitalls were for the sore and sick,
These for the crook'd, the hault, the stigmatick,
Least that their seed marked with deformity,
Should be a blemish to posterity.
Would (...) her beauty should be hid from sight,
Nere would she thus herself adorn with light,
with sparkling lamps; nor would she paint her throne
But she delights to be gazed upon:
And when the golden glorious sun goes down,
would she put on her star-bestuded crown:
And in her masking suit, the spangled sky,
Come forth to bride it in her reuelrie;
And gave this gift to all things in creation,
That they in this, should imitate her fashion.
All things that fair, that pure, that glorious been,
Offer themselves of purpose to be seen;
In sincks and vaults, the ugly Toades do dwell,
The devils since most ugly, they in hell:
Our mother earth, nere glories in her fruit,
Till by the sun clad in her Tinsell suit,
Nor does she ever smyle him in the face,
Till in his glorious arms he her embrace:
Which proves she has asoule, sense, and delight
Of generations feeling appetite.
Well hypocrite (infaith) would thou confess,
what ere thy tongue say, thy heart says no less.
Note but this one thing, (if naught else persuade)
Nature of all things male, and female made,
Showing her self in our proportion plain,
For never made she any thing in vain;
For as thou art, should any have been thus,
She would have left insample unto us.
The Turtle that is so true and chaste in love,
Shows by her mate something the spirit does move,
The Arabian Bird, that never is but one,
Is only chaste, because she is alone;
But had our mother Nature made them two,
They would have clone as Doves, and Sparrowes do,
But therefore made a martyr in desire,
And does her penance lastly in the fire;
So may they all be roasted quick that be
Apostataes to nature, as is she.
Find me but one, so young, so fair, so free,
(vvoo'd, su'd, and sought, by him that now seeks thee)
But of thy mind, and here I undertake,
Straight to erect a Nunry for her sake;
O had thou tasted of those rare delights
Ordaind each where to please great Princes sights,
To have their beauties, and their wits admird,
(Which is by nature, of your sex desird)
Attended by our traynes, our pomp, our port,
Like Gods adored abroad, kneeld to in Court,
To be saluted with the cheerful cry,
Of highness, grace, and sovereign majesty:
But unto them that know not pleasures price,
All Is one, a prison, and a Paradise.
If in a Dungion, closd up from the light,
There is no difference twixt the day and night,
Whose palate never tasted dainty cates,
Thinks homely dishes, princely delicates.
Alas poor girl, I pity thine estate,
That now thus long have lived disconsolate;
Why now at length let yet thy heart relent,
And call thy Father back from banishment:
And with those princely honors here inuest him,
That aukeward love and hate has disposest him.
Call from exile, thy dear alies and friends,
To whom the fury of my grief extends;
And if thou take my counsel in this case,
I make no doubt thou shall have better grace,
And leave that (...), that accursed Cell,
There let black night, and melancholy dwell;
Come to the Court, where all joys shall receive thee,
And till that hour, yet with my grief I leave thee.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
THis Epistle of K, John to Matilda, is much more poetical then historical,
making no mention at all of the occurrents of the time, or state, touching only
his love to her, and the extremity of his passions forced by his desires,
rightly fashioning the humo of this King as it has been truly noted by the
best and most autenticall Writers, whose nature and disposition, is truliest
discerned in the course of his love; first resting at the ceremonies of the
services of those times, then going about by all strong and probable arguments,
to reduce her to pleasures and delights, next with promises of honor, which he
thinks to be last and greatest mean, and to have greatest power in her sex;
with promise of calling home of her friends, which he thought might be a great
inducement to his desires.

Matilda to King John.
NO sooner I, received thy letters here,
Before I knew from whom, or whence they were,
But sudden fear my bloodlesse veins does fill,
As though divining of some future ill;
And in a shyuering ecstasy I stood,
A chyllie coldness runs through all my blood:
Opening thy letters, I shut up my rest,
And let strange cares into my quiet breast,
As though thy hard, vnpittying hand had sent me,
Some new devised torture to torment me;
Well had I hoped, I had been now forgot,
Cast out with those things thou remembrest not:
And that proud beauty, which inforst me hither,
Had with my name, now perrish'd both together:
But o (I see) our hoped good deceaues us,
But what we would forgo, that sildome leaves us;
Thy blamefull lines, bespotted so with sin,
Mine eyes would cleanse, ere they to read begin:
But I to wash an Indian go about,
For ill so hard set on, is hard got out.
I once determind; still to have been mute,
Only by silence to (...) thy suit,
But this again did alter mine intent,
For some will say, that silence does consent:
Desire, with small encouraging grows bold,
And hope, of every little thing takes hold.
I set me down at large to write my mind,
But now, nor pen, nor paper can I find;
For dread, and passion, are so powerful ore me:
That I discern not things that stand before me:
Finding the pen, the paper, and the wax,
This at command, and now invention lacks,
This sentence serves, and that my hand out-strikes,
That pleases well, and this as much mislikes,
I write, endite, I point, I raze, I quote,
I enterline, I blot, correct, I note;
I hope, despair, take courage, faint, disdain,
I make, allege, I immitate, I feign:
Now thus it must be, and now thus, and thus,
Bold, shamefast, fearelesse, doubtful, timorous;
My faint hands writing, when my full eye reeds,
From every word strange passion still proceeds.
O when the soul is fettered once in woe,
It Is strange what humors it does force us to;
A tear does drown a tear, sigh, sigh does smother,
This hinders that, that interrupts the other;
Th'ouer-watched weakness of a sick conceit,
Is that which makes small beauty seem so great,
Like things which hid in troubled waters lie,
which crook'd, seem straight, if straight, seem contrary,
And this our vain imagination shows it
As it conceiues it, not as judgment knows it,
(As in a Mirhor, if the same be true)
Such as your likeness, justly such are you;
But as you change your self, it changes there,
And shows you as you are, not as you were:
And with your motion does your shadow move,
If frown, or smile; such the conceit of love.
Why tell me, is it possible the mind
A form in all deformity should find?
Within the compass of man's face we see
How many sorts of several favors be;
And that the chyn, the nose, the brow, the eye,
If great, if small, flat, sharp, or if awry,
Alters proportion, alters the grace,
And makes a mighty difference in the face;
And in the world, scarce two so likely are
One with the other which if you compare,
But being set before you both together,
A judging sight does soon distinguish either.
How woman-like a weakness is it then?
O what strange madness so possesses men
Bereft of sense: such senseless wonders seeing,
without form, fashion, certainty, or being?
For which so many die to live in anguish,
Yet cannot live, if thus they should not languish;
That comfort yields not, and yet hope denies not,
A life that lives not, and a death that dies not;
That hates us most, when most it speaks us fair,
Does promise all things, always pays with air,
Yet some-time does our greatest grief appease,
To double sorrow after little ease.
Like that which thy lascivious will does crave,
which if once had, thou never more can have;
Which if thou get, in getting thou do wast it,
Taken, is lost, and perrish'd if thou have it;
which if thou gain'st, thou nere the more have wone,
I loosing nothing, yet am quite undone;
And yet of that, if that a King deprave me,
No King restores, though he a kingdom gave me.
Do thou of father and of friends deprive me?
And take thou from me, all that heaven did give me?
what nature claims, by blood, alies, or neerenes,
Or friendship challenge, by regard or deerenes.
Make me an Orphane ere my father die?
A woeful widow in virginity?
Is thy unbridled lust the cause of all?
And now thy flattering tongue bewailes my fall.
The dead man's tomb with fained tears to fill,
So the devouring Crocodile does kill,
To harbor hate in show of sweetest things,
So in the Rose the poysned serpent stings.
To lurk far off, yet lodge destruction by,
The Basiliske does poison with the eye;
To call for aid, and then to lie in wait,
So the Hienna murders by deceit;
By sweet inticements, so daine death to bring,
So from the Rocks th'aluring Mermaides sing;
In greatest wants, t'inflict tho greatest woe,
This is the worst that tyranny can do.
But where the boystrous raging storm preuailes,
In vain is use of Ankors, oars, or sails;
Above us, blustering winds, and dreadful thunder,
Gusts, flawes, and furges, still are working under;
Here on this side, the furious tempests fly,
There Rocks, and sands, and dangerous vvhirl-pooles lie,
Is this the mean that majesty approues,
And in this sort do Princes woo their loves?
With rarest music, which the hearing charms,
Fill they our ears, with noise of clattering Arms?
To please the smell; with odours sweet perfuming,
The smokie steame, of Towers with fire consuming?
For pompous tryumphs, to delight the eye,
Present us murder, and black tragedy;
To please the taste, and stir the youthful blood,
Give they us tears for drink, and sighs for food,
To please the tuch, they cares to us allow,
Our hands may feel the wrinkles in our brow,
And for sweet friends to nourish our content,
Mue they us up, send them to banishment.
Mildnes would better suit with majesty,
Then rash revenge, and rough severity,
For virtue is more amiable, more sweet
When virtue, and true majesty do meet;
For from the prospect of a kingly throne
Virtue sees much, she has to build upon:
O in what safety Temperance does rest
when it finds harbor in a kingly breast;
How dear is mercy, having power and will,
when pity helps, where equity does kill.
If pity praise-full in vnhelping men,
In powerful Kings, how glorious is it then?
Alas, and fled I hither from my fo,
That innocence should be betrayed so?
Is Court and Country both her enemy,
And no place found to shroude in chastity?
Each house for lust, a harbor, and an Inn,
Each City is a sanctuary for sin;
And all do pity beauty in distress,
If beauty chaste, then only pitiless.
And thus is beauty made the stale of lust,
Or vnreleeued, perish needs she must.
Lascivious Poets, which abuse the truth,
which often teach age to sin, infecting youth,
For the unchaste make trees and stones to mourn,
Or as they please, to other shapes do turn
Cinyras daughter; whose incestious mind,
Made her wrong nature, and dishonor kind:
Long since by them is turned into a Mirrh,
whose dropping liquor ever weeps for her:
And in a fountain, Biblis does deplore
Her fault so vile, and monsterous before,
Silla, which once her father did betray,
Is now a byrd, (if all be true they say.)
She that with Phoebus did the foul offense,
Now metamorphiz'd into Frankensence.
Other, to flowers, to odours, and to gum,
At least loves lemman is a star become:
And more; they feign a thousand fond excuses,
To hide their scapes, and cover their abuses,
The virgin only they obscure and hide,
whilst the unchaste, by them are deified;
Yet if a Vestals name be once expressed,
She must be set together with the rest.
I am not now, as when thou saw me last,
That favor soon is vanished and past;
That Rosie-blush, lapp'd in a Lilly-vale,
Now with the Morphew ouer-growne, and pale.
And down my cheeks, with showers of swelling tears,
Remain the furrows that continuance wears,
And in the circles of my withered eyes,
In aged wrinckles beauty buried lies:
And in my grace, my presence, iesture, cheer,
Ruin, distress, woe, anguish, does appear.
That breast, that hand, that cheek, that eye, that brow,
Faded, decayed, fallen, darkened, wrinckled now:
Such was my beauty once, now is it such,
Once thought most rare, now altered more then much:
Nor I regard all that thou can protest,
My vow is taken, I a Nun professed.
This Vestall habit does content me more
Then all the robes that yet I ever wore.
Had Rosamand, (a recluse of our sort)
Taken our Cloister, left the wanton Court,
Shadowing that beauty with a holy vale,
which she (alas) too loosely set to sale,
She need not like an ugly Minataur,
Have been locked up from iealious Ellinor,
But been as famous by thy mothers wrongs,
As by thy Father subject to all tongues.
To shadow sin, might can the most pretend,
Kings, but the conscience; all things can defend.
A stronger hand restraines our wilsull powers,
A will must rule above this will of ours,
Not following what our vain desires do woo
For virtues sake, but what we (only) do.
And has my Father chose to live exild,
Before his eyes should see my youth defild?
And to withstand a Tyrants lewd desire,
Beheld his Towers and Castles razd with fire:
Yet never tuch'd with grief, so only I,
Exempt from shame might with true honor die.
And shall this jewel which so dearly cost,
Now after all, by my dishonor lost?
No, no, his reverend words, his holy tears,
Yet in my soul too deep impression bears:
No, no, his farewell at his last depart,
More deeply is engraven in my heart,
Nor shall that blot, by me his name shall have,
Bring his gray hairs with sorrow to his grave,
Rather with pity weep upon my Tomb,
Then for my birth to curse my mothers womb.
Though Dunmowe give no refuge here at all,
Dunmowe can give my body burial.
If all remorcelesse, no teare-shedding eye,
My self will moan my self; so live, so die.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
THis Epistle, contains no particular points of history, more then the
generallity of the argument lays open, for after the banishment of the Lord
Robert Fitzwater, and that (...) was become a Recluse at Dunmowe, (from whence
this reply is imagined to be written,) the King still earnestly persisting in
his suit, Matilda with this chaste and constant denial, hops yet at length to
find some comfortable remedy, and to rid herself of doubts, by taking upon her
this monasticke habit, and to show that she still bears in mind his former
cruelty, bred by the impatience of his lust, she remembers him of her fathers
banishment, and the lawless exile of her alies and friends.

Do thou of Father and of friends deprive me?
Then complaining of her distress, that flying thither, thinking there to
find relief, she sees herself most assayld where she hoped to have found
most safety.

Alas, and fled I hither from my foe, That etc.
After again, standing upon the precise points of conscience, not to cast off
this habit she had taken,

My vow is taken, I a Nun professed.
And at last laying open more particulerly the miseries sustained by her Father
in England, the burning of his Castles and houses, which she proves to be for
her sake: as respecting only her honor, more then his native country and his
own fortunes.

And to withstand a Tyrants loud desire,
Beheld his Towers and Castles set on fire.
Knitting up her Epistle with a great and constant resolution,

Though Dunmow give no refuge here at all,
Dunmow can give my body burial.
FINIS.
To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne Harrington: wife to the honorable
Gentleman, Sir John Harrington, Knight.
MY singular good Lady: your many virtues known in general to all, and your
gracious favors to my unworthy self, have confirmed that in me, which before
I knew you, I only saw by the light of other men's judgments. Honor seated
in your breast, finds herself adorned as in a rich palace, (...) which makes
her admirable: which like the sun (from thence) begets most precious
things of this earthly world, only by the virtue of his rays, not the nature
of the mould. Worth is best (...) by the worthy, dejected minds want that
pure fire which should give vigor to virtue. I refer to your own great
thoughts, (the impartial Judges of true affection) the unfeigned zeal I have
ever borne to your honorable service: and so rest your Ladyships humbly at
command.

Michaell Drayton.

Queen Isabell to Mortimer.
* The Argument.
Queen Isabell, (the wife of Edward the second, called Edward Carnaruan,)
being the daughter of Phillip le Beau, King of France, forsaken by the King
her husband, who delighted only in the company of Piers Gaueston, his minion
and favorite: and after his death seduced by the evil counsel of the
Spensers. This Queen thus left by her husband, even in the glory of her youth,
drew into her especial favor Roger Mortimer, Lord of VVigmore: a man of a
mighty and inuinsible spirit. This Lord Mortimer rising in Arms against the
King, with Thomas Earl of Lancaster and the Barrons, was taken ere he could
gather his power, and by the King committed to the Tower of London. During his
imprisonment, he ordained a feast in honor of his birthday, to which he
invited Sir Stephen Segraue, Lieutenant of the Tower, and the rest of the
officers, where by means of a drink prepared him by the Queen, he cast them
all into a beauie sleep, and with ladders of cords being ready prepared for
the purpose, he escapes, and flies into France: whether she sends this
Epistle, complaining her own misfortunes, and greatly rejoicing at his safe
escape.

THough such sweet comfert comes not now from her
As Englands Queen has sent to Mortimer,
Yet what that wants, which might my power approve,
If lines can bring, this shall supply with love.
Me thinks affliction should not fright me so,
Nor should resume these sundry shapes of woe:
But when I feign would find the cause of this,
Thy absence shows me where the erroris.
Often when I think of thy departing hence,
Sad sorrow then possesses every sense,
But finding thy dear blood preserved thereby,
And in thy life, my long-wish'd liberty,
with that sweet thought my self I only pleuse,
Amid'st my grief; which sometimes gives me ease,
Thus do extremest ills a joy possess,
And one woe makes another woe seem less.
That blessed night, that mild-aspected hour,
Wherein thou made escape our of the Tower,
Shall consecrated euer-more remain:
What gentle Planet in that hour did reign;
And shall be happy in the birth of men,
which was chief Lord of the Ascendant then.
Oh, how I feared that sleepie juice I sent,
Might yet want power to further thine intent;
Or that some unseen mystery might lurk,
Which wanting order, kindly should not work:
Often did I wish, those dreadful poisoned lees
That closed the euer-waleing Dragons eyes,
Or I had had those sense-(...) stalks
That grow in shadie Proserpines dark walks;
Or those black weeds on Lethe banks below,
Or Lunary that does on Latmus flow:
Often did I fear this moist and foggie Clime,
Or that the earth, waxt barraine now with time
Should not have herbs to help me in this case,
Such as do thrive on Indias parched face.
That morrow, when the blessed sun did rise,
And shut the lidds of all heavens lesser eyes,
Forth from my (...) by a secret staire
I steal to (...), as though to take the air;
And ask the gentle stood as it did glide,
Or thou did (...) or perish by the tide?
If thou did perish, I desire the stream
To lay thee softly on her silver teame,
And bring thee to me to the quiet shore,
That with her tears, thou might have some tears more.
When suddenly does rise a rougher gale,
with that (me thinks) the troubled waves look pale,
And sighing, with that little gust that blows,
with this remembrance seems to knit her brows.
Even as this sudden passion does (...) me,
The cheerful sun breaks from a cloud to light me;
Then does the bottom evident appear,
As it would tell me, that thou (...) not there,
When as the water, flowing where I stand,
Does seem to tell me, thou (...) safe on land.
Did Bulloyne once a festival prepare
For England, (...), (...), and Navarre?
When France envied those buildings (only blessed)
Graced with the Orgies of my bridal feast,
That English Edward should refuse my bed
For that incestuous, shameless Ganimed?
And in my place, upon his regal throne,
To set that girle-boy, wanton Gaueston.
Betwixt the feature of my face and his,
My glass assures me no such difference is,
That a foul witches bastard should thereby
Be thought more worthy of his love then I.
What does avail us to be Princes heirs,
when we can boast our birth is only theirs?
When base, dissembling flatterers shall deceive us,
Of all our famous Ancestors did leave us:
And of our princely jewels and our dowers,
we but enjoy the least of what is ours;
when Minions heads must wear our Monarchs crowns,
To raise up dunghills with our famous towns:
When beggers-brats are wrapped in rich perfumes,
And sore aloft, impt with our Eagles plumes;
And joined with the brave issue of our blood,
Alie the kingdom to their crauand brood.
Did Longshanks purchase with his conquering hand,
Albania, Gascoyne, Cambria, Ireland?
That young Carnaruan (his unhappy son)
Should give away all that his Father won?
To back a stranger, proudly bearing down
The brave alies, and branches of the crown?
And did great Edward, on his deathbed give
This charge to them which afterward should live,
That, that proud Gascoyne; banished the land,
No more should tread upon the English sand?
And have these great Lords in the quarrel stood,
And sealed his last will with their dearest blood,
That after all this fearful massaker,
The fall of Beuchamp, Lasey, Lancaster,
Another faithless favorite should arise
To cloud the sun of our Nobilities;
And gloried I in Gauestons great fall,
That now a Spenser should succeed in all;
And that his ashes should another breed,
which in his place and Empire should succeed;
That wanting one, a kingdoms wealth to spend,
Of what that left, this now should make an end:
To wast all that our father won before,
Nor leave (...) sword to conquer more.
Thus but in vain we (...) do resist,
where power can do (even) all things as it list,
And with unjust men to debate of laws,
Is to give power to hurt a rightful cause:
Whilst parliaments must still redress their wrongs,
And we must (...) for what to us belongs;
Our wealth but fuel to their fond excess,
And we must fast, to feast their wantonness.
Think thou our wrongs then insufficient are
To move our Brother to religious war?
And if they were, yet Edward does (...)
Homage for (...), Guyne, and Aquitaine:
And if not that, yet has he broke the truce;
Thus all accur, to put back all excuse.
The Sisters wrong, joined with the Brothers right,
Me thinks might urge him in this cause to fight.
Be all those people senseless of our (...)
which for our Country often have managed Arms?
Is the brave Normans courage now forgot?
Or the bold Brittons lost the use of shot?
The big-bon'd Almaines, and stout Brabanders,
Their warlike Pykes, and sharp edged Semiters?
Or do the Pickards let theys (...) lie,
Once like the Centaurs of old Thessalie?
Or if a valiant Leader be their lack,
where thou art present, who should drive them back?
I do conjure thee by what is most dear,
By that great Name of famous Mortimer,
By ancient VVigmors honorable Crest,
The (...) where all thy famous Grandsires rest;
Or if then these, what more may thee approve,
Even by those vows of thy unfeigned love,
That thy great hopes may move the Christian King,
By foreign Arms some comfort yet to bring,
To curb the power of Traitors that rebel
Against the right of princely Isabell.
Vain witless woman, why should I desire
To add more spleen to thy immortal fire?
To urge thee by the violence of hate,
To shake the pyllars of thine own estate,
When what soever we intend to do,
To our misfortune ever sorts unto;
And nothing else remains for us beside,
But tears and Coffins only to provide,
When still so long as Borough bears that name
Time shall not blot out our deserved shame;
And whilst clear Trent her wonted course shall keep,
For our sad fall, her crystal drops shall weep.
All see our ruin on our backs is thrown,
And to our selves our sorrows are our own,
And Tarlton now whose counsel should direct
The first of all, is slaundred with suspect:
For dangerous things dissembled sildome are
which many eyes attend with busy care.
What should I say? my griefs do still renew,
And but begin when I should bid adieu,
Few be my words, but manifold my woe,
And still I stay, the more I strive to go.
As accents issue forth, griefs enter in,
And where I end, me thinks I but begin:
Then till fair time some greater good affords,
Take my loves payment in these ayrie words.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
O how I feared that sleepie drink I sent
Might yet want power to further thine intent.
MOrtimer being in the Tower, and ordayning a feast, in honor of his
birthday, as he pretended: and inuiting thereunto Sir Stephen Segraue
Constable of the Tower, with the rest of the officers belonging to the same,
he gave them a sleepie drink, provided him by the Queen, by which means he
got liberty for his escape.

I steal to Thames, as though to take the air,
And ask the gentle stream as it does glide,
Mortimer being got out of the Tower, swamme the river of Thames into Kent,
whereof she having intelligence, doubts of his strength to escape, by reason
of his long imprisonment, being almost the space of three years.

Did Bulloyne once a festival prepare,
For England, Almaine, Cicile, and Naudrre?
Edward Carnaruan, the first prince of Wales of the English blood, married
Isabell, daughter of Phillip the fair, at Bulloyne, in the presence of the
Kings of Almaine, Navarre, and Cicile, with the chief Nobility of France and
England, which marriage was there solemnized with exceeding pomp and
magnificence.

And in my place, upon his regal throne,
To set that girle-boy, wanton Gaucston.
Noting the effeminacie and luxurious wantonness of Gaueston the Kings Minion;
his behavior and attire ever so womanlike, to please the eye of his lascivious
Prince.

That a foul witches bastard should thereby,
It was urged by the Queen and the Nobility, in the disgrace of Piers
Gaueston, that his mother was convicted of witchcraft, and burned for the same,
and that Piers had bewitched the King.

Albania, Gascoyne, Cambria, Ireland.
Albania, Scotland so called of Albanact, the second son of Brutus, and
Cambria, Wales, so called of Camber the third son, the four (...) and
Countries, brought in subjection by Edward Longshanks.

When of our Princely jewels, and our dowers,
We but enjoy the least of what is ours.
A complaynt of the prodigality of King Edward, giving unto Gaueston the
jewels and treasure which was left him by the ancient Kings of England; and
enriching him with the goodly Manor of Wallingforde, assigned as parcel of the
dower, to the Queens of this famous I Will.

And joined with the brave issue of our blood,
Alie our kingdom to their crauand brood.
Edward the second, gave to Piers Gaueston in marriage, the daughter of Gilbert
Clare, Earl of Gloucester, begot of the Kings sister, Ioane of Acres, married
to the said Earl of Gloucester.

Should give away all that his Father won To back a stranger:
King Edward offered his right in France to Charles his brother in law, and
his right in Scotland to Robert Bruise, to be aided against the Barrons, in the
quarrel of Piers Gaueston.

And did great Edward on his deathbed give
Edward Longshanks on his deathbed at Carlisle, commanded young Edward his
son on his blessing, not to call back Gaueston, which (for the misguiding of
the Princes youth) was before banished by the whole counsel of the land.

That after all this fearful massaker,
The fall of Beuchamp, Lasey, Lancaster.
Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, Guy, Earl of Warwick, and Henry Earl of
Lincoln, who had taken their oaths before the deceassed King at his death, to
withstand his son Edward if he should call Gaueston from exile, being a
thing which he much feared: now seeing Edward to violate his Fathers
commandment, rise in Arms against the King, which was the cause of the
civil war, and the ruin of so many Princes.

And gloried I in Gauestons great fall,
That now a Spenser should succeed in all?
The two Hugh Spensers, the Father and the son, after the death of Gaueston,
became the great favorites of the King, the son being created by him Lord
Chamberlain, and the Father Earl of Winchester.

And if they were, yet Edward does detain
Homage for Pontiu, Guyne, and Aquitaine.
Edward Longshanks, did homage for those Cities and territories to the French
King, which Edward the second neglecting, moved the French King, by the
subbornation of Mortimer, to ceaze those Countries into his hands.

By ancient Wigmors honorable Crest.
Wigmore in the marches of Wales, was the ancient house of the Mortimers, that
noble and courageous family.

That still so long as Borrough bears that name,
The Queen remembers the great overthrow given to the Barrons, by Andrew
Herckley, Earl of Carlill, at Borrough bridge, after the battle at Burton.

And Torlton now, whose counsels should direct,
This was Adam Torlton, bishop of Herford, that great politician, who so highly
favored the faction of the Queen and Mortimer, whose evil counsel afterward
wrought the destruction of the King.

Mortimer to Queen Isabell.
AS thy saluts my sorrows do adiourne,
So back to thee their interest I return;
Though not in so great bounty (I confess)
As thy heroicke princely lines express:
For how should comfort issue from the breath
Of one condemned, and long lodged up in death?
From murders rage thou did me once repriue,
Now in exile, my hopes thou do revive;
Twice all was taken, twice thou all did give,
And thus twice dead, thou make me twice to live.
This double life of mine, your only due,
You gave to me; I give it back to you;
Nere my escape had, I aduentur'd thus,
As did the skye-attempting Daedalus;
And yet to give more safety to my flight,
Have made a night of day, a day of night.
Nor had I backed the proud aspyring wall,
which held without, my hopes, within, my fall,
Leaving the cords to tell where I had gone,
For gazing eyes with fear to look upon,
But that thy beauty, (by a power divine)
Breathed a new life into this spirit of mine.
Drawn by the sun of thy celestial eyes,
with fiery wings made passage through the skies.
The heavens did seem the charge of me to take,
And sea and land be friend me for thy sake;
Thames stopped hen tide, to make me way to go,
As thou had charged her that it should be so,
The hollow murmuring winds their due time kept;
As they had rocked the world, whilst all things slept;
One billow bore me, and another drove me,
This strove to help me, and that strove to save me;
The brisling Reeds, moved with the air, did chide me,
As they would tell me, that they moant to hide me.
The pale-faced night beheld thy heavy cheer,
And would not let one little star appear,
But over all, her smoakie mantle hurled,
And in thick vapors muffled up the world;
And the pure air became so calm and still
As it had been obedient to my will;
And every thing disposd unto my rest,
As when one Seas the Alcion buildes her nest.
And those rough waves which late with fury rusht,
Slide smoothly on; and suddenly are hushed;
Nor Neptune lets his surges out so long
As Nature is in bringing forth her young;
Nor let the Spensers glory in my chance
That thus I live an exile now in France;
That I from England banished should be,
But England rather banished from me:
More were her want, France our great blood should bear,
Then Englands loss should be to Mortimer.
My Grandsire was the first since Authurs reign,
That the Round-table lastly did ordain;
To whose great Court at Kenelworth did come
The peerlesse knighthood of all Christendom:
Whose princely order, honored England more
Then all the conquests she atchiu'd before.
Never durst Scot set foot on English ground,
Nor on his back did English bear a wound,
whilst VVigmore flourisht in our princely hopes,
And whilst our Ensign marched with Edwards troops:
Whilst famous Longshanks bones (in Fortunes scorn)
As sacred relics to the field were borne;
Nor ever did the valiant English doubt,
Whilst our brave battles guarded them about.
Nor did our wives and woeful mothers mourn
The English blood that stained Banocksburn,
Whilst with his Minions sporting in his Tent,
Whole days and nights in banqueting were spent:
Until the Scots (which under safeguard stood)
Made lavish hauock of the English blood;
And battered helmes lay scattered on the shore,
where they in conquest had been borne before.
A thousand kingdoms will we seek from far,
As many Nations wast with civil war,
where the disheuel'd ghastly Sea-nymphe sings,
Or well-rigd shyps shall stretch their swelling wings,
And dragge their Ankors through the sandy foame,
About the world in every Clime to roame,
And those vnchristned Countries call our own,
where scarce the name of England has been known;
And in the Dead-sea sinck our houses fame,
From whose stern waves we first derived our Name,
Before foul black-mouthed infamy shall sing
That Mortimer ere stooped unto a King.
And we will turn sterne-visag'd Fury back,
To seek his spoil, who sought our utter sack:
And come to beard him in our native I Will,
Ere he march forth to follow our exile.
And after all these boystrous stormy shocks,
Yet will we grapple with the chaulkie Rocks.
Nor will we come like Pirates, or like thieves,
From mountain Forests, or sea-bordering Cleeues,
But (...) the air with terror (when we come)
Of the stern trumpet, and the bellowing drum:
And in the field advance our plumie Crest,
And march upon fair Englands flowrie breast;
And Thames which once we for our life did swim,
Shaking our dewie tresses on her brim,
Shall bear my Navy; vaunting in her pride,
Falling from Tanet with the powerful tide;
Which fertile Essex, and fair Kent shall see,
Spreading her flagges along the pleasant lee,
When on her stemming poopes she proudly bears
The famous Ensigns of the Belgicke Peers.
And for the hateful sacriligious sin
Which by the Pope he stands accursed in;
The Cannon text shall have a common glesse,
Receipts in parcels, shall be paid in (...)
This doctrine preached, who from the Church does take,
At least shall trebble restitution make:
For which Rome sends her curses out from far,
Through the stern throat of terror-breathing war,
Till to th'vnpeopled shore she brings supplies
Of those industrious Roman, Colonies.
And for his homage, by the which of old
Proud Edward Guyne and Aquitane does hold,
Charles by inuasiue Arms again shall take,
And send the English forces over the Lake;
when Edwards fortune stands upon this chance,
To loose in England, or expusd from France;
And all those towns great Longshanks left his son,
Now lost again, which once his Father won.
Within their strong Percullisd Ports shall lie,
And from their walls his sieges shall defy.
And by that firm and undissolved knot,
Betwixt the neighboring French, and bordering Scot,
Bruise now shall bring his Redshanks; from the seas,
From th'Iled Orcad's, and the Hebrydes,
And to his Western Havens give free pass,
To land the warlike Irish Galiglasse:
Marching from Tweed to swelling Humber sands,
vvasting along the Northern nether-lands:
And wanting those which should his power sustain,
Consumed with slaughter in his bloody (...),
Our warlike sword shall drive him from his shrone,
where he shall lie for is to tread upon:
And those great Lords, now after their attaints,
Canonized amongst the English Saints;
And by the superstitious people, thought,
That by their Relics, miracles are wrought,
And think that flood much virtue does retain,
which took the blood of famous Bohun slain;
Continuing the remembrance of the thing,
To make the people more abhor their King,
Nor shall a Spenser (be he nere so great)
Possess our VVigmore, our renowned seat.
To raze the ancient Trophies of our race,
with our deserts their monuments to grace;
Nor shall he lead our valiant marchers forth,
To make the Spensers famous in the North:
Nor be the Gardants of the British pales,
Defending England, and preserving Wales.
At first our troubles seemed calm enough,
But now are grown more boyst'rous and more rough,
with grauest counsel all must be directed,
where plainest shows are openly suspected;
For where mishaps our errors does assault,
There does it easilest make us see our fault.
Then (sweet) repress all fond and wilful spleen,
Two things to be a woman; and a Queen:
Keep close the cyndars, least the fire should burn,
It is not this which yet must serve our turn.
And if I do not much mistake the thing,
The next supply shall greater comfort bring;
Till when, I leave my Princess for a while,
Live thou in rest, though I live in exile.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Of one condemned, and long lodged up in death.
ROger Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore, had stood publicly condemned, for his
insurrection with Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and Bohun Earl of Herford, by the
space of three months; and as the report went, the day of his execution was
determined to have been shortly after, which he prevented by his escape.

Twice all was taken, twice thou all did give.
At what time the two Mortimers, this Roger Lord of Wigmore, and his uncle
Roger Mortimer the elder, were apprehended in the West, the Qeene (by means of
Torlton Bishop of Herford, and Beck Bishop of Duresme and Patriarck of
Jerusalem, being then both mighty in the state, upon the submission of the
Mortimers, somewhat pacified the King, and now secondly she wrought means
for his escape.

Leaving the cords to tell where I had gone.
With strong ladders made of cords provided him for the purpose, he escaped
out of the Tower, which when the same were found fastened to the walls, in
such a desperate attempt they bred astonishment to the beholders.

Nor let the Spensers glory in my chance,
The two Hugh Spensers, the Father and the son, then being so highly
favored of the King, knew that their greatest safety came by his exile, whose
high and turbulent spirit, could never brook any corriuall in greatness.

My Grandstre was the first since Arthurs ralgne,
That the Round-table lastly did ordain.
Roger Mortimer, called the great Lord Mortimer, Grandfather to this Roger,
which was afterward the first Earl of March, reerected again the Round-table
at Kenelworth, after the ancient order of King Arthurs table, with the retinue
of a hundred knights and a hundred Ladies in his house, for the entertaining of
such adventures as came thither from all parts of Christendom.

Whilst famous Longshanks bones in fortunes scorn.
Edward Longshanks willed at his death, that his body should be boiled the
flesh from the bones, and that the bones should be borne to the wars in
Scotland, which he was persuaded unto by a prophecy, which told that the
English should still be fortunate in conquest, so long as his bones were
carried in the field.

The English blood that stained Banocksburne.
In the great voyage Edward the second made against the Scots, at the battle
at Striueling, near unto the river of Banocksburne, in Scotland, where there
was in the English Camp such banqueting and excess, such riot and misorder,
that the Scots, (who in the mean time labored for advantage) gave to the
English a great and fearful overthrow.

And in the Dead-sea, sincke our houses fame, From whose etc.
Mortimer so called of Mare Mortuum, and in French, Mort mer: in English the
Dead sea, which is said to be, where Sodom and Gomorra once were, before they
were destroyed by fire from heaven.

And for that hateful sacriligious sin,
Which by the Pope he stands accursed in,
Gaustelinus and Lucas, two Cardinals, sent into England from Pope Clement, to
appease the ancient hate between the King and Thomas Earl of Lancaster, to
whose Embassy the King seemed to yield unto, but after their departure he went
back from his promises, for which he was accursed at Rome.

Of those industrious Roman Colonies.
A Colonie is a sort or number of people, that came to inhabit a place before
not inhabited, whereby he seems here to prophecy of the subversion of the
Land; the Pope joining with the power of other Princes, against Edward for the
breach of his promise.

Charles by inuasiue Arms again shall take,
Charles the French King, moved by the wrong done unto his sister, ceazeth the
Provinces which belonged to the King of England, into his hands, stirred the
rather thereto by Mortimer, who solicited her cause in France, as is expressed
before in the other Epistle, in the Gloss upon this point.

And those great Lords now after their attaints,
Canonized amongst the English Saints.
After the death of Thomas Earl of Lancaster at Pomfret, the the people
imagined great miracles to be done by his relics: as they did of the body of
Bohun Earl of Herford, slain at Borough bridge.

FINIS.
To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, Edward Earl of Bedford.
THrice noble and my gracious Lord, the love I have ever borne to the
illustrious house of Bedford, and to the honorable family of the Harringtons,
to the which by marriage your Lordship is happily united, has long since
devoted my true and zealous affection to your honorable service, and my Poems
to the protection of my noble Lady, your Countess: to whose service I was
first bequeathed, by that learned and accomplished Gentleman, Sir Henry Goodere
(not long since deceased,) whose I was whilst he was: whose patience, pleased
to bear with the imperfections of my beedlesse and unstaid youth. That
excellent and matchless Gentleman, was the first cherisher of my Muse, which
had been by his death left a poor Orphane to the world, had he not before
bequeathed it to that Lady whom he so deerly loved. Vouchsafe then my dear
Lord to accept this Epistle, which I dedicate as zealously, as (I hope) you
will patronize willingly, until some more acceptable service may be witness of
my love toward your honor.

Your Lordships ever, Michaell Drayton.

Queen Isabell to Richard the second.
* The Argument.
Queen Isabell (the daughter of Charles king of France) being the second wife
of Richard the second, the son of Edward the black Prince, the eldest son
of King Edward the third: After the said Richard her husband was deposed from
his crown and kingly dignity, by Henry Duke of Herford, the eldest son of
John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, the fourth son of Edward the third, this
Lady being then very young, was sent back again into France, without dowre,
at what time the deposed King her husband was sent from the Tower of London (as
a prisoner) unto Pomfret Castle. Whether this poor Lady, bewayling her
husbands misfortunes, writes this Epistle from France.

AS does the yearly Augur of the spring
In depth of woe, thus I my sorrow sing;
Words tuned with sighs, tears falling often among,
A doleful burden to a heavy song;
Words issue forth to find my grief some way,
Tears ouer-take them, and do bid them stay:
Thus whilst one strives, to keep the other back,
Both once too forward, now are both too slack.
O how I flatter grief, and do entreat it,
Grief flatters me, so often as I repeat it.
And to it self has sorrow changed me so,
That woe is turned to me, I turned to woe.
If fatal Pomfret, has in former times,
Nourished the grief begot in hoter Clymes,
Thither I send my woes, there to be fed,
But where first borne, where fitter to be bred;
They unto France be aliens, and unknown,
England from her, does challenge these her own.
They say, all mischife comes from the North,
It is too true, my fall does set it forth;
And where bleake winters storms do ever rage,
There should my sighs find surest anchorage,
Except that breeme air holds the Northern part,
Do freese that Aetna, which so burns my heart.
But why should I thus limmit grief a place,
when all the world is filled with our disgrace?
And we in bounds thus striving to contain it,
The more abounds, the more we do restrain it.
O how even yet, I hate my loathed eyes,
And in my glass often call them faythlesse spies,
That were so hapless, with one loving look,
To grace that Traitor, perjured Bullenbrooke;
But that of sense, joy had all sense bereaved,
They never should have been so much deceau'd.
Proud was the Courser which my Lord bestrid,
when Richard like his conquering Grandsire rid,
For all the world, in every look alike
The Rosy Islands in his Lilly cheek;
His silken Amber curles so would he tie,
So carried he his princely Eagle eye:
From top to toe, his like in every lim,
All look on Edward, that did look on him.
The perfect pattern Nature chose alone,
When at the first she framed proportion,
Reserved till then, that all the world should view it,
And praise th'insample by the which she drew it;
O let that day be guilty of all sin,
That is to come, or ever yet has bin,
Wherein great Norfolks forward course was staid,
To prove the treasons he to Herford laid.
When with stern fury, both these Dukes enraged,
Their gauntlets then at Couentry engaged,
when first thou did repeal thy former grant,
Sealed to brave Mowbray, as thy Combatant,
From times unnumbered hours, let time divide it,
Least in his minutes, he should hap to hide it:
Yet on his brows let wrinckled age still bear it,
That when it comes, all other hours may fear it,
And all ill-boading Planets, by consent,
That day may hold their wicked parliament;
And in heavens large Decrees, enrole it thus,
Black, dismal, fatal, inauspitious,
For then should he, in height of all his pride,
Under great Mowbrays valiant hand have died:
Nor should not now from banishment retire,
The fatal brand to set our Troy on fire.
O why did Charles relieve his needy state?
A vagabond, and straggling runnagate;
And in his Court, with grace did entertain
This vagrant exile, this abiected Caine:
That with a thousand mothers curses went,
Marked with the brands of ten years banishment.
When thou to Ireland took'st thy last farewell,
Millions of knees upon the pauements fell,
And every where th'applauding echoes ring
The joyful shouts that did salute a King;
Thou went victorious, crowned, in triumph borne,
But came subdued, vncrown'd, and laughed to scorn;
And all those tongues which tit'led thee their Lord,
Grace Henry's glorious style with that great word;
And all those eyes did with thy course ascend,
Now all too few on Herford to attend.
Princes (like suns) be evermore in sight,
All see the clouds which do eclipse their light;
Yet they which lighten all down from their skies,
See not the clouds offending others eyes,
And deem their noone-tide is desired of all,
When all expect clear changes by their fall.
What color seems to shadow Herfords claim,
when law and right his Fathers hopes does maime?
Affirmed by Churchmen (which should bear no hate)
That John of Gaunt, was illigittimate:
whom his reputed mothers tongue did spot,
By a base Flemish Boore to be begot,
whom Edwards Eglets mortally did shun,
Daring with them to gaze against the sun.
Where lawful right and conquest does allow,
A triple crown on Richards princely brow,
Three kingly Lions bears his bloody field,
No bastards mark does blot his conquering shield;
Never durst he attempt our hapless shore,
Nor set his foot on satall Rauenspore;
Nor durst his slugging Hulks approach the strand,
Nor stooped a top as signal to the Land,
Had not the Percyes promisd aid to bring,
Against their oath unto their lawful King;
Against their faith unto our Crowns true heir,
Their valiant kinsman, Edmond Mortimer.
When I to England came, a world of eyes
were there attending on my fair arise;
when I came back, those fatal Plannets frown,
And all are set before my going down;
The smooth-faced Air did on my coming smile,
But with rough storms are driven to exile:
But Bullenbrooke deuisd we thus should part,
Fearing two sorrows should possess one heart;
That we should thus complain our griefs alone,
Least one should live in two, two live in one;
Inflicting woe, and yet does us deny
But that poor joy is found in misery.
He has before diuors'd thy Crown and thee,
which might suffice, and not to widow me;
Nor will one place our poverty contain,
which in our pomp, both in one bed have lain:
Which is to prove (the greatness of his hate)
How much our fall, exceeds our estate.
When England first obtaind me by thy love;
Nor did a kingdom my affection move,
Before a Crowns sad cares I yet did try,
Nor thought of Empire, but loves Emperie;
Before I learned to sooth a public vain,
And only thought, to love, had been to reign.
I would to God that princely Anne of Beam,
Might still have worn the English Diadem,
That she whose youth first decked thy bridal bed,
Had kept that fatal wreath upon her head;
Would God she still might have enjoyed her room,
Possessed my throne, and I have had her Toombe:
Or would Aumerle had sunck when he betrayed,
The complot which that holy Abbot laid;
When he infringed the oath which he first took,
To end that proud usurping Bullenbrooke,
And been the ransom of our friends dear blood,
Untimely lost, and for the earth too good;
And we untimely mourn our hard estate,
They dead too soon, and we do live too late.
Death seuers them, and life does us enclose,
Their help decreased, does augment our woes;
And though with tears I from my love depart,
This curse on Herford fall to ease my heart;
If the foul breach of a chaste lawful bed,
May bring a curse, my curse light on his head.
If murders guilt with blood may deeply stain,
Green, Scroope, and Bushie, die his fault in grain:
If perjury may heavens pure gates debar,
Damned be the oath he made at Doncaster;
If the deposing of a lawful King,
Thy curse condemn him, if no other thing;
If these disioyn'd, for vengeance cannot call,
Let them united, strongly curse him all.
And for the Percies, heaven yet hear my prayer,
That Bullenbrooke, now placed in Richards chair,
Such cause of woe unto their wives may be,
As those rebellious Lords have been to me.
And that proud Dame which now controleth all,
And in her pomp triumphs in my fall,
For her great Lord may water her sad eyne,
with as salt tears as I have done for mine:
And mourn for Henry Hote-spurre, her dear son,
As I for my sweet Mortymer have done;
And as I am, so succourlesse be sent
Lastly, to taste perpetual banishment.
Then loose thy care, where first thy crown was lost,
Sell it so dearly, for it dearly cost;
And since they did of liberty deprive thee,
Burying thy hope, let not thy care out-liue thee.
But hard (God knows) with sorrow does it go,
when woe becomes a comforter to woe;
Yet much (me thinks) of comfort I could say,
If from my heart pale fear were rid away;
Something there is, which tells me still of woe,
But what it is, that heaven above does know,
Grief to it self, most dreadful does appear,
And never yet was sorrow void of fear;
But yet in death does sorrow hope the best,
And with this farewell wish thee happy rest.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
If fatal Pomfret has in former times,
POmfret Castle ever a fatal place to the Princes of England, and most ominous
to the blood of Plantaginet.

O how ever yet I hate my lothed eyes, And in my glass, etc.
When Bullenbrooke returned to England from the West, bringing Richard a
prisoner with him, the Queen, who little knew of her husbands hard success,
stayed to behold his coming in, little thinking to have seen her husband thus
led in triumph by his foe, and now seeming to hate her eyes, that so much had
graced her mortal enemy.

Wherein great Norfolkes forward course was staid,
She remembers the meeting of the two Dukes, of Herford and Norfolk at
Couentry, urging the iustnes of Mowbrayes quarrel against the Duke of
Herforde, and the faithful assurance of his victory.

Oh why did Charles relieve his needy siate?
A vagabond, etc.
Charles the French King her father, received the Duke of Herford into his
Court, and releeu'd him in France, being so nearly alied, as Cousin german to
King Richard his son in Law, which he did simply, little thinking that he
should after return into England, and dispossess King Richard of the crown.

When thou to Ireland took'st thy last farewell,
King Richard made a voyage with his Army into Ireland, against Onell and
Mackemur which rebelled, at what time Henry entered here at home, and robbed him
of all kingly dignity.

Affirmed by Churchmen, (which should bear no hate)
That John of Gaunt was illigitimate.
William Wickham, in the great quarrel betwixt John of Gaunt and the Clergy,
of mere spite and malice (as it should seem) reported that the Queen
confessed to him on her deathbed, being then her Confessor, that John of Gaunt
was the son of a Flemming, and that she was brought to bed of a woman child
at Gaunt, which was smothered in the cradle by mischance, and that she
obtained this child of a poor woman, making the King believe it was her own,
greatly fearing his displeasure. Fox. ex Chron. Albani.

No Bastards mark does blot our conquering shield.
Showing the true and indubitate birth of Richard, his right unto the Crown of
England, as carrying the Arms without blot or difference.

Against their faith unto the Crowns true heir,
Their noble kinsman etc.
Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, son of Earl Roger Mortimer, which was son
to Lady Phillip daughter to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third son to King
Edward the third, which Edmond, (King Richard going into Ireland) was
proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown, whose Aunt called Ellinor, this Lord
Percie had married.

I would to God, that princely Anne of Beam,
Richard the second, his first wife was Anne, daughter to the K. of Beam,
which lived not long with him, and after, he married this Isabell, daughter to
Charles, King of France. This Princess was very young, and not marriageable
when she came first into England.

O would Aumerle had suncke when he betrayed
The complot which that holy Abbot laid.
The Abbot of Westminster had plotted the death of King Henry, to have been
done at a Tylt at Oxford; of which confedracie there was, John Holland, Duke
of Excester, Thomas Holland, Duke of Surry, the Duke of Aumerle, Mountacute,
Earl of Salisbury, Spenser Earl of Gloucester, the Bishop of Carlisle, Sir Thomas
Blunt, these all had bound themselves one to another by Indenture to perform
it, but were all betrayed by the Duke of Aumerle.

Scroope, Green, and Bushie, die his fault in grain,
Henry going toward the Castle of Flint, where King Richard was, caused
Scroope, Green, and Bushie, to be executed at Bristow' as vile persons, which
had seduced this King to this lascivious and wicked life.

Damned be the oath he made at Doncaster.
After Henry's exile, at his return into England, he took his oath at
Doncaster upon the Sacrament, not to claim the crown, or kingdom of England,
but only the dukedom of Lancaster, his own proper right, and the right of
his wife.

And mourn for Henry Hote-spurre, her dear son,
As I for my etc.
This was the brave courageous Henry Hote-spurre, that obtained so many
victories against the Scots, which after falling out right with the curse of
Queen Isabell, was slain by Henry, at the battle at Shrewsburie.

Richard the second to Queen Isabell.
WHat can thou look or hope for from that hand,
which neither sense nor reason could command?
A kingdoms greatness hardly can he sway,
That wholesome counsel did not first obey;
Ill did this rude hand guide a scepter then,
Ill this rude hand now governs a pen;
How should I call my self, or by what name,
To make thee know from whence these letters came?
Not from thy husband, for my hateful life
Has made thee widow, being yet a wife;
Nor from a King, that title I have lost,
And of that name proud Bullenbrooke does boast:
Never to have been, might some comfort bring,
But no woe is, to say, I was a King.
This lawless life, which first procured my hate,
This tongue, which first denounced my kingly state,
This abject mind, which did consent unto it,
This hand, that was the instrument to do it,
These all bear witness, that I do deny
All worldly hopes, all kingly majesty.
Did thou for my sake leave thy fathers Court,
Thy famous Country, and thy princely port,
And vndertook'st to travail dangerous ways,
Driven by awkward winds, and boyst'rous seas;
And lefts great Burbon for thy love to me,
Who sued in marriage to be linck'd to thee,
Offering for dower the Countries bordring nie,
Of fruitful Almaine, and rich Burgundy,
Did thou all this, that England should receive thee,
To miserable banishment to leave thee?
And in thy ruin, and thy fortunes wrack,
Forsaken here, to France to send thee back.
When quiet sleep (the heavy hearts relief)
Seals up my senses, somewhat lesning grief,
My kingly greatness unto mind I call,
And think that I but dreamed of my fall;
With this conceit, my sorrows I beguile,
That my fair Queen is but with-drawne a while,
And my attendants in some Chamber by,
As in the height of my prosperity.
Calling aloude, and asking who is there,
The Echo aunswering, tells me VVoe is there.
And when mine arms would gladly thee enfold,
I clip the pillow, and the place is cold,
Which when my waking eyes precisely view,
It Is a true token, that it is too true.
As many minutes as in one hour be,
So many hours each minute seems to me;
Each hour a day, morn, evening, set, and rise,
Each day a year, complet with miseries,
A summer, winter, springtime, and a fall,
All seasons varying, yet unseasoned all;
Hot griefs, cold cares, moist sorrow, scorching hate,
Too long extremes, too short a temperate;
Each year a world from golden ages past,
That hastes on the iron times at last,
That from creation of all happy things,
A desolution to my fortune brings;
This endless woe, my thread of life still wears,
In minutes, hours, days, months, ages, years.
Joy in the sun, that do possess the South,
For Pomfret stands here, in the Norths cold mouth;
There wanton Summer lords it all the year,
Frost-starued VVinter does inhabit here;
A place wherein Despair may fitly dwell,
For sorrow best suits with a clowdy Cell.
Let Herford vaunt of our atchiuements done,
Of all the honors that great Edward wone,
Of famous Cressy, where his keen sword lopped,
The flowers of France, which all had ouer-topp'd;
And with those fair Delices, set the walk,
where our emperious English Lions stalk,
which plucked those Lillies, planted on those streams,
And set them here, upon the banks of Thames.
Now Bullenbrooke, our conquering Trophies bears,
Our glorious spoils this false Ulysses wears,
And all the story of our famous war,
Must grace the Annalls of great Lancaster.
Seven goodly syens from one stock begun,
Seven lively branches from one root did run;
My princely Father was the straightest stem
The fairest blossom which adorned them;
Whose precious buds began to spring so fair,
As soon they showed what fruit they meant to bear,
But I his graft and barraine trunk am grown,
And for a fruitless water-bough am hewne,
From our brave Grandsire, both in one degree,
Yet after Edward, lohn the young'st of three:
But princely Wales, by me gives place to Gaunt,
Henry on Richard now predominant.
When that usurping bastard-sonne of Spain,
Deposed Petro, from his peaceful reign.
My Father moved with the Castillians moan,
Plucked down that proud aspyring Phaeton:
And ere a Crown had yet adorned his head,
A conquered King from France to England led.
A subjects hand my Crown from me has torn,
And by a home-nurst beggar, ouer-borne.
Is valor hence with him to heaven fled?
Or in my barren breast decayed and dead?
Who for his virtue and his conquests sake,
Posterity a demie God shall make:
And judge this vile and abject spirit of mine,
Could not proceed from temper so divine.
What earthly humor, or what vulgar eye,
Now looks so low, as on my misery?
When Bullenbrooke is seated on our throne,
And makes that his, which we but called our own:
He bids, commands, he chooses, he elects,
Pardons, defends, he warrants, he protects;
Into our counsels he himself intrudes,
And who but Herford with the multitudes?
Thus Bullenbrooke triumphs in our fall,
And for their King reputed is of all.
His power disgrades, his dreadful frown disgraceth,
He throws them down, who^ our advancement places;
As my disable and unworthy hand,
Could give no sovereign title of command.
He treads our sacred tables in the dust,
And proves our acts of parliament unjust;
As though he hated that it should be said,
That such a law, by Richard once was made.
When Herford had his judgment of exile,
Saw I the peoples murmuring the while,
Saw I the love, the zeal, the faith, the care,
The Commons still to pleasing Herford bare;
Fond women, and scarce-speaking children moume,
weeping his parting, wishing his return.
And was I forced t'abridge his banished years,
when they bedewed his footsteps with their tears,
Yet could not see mine own ensuing fall,
Not seeing that, which saving that, saw all.
Never our treasure stuffed with greater store,
Never our strength, never our power was more,
Never more large bounds to our Emperie,
Never more counsel, wisdom, policy:
Never did all so suddenly decline,
But justice is the heavens, the fault is mine.
Kings palaces stand open to let in,
The soothing Traitor, and the guide to sin,
Many we have in tryumphs to attend us,
But few are left in perrill to defend us;
Amongst the most, the worst we best can choose,
It Is easy to desire, but hard to use.
Oh famous Gloucester, thou fore-saw'st my end,
The curse that did my lawless youth attend,
His death is new, (and I in sin am old,)
who my destruction, (Prophet-like) foretold;
And like Laocan, crying from his tower,
Foreshow'd the horse which hid the Grecian power.
Is this the thing for which we toil and sweat?
For which the great, do kneel unto the great?
Is this the thing, in seeking to attain,
All pain is pleasure, and all loss is gain?
Is this the jewel which we prize so hie?
At heaven, at fame, at life, at liberty;
And unto this, in striving to aspire,
Are we made slaves unto our fond desire?
Yet on steep Icie banks here still we dwell,
And if we slip, our fall is into hell.
Sweet Queen, I Will take all counsel thou can give,
So that thou bid me neither hope nor live;
Counsel that comes when ill has done his worst,
Blesses our ill, but makes our good accursed.
Comfort is now unpleasing to mine ear,
Past cure, past care; my bed is now my Beer.
Since thus misfortune keeps us here so long,
Till heaven be grown unmindful of our wrong,
We may in war, some-time take truce with foes,
But in despair, we cannot with our woes.
O let this name of Richard never die,
Yet still be fatal to posterity;
And let a Richard from our line arise,
To be the scourge of many families,
And let the Crown be fatal that he bears,
And wet with sad lamenting mothers tears.
Thy curse on Percy, heaven does now prevent,
who has not one curse left, on me unspent,
To scourge the world, now borrowing of my store,
As rich in plagues, as I in wealth am pore.
Then cease (dear Queen) my sorrows to bewail,
My wounds too great for pity now to heal,
Age steals on whilst thou complainest thus,
My griefs be mortal, and infectious;
Yet better fortunes, thy fair youth may try,
That follow thee, which still from me does fly.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
This tongue which first denounced my kingly state,
RIchard the second, at the resignation of the Crown to his Cousin Henry in the
Tower of London, at the delivery of the same with his own hand, confessed
himself to be unable to govern, denounced all kingly dignity; so that he
might only have his life.

And left'st great Burbon for thy love to me,
Who sued in marriage to be linck'd to thee.
Before the Princess Isabell was married to Richard the second, Jews Duke of
Burbon sued to have had her in marriage, which it was thought he had obtained,
if this motion had not (...) out in the mean time; this Duke of Burbon sued
again to have received her at her coming into France, after the imprisonment
of King Richard, but King Charles her Father then crossed him as before, and gave
her to Charles, son to the Duke of Orleance.

Let Herford vaunt of our atchiuements done,
Henry the eldest son of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, which at the first
was Earl of Darbie, then created Duke of Herford, but after the death of John
of Gaunt his Father, was Duke of Lancaster, and Herford, Earl of Darby,
Leicester, and Lincoln, and after he had obtained the Crown, was called by
the name of Henry of Bullenbrooke, which is a town in Lincoln shiere, as
usually all the Kings of England bare the name of the places where they were
borne.

Of famous Cressy, where his keen sword lopped,
The flowers of France, which all had ouertopp'd.
Remembering the famous victory Edward the third their Grandfather obtained at
Cressy, where were almost slain all the Nobility of France, where the
Frenchmen lost all their ancient glory.

And with their Flower-delices set the walk,
Where our etc.
Edward the third, by the conquest of France, joined the Lillies or
Flower-delices, which is the Arms of France, with the Lions, the Arms of
England, which coat first came from Normandy by the Conqueror, remaining in
the right of his possession.

Seven goodly syens from one stock began,
Edward the third had seven sons, his eldest Edward Prince of Wales, after
called the black Prince, William of Hatfielde his second, Lionell Duke of
Clarence the third, John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster the fourth, Edmond of
Langley, Duke of York the fifth, Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester the sixth,
and William of Windsore the seventh.

My princely Father was the straightest stem.
Truly boasting himself, to be the eldest son of the eldest Brother, which
was Edward the black Prince.

Yet after Edward, John the young'st of three.
By this disabling Henry Bullenbrooke, being the son but of a fourth
brother, William and Lionell being both before John of Gaunt.

When that usurping bastard son of Spain,
Noting the courage of his Father, which set Petro the King of Castile in his
kingdom, when he was expulsed by his bastard brother.

A conquered King from France to England led.
The black Prince took King John of France prisoner, at the battle of
Poycters, and brought him into England, where he dyed at the Sauoy.

And by a home-nurst beggar ouer-borne.
By this reproving his own weakness and cowardice, who had suffered himself
to be expulsed his kingdom by a subject, and one so much inferior to himself
in greatness.

And proves our acts of parliaments unjust.
In the first parliament that Henry called after Richard had resigned the
Crown, he anihilated all the laws that were made in the parliament called
the wicked parliament, held in the 20. year of King Richards reign.

Saw I the love, the Zeal, the faith, the care,
The Commons still etc.
When the Combat should have been at Couentry, betwixt Henry Duke of Herford,
and Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, the Commons mourned exceedingly, after they heard
that Herford was adiuged by the King to be banished for ten years, so
greatly was he always favored of the people.

And was I forced to abridge his banished years,
When Henry Duke of Herford came to Eltham to take his leave of King Richard,
the King (to please the Commons rather then for any love he bare to Herford,)
plucked back four years of his banishment.

O famous Gloucester, thou fore-saw'st the end,
Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Gloucester, the Kings uncle, who had oftr reproved
this youthful Kings insolence, was put to death at Callice, by the
commandment of this Richard, his unnatural kinsman.

And let a Richard from our line arise,
A prophecy of Richard Crookebacke the Tyrant, which after was the only
scourge and plague of both the houses of York and Lancaster, and the death of
many great Princes.

FINIS.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord Henry Howard.
LEarned and noble Lord, custom and continuance have sealed this privilege to
Poetry, that (sometime) the light subject of a labored Poem, is graced with
the title of a learned and judicial censor: your Lordship sufficiently knows
what I but put you in remembrance off, your wisdom and experience know what
has been most usual in the course of times: your judgment makes me
doubtful, being what I am: your honor gives me some comfort, being what you
are: Counsel is not ever conversant with severity, and I know true virtue
loves, what is never so little like herself, how unseasoned so ever my rymes
seem to the world: I am pleased if you peruse them with patience. Thus
wishing my lines may be as acceptable as I desire, I leave them to your
learned censor.

Michaell Drayton.

Queen Katherine to Owen Tudor.
* The Argument.
After the death of that victorious Henry the fifth, Queen Katherine, the (...)
of England and France, daughter to Charles the French King, holding her estate
with Henry her son, (then the sixth of that name,) falls in love with Owen
Tudor a VVlechman, a brave and gallant Gentleman of the VVardrop to the young
King her son: yet greatly fearing if her love should be discovered, the
Nobility would cross her purposed marriage: or fearing, that if her fair and
princely promises should not assure his good success, this high and great
attempt, might (perhaps) daunt the forwardness of his modest and shame fast
youth: wherefore to break the Ice to her intent, she writes unto him this
Epistle following.

IV dge not a Princess worth impeached hereby,
That love thus tryumphs over majesty;
Nor think less virtue in this royal hand,
which now entreats, that wonted to command;
For in this sort, though humbly now it woo,
The day has been, thou would have kneeled unto.
Nor think that this submission of my state,
Proceeds from frailty, (rather judge it fate)
Alcides nere more fit for loves stern shock,
Then when for love sat spinning at the Rock.
Never less clouds did Phoebus glory dim,
Then in a Clownes shape when he covered him;
Jove's great command was never more obay'd,
Then when a Satyrs antic parts he played.
He was thy King, that sued for love to me,
She is thy Queen, that sues for love to thee.
When Henry was, what is Tudors now, was his,
whilst yet thou art, what is Henry's, Tudors is;
My love to Owen, him my Henry gives,
My love to Henry, in my Owen lives;
Only in Henry, was my Tudor then,
Only in Tudor, Henry now again.
Henry wooed me whilst wars did yet increase,
I woo my Tudor now in calmest peace,
To win affection, he did conquest prove,
And I on conquest do make war with love:
Great Henry soughtt' accomplish his desire,
Armed with tempests, thunder-boults of fire,
As once when Iunos treasons forced Jove,
T'imbrace the beauteous Semele, his love.
I to my love, as once the Ciprian Queen,
On Simois banks was with the Troyan seen.
Incampt at Melans, in wars hot alarmes,
First saw I Henry, clad in princely Arms.
At pleasant Windsor, there these eyes of mine,
Judged Tudor first, for wit and shape divine.
Henry abroad, with puissance and with force,
Tudor at home, with courtship and discourse;
He then, thou now, I hardly can judge whether
Did like me best, Plantaginet or Tether.
A march, a measure, battle, or a dance,
A courtly rapier, or a conquering Lance.
His princely bed advanced my renown,
And on my temples set a double Crown;
which glorious wreath, (as Henry's lawful heir,)
Henry the sixth upon his brow does bear.
At Troy in Champayne he did first enjoy
My bridall-rites, to England brought from Troy;
In England now, that honor thou shall have,
which once in Champayne famous Henry gave.
I seek not wealth, three kingdoms in my power,
If these suffice not, where shall be my dower;
Sad discontent may ever follow her,
which does base pelf before true love prefer:
If titles still could our affections tie,
what is so great, but majesty might buy;
As I seek thee, so Kings (...) me desire,
To what they crave, thou easily may aspire.
That sacred fire, once warmed my heart before,
The fuel fit, the flame is now the more,
And means to quench it, I in vain do prove,
We may hide treasure, but not hide our love,
And since thy virtue this at first did gain it,
will I by reason now seek to restrain it.
Nor these great titles vainly will I bring,
Wife, daughter, mother, sister to a King,
Of grandsire, father, husband, son, and brother,
More thou alone to me, then all the other.
Nor think so Tudor, that this love of mine,
Should wrong the Gaunt-borne great Lancastrian line,
Nor stir the English blood, the Sun and Moon,
T'repine at Lorayne, Burbon, Alansoon;
Nor do I think there is such different ods,
That they alone should counted be for Gods.
If Cadmus earthly issue reckoning us,
And they from Jove, Mars, Neptune, Eolus,
Of great Latonas offspring only they,
And we the brats of woeful Niobe,
Our famous Grandsires (as their own) bestrid,
That horse of fame, that Ioue-begotten steed,
Whose bounding hoof plowed that Boetian spring,
where those sweet Maids of memory do sing.
Not only Henry's Queen, but boast as well,
To be the child of Charles and Isabell.
Nor do I know from whence their grief should grow,
They by this match should be disparaged so,
when John and Longshanks issue both affied,
And to the Kings of Wales in wedlock tied,
Showing the greatness of your blood hereby,
Your race, and royal consanguinitie.
And Wales as well as haughty England boasts,
Of Camilot, and all her Penticosts;
A nephews room in great Pendragons race,
At Arthurs Table held a princely place.
If of the often conquests of our Land,
They rear the spoils of their victorious hand,
If these our ancient Chronicles be true,
They altogether are not free from you.
When bloody Rufus sought your utter sack,
Twice entering Wales, yet twice was beaten back.
When famous Cambria washed her in the flood,
Made by th'effusion of the English blood;
And often returned with glorious victory,
From VVorster, Herford, Chester, Shrewsbury,
whose power, in every conquest so preuailes,
As once expuls'd the English out of Wales.
Although my beauty made my Countries peace,
And at my bridal bloody wars did cease,
Yet more then power, had not his person been,
I had not come to England as a Queen.
Nor took I Henry to supply my want,
Because in France that time my choice was scant;
when France had robbed all Christendom of men,
And Englands flower remained amongst us then:
Glaster, whose counsels ( Nestor like) assist
Courageous Bedford, that great martiallist;
Warwick, for virtue honored of his foes,
And York, whose fame yet daily greater grows,
Warwick, the pride of Neuels haughty race,
Great Salsbury, so feared in every place.
That valiant Poole, whom no atchiuement dares,
And Vere, so famous in the Irish wars,
Whom (though I were a mighty Princess borne)
Yet of the worst, no whit I need to scorn;
But Henry's rare perfections, and his parts,
As his sword kingdoms, so those conquered hearts.
As chaste was I to him, as Queen might be,
But freed from him, my chaste love vowed to thee:
Beauty does fetch all favor from thy face,
All perfect courtship rests in thy grace.
If thou discourse, thy lips such accents break,
As love a spirit, forth of thee seemed to speak.
The British language, which sweet vowels wants,
And iarrs so much upon harsh consonants,
Comes with such grace srom thy mellifluous tongue,
As do the sweet notes of a well set song,
And runs as smoothly from those lypps of thine,
As the pure Thuskan from the Florantine;
Leaving such seasoned sweetness in the ear,
As the voice past, yet still the sound is there.
Like Nisus Tower, where once Apollo lay,
And on his golden vial used to play;
where senseless stones were with such music drowned,
As many years they did retain the sound.
Had he which dared proud Perseus to the field,
Carried my Tudors picture in his shield,
The sight there of should have subdued alone,
That Gorgons head, which turned men to a stone.
If Jove should take my Tudors lovely eye,
And with heavens lights should place it in the sky,
The wandering stars would leave their endless maze,
And fix themselves, upon that star to gaze.
If fair Alcmenas three nights-gotten son,
when he his twelve great labors first had done,
Had known one lock of thy delicious ore,
Kept by the Dragon, Lion, Serpent, Bore,
Twelve labors more for that he would sustain,
And where he ended, would begin again.
Yet let not this make thee thy self forget,
Nor my affection now so firmly set;
Nor with repulse my forwardnes reprove,
To boast the conquest of a princely love:
No my sweet Tudor, I will answer no,
Thy gentle brow does mildly warrant so.
When Nature showed her wonders in thy face,
She made that mount Loves royal sporting place,
where sweet content does banquet all the year,
Nor coy disdain yet ever dwelled there;
Let peevish worldlings speak of right and wrong,
Leave plaints and pleas, to whom they do belong,
Let old men speak of chances and events,
And Lawyers talk of titles, and discents;
Leave fond reports to such as stories tell,
And couenaunts to such as buy and sell,
Love my sweet Tudor, that becomes thee best,
And to our good success refer the rest.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Great Henry sought to accomplish his desire,
Armed etc.
HEnry the (...) making claim unto the Crown of France, first sought by
Arms to subdue the French, and after sought by marriage to confirm what he
got by conquest, the heat and fury of which invasion, is aluded to the
fiction of Semele in Ovid: which by the crafty persuasion of Juno, requested
Jove to come unto her as he was wont to come unto his wife Juno, who at her
request he yielding unto, destroyed her in a tempest.

Encamped at Melans in wars hot alarmes,
First etc.
Near unto Melans, upon the river of Seyne, was the appointed place of parley
between the two Kings of England, and France, to which place, Isabell the
Queen of France, and the Duke of Burgoyne, brought the young Princess
Katherine, where King Henry first saw her.

And on my temples set a double Crown,
Henry the fifth, and Queen Katherine, were taken as King and Queen of
France; and during the life of Charles the French king, Henry was called King
of England, and heir of France, and after the death of Henry the fifth, Henry
the sixth his son, then being very young, was crowned at Paris, as true and
lawful King of England and France.

At Troy in Champayne he did first enjoy,
Troy in Champayne, was the place where that victorious king Henry the fifth
married the Princess Katherine, in the presence of the chief Nobility of the
Realms of England and of France.

Nor these great titles vainly will I bring,
Wife, daughter, mother, etc.
Few Queens of England, or France, were ever more princely alied then this
Queen, as it has been noted by Historiographers.

Nor think so Tudor, that this love of mine,
Should wrong the Gaunt-borne etc.
Noting the descent of Henry her husband, from John Duke of Lancaster, the
fourth son of Edward the third, which Duke Iolm was surnamed Gaunt, of the
City of Gaunt in Flaunders, where he was borne.

Nor stir the English blood, the Sun and Moon,
T'repine etc.
Aluding the greatness of the English line, to Phoebus and Phoebe, fained to be
the children of Latona, whose heavenly kind might scorn to be joined with any
earthly progeny; yet withal, boasting the blood of France, as not inferior
to theirs. And with this allusion follows on the history of the strife
betwixt Juno and the race of Cadmus, whose issue was afflicted by the wrath of
heaven. The children of Niohe slain, for which the woeful mother became a
Rock, gushing forth continually a fountain of tears.

And John and Longshanks issue, both affied,
Lhewellin, or Leolin ap Iorwerth, married Joan, daughter to King John, a most
beautiful Lady. Some Authors affirm she was base borne. Lhewellin ap Gryfith
married Ellinor, daughter to Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, and Cousin to
Edward Longshankes, both which Lhewellins were Princes of Wales.

Of Camilot and all her Penticosts,
A nephews room etc.
Camilot, the ancient Palace of King Arthur, to which place all the Knights
of that famous order yearly repaired at Penticost, according to the law of the
Table, and most of the famous homeborne Knights were of that Country, as to
this day is perceived by their ancient monuments.

When bloody Rufus sought your utter sack,
Noting the ill success which that William Rufus had in two voiages he made
into Wales, in which a number of his chief Nobility were slain.

And often returned with glorious victory,
Noting the diverse sundry incursians that the Welchmen made into England, in
the time of Rufus, John, Henry the second, and Longshanks.

Owen Tudor to Queen Katherine.
WHen first mine eyes beheld thy princely name,
And found from whence these friendly letters came,
As in excess of joy my self forgot,
Whether I saw it, or I saw it not;
My panting heart does bid mine eyes proceed,
My dazeled eye, inuites my tongue to reed;
Mine eye should guide my tongue, amazed mist it,
My lips which now should speak, are dombe, and kissed it,
And leaves the paper in my trembling hand,
when all my senses so amazed stand:
Even as a mother coming to her child,
which from her presence has been long exiled,
with tender arms his gentle neck does strain,
Now kissing him, now clipping him again;
And yet excessive joy delndes her so,
As still she doubts if this be hers or no;
At length awak'ned from this pleasing dream,
when passion somewhat leaves to be extreme,
My longing eyes, with their fair object meet,
Where every letter's pleasing, each word sweet.
It was not Henry's conquests, nor his Court,
That had the power to win me by report,
Nor was his dreadful terror-striking name,
The cause that I from Wales to England came,
For Christian Rhodes, and our religious truth,
To great atcheeuements first had won my youth;
Before adventure did my valor prove,
Before I yet knew what it was to love:
Nor came I hither by some poor event,
But by the eternal Destinies consent,
whose vncomprised wisedoms did foresee,
That thou in marriage should be linck'd to me.
By our great Merlin, was it not foretold,
(Amongst his holy prophecies enrold)
when first he did of Tudors fame divine,
That Kings and Queens should follow in our line;
And that the Helm, (the Tudors ancient Crest)
with Lillies fetched from France should be possessed;
And that our Leeke, (our Countries chief renown)
Should grow with Roses, in the English Crown:
As Charles fair daughter, thou the Lilly wear'st,
As Henry's Queen, the blushing Rose thou bear;
By Englands conquest, and by Fraunce's oath,
Thou art the true made dowager of both;
Both in thy Crown, both in thy cheek together,
Join Tethers love to thine, and thine to Tether.
Then make no future doubts, nor fear no hate,
when it so long has been foretold by Fate;
And by the all-disposing doom of heaven,
Before our births, unto one bed were given.
No Pallas here, nor Juno is at all,
when I to Venus give the golden ball;
Nor when the Grecians wonder I enjoy,
None in revenge to kindle fire in Troy.
And have not strange events diuin'd to us,
That in our love we should be prosperous.
When in thy presence I was called to dance,
In lofty tricks whilst I my self advance,
And in my turn, my footing faild by hap,
vva'st not my chance to light into thy lap.
Who would not judge it Fortunes greatest grace,
Since he must fall, to fall in such a place;
His birth from heaven thy Tudor not deriues,
Nor stands on typ-toes in superlatiues,
Although the envious English do devise
A thousand jests of our hiperbolies;
Nor do I claim that plot by ancient deeds,
where Phoebus pastures his fire-breathing steeds;
Nor do I boast my God-made Grandsires skarres,
Nor Giants trophies in the Tytans wars;
Nor feign my birth (your princely ears to please)
By three nights getting, as was Hercules;
Nor do I forge my long decent to run.
From aged Neptune, or the glorious sun,
And yet in Wales with them most famous be,
Our learned Bards do sing my pedigree,
And boast my birth from great Cadwallader,
From fair Cair-Septon, in Mount Palador,
And from Eneons line, the South Wales King,
From Theodor the Tudors name do bring.
My royal mothers princely stock began,
From her great Grandame fair Gwenellian,
By true decent from Leolin the great,
As well from North Wales as fair Powslands seat;
Though for our princely Genealogy,
I do not stand to make Apology:
Yet who with judgments true impartial eyes,
Shall look from whence our name at first did rise,
Shall find that Fortune is to us in debt;
And why not Tudor, as Plantaginct?
Nor that term Croggen, nickname of disgrace,
Vsd as a byword now in every place,
Shall blot our blood, or wrong a VVelchmans name,
which was at first begot with Englands shame.
Our valiant swords, our right did still maintain,
Against that cruel, proud, usurping Dane;
And buckled in so many dangerous fights,
with Norwayes, Swethens, and with Muscouits,
And kept our native language now thus long,
And to this day yet never changed our tongue;
when they which now our nation feign would tame,
Subdued, have lost their Country, and their name.
Nor never could the Saxons swords provoke
Our Britain necks to bear their servile yoke,
where Cambrias pleasant Countries bounded be,
with swelling Seuerne, and the holy Dee;
And since great Brutus first arrived, have stood
The only remnant of the Troyan blood.
To every man is not allotted chance,
To be the glorious conqueror of France;
Yet if my titles may be raisd by thee,
If heaven say this, heaven says yet more may be;
And our S. David, in the Britains right,
May join with George, the sainted English Knight,
And old Caer-marden, Merlins famous town,
Not scorned by London, though of such renown.
Ah would to God, that hour my hopes attend,
were with my wish, brought to desired end.
Blame me not Madame, though I thus desire,
when Kings do wonder what I do admire;
Should thou but touch swart Melas with thy hand,
His Ietty gravel would be Tagus sand.
Nature to show more skill in thy curles, strove,
Then did Arachne in the web she woue;
Where thou will sit unto thy Lute to sing,
There shall another fair Pirene spring.
The Gods wish Hebe had no other Cup,
But thy sweet lip for Nectar when they sup.
The sweet calm odor thy breath does respire,
Might cool that all which Phaeton set on fire.
VVonder not (Madam) though all eyes do gaze,
when such a Comet does begin to blaze;
Till now your beauty in nights bosom slept,
what eye durst look, where awful Henry kept;
Who durst attempt to sail but near the bay,
where that all-conquering great Alcides lay;
But beauty now is set a Princes prize,
And kings now come to cheapen merchandise.
If thou but walk to take the breathing air,
Orithia makes me that I Boreas fear,
If to the fire, love once in lightning came,
And fair Egina makes me fear the flame.
If in the sun, then sad suspicion dreams,
Phoebus should spread Lucothoe in his beams,
If in a Fountain thou do cool thy blood,
Neptune I fear which once came in a flood;
If with thy maids, I dread Apollos rape,
who cusned Chion in an old vviues shape;
If thou do banquet, Bacchus makes me dread,
who in a Grape Erigone did feed;
And if my self thy Chamber door should keep,
Yet fear I Hermes, coming in a sleep.
Pardon (sweet Queen) if I offend in this,
In these delays, love most impatient is:
And youth wants power, his hot spleen to suppress,
when hope already banquets in excess.
Though Henry's fame, in me you shall not find,
Yet that which better shall content your mind;
What helps a Crowns adorning of the head,
when comfort wants in a princely bed;
But only in the title of a King
was his advantage, in no other thing:
If in his love more pleasure you did take,
Never let Queen trust VVelchman for my sake.
Yet judge me not from modesty exempt,
That I another Phaetons charge attempt;
My mounting thoughts, which thus to heaven aspire,
Shows that my spirit's tuch'd with celestial fire,
For had it been of gross and earthly mud,
It never durst presume to such a good;
If love a fault, the more is beauties shame,
when she herself is Author of the same;
All men to one peculiar vice incline,
Only to love, is naturally mine.
Thou art by beauty famous, as by birth,
Ordaind by heaven, here to adorn the earth,
Ad faithful love unto thy princely state,
And then alike in all things fortunate.
A King might promise more, I not deny,
But yet (by heaven) he loved not more then I.
And thus I leave, till time my faith approve,
I cease to write, but never cease to love.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
O that the Helm, the Tudors aundient Crest,
THe Arms of Tudor was the Helmes, or men's heads, whereof he speaks as a
thing prophetically foretold of Merlin.

When in thy presence I was called to dance.
Owen Tudor, being a courtly and active Gentleman, commanded once to dance
before the Queen, in a turn (not being able to recover himself) fell into
her lap, as she sat upon a little stool, with many of her Ladies about her.

And yet with them in Wales, most famous be,
Our learned Bards, etc.
This Berdh, as they call it in the British tongue, or as we more properly say
Bard, or Bardus be their Poets, which keep the records of Pedigrees and
descents, and sing in oades and measures to their Harps, after the old manner
of the Lirick Poets.

And boast my blood from great Cadwallader,
Cadwallader the last King of the Britains, descended of the noble and
ancient race of the Troyans, to whom an Angel appeared, commanding him to
go to Rome to Pope Sergius, where he ended his life.

Since fair Cair-Septon in mount Palador,
Cair-Septon, now called Shaftsbury, at whose building it was said an Eagle
prophesied (or rather one named Aquilla) of the fame of that place, and of the
recovery of the I Will by the Britains bringing back with them the bones of
Cadwallader from Rome.

And from Eneons line, the South Wales King,
From Theodor etc.
This Eneon was slain by the Rebels of Gwentsland, he was a noble and worthy
Gentleman, who in his life did many noble acts, and was father to Theodor, or
Tudor Maur, of whom descended the Princes of South Wales.

From her great Grandam fair Guenellian.
Guenellian the daughter of Rees ap Griffeth, ap Theodor, Prince of
South Wales, married to Edniuet Vahan, auncestor to Owen Tudor.

My true descent from Leolin the great,
This is that Lewhelin, called Leolinus magnus, Prince of Northwales.

Nor that word Croggen, nickname of disgrace,
In the voyage that Henry the second made against the Welchmen, as his
soldiers passed Offas ditch at Croggen Castle, they were overthrown by the
Welchmen, which word Croggen, has since been used to the Welchmens disgrace,
which was at first begun with their honor.

And old Caer Merdin, Merlins famous Town;
Caer Merdin, or Merlins Town, so called of Merlins being sound there; This
was Ambrose Merlin, whose prophecies we have. There was another of that name,
called Merlin Siluestris, borne in Scotland, surnamed Calidonius, of the
Forest Calidon, where he prophesied.

And kept our nature Language now thus long,
The Welchmen be those ancient Britains, which when the Picks, Danes, and
Saxons invaded here, were first driven into those parts, where they have kept
their language ever since the first, without commixtion with any other language.

FINIS.
To my honored Mistres, Mistres Elizabeth Tanfelde, the sole Daughter and
heir, of that famous and learned Lawyer, Lawrence T anfelde Esquire.
Fair and virtuous Mistress, since first it was my good fortune to be a
witness of the many rare perfections wherewith nature and education have
adorned you: I have been forced since that time to attribute more admiration to
your sex, then ever Petrarch could before persuade me to by the praises of
his Laura. Sweet is the French tongue, more sweet the Italian, but most sweet
are they both if spoken by your admired self. If Poesy were prayselesse, your
virtues alone were a subject sufficient to make it esteemed though amongst the
barbarous Getes: by how much the more your tender years give scarcely warrant
for your more then womanlike wisdom, by so much is your judgment, and
reading, the more to be wondered at. The Graces shall have one more Sister by
your self, and England by your birth shall add one Muse more to the Muses: I
rest the humbly devoted servant to my dear and modest Mistress: to whom I
wish, the happiest fortunes I can devise.

Michaell Drayton.

William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, to Queen Margarit.
* The Argument.
William de la Pole, first Marquis, and after created Duke of Suffolk, being
sent into France by King Henry the fixed, concludes a marriage between the
King his Master, and Margarite, daughter to Rayner Duke of Aniou: who only
had the title of the King of Cicily and Jerusalem. This marriage being made
contrary to the liking of the Lords and counsel of the Realm, (by reason of
the yielding up Aniou and Maine into the Dukes hands, which shortly after
proved the loss of all Aquitaine,) they ever after cotiuually hated the Duke;
and after (my means of the Commons) banished him at the parliament at Bery:
where after he had the judgment of his exile, being then ready to depart, he
(...) back to the Queen this Epistle.

IN my disgrace (dear Queen) rest thy content,
And Margarits health from Suffolks banishment;
Not one day seems five years exile to me,
But that so soon I must depart from thee;
Where thou not present, it is ever night,
All be exiled that live not in thy sight.
Those Savages which worship the suns rise,
would hate their God, if they beheld thine eyes,
The worlds great light, might thou be seen abroad,
would at our noonestead ever make aboade;
And force the poor Antipodes to mourn,
Fearing least he would never more return.
VVere't not for thee, it were my great'st exile
To live within this Sea-inuirond I Will.
Poles courage brooks not limitting in bands,
But that (great Queen) thy sovereignty commands;
Our Falcons kind cannot the cage endure,
Nor buzzard-like does stoop to every lure;
Their mounting brood in open air does roue,
Nor will with Crows be cooped within a grove;
We all do breath upon this earthly ball,
Likewise one heaven encompasseth us all:
No banishment can be to him assigned,
who does retain a true resolved mind.
Man in himself, a little world does bear,
His soul the Monarch ever ruling there,
where ever then his body does remain,
He is a King that in himself does reign,
And never fears Fortunes hot'st alarmes,
That bears against her, Patience for his Arms.
This was the mean proud Warwick did invent,
To my disgrace, at Leister parliament,
That only my base yielding up of Maine,
Should be the loss of fertile Aquitaine,
with the base vulgar sort to win him fame,
To be the heir of good Duke Humfreys name;
And so by treason spotting my pure blood,
Make this a mean to raise the Neuells brood.
With Salesbury, his vile ambitious Syer,
In Yorks stern breast, kindling long hidden fire,
By Clarence title working to supplant,
The Eagle ayrie of great John of Gaunt.
And to this end did my exile conclude,
Thereby to please the rascal multitud;
Urged by these envious Lords to spend their breath,
Calling revenge on the Protectors death,
That since the old decrepit Duke is dead,
By me of force he must be murdered.
If they would know who robbed him of his life,
Let them call home Dame Ellinor his wife;
who with a Taper walked in a sheet,
To light her shame, at no one through London street;
And let her bring her Nigromanticke book,
That foul hagge Iordane, Hun, and Bullenbrooke:
And let them call their spirits from hell again,
To know how Humfrey died: and who shall reign.
For twenty years and have I served in France,
Against great Charles, and bastard Orleance?
And seen the slaughter of a world of men,
Victorious now, and conquered again;
And have I seen Vernoylas batfull fields,
Strewed with ten thousand Helmes, ten thousand shields,
where famous Bedford did our fortune try,
Or France or England for the victory.
The sad inuesting of so many Towns,
Scor'd on my breast in honorable wounds;
When Mountacute and Talbot of such name,
Under my Ensign, both first won their fame:
In heat and cold all fortunes have endured,
To rouse the French, within their walls immured.
Through all my life, these perrills have I past,
And now to fear a banishment at last?
Thou know how I, (thy beauty to advance,)
For thee refusd the infant Queen of France,
Brake the contract Duke Humfrey first did make,
Twixt Henry, and the Princess Arminacke;
Only (sweet Queen) thy presence I might gain,
I gave Duke Rayner, Aniou, Mauns, and Maine,
Thy peerless beauty for a dower to bring,
To counterpoize the wealth of Englands King;
And from Aumearle withdrew my warlike powers,
And came my self in person first to Towers,
Th'Embassadours for truce to entertain,
From Belgia, Denmark, Hungary, and Spain,
And telling Henry of thy beauties story,
I taught my tongue a Lovers oratorie,
As the report it self did so indite,
And make tongues ravish ears with their delight:
And when my speech did cease, (as telling all)
My looks showed more, that was Angelical.
And when I breathed again, and paused next,
I left mine eyes to preach upon the text.
Then coming of thy modesty to tell,
In musicks numbers my voice rose and fell;
And when I came to paint thy glorious style,
My speech in greater cadences to file,
By true descent to wear the Diadem,
Of Naples, Cicils, and Jerusalem.
And from the Gods thou did derive thy birth,
If heavenly kind could join with brood of earth;
Gracing each title that I did recite,
with some mellifluous pleasing Epithet;
Nor left him not, till he for love was sick,
Beholding thee in my sweet Rethorick.
A fifteens tax in France I freely spent,
In tryumphs, at thy nuptial Tournament;
And solemnized thy marriage in a gown,
Valued at more then was thy Fathers Crown;
And only striving how to honor thee,
Gave to my King, what thy love gave to me.
Judge if his kindness have not power to move,
who for his loves sake gave away his love.
Had he which once the prize to Greece did bring,
(Of whom old Poets long ago did sing)
Seen thee for England but imbarqu'd at Deep,
would ouer-boord have cast his golden sheep,
As too unworthy ballast to be thought,
To pester room, with such perfection fraught.
The brynie seas which saw the ship enfold thee,
would vaute up to the hatches to behold thee,
And falling back, themselves in thronging smoother,
Breaking for grief, envying one another:
When the proud Bark, for joy thy steps to feel,
Scorned the salt waves should kiss her furrowing keele,
And tricked in all her flaggs, herself she braues,
Dancing for joy upon the silver waves;
when like a Bull, from the Phenician strand,
Jove with Europa, trypping from the land,
Upon the bosom of the maine does scud,
And with his swannish breast cleaving the flood,
Toward the fair fields, upon the other side,
Bears Agenors joy, Phenicias pride.
All heavenly beauties, join themselves in one,
To show their glory in thine eye alone;
which when it turns that celestial ball,
A thousand sweet stars rise, a thousand fall.
Who justly says, mine banishment to be,
when only France for my recourse is free?
To view the plains where I have seen so often,
Englands victorious Ensigns raisd aloft;
when this shall be my comfort in my way,
To see the place where I may boldly say,
Here mighty Bedford forth the vaward led,
Here Talbot charged, and here the Frenchmen fled,
Here with our Archers valiant Scales did lie,
Here stood the Tents of famous VVillohbie;
Here Mountacute ranged his unconquered band,
Here forth we marched, and here we made a stand.
What should we stand to mourn and grieve all day,
For that which time does easily take away:
What fortune hurts, let patience only heal,
No wisdom with extreamities to deal;
To know our selves to come of human birth,
These sad afflictions cross us here on earth;
A tax imposd by heavens eternal law,
To keep our rude rebellious will in awe.
In vain we prise that at so dear a rate
whose best assurance is a fickle state,
And needless we examine our intent,
when with prevention, we cannot prevent;
when we our selves foreseeing cannot shun,
That which before, with destiny does run.
Henry has power, and may my life dispose,
Mine honor mine, that none has power to lose,
Then be as merry, (beauteous, royal Queen)
As in the Court of France we erst have been;
As when ariu'd in Porchesters fair road,
(where, for our coming Henry made aboade)
when in mine arms I brought thee safe to land,
And gave my love, to Henryes royal hand;
The happy hours, we passed with the King,
At fair South-hampton, long in banqueting,
With such content as lodged in Henry's breast,
when he to London brought thee from the West;
Through golden Cheap, when he in pomp did ride,
To Westminster, to entertain his Bride.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Our Faulcons kind cannot the cage endure.
HE alludes in these verses to the Faulcon, which was the ancient device of
the Poles, comparing the greatness and haughtines of his spirit, to the nature
of this byrd.

This was the mean proud Warwick did invent,
To my disgrace etc.
The Commons, at this Parliament, through Warwickes means, accused Suffolk of
treason, and urged the accusation so vehemently that the King was forced to
exile him for five years.

That only my base yielding up of Maine,
Should be the loss of fertile Aquitane.
The Duke of Suffolk being sent into France to conclude a peace, chose Duke
Rayners daughter, the Lady Margaret, whom he espoused for Henry the sixth,
delivering for her to her Father, the Countries of Aniou and Maine, and the
City of Mauns. Whereupon the Earl of Arminack (whose daughter was before
promised to the King) seeing himself to be mocked, caused all the English men
to be expulsed out of Aquitaine, Gascoyne, and Guyne.

With the base vulgar sort to win him fame,
To be the heir of good Duke Humfreys name.
This Richard that was called the great Earl of Warwick, when Duke Humfrey was
dead, grew into exceeding great favor with the Commons.

With Salisbury, his vile ambitious Sire,
In Yorks stern breast, kindling long hidden fire,
By Clarence title working to supplant,
The Eagle Ayrie of great John of Gaunt.
Richard Plantaginet, Duke of York, in the the time of Henry the sixth,
claymed the Crown, (being assisted by this Richard Neuell Earl of
Salisburie, and Father to the great Earl of Warwick, who favored exceedingly
the house of York) in open parliament, as heir to Lionell Duke of Clarence,
the third son of Edward the third, making his title by Anne his mother, wife
to Richard Earl of Cambridge, son to Edmond of Langley, Duke of York; which
Anne, was Daughter to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, which Roger, was son and
heir to Edmond Mortimer, (...) married the Lady Phillip, Daughter and heir to
Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third son of King Edward, to who^ the crown
after Richard the seconds death lineally descended he dying without issue. And
not to the heirs of the Duke of Lancaster, that was younger Brother to the
Duke of Clarence. Hall cap. 1. Tit. (...) or. and Lanc.

Urged by these envious Lords to spend their breath,
Calling revenge on the Protectours death.
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and Lord Protector, in the (...). year of Hen.
6. was by the means of the Queen, and the Duke of Suffolk was atested by ye
Lord Beumond at the Parliament (...) at Berry, and the same night after
murdered in his bed.

If they would know who robbed him, etc. To this verse,
To know how Humfrey dyed, and who shall reign.
In these verses her jests at the Protectours wife, who being (...) and
convicted of treason, because with John Hun a Priest, Roger Bollingbrooke a
Negromancer, and Margery Iordane called the Witch of Ely, she had consulted
and agreed by Sorcery to kill (...) King, was adjudged to perpetual prison in
the I Will of Man, and (...) do penance openly in three public places in
London.

For twenty years and have I served in France.
In the 6. year of Hen. the 6. the Duke of Bedford being deceased then
Lieutenant general, and Regent of France: this Duke of Suffolk was promoted
to that dignity, having the L. Talbot, (...). Scales, and the Lord Mountacute
to assist him.

Against great Charles, and Bastard Orleance.
This was Charles the seventh, that after the death of Henry the (...)
obtained the crown of France, and recovered again much of that his Father
had lost. Bastard Orleance was son to the Duke of Orleance, begotten of the
L. Cawnies wife, preferred highly to many notable offices, because he being a
most valiant Captain, was continual enemy to the Englishmen, daily infesting
them with diverse incursions.

And have I seen Vernoyla's batfull fields.
Vernoyle is that noted place in France, where the great battle was fought in
the beginning of Hen. 6. his reign, where the most of the French cheualry were
overcome by the Duke of Bedford.

And from Aumearle withdrew my warlike powers.
Aumearle is that strong defenced town in France, which the Duke of Suffolk
got after 24. great assaults given unto it.

And came my self in person first to Towers
Th'Embassadours for truce to entertain,
From Belgia, Denmark, Hungary, and Spain.
Towers is a City in France, built by Brutus as he came into Britain, where
in the 21. of Henry the 6, was appointed a great diet to be kept, whether came
th'Embassadours of The Empire, Spain, Hungary, and Denmark to entreat for a
perpetual peace, to be made between the two Kings of England, and France.

By true descent to wear the Diadem
Of Naples, Cicile, and Jerusalem.
Rayner Duke of Aniou, Father to Queen Margarit, called him self King of
Naples, Cicily, and Jerusalem, having the title alone of King of those
Countries.

A fifteenes tax in France I freely spent.
The Duke of Suffolk after the marriage concluded twixt King Henry, and
Margarit Daughter to Duke Rayner, asked in open Parliament a whole fifeteenth
to fetch her into England.

Seeue thee for England but imbark't at Deep.
Deep is a Town in France, bordering upon the Sea where the Duke of Suffolk
with Queen Margarit took ship for England.

As when ariu'd in Porchesters fair Road.
Porchester a Haven Town in the South-west part of England, where the King
tarried expecting the Queens ariuall, whom from thence he conveyed to
South-hampton.

Queen Margarit to William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk.
WHat news (sweet Pole) look thou my lines should tell,
But like the sounding of the doleful bell,
Bidding the deaths-man to prepare the grave,
Expect from me no other news to have.
My breast, which once was mirths imperial throne,
A vast and desert wilderness is grown;
Like that cold Region, from the world remote,
On whose breeme seas, the Icie mountains flote,
where those poor creatures banished from the light,
Do live imprisoned in continual night.
No joy presents my souls internal eyes,
But divination of sad tragedies,
And care takes up her solitary Inn,
where youth and joy, their Court did once begin.
As in September, when our year resignes,
The glorious sun unto the watery signs,
which through the clouds looks on the earth in scorn;
The little Byrd, yet to salute the morn,
Upon the naked branches sets her foot,
The leaves now lying on the mossy root;
And there a silly chirripping does keep,
As though she feign would sing, yet feign would weep,
Praising fair Summer, that too soon is gone,
Or mourning VVinter, too fast coming on.
In this sad plight I mourn for thy depart,
Because that weeping cannot case my heart.
Now to our aid, who stirs the neighboring Kings;
Or who from France a puissant Army brings;
Who moves the Norman to assist our war;
Or brings in Burgoyn, to aid Lancaster;
Who in the North our lawful claim commends,
To win us credit with our valiant friends;
To whom shall I my secret thoughts impart;
Whose breast is now the closet of my heart;
The ancient Heroes, fame thou did revive,
And did from them thy memory derive;
Nature by thee, both gave and takes all,
Alone in Pole she was too prodigal;
Of so divine and rich a temper wrought,
As heaven for him, perfections depth had sought,
Peables and Flints we find in every path,
The Diamond rich India only has.
Well knew King Henry what he pleaded for,
when thou were made his sweet-tong'd Orator;
whose Angell-eye, by powrefull influence,
Imparteth wonders, passing eloquence,
That when love would his youthful sports have tryde,
But in thy shape, himself would never hide;
which in his love had been of greater power,
Then was his Nymph, his flame, his swanne, his shower.
To that allegiance York was bound by oath,
To Henry's heirs, and safety of us both,
No longer now he means record shall bear it,
He will dispense with heaven, and will vnsweare it.
He that is in all the worlds black sins forlorn,
Is careless now how often he be forsworn;
And now of late his title has set down,
By which he claims the right of Englands Crown.
And now I hear, his hateful Duchess chatts,
And rips up their decent unto her brats,
And blesses them as Englands lawful heyrs,
And tells them that our Diadem is theyrs.
And if such hap her Goddess fortune bring,
If three sons fail, she will make the fourth a King.
He that is so like his Dam, her youngest Dick,
That foul, ilfauored, crookback'd stigmatick,
That like a carkase stolen out of a Tomb,
Came the wrong way out of his mothers womb;
with teeth i'ns head, his passage to have torn,
As though begot an age ere he was borne.
Who now dare curb proud York, if he do rise?
And stoop that haggard, which so threats the skies?
To crop that bastard weed which daily grows,
To ouer-shadow our vermilion Rose?
Or who will muzzell that unruly Bear?
From whose stern presence all do fly for fear;
whilst on his knees the silly King is down,
To save their labor, reaching at his Crown.
Where like a mounting Cedar he should bear
His plumed top, aloft into the air;
And let these shrubs sit underneath his shrowdes,
whilst in his arms he does embrace the clouds.
But he with error in devotion led,
Lets others raze the Crown from of his head;
And (like a woman) sits him down to weep,
Where he in Arms his kingly right should keep,
As ill beseeming Henry's royal son,
As when Alcides at the distaffe spunne.
O that he should his Fathers right inherit,
Yet by an alien to that mighty spirit;
That field the Western world with his report,
His glorious conquest got at Agyncourt;
Whose name to France did greater terror bring,
Then to the foul, the presence of their King;
Who filled the ditches of besiged Cane,
with mangled bodies of our Nation slain:
And made the Normans eat their horse for food,
Yet starved for hunger; made them drunk with blood.
Nor can he come from Lancasters great line,
Or from the womb of beauteous Katherine.
All other creatures follow after kind,
But man alone does not beget the mind.
My Daysie-flower which erst perfumed the air,
which for my favors Princes once did wear,
Now in the dust lies trodden on the ground,
And with Yorks garlands every one is crowned;
Those flattering stars which followed our fair rise,
Now toward our set, are vanished from our eyes,
Yorks rising sons now altogether shine,
And our light dim, toward evening does decline;
Now in the skies his dreadful Comet waves,
And who be stars, but VVarwicks bearded staves;
And all those knees which bended once so low,
Grow stiff, as though they had forgot to bow;
And none like them, pursue me with despite,
which most have cryde, God save Queen Margarite.
When fame shall brute thy banishment abroad,
The Yorkish faction then will lay on load;
And when it comes once to our Western Coast,
O how that hagge Dame Elinor will boast;
And labor straight, by all the means she can,
To be called home, out of the I Will of Man;
To which I know great Warwick will consent,
To have it done by act of Parliament,
That to my teeth, my birth she may defy,
Slaundring Duke Rayner with base beggary;
The only way she could devise to grieve me,
vvanting sweet Suffolk, which should most relieve (...).
And from that stock does sprout another bloome,
A Kentish Rebel, a base vpstart groom;
And this is he the VVhite-Rose must prefer,
By Clarence daughter, matched with Mortimer.
Thus by Yorks means, this rascal pesant Cade,
Must in all have Plantaginet be made;
Thus that ambitious Duke sets all on work
To sound what friends affect the claim of York,
Whilst he abroad does practice to command,
And makes us weak by strengthening Ireland;
More his own power still seeking to increase,
Then for King Henry's good, or Englands peace.
Great Winchester untimely is deceased,
That more and more my woes should be increased.
Beuford, whose shoulders proudly bare up all
The Churches prop, that famous Cardinal,
The Commons, (bent to mischief) never let,
with France t'vpbrayd that valiant Somerset,
Railing in tumults on his soldiers loss;
Thus all goes backward, cross comes after cross.
And-nowe of late, Duke Humfreys old alies,
with banished Elnors base accomplices,
Attending their revenge, grow wondrous crouse,
And threaten death and vengeance to our house;
And I alone the woeful remnant am,
To Endure these storms, with woeful Buckingham.
I pray thee Pole have care how thou do pass,
Never the Sea yet half so dangerous was;
And one foretold by water thou should die,
(Ah foul befall that foul tongues prophecy,)
And every night am troubled in my dreams,
That I do see thee tossed in dangerous streams;
And oft-times shipwrackt, cast upon the land,
And lying breathless on the queachie sand;
And often in vision see thee in the night,
where thou at sea maintain'st a dangerous fight;
And with thy proved Target and thy sword,
Beat'st back the Pyrate which would come abord.
Yet be not angry that I warn thee thus,
The truest love is most suspicious:
Sorrow does utter what us still does grieve,
But hope forbids us sorrow to believe;
And in my counsel yet this comfort is,
It cannot hurt, although I think amiss:
Then live in hope, in triumph to return,
when cleerer days shall leave in clouds to mourn;
But so has sorrow girt my soul about,
That, that word hope, (me thinks) comes slowly out:
The reason is, I know it here would rest,
where it may still behold thee in my breast.
Farewell sweet Pole, feign more I would endite,
But that my tears do blot as I do write.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Or brings in Burgoyn to aid Lancaster.
PHillip Duke of Burgoyn and his son were always great favorites of the
house of Lancaster: howbeit they often dissembled both with Lancaster and York.

Who in the North our lawful claim commends,
To win us credit with our valiant friends.
The chief Lords of the North-parts in the time of Henry the 6. withstoode the
Duke of York, at his rising, giving him two great overthrows.

To that aleageance York was bound by oath
To Henry's heirs, and safety of us both.
No longer now he means records shall bear it,
He will dispense with heaven, and will vnsweare it.
The Duke of York at the death of Henry the fifth, and at this Kings
coronation, took his oath to be true subject to him, and his heirs for ever:
but afterward dispensing therewith, claimed the Crown as his rightful and
proper inheritance.

If three Sons fail, she will make the fourth a King.
The Duke of York had four Sons, Edward Earl of March, that afterward was
Duke of York, and King of England, when he had deposed Henry the 6. and Edmond
Earl of Rutland, slain by the Lord Clifford at the battle at Wakefield: and
George Duke of Clarence that was murdered in the Tower: and Richard Duke of
Gloucester who was (after he had murdered his Brothers sons) King by the name
of Richard the third.

He that is so like his Dam, her youngest Dicke,
That foul ill favored crookback'd Stigmaticke, etc.
Till this verse. As though begot an age, etc.
This Richard (whom ironiacally she here calls Dicke) that by treason after
his Nephews murdered, obtained the Crown, was a man low of stature,
crooke-back'd, the left shoulder much higher then the right, and of a very
crabbed and sower countenance: his Mother could not be delivered of him uncut,
and he was borne toothed, and with his feet forward contrary to the course of
nature.

To ouershadow our vermilion Rose.
The red Rose was the badge of the house of Lancaster, and the white Rose of
York, which by the marriage of Henry the seventh, with Elizabeth indubitate
heir of the house of York, was conjoined and united.

Or who does muzzle that unruly Bear.
The Earl of Warwick, the setter up and puller down of Kings, gave for his
Arms the white Bear rampant, and the Ragged staff.

His glorious conquest got at Agyncourt.
Agincourt is a Teritory in France, where King Henry the fifth discomfited the
whole French puissance being 60000. horsemen, besides foote-men and Pages, and
slew at the same battle 8000, of their Nobility, Knights, and Gentlemen. And
almost all the Princes of France, besides such as were taken prisoners.

Who filled the ditches of besieged Caen
With mangled bodies. etc.
Caen is a marvelous strong Town of Normandy, which after long famine and
extreme misery, was yielded up to King Henry the fifth, who fortified the
Town and Castle to the use of the English.

My Daysie flower which erst perfumed the air,
Which for my favor Princes once did wear, etc.
The Daysie in French is called Margarit, which was Queen Margarits badge,
wherewith all the Nobility and chiualry of the Land at the first ariuall were
so delighted, that they wore it in their Hats in token of honor.

And who be Stars but Warwicks bearded staves.
The ragged or bearded staff was a part of the Arms belonging to the Earldome
of Warwick.

Slaundering Duke Rayner with base beggary.
Rayner Duke of Aniou, called himself King of Naples, Cicile, and Jerusalem,
having neither inheritance nor tribute from those parts, and was not able at
the marriage of the Queen of his own charges to send her into England though
he gave no dower with her: which by the Duchess of Gloucester was often in
disgrace cast in her teeth.

A Kentish Rebel, a base vpstart Groom.
This was Jack Cade which caused the Kentish-men to rebel in the 28. year of
Henry the 6.

And this is he the white Rose must prefer,
By Clarence Daughter matched to Mortimer.
This Jack Cade instructed by the Duke of York, pretended to be decended from
Mortimer which married Lady Phillip, Daughter to the Duke of Clarence.

And makes us weak by strengthening Ireland.
The Duke of York being made Deputy of Ireland, first there began to practice
his long pretended purpose, strengthening himself by all means possible that
he might at his return into England by open war, to claim that which so
long he had privily gone about to obtain.

Great Winchester untimely is deceased.
Henry Beuford Bishop and Cardinal of Winchester, Son to John of Gaunt,
begot in his age, was a proud and ambitious Prelat, favoring mightily the
Queen, and the Duke of Suffolk, continually heaping up innumerable treasure,
in hope to have been Pope, as himself on his deathbed confessed.

With France t'vpbraide the valiant Somerset.
Edmond Duke of Somerset, in the 24. of Henry the 6 was made Regent of France,
and sent into Normandy to defend the English Territories against the French
invasions, but in short time he lost all that King Henry the fifth wone, for
which cause the Nobles and the Commons cuer after hated him.

To Endure these storms with woeful Buckingham.
Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, was a great favorite of the Queens Faction, in
the time of Henry the 6.

And one foretold by water thou should dye.
The Witch of Eye received answer by her spirit, that the Duke of Suffolk
should take heed of water; which the Queen forwarnes him of, as remembering
the Witches prophecy, which afterward came to pass.

FINIS.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Mounson, Knight.
SIR, amongst many which most deservedly love you, though I the least, yet am
loath to be the last, whose endeavors may make known how highly they esteem of
your noble and kind disposition: let this Epistle Sir (I beseech you) which
unworthily wears the Badge of your worthy name, acknowledge my zeal with
the rest, (though much less deserving) which for your sake do honor the
house of the Mounsons. I know true generositie accepts what is zelously
offered, though not ever deseruingly excellent, yet for love of the Art from
whence it receives resemblance. The light Phrigian harmony stirs delight,
as well as the melancholy Doricke moves passion: both have their motion in the
spirit, as the lyking of the soul moves the affection. Your kind acceptance
of my labor, shall give some life to my Muse, which yet houers in the
uncertainty of the general censure.

Michaell Drayton.

Edward the fourth to Shores wife.
* The Argument.
This Mistress Shore, King Edward the fourths beauteous paramore, was so
called of her husband a Goldsmith, awelling in Lumbard street. Edward the
fourth, son to Richard Duke of York, after he had obtained the Crown by
deposing Henry the sixth, (which Henry was after murdered in the Tower by
Richard Crookebacke) and after the battle fought at Barnet, where that famous
Earl of Warwick was slain, and that King Edward quietly possessed the
Crown, hearing (by report of many) the rare and wonderful beauty of the
aforesaid Shores wife, comes himself disguised to London to see her; where
after he had once bebeld her, he was so surprised with her admirable beauty,
as not long after he robbed her husband of his dearest jewel; but first by this
Epistle he writes unto her.

Unto the fayr'st that ever breathed this air,
From English Edward to that fairest fair;
Ah would to God thy title were no more,
That no remembrance might remain of Shore,
To countermaund a Monarchs high desire,
And bar mine eyes of what they most admire.
O why should Fortune make the City proud,
To give that more then is the Court alow'd?
Where they like (wretches) hoard it up to spare,
And do engrosse it, as they do their ware.
When fame first blazed thy beauty here in Court,
Mine ears repulsd it, as a light report,
But when mine eyes saw what mine ear had hard,
They thought report too niggardly had spard;
And strooken dumb with wonder, did but mutter,
Conceiving more then she had words to utter.
Then think of what thy husband is possessed,
when I envy that Shore should so be blessed,
when much abundance makes the needy mad,
And having all, yet knows not what is had;
Into fools bosoms this good fortune creepes,
And wealth comes in the whilst the miser sleeps.
If now thy beauty be of such esteem,
which all of so rare excellency deem,
what would it be, and prized at what rate,
were it adorned with a kingly state?
which being now, but in so mean a bed,
Is like an uncut Diamond in lead,
Ere it be set in some high-prized ring,
Or garnished with rich enamiling;
The sparkling luster of the stone is spilt,
If that the beauty be not showed in gilt.
When first attracted by thy heavenly eyes,
I came to see thee, in a strange disguise,
Passing thy shop, thy husband called me back,
Demanding what rare jewel I did lack?
I want, (thought I) one that I dare not crave,
And one (I fear) thou will not let me have;
He calls for Caskets forth, and shows me store,
But yet I knew he had one jewel more;
And deadly cursed him that he did deny it,
That I might not for love or money buy it.
O might I come a Diamond to buy,
whose sparkling radiance shadowed but thine eye,
would not my treasure serve, my Crown should go,
any jewel could be prized so;
(...) Agat, branched with thy blushing strains,
(...) Saphyre, but so azur'd, as thy veins;
My kingly scepter only should redeem it,
At such a price if judgment could esteem it.
How fond and senseless, be those strangers then,
Who bring in toys to please the English men.
(...) smile to think how fond th'Italians are,
To judge their artificial Gardens rare,
when London in thy cheeks can show them here,
Roses and Lillies growing all the year;
The Portugal, that only hopes to win,
By bringing stones from farthest India in,
when happy Shore can bring them forth a gerle,
whose lips be Rubies, and her teeth be Pearl.
How silly is the Polander and Dane,
To bring us Crystal, from the frozen maine,
when thy clear skins transparence does surpass,
Their Crystal, as the Diamond does glass.
The foolish French, which brings in trash and toys,
To turn our women men, our gerles to boys,
when with what tire thou do thy self adorn,
That for a fashion only shall be worn;
which though it were a garment but of hair,
More rich then robe that ever Empress ware.
Me thinks thy husband takes his mark awry,
To set his plate to sale when thou art by;
when they which do thy Angel locks behold,
Like basest dross do but respect his gold;
And wish one hair before that massy heap,
And but one lock before the wealth of Cheap:
And for no cause else, hold we gold so dear,
But that it is so like unto thy hair.
And sure I thinkc Shore cannot choose but flout
Such as would find the great Elixar out,
And laugh to see the Alchimists, that choke
Themselves with sumes, and wast their wealth in smoke,
when if thy hand but touch the basest mould,
It is converted unto purest gold,
when theirs is chaffer'd at an easy rate,
well known to all to be adulterate;
And theyrs, no more when it by thine is set,
Then paltry Beugle, or light-prized let.
Let others wear perfumes, for thee unmeet,
If there were none, thou could make all things sweet.
Thou comfort'st sense, and yet all sense do wast,
To hear, to see, to smell, to feel, to taste;
Thou a rich ship, whose very refuse ware,
Aromaticks, and precious odors are.
If thou but please to walk into the Pawn,
To buy thee Cambricke, Callico, or Lawne,
If thou the whiterles of the same would prove,
From thy more whiter hand pluck off thy glove;
And those which by, as the beholders stand,
will take thy hand for Lawne, Lawne for thy hand.
A thousand eyes, closed up by envious night,
Do wish for day, but to enjoy thy sight;
And when they once have blessed their eyes with thee,
Scorn every object else, what ere they see,
So like a Goddess beauty still controules,
And has such powerful working in our souls.
The Merchant which in traffic spends his life,
Yet loves at home to have a dainty wife,
The blunt-spoke Cynick, poring on his book,
Sometime (aside) at beauty loves to look.
The Churchman, by whose teaching we are led,
Alowes what keeps love in the marriage bed;
The bloody soldier which in Arms does toil,
with Beauty yet content to share his spoil,
The busy lawyer wrangling in his pleas,
Finds in beauty yet there is some ease;
The toyling tradesman, and the sweating Clown,
Would have his wench fair, though his bread be brown;
So much is Beauty pleasing unto all,
To Prince and peasant, one in general:
Nor never yet did any man despise it,
Except too dear, and that he could not prize it,
Vnlearn'd is learning, artlesse be all Arts,
If not employed to praise thy several parts;
Poor plodding schoolmen, they are far too low,
which by probations, rules, and axiom's go,
He must be still familiar with the skies,
which notes the reuolutions of thine eyes;
And by that skill which measures sea and land,
See beauties world, thy wast, thy foot, thy hand,
Where he may find, the more that he does view,
Such rare delights as yet are strange and new;
And other worlds of beauty more and more,
Which (...) discovered before:
And to thy rare proportion to apply,
The lines and circles in Geometry,
Using alone Arithmaticks strong ground,
Numbering the virtues that in thee are found.
And when these all have done what they can do,
For thy perfections all too little too.
But leaving Arts, what should I say thou art?
But of each Goddess thou a better part,
From Iris white, thy red, vermillion, blew,
Thy skin, thy lip, thy cheek, thy veins pure hiew;
But those in her, together mixed be,
But all distinct, and several in thee.
From beauteous Ceres, thy soft-swelling breast,
Those orient Grapes give Nectar, being pressed;
Thy smyles from Venus, but such smyles of joy,
As when she laughes upon her little boy;
Thy caridge, from maiesticke luno's gate,
which gives delight for all to wonder at.
When from the East the dawne has broken out,
And gone to seek thee all the world about,
within thy Chamber has she fixed her light,
where but that place, the world has all been night;
Then is it fit that every vulgar eye,
Should see love banquet in her majesty?
We deem those things our sight does most frequent,
To be but mean, although most excellent;
For strangers still the streets are swept and strewed,
Few look on such as daily come abroad;
Things much restraind, does make us much desire them,
And beauties sildome seen, makes us admire them.
Nor is it fit a City shop should hide,
The worlds delight, and Natures only pride,
But in a Princes sumptuous gallery,
Hung all with Tissue, flor'd with Tapistrie;
where thou shall sit, and from thy state shall see,
The tylts and tryumphs that are done for thee.
Then know the difference (if thou list to prove)
Betwixt a vulgar, and a kingly love,
And when thou fino'st, as now thou doubt'st the troth,
Be thou thy self impartial Judge of both;
Where hearts be knit, what helps if not enjoy?
Delays breed doubts, no cunning to be coy.
Whilst lazy Time his turn by tariance serves,
Love still grows sickly, and hope daily storms
Mean while, receive that warrant by these lines,
which princely rule and sovereignty resignes;
Till when, these papers by their Lords command,
By me shall kiss thy sweet and dainty hand.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
THis Epistle of Edward to Shores wife, and of hers to him being of unlawful
affection, ministers small occasion of historical Notes, for had he mentioned
the many battles betwixt the Lancastrian faction and him, or other warlike
dangers, it had been more like to Plautus boasting Soldier then a kingly
Courtier. Notwithstanding it shall not be amiss to annexe a line or two.

From English Edward to the fairest fair.
Edward the fourth was by nature very chiualrous and very amorous, applying his
sweet and amiable aspect to attain his wanton appetite the rather, which was
so well known to Jews the French King, who at their interuiew invited him to
Paris, that as Cominaeus reports, being taken at his word, he notwithstanding
brake off the matter, fearing the Parisian dames with their witry conversation,
would detain him longer then should be for his benefit, by (...) means Edward
was disapointed of his journey: and albeit Princes whilst they live have
nothing in them but what is admirable, yet we need not mistrust the flattery
of the Court in those times, for certain it is that his shape was excellent,
his hair drew near to a black, making his faces favor seem more
delectable. Though the smalenes of his eyes full of a shining moisture, as it
took away some comlines, so it argued much sharpnes of understanding, and
cruelty mingled therewith. And in deed (...) Buchanan (that imperious Scot)
charge him and other Princes of those times, with affection of tyranny as
Richard the third manifestly did.

When first attracted by thy heavenly eyes.
Edwards intemperate desires, with which he was wholly overcome, how tragically
they in his offspring were punished, is universally known. A mirror
representing their ouer-sight, that rather leave their children what to
possesle, then what to imitate.

How silly is the Polander and Dane
To bring us Crystal from the frozen maine.
Alluding to their opinions, who imagine Crystal to be a kind of Ice, and
therefore it is likely they who come from the frozen parts, should bring great
store of that transparent stone, which is thought to be congealed with extreme
cold. Whether Crystal be Ice or some other liquor, I omit to dispute, yet by
the examples of Amber and Coral there may be such an induration, for Solinus
out of Pliny mentions, that in the Northerly Regions a yellow ielly is taken
up out of the Sea at low tides, which he calls Succinum, we Amber, so likewise
out of the Ligustick deep, a part of the Mediterrin Sea, a greenish stalk is
gathered, which hardened in the air becomes to be Coral either white or red.
Amber notwithstanding is thought to drop out of trees, as appears by Martials
Epigram.

Et latet, et lucet Phaethontide condita (...),
Vt videatur apis necture clausa sub,
Dignum (...) pretium tulit ille laborum,
Credibile est ipsam sic voluisse mori.
To behold a Be inclosde in Electrum, is not so rare as that a Boys throat
should be cut with the fall of an Icesickle, the which Epigram is excellent,
the 18, lib. 4. He calls it Phaethontis gutta, because of that fable which Ovid
rehearses, concerning the Heliades, or Phaetons Sisters metamorphozed into
those trees, whose gum is Amber, where Flies alighting, are often times
tralucently imprisoned.

The Epistle of Shores wife, to King Edward the Fourth.
AS the weak child, that from the Mothers wing,
Is taught the Lutes delicious fingering,
At every strings soft touch, is moved with fear,
Noting his Masters curious listening ear;
Whose trembling hand, at every strain bewrayes,
In what doubt he; his new set lesson plays;
As this poor child, so sit I to indite,
At every word still quaking as I write.
Would I had led an humble Shepherds life,
Nor known the name of Shores admired wife,
And lived with them in Country fields that range,
Nor seen the golden Cheap, nonglittering Change,
To stand a Cometgaz'd at in the skies,
Subject to all tongues, object to all eyes.
Often have I heard my beauty praisd of many,
But never yet so much admired of any;
A Princes Eagle eye to find out that,
which vulgar sights do sildome wonder at,
Makes me to think affection flatters sight,
Or in the object something exquisite.
To housed beauty, sildome stoopes report,
Fame must attend on that which lives in Court.
What swanne of great Apollos brood does sing,
To vulgar love, in courtly Sonetting?
O what immortal Poets sugared pen,
Attends the glory of a Citizen;
Often have I wondered what should blind your eye,
Or what so far seduced Majesty,
That having choice of beauties so divine,
Amongst the most to choose this least of mine;
More glorious suns adorn fair Londons pride,
Then all rich Englands continent beside;
who takes in hand to make account of this,
May number Rumneys flowers, or Isis fish;
who does frequent our Temples, walks, and streets,
Noting the sundry beauties that he meets,
Thinks not that Nature left the wide world poor,
And made this place the Chequer of her store?
As heaven and earth were lately fallne at larrs,
And grown to vying wonders, dropping stars.
That if but some one beauty should incite,
Some sacred Muse, some ravished spirit to write,
Here might he fetch such true Promethian fire,
As after ages should his lines admire;
Gathering the honny from the choysest flowers,
Scorning the withered weeds in Country bowers.
Here in this Garden (only) spings the Rose,
In every common hedge the Bramble grows,
Nor are we so turned Neapolitan,
That might incite some foul-mouthed Mantuan,
To all the world to lay out our defects,
And have just cause to rail upon our sex;
To pranck old wrinkels up in new attire,
To alter natures course, prove time a liar,
Abusing fate, and heavens just doom reuerse,
On beauties grave to set a Crimson hearse;
with a deceitful foil to lay a ground,
To make a glass to seem a Diamond.
Nor cannot without hazard of our name,
In fashion follow the Venetian Dame,
Nor the fantastic French to imitate,
Attired half Spanish, half Italionate;
Nor wast, nor curle, body nor brow adorn,
That is in Florence, or in Genoa borne.
But with vain boasts how witless (...) am I,
Thus to draw on mine own indignity(...)
And what though married when I was but young,
Before I knew what did to love belong;
Yet he which now is possessed of the room,
Cropped beauties flower when it was in the bloome,
And goes away enriched with the store,
whilst others gleane, where he had reapt before,
And he dares swear that I am true and just,
And shall I then deceive his honest trust?
Or what strange hope should make you to assail,
where strongest battery never could prevail?
Belike you think that I repulsd the rest,
To leave a King the conquest of my breast,
Or have thus long preserved my self from all,
A Monarch now should glory in my fall.
Yet rather let me die the vilest death,
Then live to draw such sinne-polluted breath;
But our kind hearts, men's tears cannot abide,
And we least angry often, when most we chyde;
Too well know men what our creation made us,
And nature too well taught them to invade us.
They know but too well, how, when, what, and where,
To write, to speak, to sue, and to forbear,
By signs, by sighs, by motions, and by tears,
when vows should serve, when oaths, when smiles, when prayers,
What one delight our humors most does move,
Only in that you make us nourish love.
If any natural blemish blot our face,
You do protest it gives our beauty grace;
And what attire we most are vsd to wear,
That (of all other) excellent'st you swear;
And if we walk, or sit, or stand, or lie,
It must resemble some one Dietie;
And what you know we take delight to hear,
That are you ever sounding in our ear;
And yet so shameless when you tempt us thus,
To lay the fault on beauty, and on us:
Romes wanton Ovid did those rules impart;
O that your nature should be helped by Art.
Who would have thought, a King that cares to reign,
Enforced by love, so Poet-like should feign?
To say that Beauty, Times stern rage to shun,
In my cheeks (Lillies) hid her from the sun;
And when she meant to triumph in her May,
Made that her East, and here she broke her day,
And swear'st that Summer still is in my sight,
And but where I am, all the world is night:
And that the fayr'st, ere since the world began,
To me, a sunne-burnt, base Egyptian;
But yet I know more then I mean to tell,
(Oh would to God you knew it not too well.)
That women often their most admirers raise,
Though publicly not flattering their own praise.
Our churlish husbands, which our youth enjoyed,
who with our dainties have their stomachs cloyd,
Do loathe our smooth hand with their lips to feel,
To Enrich our favors, by our beds to kneel;
At our command to wait, to send, to go,
As every hour our amorous servants do;
which makes a stolen kiss often we bestow,
In earnest of a greater good we owe;
when he all day torments us with a frown,
Yet sports with Venus in a bed of Down;
whose rude imbracement, but too ill beseemes,
Her span-broade wast, her white and dainty limbs;
And yet still preaching abstinence of meat,
when he himself, of every dish will eat.
Blame you our husbands then, if they deny
Our public walking, our loose liberty,
If with exception still they us debar,
The circuit of the public Theater;
To hear the smooth-tongu'd Poets Siren vain,
Sporting in his lascivious Comic scene:
Or the young wanton wits, when they applaude
The (...) persuasions of some subtle (...);
Or passionate Tragedian in his rage,
Acting a loue-sicke passion on the stage;
when though abroad restraining us to rome,
They very hardly keep us safe at home,
And often are touched with fear, and inward grief,
Knowing rich prizes soonest tempt a thief.
What sports have we, whereon our minds to set?
Our dog, our Parrat, or our Marmuzet;
Or once a week to walk into the field;
Small is the pleasure that these toys do yield.
But to this grief, a medicine you apply,
To cure restraint with that sweet liberty;
And sovereignty; (o that bewitching thing,)
Yet made more great, by promise of a King:
And more, that honor which does most entice
The holiest Nun, and she that is nere so nice.
Thus still we strive, yet overcome at length,
For men want mercy, and poor women strength:
Yet grant, that we, could meaner men resist
when Kings once come, they conquer as they list.
Thou art the cause Shore pleases not my sight;
That his embraces give me no delight;
Thou art the cause, I to my self am strange.
Thy coming, is my full, thy set, my change.
Long VVinter nights be minutes, if thou hear,
Short minutes if thou absent be a year.
And thus by strength thou art become my fate,
And make me love, even in the midst of hate.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Would I had led an humble Sheepheards life,
Nor (...) the name of Shores admired wife.
TWo or three poems written by sundry men, have magnified this woman's beauty:
whom that ornament of England and Londons more particular glory, Sir Thomas
Moore very highly has praised for her beauty, she being alive in his time,
though being poor and aged. Her stature was mean, her hair of a dark
yellow, her face round and full, her eye gray, delicate (...) being betwixt
each parts proportion, and each proportions (...), her body fat, white, and
smooth, her countenance cheerful, and like to her condition. That picture
which I have seen of (...), was such as she rose out of her bed in the
morning, having nothing on but a rich Mantle cast (...) one (...) her
shoulder, and sitting in a chair on which her naked arm did lie. What her
Fathers name was, or where she was borne is not certainly known: but Shore a
young man of right good person, wealth, and behavior, abandond her bed after
the King had made her his Concubine. Richard the third causing her to do open
penance in Paul's Churchyard, (...) that no man should relieve her, which the
tyrant did not so much for his hatted to sin, but that by making his Brothers
life odious, he might cover his horrible treason the more cunningly.

May number Rumneys flowers, or Isis fish.
Rumney is that famous Marsh in Kent, at whose side (...) an Hauen-towne does
stand. Hereof the excellent English Antiquarie Master Camden, and Master
Lumbert in his perambulation do make mention and Marshes are commonly called
those low grounds, which abut upon the Sea, and from the Latin word are so
denominated. Isis here is used for Thamesis by a Senecdochicall kind of
speech, or by a poetical liberty in using one for another, for it is said that
Thamesis is compounded of Tame; and Isis, making when they are met, that
renowned water running by London, a City much more renowned (...) that water:
which being plentiful of fish, is the cause also why all things else are
plentiful therein. Moreover I am persuaded that there is no River in the world
beholds more stately buildings on either side clean through, then the Thames.
Much is reported of the Graund Canale in Venice, for that the Fronts on either
side are so gorgeous.

That might incite some foul-mouthed Mantuan.
(...) Mantuan a pastoral Poet, in one of his Eglogs bitterly enueieth against
woman-kinde, some of the which by way of an Appendex, might be here inserted,
seeing the fantastic and insolent humors of many of that sex deserve much
sharper physic, were it not that they are grown wiser, then to amend, for such
an idle Poets speech as Mantuan, yeh, or for Euripides himself, or Senecas
inflexible (...).

The circuit of the public Theater.
(...) a most fit Author for so dissolute a Sectarie, calls that place (...),
for though Shores wife wantonly plead for liberty, which is the true humor of a
Curtizan, yet much more is the praise of modesty then of such liberty. Howbeit
the Vestall Nuns had seats assigned them in the Roman Theater, whereby it
should appear, it was counted no impeachment to modesty, though they
offending therein were buried quick: a sharp law for them, who may say as
Shores wife does,

When though abroad restraining us to rome,
They very hardly keep us safe at home.
FINIS.
To the Right Worshipful Henry Goodere, of Powlesworth Esquire.
SIR, this Poem of mine, which I imparted to you, at my being with you at
your lodging at London in May last, brought at length to perfection,
(emboldened by your wonted favors) I adventure to make you Patron of. Thus Sir
you see I have aduentred to the world, with what like or dislike, I know nor,
if it please (which I much doubt of) I pray you then be pertaker, of that which
I shall esteem not my least good: if dislike, it shall lessen some part of my
grief, if it please you to allow but of my love: howsoever, I pray you accept
it as kindly as I offer it, which though without many (...), yet (I assure you)
with much desire of your honor. Thus until such time as I may in some more
larger measure make known my love to the happy and generous family of the
Gooderes, (to which I confess my self to be beholding to, for the most part
of my education) I wish you all happiness.

Michaell Drayton.

Marie the French Queen, to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk.
* The Argument.
Mary, the daughter of that renowned Prince King Henry the seventh, being
very young at her Fathers death, after by ber Brother King Henry the eight, was
given in marriage to Jews King of France, being a man old and decrepite; This
fair and beautiful Lady, long before had placed her affection on Charles
Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, a brave and courageous young Gentleman, and an
especial favorite of the King her Brother, and a man raised by him. King
Jews, the husband of this beautiful Queen, lived not long after be was
married: and Charles Brandon having commission from the King to bring her back
to England, but being delayed by some sinister means, the French Queen
writes this Epistle, to hasten the Duke forward on his intended voyage to
France.

SVch health from heaven my self may wish to me,
Such health fro France, Queen Mary sends to thee.
Brandon, how long make thou excuse to stay;
And know how ill we women brook delay;
If one poor Channel thus can part us two,
Tell me (unkind) what would an Ocean do?
Leander had an Hellespont to swim,
Yet this from Hero could not hinder him.
His Bark (poor soul) his breast, his arms his oars,
But thou a ship, to land thee on our shores;
And opposite to famous Kent does lie,
The pleasant fields of famous Pickardie,
where our (...) Callice, walled in her sands,
In kenning of the cliffie Dover stands.
Here is no Beldame nurse to pout or lower,
when wantonning, we revel in my Tower;
Nor need I top my Turret with a light,
To guide thee to me, as thou swimm'st by night;
Compared with me, were thou but half so kind,
Thy sighs should stuff thy sails, though wanting wind;
But thy breast is becalmed, thy sighs be slack,
And mine too stiff, and blow thy broad sails back.
But thou will say, that I should blame the flood,
Because the wind so full against thee stood;
Nay blame it not, it did so roughly blow,
For it did chyde thee, for thou wast so slow:
For it came not to keep thee in the Bay,
But came from me, to bid thee come away.
But that thou vainly lett'st occasion slide,
Thou might have wasted hither with the tide,
If when thou come, I knit mine angry brow,
Blame me not Brandon, thou have broke thy vow.
Yet if I meant to frown, I might be dombe,
For this may make thee stand in doubt to come,
Nay come, sweet Charles, have care thy ship to guide;
Come my sweet heart, in faith I will not chide.
When as my Brother and his lovely Queen
In sad attire for my depart were seen,
The utmost date expired of my stay,
when I from Dover did depart away,
Thou know what woe I suffered for thy sake,
How often I feigned of thee my leave to take;
God and thou know with what a heavy heart
I took my farewell when I should depart:
And being shypp'd, gave signal with my hand,
Up to the Cliffe where I did see thee stand,
Nor could refrain in all the peoples view,
But cried to thee, sweet Charles adieu, adieu.
Look how a little infant that has lost,
The thing wherewith it was delighted most,
weary with seeking, to some corner creepes,
And there (poor soul) it sits it down, and weeps;
And when the Nurse would feign content the mind,
Yet still it mourns for that it cannot find:
Thus in my careful Cabin did I lie,
when as the ship out of the road did fly.
Think thou my love was faithful unto thee,
when young Castile to England su'd for me:
Be judge thy self, if it were not of power,
when I refusd an Empire for my dower.
To Englands Court, when once report did bring,
How thou in France did revel with thy King,
when he in triumph of his victory,
(...) a rich imbrodered Canapie,
(...) proud Tournay, which did (...) stand,
To beg for mercy at his conquering hand;
To hear of his enderements, how I joyed?
But see, this calm was suddenly destroyed,
When Charles of Castile there to banquet came,
with him his sister, that ambitious Dame,
Sauoys proud Duchess, knowing how long she,
By her love sought to win my love from me;
Fearing my absence might thy vows acquit,
To change thy Mary for a Margarite.
When in King Henry's Tent of cloth of gold,
She often did thee in her arms enfold;
where you were feasted more diliciously,
Then Cleopatra did Mark Anthony;
where sports all day did entertain your sight,
And then in Masks you passed away the night:
But thou will say, It proper is unto us,
That we by nature all are iealious.
I must confess, it is often found in our sex,
But who not love, not any thing suspects?
True love does look with pale suspicions eye,
Take away love, if you take jealousy.
When Henry, Turwyn, and proud Tournay won,
Little thought I the end when this begun;
When Maximilian to those wars adrest,
vvare Englands Cross on his imperial breast,
And in our Army let his Eagle fly,
And had his pay from Henry's treasury,
Little thought I, when first began these wars,
My marriage day should end these bloody iarrs;
From which I vow, I yet am free in thought,
But this alone by VVoolseys wit was wrought.
To his advise the King gave free consent,
That will I, nill I, I must be content.
My virgins right, thy state could not advance,
But now enriched with the dower of France;
Then, but poor Suffolks Duchess had I been,
Now, the great Dowger, the most Christian Queen.
But I perceive where all thy grief does lie,
Jews of France had my virginity:
He had indeed, but shall I tell thee what,
Believe me Brandon, he had scarcely that;
Good feeble King, he could not do much harm,
But age must needs have something that is warm;
Small drops (God knows) do quench that heatles fire,
when all the strength is only in desire.
And I could tell, if modesty might tell,
There Is somewhat else that pleases Lovers well,
To rest his cheek, upon my softer cheek,
was all he had; and more he did not seek.
So might the little babie clip the nurse,
And it content, she never a whit the worse;
Then think this Brandon, if that make thee frown,
For mayden-head he, on my head set a Crown,
who would exchange a kingdom for a kiss,
Hard were the heart that would not yield him this;
And time yet half so swiftly does not pass,
Not full five months yet elder then I was.
When thou to France conducted was by fame,
with many Knights which from all Countries came,
Installed at S. Dennis in my throne,
where Jews held my coronation;
where the proud Dolphin, for thy valor sake,
Chose thee at tilt his princely part to take;
when as the staves upon thy caske did light,
Grieved therewith, I turned away my sight;
And spoke aloude, when I my self forgot,
(...) my sweet Charles, my Brandon, hurt him not,
But when I feared the King perceived this,
Good silly man, I pleased him with a kiss;
And to extol his valiant son began,
That Europe never bred a brauer man:
And when (poor King) he simply praised thee,
Of all the rest I asked which thou should be:
Thus I with him, dissembled for thy sake,
Open confession now a mends must make.
Whilst this old King upon a pallet lies,
And only holds a combat with mine eyes;
Mine eyes from his, by thy sight stolen away,
which might too well their Mistres thoughts bewray.
But when I savv thy proud unconquered Lance,
To bear the prize from all the flower of France,
To see what pleasure did my soul embrace,
Might easily be discerned in my face.
Look as the dew upon a Damaske-Rose,
How through that cleerest pearl his blushing shows,
And when the soft air breathes upon his top,
From those svveet leaves falls easily drop by drop;
Thus by my cheek, down rayning from mine eyes,
One tear for joy, another room supplies.
Before mine eye (like Touch) thy shape did prove,
Mine eye condemned my too too partial love;
But since by others I the same do try,
My love condemns my too too partial eye.
The precious stone most beautiful and rare,
when with it self we only do compare,
we deem all other of that kind to be,
As excellent as that we only see;
But when we judge of that with others by,
Too credulous we do condemn our eye,
which then appears more orient, and more bright,
As from their dimnes, borrowing greater light.
Alansoon, a fine timbered man, and tall,
Yet wants the shape thou art adorned withal;
Vandom, good carridge, and a pleasing eye,
Yet wants my Suffolks Lions majesty;
Courageous Burbon, a sweet manly face,
But yet he wants my Brandons courtly grace.
Proud Longauile, our Court judged had no peer,
A man scarce made (was thought) whilst thou wast here.
County S. Paul, brau'st man at Arms in France,
would yield himself a Squire to bear thy Lance;
Galleas and Bounarme, matchless for their might,
Under thy towering blade have couched in fight.
If with our love my Brother angry be,
I Will say for his sake I first loved thee;
And but to frame my liking to his mind,
Never to thee had I been half so kind.
Should not the sister like as does the brother,
The one of us should be unlike the other.
Worthy my love, the vulgar judge no man,
Except a Yorkist, or Lancastrian;
Nor think that my affection should be set,
But in the line of great Plantaginet.
I pass not what the idle Commons say,
I pray thee Charles make have, and come away.
To thee what is England, if I be not there;
Or what to me is France, if thou not here;
Thy absence makes me angry for a while,
But at thy presence I must needsly smile.
When last of me his leave my Brandon took,
He swear an oath, (and made my lyps the book)
He would make have, which now thou do deny,
Thou art for sworn, o wilful perjury.
Sooner would I with greater sins dispense,
Then by entreaty pardon this offense.
But yet I think, if I should come to shriue thee,
Great were the fault that I should not forgive thee;
Yet were thou here, I should revenged be,
But it should be with too much loving thee.
The utmost date expired of my stay,
When I from Dover did depart away.
KIng Henry the 8. with the Queen and Nobles, in the 6. year of his reign,
in the month of September, brought this Lady to Dover, where she took shipping
sor France.

Think thou my love was faithful unto thee,
When young Castile to England sued for me.
It was agreed and concluded twixt Hen. the 7, and Phillip King of Castile,
Son to Maximilian the Emperor, that Charles eldest Son of the said
Phillip, should marry the Lady Mary, Daughter to King Henry, when they came to
age: which agreement was afterward in the 8. year of Hen. the 8. annihilated.

When he in triumph of his victory
Under a rich embrodred Canapy,
Entered proud Turnay which did trembling stand, etc.
Henry the 8. after the long seege of Turnay, which was delivered to him upon
composition, entered the City in triumph, under a Canapy of cloth of gold,
borne by four of the chief and most noble Citizens: the King himself
mounted upon a gallant Courser barded with the Arms of England, France, and
Ireland.

When Charles of Castile there to banquet came,
With him his Sister that ambitious Dame.
Sauoys proud Duchess.
The King being at Turnay: there came to him the Prince of Castile, and the
Lady Margarit Duchess of Sauoy his Sister, to whom King Hen. gave great
entertainment.

Sauoys proud Duchess knowing how long she
By her love sought to win my love from (...).
At this time there was speech of a marriage to be concluded, between Charles
Brandon then L. Lisle, and the Duchess of Sauoy, the L. Lisle being highly
favored, and exceedingly beloved of the Duchess.

When in King Henryes Tent of cloth of gold.
The King caused a rich Tent of cloth of gold to be erected, where he feasted
the Prince of Castile, and the Duchess: and entertained them with sumptuous
maskes and banquets during their aboade.

When Maximilian to those wars adrest,
Wore Englands Cross on his imperial breast.
The Emperor Maximilian with all his Soldiers, which served under King
Henry, wore the cross of Saint George, with the Rose on their breasts.

And in our Army let his Eagle fly.
The black Eagle is the badge imperial, which here is used for the
displaying of his ensign or standard.

And had his pay from Henry's treasury.
Henry the 8, at his wars in France, retained the Emperor and all his
Soldiers in wages, which served under him during those wars.

But this alone by VVoolseys wit was wrought.
Thomas Woolsey, the Kings Almoner, then Bishop of Lincoln, a man of great
aucthority with the King, and afterward Cardinal, was the cheese cause that
the Lady Mary was married to the old French King, with whom the French King had
dealt under hand to befriend him in that match.

When the proud Dolphin for thy valor sake,
Chose thee at tylt his princely part to take.
Frauncis Duke of Valoys, and Dolphin of France, at the marriage of the Lady
Mary, in honor thereof proclaimed a Iusts, where he chose the Duke of
Suffolk, and the Marquis Dorset for his aids, at all Martial exercises.

Galeas, and Bounarme matchles for their might.
This County Galeas at the Iusts ran a course with a Spear, which was at the
head 5. inches square on every side, and at the But 9. inches square, whereby
he showed his wondrous force and strength. This Bounarme, a Gentleman of
France, at the same time came into the field armed at all points with 10.
Spears (...) him: in each (...), 3, under each thigh one, one under his left
arm, and one in his hand, and putting his horse to the carere, never stopped
him till he had broken every staff. Hall.

Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, to Mary the French Queen.
But that thy faith commands me to forbear,
The fault thine own, if I impatient were;
Were my dispatch such as should be my speed,
I should want time thy loving lines to reed.
Here in the Court, Camelion like I fare,
And live (God knows) of nothing but of air;
All day I wait, and all the night I watch,
And starve mine ears to hear of my dispatch;
If Dover were th'Abydos of my rest,
Or pleasant Callice were my Maryes Cest,
Thou should not need, fair Queen to blame me so,
Did not the distance to desire say no;
No tedious night from travel should be free,
Till through the waves, with swimming unto thee,
A snowy path I made unto thy Bay,
So bright as is that Nectar-stayned way,
The restless sun by travailing does wear,
Passing his course to finish up his year.
But Paris locks my love within the maine,
And London yet thy Brandon does detain;
Of thy firm love thou put'st me still in mind,
But of my faith, not one word can I find.
When Long auile to Mary was affied,
And thou by him wast made King Lewis bride,
How often I wished that thou a prize mights be,
That I in Arms, might combat him for thee,
And in the madness of my love distraught,
A thousand times his murder have forethought;
But that th'all-seeing powers which sit above,
Regard not mad men's oaths, nor faults in love;
And have confirmed it by the grant of heaven,
That lovers sins on earth should be forgiven;
For never man is half so much distressed,
As he that loves to see his love possessed.
Coming to Richmond after thy depart,
(Richmond, where first thou stol'st away my heart,)
Me thought it looked not as it did of late,
But wanting thee, forlorn, and desolate,
In whose fair walks thou often have been seen,
To sport with Katberine, Henry's beauteous Queen,
Astonishing sad-vvinter with thy sight,
As for thy sake, the day has put back night;
That the Byrds thinking to approach the spring,
Forgot themselves, and have begun to sing:
So often I go by Thames, so often return,
Me thinks for thee, the River yet does mourn,
who I have seen to let her stream at large,
which like a Hand-mayde waited on thy Barge;
And if thou hapst against the flood to row,
Which way it ebd before, now would it flow;
Letting her drops in tears fall from thy oars,
For joy that she had got thee from the shoares.
The silver swannes, with music that those make,
Ruffing their plumes, come glyding on the lake,
As the fleet Dolphins, by Arions strings,
were brought to land with musicks rauishings;
The flocks and herds that pasture near the flood,
To gaze upon thee, have forborne their food;
And sat down sadly, mourning by the brim,
That they by nature were not made to swim.
When as the Post to Englands royal Court,
Of thy hard passage brought the true report;
How in a storm thy well rigged shyps were tossed,
And thou thy self in danger to be lost,
I knew it was Venus loathed that aged bed,
where beauty so should be dishonored,
Or feared the Sea-Nymphs haunting of the Lake,
If thou but seen, their Goddess should forsake.
And whirling round her Doue-drawne Coach about,
To view thy Navy now in launching out,
Her ayrie mantle loosly does unbind,
which fanning forth a rougher gale of vvind,
vvafted thy sails with speed unto the land,
And runs thy ship on Bullens harboring strand.
How should I joy of thy arrive to hear?
But as a poor seafaring passenger,
After long travail, tempest-torne and wracked,
By some vnpittying Pyrat that is sacked;
Hears the false robber that has stolen his wealth,
Landed in some safe harbor, and in health;
Enriched with inualuable store,
For which he long has traueled before.
When thou to Abaile held'st the appointed day,
we heard how Jews met thee on the way;
where thou in glittering Tissue strangly dight,
Appear'dst unto him, like the Queen of light,
In Cloth of silver all thy virgin train,
In beauty sumptuous, as the Northern waine;
And thou alone the foremost glorious star,
which lead'st the teame of that great VVagoner.
What could thy thought be, but as I do think,
When thine eyes tasted, what mine ears did drink?
A Cripple King laid bedrid long before,
Yet at thy coming crept out of the door,
It Was well he rid, he had no legs to go,
But this thy beauty forced his body to;
For whom a cullice had more fitter been,
Then in a golden bed a gallant Queen.
To use thy beauty as the miser gold,
which hoards it up but only to behold,
Still looking on it with a jealous eye,
Fearing to lend, yet loving usury;
O Sacrilege, (if beauty be divine,)
The profane hand should tuch the hallowed shrine.
To surfeit sickness on the sound man's diet,
To rob Content, yet still to live unquiet,
And having all, to be of all be guild,
And yet still longing like a little child.
When Marquis Dorset and the valiant Grayes,
To purchase farm first crossed the narrow Seas,
with all the Knights that my associates went,
In honor of thy riuptiall turnament,
Think thou I joyed not in thy Beauties pride?
when thou in triumph did through Paris ride;
Where all the streets as thou did pace along
with Arras, Bisse, and Tapestry were hong.
Ten thousand gallant Citizens prepared,
In rich attire thy Princely self to guard,
Next them three thousand, choice religeous men,
In golden vestments followed them again;
And in precession as they came along,
with (...) sang thy marriage song.
Then five (...) Dukes, as did their places fall,
To each (...) a Princely Cardinal,
Then thou on thy imperial Chariot set,
Crowned with a rich imperled Coronet,
whilst the Parisian Dames, as thy train past,
Their precious Incence in abundance cast.
As Cinthia from the waue-embatteld shrouds,
Opening the west, comes streaming through the clouds,
with shining troops of siluer-tressed stars
Attending on her, as her Torch-bearers,
And all the lesser lights about her throne,
with admiration stand as lookers on;
Whilst she alone in height of all her pride,
The Queen of light, along her sphere does glide.
when on the tylt my Horse like thunder came;
No other signal had I but thy name,
Thy voice my Trumpet, and my guide thine eyes,
And but thy beauty, I esteemed no prize.
That large-limd Almaine of the Giants race,
which bare strength on his breast, fear in his face,
whose senewed arms, with his steele-tempered blade,
Through plate and male, such open passage made,
Upon whose might the French-mens glory lay,
And all the hope of that victorious day,
Thou saw thy Brandon beat him on his knee,
Offering his shield a conquered spoil to thee.
But thou will say, (perhaps) I vainly boast
And tell thee that, which thou already know,
No sacred Queen, my valor I deny,
It was thy beauty, not my chiualry:
One of thy tressed Curles which falling down,
As loath to be imprisoned in thy Crown,
I saw the soft air sportiuely to take it,
To diverse shapes and sundry forms to make it,
Now parting it, to four, to three, to twain,
Now twisting it, and then untwist again;
Then make the threads to dally with thine eye,
A sunny candle, for a golden fly.
At length from thence one little tear it got,
which falling down, as though a star had shot,
My vp-turnd eye pursues it with my sight,
The which again redoubleth all my might.
It Is but in vain, of my descent to boast,
when heavens Lamp shines, all other lights be lost,
Faulcons look not, the Eagle sitting by,
whose brood does gaze the sun with open eye;
Else might my blood find issue from his force,
In Bosworth plain, beat Richard from his horse;
whose puissant Arms, great Richmond chose to weeld.
His glorious Colors, in that conquering feeld;
And with his sword, in his dear sovereigns sight,
To his last breath, stood fast in Henry's right.
Then beauteous Empress, think this safe delay,
Shall be the even to a joyful day;
Foresight does still on all advantage lie,
wise men must give place to necessity;
To put back ill, our good we must forbear,
Better first fear, then after still to fear.
Tweare ouer-sight in that at which we aim,
To put the hazard on an after game;
with patience then let us our hopes attend,
And tell I come, receive these lines I send.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
When Longauile to Mary was affied.
THE Duke of Longauile which was prisoner in England, upon the peace to be
concluded between England and France, was delivered, and married the
Princess Mary for Jews the French King his Master.

How in a storm thy well-rigd ships were tossed,
And thou, etc.
As the Queen sailed for France, a mighty storm arose at Sea, so that the
Navy was in great danger, and was severed, some driven upon the Coast of
Flaunders, some on Britain: the ship wherein the Queen was, was driven into
the Haven at Bullen with very great danger.

When thou to Abuile heldst th'apoynted day.
King Jews met her by Abuile, near to the Forest of Arders, and brought her
into Abuile with great solemnity.

Appear'dst unto him like the Queen of Light.
Expressing the sumptuous attire of the Queen and her train: attended by the
chief of the Nobility of Kngland, with 36. Ladies all in cloth of silver,
their Horses trapped with Crimson velvet.

A Cripple King laid bedrid long before.
King Jews, was a man of great years, troubled much with the gout, so that
he had had of long time before little use of his legs.

When Marquis Dorset and the valiant Grayes.
The Duke of Suffolk, when the proclaimation came into England, of Iusts to be
holden in France at Paris: he for the Queens sake his Mistres obtained of the
King to go thither: with whom went the Marquis Dorset and his four Brothers,
the Lord Clynton, Sir Edward Neuill, Sir Gyles Capell, Tho. Cheyney: which went
all over with the Duke as his assistants.

When thou in triumph did through Paris ride.
A true description of the Queens entering into Paris, after her (...) performd
at Saint Denis.

Then five great Dukes as did their places fall.
The Dukes, of Alansoon, Burbon, Vadome, Longauile, Suffolk, with five
Cardinals.

That large-limd Almayne of the Giants race.
Frauncis Valoys, the Dolphin of France (...) the glory, that the Englishmen
had obtained at the tilt, brought in an Almayne secretly, a man thought almost
of incomparable strength, which incountred Charles Brandon at Barriers, but the
Duke (...) with him, so beat him about the head with the pomell of his sword,
that the blood came out of the sight of his Caske.

Else might my blood find issue from his force,
In Bosworth, etc.
Sir William Brandon standerd-bearer to the Earl of Richmond, (after Henry the
7,) at Bosworth field, a brave and gallant Gentleman: who was slain by Richard
there, this was Father to this Charles Brandon, after Duke of Suffolk.

FINIS.
To the modest and virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistres Frauncis Goodere, Daughter to
Sir Henry Goodere Knight, and wife to Henry Goodere Esquire.
My very gracious and good Mistres, the love and duty I bare to your Father
whilst he lived, now after his decease is to you hereditary: to whom by the
blessing of your birth he left his virtues. Who bequeathed you those which were
hit, gave you what so ever good is mine, as devoted to his, he being gone, whom
I honored so much whilst he lived: which you may justly challenge by all laws of
thankfulness. My self having been a witness of your excellent education, and
mild disposition (as I may say) ever from your Cradle, dedicate this Epistle
of this virtuous and goodly Lady to your self: so like her in all perfection,
both of wisdom and learning: which I pray you accept till time shall enable me
to leave you some greater monument of my love.

Michaell Drayton.

The Lady Jane Gray, to the Lord Gilford Dudley.
* The Argument.
After the death of that virtuous young Prince King Edward the sixth, the son
of that famous King Henry the eight. Jane, the daughter of Henry Gray, Duke of
Suffolk, by the consent of John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, was proclaimed
Queen of England: being married to Gilford Dudley, the fourth son of the
foresaid Duke of Northumberland; which match was concluded by their ambitious
Fathers, who went about by this means to bring the Crown unto their Children,
and to dispossess the Princess Mary, eldest daughter of King Henry the eight,
heir to King Edward her Brother. Queen Mary rising in Arms to claim her
rightful Crown, takes the said Jane Gray, and the Lord Gilford her husband,
being lodged in the Tower for their more safety, which place being lastly
their Palace, by this means becomes their prison: where being severed in
sundry prisons, they write these Epistles one to another.

MIne own dear Lord, since thou art locked from me.
In this disguise my love must steal to thee,
Since to renew all loves, all kindness past,
This refuge scarcely left, yet this the last.
My Keeper coming, I of thee enquire,
(...) with thy greeting, aunswers my desire;
which my tongue willing to return again,
Grief stops my words, and I but strive in vain;
VVhere-with amazed, away in have he goes,
when through my lips, my heart thrusts forth my woes;
when as the doors that make a doleful sound,
Drive back my words, that in the noise are drowned;
which somewhat hushed, the echo does record,
And twice or thrice reiterats my word,
when like an adverse wind in Isis course,
Against the tide bending his boystrous force;
But when the flood has wrought it self about,
He following on, does headlong thrust it out:
Thus strive my sighs, with tears ere they begin,
And breaking out, again sighs drive them in.
A thousand forms present my troubled thought,
Yet prove abortiue when they forth are brought,
From strongest woe, we hardly language wrest,
The depth of grief, with words is sounded least.
As tears do fall, and rise, sighs come and go,
So do these numbers ebb, so do they flow.
These briny tears, do make my Ink look pale,
My Inck clothes tears in this sad mourning veil,
The Letters mourners, weep with my dim eye,
The paper pale, grieved at my misery.
Yet miserable our selves, why should we deem?
Since none is so, but in his own esteem;
who in distress, from resolution flies,
Is rightly said to yield to miseries;
That life is only miserable and vile,
From which fair patience does it self exile.
They which begot us, did beget this sin,
They first begun, what did our grief begin;
We tasted not, it was they which did rebel,
Not our offense, but in their fall we fell;
They which a Crown would to my Lord have linck'd,
All hope, all life, all liberty extinct;
A subject borne, a Princess to have been,
Has made me now, nor subject, nor a Queen.
Ah vile ambition, how do thou deceive us,
Which show us heaven, and yet in hell do leave us?
Sildome untouched does innocens escape,
when error comes in good counsels shape,
A lawful title counterchecks proud might,
The weakest things become strong props to right;
Then my dear Lord, although affliction grieve us,
Yet let our spotless innocens relieve us.
Death but an acted passion does appear,
where truth gives courage, and the conscience clear,
And let thy comfort thus consist in mine,
That I bear part of what so ere is thine;
As when we lived untouched with these disgraces,
when as our kingdom was our sweet embraces;
At Durham Palace, where sweet Himen sang,
whose buildings with our nuptial music rang?
when Prothalamions praysd that happy day,
wherein great Dudley matched with noble Gray,
when they deuisd to linck by wedlocks band,
The house of Suffolk to Northumberland;
Our fatal Dukedom, to your Dukedom bound,
To frame this building on so weak a ground;
For what auailes a lawless usurpation?
which gives a scepter, but not rules a nation,
Only the surfit of a vain opinion;
what gives content, gives more then all dominion.
When first mine ears were persed with the same,
Of Jane proclaimed by a Princes name,
A sudden fright my trembling heart appalls,
The fear of conscience enters iron walls.
Thrice happy for our Fathers had it been,
If what we feared, they wisely had foreseen,
And kept a mean gate in an humble path,
To have escaped these furious tempests wrath.
The Cedar-building Eagle bears the wind,
And not the Faulcon, though both Hawks by kind;
That kingly byrd does from the clouds command,
The fearful foul that moves but near the land.
Though Mary be from mighty Kings descended,
My blood not from Plantaginet pretended;
My Grandsire Brandon, did our house advance,
By princely Mary, dowager of France;
The fruit of that fair stock which did combine,
And Yorks sweet branch with Lancasters entwine,
And in one stalk did happily unite,
The pure vermilion Rose, with purer white;
I, the untimely slip of that rich stem,
whose golden bud brings forth a Diadem.
But oh forgive me Lord, it is not I;
Nor do I boast of this, but learn to die.
Whilst we wear as our selves conjoined then,
Nature to nature, now an alien.
The purest blood, polluted is in blood,
Nearest contemnd, if sovereignty withstood;
A Diadem once dazeling the eye,
The day too dark to see affinity;
And where the arm is stretched to reach a Crown,
Friendshyp is broke, the dearest things thrown down;
For what great Henry most strove to avoid,
The heavens have built, what earth would have destroyed,
And seating Edward on his regal throne,
He gives to Mary, all that was his own,
By death assuring what by life is theyrs,
The lawful claim, of Henry's lawful heirs.
By mortal laws, the bond may be diuorc'd,
But heavens decree, by no means can be forced,
The rule the case, when men have all decreed,
who took him hence, knew well who should succeed.
In vain be counsels, statuts, human laws,
when chief of counsels pleads the iustest cause;
Thus rule the heavens in their continual course,
That yields to fate, that does not yield to force.
Man's wit does build for time but to devour,
But vertu's free from time, and fortunes power;
what virtue gets, once got, does never wast,
And having this, this thou for ever have:
Then my kind Lord, sweet Gilford be not grieved,
The soul is heavenly, and from heaven releeu'd;
And as we once have plighted troth together,
Now let us make exchange of minds to either;
To thy fair breast take my resolved mind,
Armed against black Despair, and all her kind,
And to my bosom breathe that soul of thine,
There to be made as perfect as is mine:
So shall our fayths as firmly be approved,
As I of thee, or thou of me beloved.
This life, no life, were thou not dear to me,
Nor this no death, were I not woe for thee;
Thou my dear husband, and my Lord before,
But truly learn to die, thou shall be more.
Now live by prayer, on heaven fix all thy thought,
And surely find, what ere by zeal is sought;
For each good motion that the soul awakes,
A heavenly figure sees, from whence it takes,
That sweet resemblance, which by power of kind,
Forms (like it self) an Image in the mind,
And in our faith the operations be
Of that diuinenes, which by faith we see;
which never errs, but accidentally,
By our frail fleshes imbicillitie;
By each temptation ouer-apt to slide,
Except our spirit becomes our bodies guide;
For as our bodies prisons be these Towers,
So to our souls, these bodies be of ours:
whose fleshly walls hinder that heavenly light,
As these stone walls deprive our wished sight,
Death is the key which unlocks misery,
And lets them out to blessed liberty.
Then draw thy forces all unto thy heart,
The strongest fortress of this earthly part;
And on these three let thy assurance lie,
On faith, repentance, and humility;
Humility to heaven the step, the stayre,
Is for devotion, sacrifice, and prayer;
The next place does to true repentance fall,
A salve, a comfort, and a cordial:
He that has that, the keys of heaven has,
That is the guide, that is the port, the path;
Faith is thy Fort, thy shield, thy strongest aid,
Never controld, nere yielded, nere dismayed;
which does dilate, unfold, foretell, expresses,
which gives rewards, inuesteth, and possesses.
Then thank the heaven, preparing us this room,
Crowning our heads with glorious martyrdom,
Before the black and dismal days begin,
The days of all Idolatry, and sin,
Not suffering us to see that wicked age,
When persecution vehemently shall rage,
when tyranny, new tortures shall invent,
Inflicting vengeance on the innocent.
Yet heaven forbids, that Mary's womb shall bring,
Englands fair Scepter to a foreign King,
But unto fair Elizabeth shall leave it,
which broken, hurt, and wounded, shall receive it:
And on her temples having placed the Crown,
Root out the dregs Idolatry has sown;
And Syons glory shall again restore,
Laid ruin, wast, and desolate before:
And from black sinders, and rude heaps of stones,
Shall gather up the Martirs scattered bones,
And shall exterpe the power of Rome again,
And cast aside, the heavy yoke of Spain.
Farewell sweet Gilford, know our end is near,
Heaven is our home, we are but strangers here,
Let us make have to go unto the blessed,
which from these weary worldly labors rest,
And with these lines my dearest Lord, I greet thee,
Until in heaven thy Jane again shall meet thee.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
They which begot us, did beget this sin.
Showing the ambition of the two Dukes their Fathers, whose pride was the cause
of the utter overthrow of their children.

At Durham Palace where sweet Hymen sang
The buildings, etc.
The Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth Son to John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland,
married the Lady Jane Gray, Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk at Durham house in
the Strand.

When first mine ears were pierced with the fame
Of Jane proclaimed by a Princess name.
Presently upon the death of King Edward, the Lady Jane was taken as Queen,
conveyed by water to the Tower of London for her safety, and after proclaimed
in diverse parts of the Realm: as so ordained by King Edwards Letters-pattents,
and his will.

My Grandsire Brandon did our house advance
By Princely Mary Dowager of France.
Henry Gray, Duke of Suffolk, married Frauncis the eldest daughter of Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by the French Queen, by which Frauncis he had this
Lady Jane: this Mary the French Queen was Daughter to King Henry the seventh,
by Elizabeth his Queen, which happy marriage conjoined the two Noble families
of Lancaster and York.

For what great Henry most strove to avoid.
Noting the distrust that King Henry the eight ever had in the Princess Mary
his Daughter, fearing she should alter the state of Religion in the Land, by
matching with a Stranger, confessing the right that King Henry's issue had to
the Crown.

And unto fair Elizabeth shall leave it.
A Prophecy of Queen Mary's barrennes, and of the happy and glorious reign
of Queen Elizabeth: her restoring of Religion, the abollishing of the Romish
servitude, and casting aside the yoke of Spain.

The Lord Gilford Dudley, to the Lady Jane Gray.
THus from the strongest treble-walled Tower,
Swan-like I sing, before my dying hour;
O if there were such power but in my verse,
As in these woes, my wounded heart do pierce,
Stones taking sense, th'obdurate flint that hears,
Should at my plaints dissolve it self to tears.
Lend me a tear, I Will pay thee with a tear,
And interest to, if thou the stock forbear;
vvoe, for a woe, and for thy interest lone,
I will return thee franckly two for one;
I Will give thee hours of woe, and years of sorrow,
And turn the day to night, the night to morrow.
And if thou think time yet does pass to soon,
when evening comes, we will make it but our noone;
And if a grief prove weak, and not of force,
I will exchange a better for a worse;
And if thou think too quickly sorrow ends,
Another twice so long shall make amends.
Perhaps thou wilt judge, in such extremes as these,
That words of comfort might far better please;
But such strange power, in thy perfection lives,
As smyles in tears, and tears in gladness gives.
Yet think not Jane, that cowardly I faint,
As begging mercy by this sad complaint;
Or yet suppose my courage daunted so,
That thou should stand betwixt me, and my foe,
That grym-aspected death should now control,
And seem fo fearful to my parting soul,
For were one life, a thousand life's to me,
Yet were all those too few to die with thee;
when thou thy woes so patiently do bear,
As if in death, no cause of sorrow were,
And no more do lyfes dissolution shun,
Then if cold age his longest course had run.
Thou which did once give comfort to my woe,
Now art alone, become my comforts foe;
Not that I leave wherein I did delight,
But that thou art debarred my wished sight;
For if I speak, and would complain my wrong,
Straightwayes thy name does come into my tongue;
And thou art present as thou still did lie,
Or in my heart, or in my lypps, or eye.
No evil plannet reigned at thy birth,
Nor was that hour prodigious here on earth;
No fatal mark of froward destenie,
Could be diuin'd in thy nativity;
It Is only I, that did thy fall devise,
And thou by me, art made a sacrifice;
As in the East, whereas the loving wives,
Do with their husbands ever end their lives,
And crowned with garlands, in their brydes attire,
Go with their husbands to that holy fire;
And she unworthy thought to live of all,
whom fear of death, or danger does appall.
I boast not of Northumberlands great name,
Nor of Ketts conquest, which adornes the same;
When he to Norfolk led his troops from far,
And yoked the Rebels in the chain of war,
when our VVhite-beare, did furiously respire,
The flames that singed their Villages with fire,
And brought sweet peace in safety to our doors,
Yet left our fame upon the Eastern shores;
Nor of my princely Brothers, which might grace,
And plant true honor in the (...) race;
Nor of Grayes match, my chydren borne by thee,
Alied to York and Lancaster should be;
But of thy virtues proudly boast I dare,
That she is mine, whom all perfections are.
I craved no kingdom, though I thee did crave,
And having thee, I wished no more to have.
Yet let me say, how ere this fortune fell,
Me thinks a Crown should have becom'd thee well,
Me thinks thy wisdom was ordaind alone,
To bless a scepter, beautify a throne;
Thy lyps a sacred oracle retain,
where in all holy prophecies remain;
More highly prized thy virtues were to me,
Then Crowns, then Kingdoms, or then Scepters be.
So chaste thy love, so innocent thy life,
A wifed virgin, and a mayded wife;
The greatest gifts that heaven could give me here,
Nothing so sweet, so good, so pure, so dear.
This was the (...) of late,
Ere worldly cares (...),
Before these troubles (...) confound,
Or war, or weapon, (...) wound;
Ere dreadful Armies did (...) our shores,
Or walls were shaken with the (...) roars.
Suspect bewrayes our thoughts, betrays our words,
One Crown is guarded with a thousand swords;
To mean estate but common woes are shown,
But Crowns have cares that ever be unknown;
And we by them are to those dangers led,
Of which the least we are experienced.
When Dudley led his Armies to the East,
Of all the bosom of the Land possessed,
what earthly comfort was it that he lacked,
That with a Counsels warrantie was backed?
That had a kingdom, and the power of Laws,
Still to maintain the iustnes of his cause;
And with the Clergies help, the Commons aid,
In every place the peopled Kingdom swayed.
But what (alas) can Parliaments avail,
When Mary's might, must Edwards acts repeal?
When Suffolks power, does Suffolks hopes withstand,
Northumberland, does leave Northumberland.
And those which should our greatness underprop,
Raze our foundation, overthrow our top.
Ere greatness come, we wish it with our heart,
But being come, we wish it would depart,
And indiscreetly follow that so fast,
which when it comes, brings perrill at the last.
If any man do pity our offense,
Let him be sure to get him far from hence,
Here is no place, no comfort here at all,
For any one that shall bewail our fall,
And we in vain of mercy should but think,
Our brinie tears the sullen earth does drink.
O that all tears for us should be forlorn,
And all abortiue when they should be borne;
Mothers that should their chyldrens fortunes rue,
Fathers in death to kindly bid adieu;
Friends of their friends, a kind farewell to take,
The faithful servant mourning for our sake;
Brothers and sisters waiting on our Beer,
Mourners to tell what we were living here;
Those ears are stopped which should bewail our fall,
And we the mourners, and the dead and all;
And that which first our palace was ordaind,
The prison, which our liberty restraind,
And where our Court we held in princely state,
There now alone, are left disconsolate.
Thus then resolved, as thou, resolved am I,
Die thou for me, and I for thee will die;
And yet that heaven Elizabeth may bless,
Be thou (sweet Jane) a faithful Prophitesse.
with that health gladly resaluting thee,
which thy kind farewell, wished before to me.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Nor of Ketts conquest which adornes the same.
I Ohn Duke of Northumberland, when before he was Earl of Warwick, in his
expedition against Ket, overthrew the Rebels of Norfolk and Suffolk, encamped
at Mount Surrey in Norfolk.

Nor of my Princely Brothers which might grace.
Gilford Dudley as remembering in this place the towardnes of his Brothers,
which were all likely in deed to have raised that house of the Dudleys, of
which he was a fourth Brother, if not suppressed by their Fathers overthrow.

Nor of Grayes match my children borne by thee.
Noting in this place the alliance of the Lady Jane Gray, by her Mother, which
was Frauncis the Daughter of Charles Brandon, by Mary the French Queen,
Daughter to Henry the seventh, and Sister to Henry the eight.

To bless a Scepter beautify a (...).
Sildome has it ever been known of any woman endued with such wonderful
gifts, as was this Lady, both for her wisdom and learning, of whose skill in
the tongues one reports by this Epigram.

Miraris Ianam Graio sermon valere,
Quo primum nata est tempore Graia fuit.
When Dudley led his Armies to the East.
The Duke of Northumberland prepared his power at London, for his expedition
against the Rebels in Norfolk, and making have away, appointed the rest of his
forces to meet him at Newmarket Heath: of whom this saying is reported, that
passing through Shorditch, the Lord Gray in his company seeing the people in
great numbers came to see him, he said, The people press to see us, but none
bid God speed us.

That with the Counsels warranty was backed.
John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, when he went out against Queen Mary, had
his Commission sealed for the generalship of the Army, by the consent of the
whole Counsel of the Land, in so much that passing through the Counsel
Chamber at his departure: the Earl of Arondell wished that he might have gone
with him in that expedition, and to spend his blood in the quarrel.

When Suffolks power does Suffolks hopes withstand,
Northumberland does leave Northumberland.
The Suffolk men were the first, that ever resorted to Queen Mary in her
distres, repayring to her succors, whilst she remained both at Keningall, and
at Fremingham Castle, still increasing her aids, until the Duke of
Northumberland, was left forsaken at Cambridge.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Folio. page, line, fault. correction. 9 1 11 for Let this, read Let these 12 2
1 for love and read love not 23 2 14 for expusd from read expulsd from 35 1 17
for your censor read your censure 35 2 25 for loves stern read wars stern
36 2 32 for If Cadmus read Of Cadmus 42 2 23 for Aquilla read Aquila 46 1 29
for in the the time read in the time 46 2 10 for was by the read by the 56 2 1
for daily storms read daily starues 58 1 22 for only spings read only
springs 63 1 7 for It proper is un to us. read It Is proper unto us.


