THE PRACTICE OF PRINCES.

Published by A. Ar.

Prove. 29.4. The King by judgment stablisheth the Land: but he that receives
gifts overthrows it.

Printed in the year 1630.

WHen the Children of Israel had sinned against the Lord, he delivered them
over in the hands of spoylers, and sold them into the hands of their enemies
round about, so that they could not stand before them, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
Judge. 2. Our estate is so, we have transgressed his laws with an high hand, and
yet we have not hearts to lament it as we should, nor eyes to see the hand of
God go out against us in all we set our hands unto, both in peace and war;
but we attribute all to secondary causes, and look not to the Lord against
whom we have sinned: some of us can see that our best Nobility and valiantest
Captains and Souldyers, are cut off by indirect means, and our wealth and
honor consumed, to our great reproach and ignominy. Yet we do not observe it
as we should, and what a fearful estate our land now stands in, this short
treatise does show amongst them that bear sway, or at least might be heard by
the rulers, All seek their own, and no man that is Christ's. Some of them
pretend to be conversant for him in superficie boni, but it is indeed in alto
mal^. Where is there amongst us any that will stand for the cause of Christ?
so that I may say: there is but a step between us and death. Hester will
interpose hirself for her country, and if she perish she perish; the fire of
Gods wrath is ready to break in upon us, therefore if the fuel of sin be not
taken away the wrath of Gods will never cease till we be all consumed. What
true heart will not bring help to quench this fire? alas it will be vain to
bring water when the house is burnt to ashes.

Who will not at least cry when he sees his mother murdering, I will conclude
with the Apostles words: Lord save us else we all perish.

A. Ar.

The practice of Princes.
WISDOM in the Proverbs which all Divines acknowledge to be the Son of God,
the eternal Word, by which the father made the world, Prove. 8.15.
says there, by me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice: by me Princes
rule, and the nobles and all the Judges of the earth. Where, though it be true
that God infused into diverse heathen Princes and Judges zealous of virtue and
justice, some beams of this Wisdom, who may therefore be said, in some sort, to
rule by it; yet we are not to understand that every King and Governor, that
rules and judges by unlawful policy or wicked counsel, 1. King. 12 26.
does it by this Wisdom. Jeroboam, vainly fearing that the peoples going up to
Jerusalem would make them revolt, took counsel for the setting up of calves
in Bethel and Dan, wherein he and his counsel did not rule by this Wisdom but by
a divelish policy, which indeed was rather folly then true Wisdom, for it
made God his enemy* and was the sudden overthrow of his house; as the like
earthly policies were of the families of Saul, Ahab, Absolon, Achitophel, Haman
and others. The meaning therefore of that place is, that all Kings, Princes,
Judges and Governors, that judge and rule well and happily, they judge by or
according to that wisdom which is Gods word: thereby keeping their people (what
in them is) in the true worship and fear of God; as did David, Iehoshaphat,
Hezekiah and Josiah, wherein they are truly Gods Vicegerents, seeking his
kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, and whereby their own kingdoms are
kept in peace, and the neighboring kingdoms come to fear them, as they did
Iehoshaphat, therefore wisdom says, 2. Chro. 17 10.
By me Kings reign: not by any polices or subtlety but by me, who am Gods
Wisdom. Which is there found most true, where Princes square their counsels by
Gods word, and labor that their people may be governed in all matters of
faith and salvation by his revealed will; and where, as they ought, 1. Chro. 29
^3. ^^u. 11.15 ^^^l. 22.8
their own laws and government tend to the same end: for therefore the
throne of a King is called, the throne of the Lord and the kingdoms of this
world the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.

But besides those general rules in the Law and the Gospel, which show Princes
what should be the end and scope of al their laws and government; Psa. 65.7
Psa. 110.2
and by which (where kings do so esteem of them) their people are bridled and
kept in awe, as by that word, which stilled the raging of the sea, and the
madness of the people; and which is the rod of his strength; this Wisdom in holy
writ, and especially in that book of the Proverbs, has left unto all Princes
diverse special Rules whereby they ought to square all their actions and
government, which may be called The Princes principles, or The practice of
Princes: which should be regarded as Christ's charge to Christian Kings, and
ever observed, because they are Gods immutable Wisdom, which he has left to be
a sure guide to all Princes to the end of the world; and whereof in a more
special manner that may seem to be said, By me Kings reign, etc. Now
therefore hearken o Children unto me. If all the Children of Wisdom ought so to
do, Princes more especially, their calling being of the greatest weight,
deeply concerning so many thousands of people, Reu. 1.5.
and standing most in need of that Wisdoms help, which is the Son, and the
Prince of the Kings of the earth. Al Princes are as much bound to observe his
laws and directions, as their meanest subjects are to regard theirs, for he
is the King of kings, and all his Rules and directions are perpetual laws; so
immutable and irrevocable that all designs and determinations that are
contrary unto them, how fair a show soever they make of wisdom and a probable
good, they are but mere wickedness, and can not establish the Prince that puts
them in practice, but rather tend to his undoing: Prove. 12.3. Esa. 30.1. and
chap. 31 1.
for that is one infallible principle left us by Wisdom, A man can not be
established by wickedness, and therefore the Lord says, Woe to the rebellious
children, that take counsel, but not of me, and cover with a covering but not
of my spirit: which walk to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh,
^. Chro. 16
and trust in the shadow of Egypt as Asa also sought a league with Syria, and
relied on it, Pro 16.12.
and not on the Lord,, and was therefore punished, wherefore Wisdom says, It
is an abomination to Kings to commit wickedness: for the throne is established
by justice: by carrying themselves justly toward God and their people,
therefore state policies that stand not with piety must needs overthrow it.
Such are all temporisings. in matters of religion, with Princes and people of a
contrary faith, and seeking, or favoring middle ways of reconcilement, such
as halt between God and Baal, between Christ and Antichrist, like the
Arminians of our time: which ever grow from bad to worse, and make but the
adversaries abroad and at home more insolent, and God to give us over to be
deceived by their practices. As we may see in the fruit of that treaty with
Spain; wherein King James, who had ever favored the Papists, and slacked the
execution of laws against them, at last to attain his ends first with Spain,
and then with France, permitted aid to go to the Archduches, and after to the
French King against the Rochellers: more manifestly connived at popery,
favored the old Countess, diverse Lords, and others, the friends thereof;
frowned on the religious opposers of their practices, in court and parliament;
suffered not the laws, to be executed on Priests and Jesuits but suffered them
in a manner openly to dispute, preach and write, and in some sort forbad
preaching and writing against them: all which could not but make Israel to
sin, many to leave their love and zeal of the truth, others to fall to
Popery, Arminianisme, temporising or neutralitie; which things, it seems were
also done and suffered, to bind them The Papists.
by those favors from practicing against his life, as they had done against the
life of Queen Elizabeth. Howsoever neither by those favors, nor yet by urging
and pressing fruitles traditions and ceremonies, and silencing such as groaned
under them, were their number lessened, and drawn nearer to our religion; but
rather multiplied and made to affirm, that the most learned, and wise on our
side, did hereby show their good opinion of Popish religion. In so much that
Fisher the Jesuit grew so insolent in print, as to incite the King, by the
example of the French King Henric 4. to let in the Jesuits, saying, that
besides thanks and presents from Peru, China, etc. he purchased 2000. pounds
for his fame. See the Reply to Fishers Praefac.
But he knew the Kings timorous nature; and therefore as B. White observed, He
had his end in mentioning that instance known to the world direful and
tragical, and a hope by that trope to intrude by terror for how they requited
that Kings love the doleful catastrophe shevved, therefore he adds, male
ominatis parcite verbis. Knowing that me^ would be ready to infer that King
James was like to find no better requital of Papists for his politik favoring
of them: which is always just with him to permit, who says, Mat. 10.3^
He that vvil save his life viz. by ungodly temporisings shall loose it. The
King knew that though he should call the best protestants, puritans, wrong them
and their religion; yea see it suffer never so much injury and loss from
others; yet there was no danger of them; (much less that a King should need
to burn Paraeus his works; though he meant to deserve evil) for religion
binds their hands. But must they therefore have the more injuries heaped on
them to please the Papists? or because Papists are bloody, if crossed in
religion, must Kings therefore temporise with them, and not rather trust in
Gods protection, Pro. 1.5.9.
as Queen Elizabeth did? That which men do, in an unjust policy, to prevent
an evil, is in Gods justice suffered to be the cause that brings it on them, as
Genesis 11.4. Ioh. 11.48. And accordingly, it seemed so probable, that King James
died by the practice of such papists and popelings, as every day lulled him
asleep with tales, flatteries, wine, jests, songs, and catches, while the
Palatinate was loosing; that the Parliament desired to have it sifted out, but
this proceeding for him was dashed in such sort, as he, to his own hurt, had
often crushed the endeavors of many Parliaments by prerogative, wherein he
having by checks and scorns prevailed against the councels and privileges of
Parliaments, and refused to let them rid him of such flatterers and secret
enemies, as neither truly feared the Lord nor the King, Pro. 24.21
but midled with jesuited Spirits, given to change, religion and government, as
being of the Spanish faction, that was true in him which the Preacher says, J
saw a time that man rules over man to his own hurt. In so much that some
said Better is a poor and wise child, Eccles. 8.9. chap. 4.13.
then an old and foolish King, that will be no more admonished. But certainly
he had great abilities of understanding and judgment, if fear of the papists
power and practices, and an unlimited desire of peace with them, had not made
him use many temporising policies, pleasing to them, and grievous to his best
subjects. Howsoever his policies, of that kind, found no better fruit then
the increase of papists and the emboldening of them here, the shamfull loss of
the Palatinate, the undoing of his posterity there, the danger of loosing his
only Sone in Spain, the more violent persecution of the protestants
(...)Germany and France, to the loss of many friends abroad, of (...)
Subjects hearts at home, and his own fame every where. In further proof
whereof, I need say the less, seeing vox populi, votiva Angliae and Tom
tell-troth have said so much: yet some men make a god of him, and urge his Son
to follow his fathers wisdom, as if we had not yet had mischeife enough by the
reviveing Romish and Spanish factions. But God grant it may be a warning to
him, and all other protestant Princes, to abandon all such fruitles and
drangerons policies, as favor diverse religions, together with the treacherous
promoters of them; and to hearken in such cases to that which the Wisdom of God
says. Pro. 3.5. Pro. 23.4.
Trust in the Lord with all thy heart and lean not to thine own
understanding. Cease from thine own wisdom. Ask counsel of God at his
oracles, for therefore Wisdom says to such a one as has not so consulted with
Gods word, as he ought; Pro. 19.20.
Hear council and receive instruction, that thou may be wise in the later
end: verse. 27.
and for policies and counsels that stand not with Gods word; My Son hear no
more the instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge.

Wisdom says, Pro. 14.28
in the multitude of the people is the honor of a King, and for the want of
people comes the destruction of the Prince; that is, whether he lack people,
or having multitudes want their hearts, which Rhehoboam found true, 1. King.
12
when embracing evil counsel, and seeking to be a more absolute Lord over
them, then his father, he thereby lost the most of them, and so his greatest
strength under God, whereby he was exposed to the more danger of all foraigne
enemies. which proves it to be one of the most traitorous offices that can be,
in councillors to alienate the heart of a King from his subjects.

Here therefore questionles, they can not be excused, who incensed the King
against his subjects in Parliament. I know some lay great fault in the Knights
and Burgesses for delaying the grant of the subsidy of tunnage and poundage,
considering the Kings wants. The truth is, they had been worthy of great
blame, if the necessity, that compelled them to it, By depriving them of their
privileges to reform abuses in church and Commonwealth.
had not pleaded for them: which was to get some things, before that grant,
reformed, which did eat at the root of religion and state, and which they
thought they should never be once suffered to speak of, much less to question
and sift out, if the customs were once granted, for they knew that many great
crimes of lust, murder, oppression, and the like, could not get hearing, much
less justice, when they had been laid to the Duke and his confederates in
former sessions and sittings of Parliament, as well since the death of King
James, as before; and that also in matters of treachery in religion and state,
as about the loss of the Palatinat, treasure, shipping, munition and honor,
in the expedition to Cales, Rees, Rochel, and in other designs: wherein they of
that faction, under publik pretenses seemed to be private Agents for Rome,
France and the house of Austria, and diverse of them manifest introducers of
Arminianisme, which they used as a shooing-horn to draw on Popery and division,
Mar. 3.24.
though they know that a Kingdom divided in it self can not stand. In this
last sitting, diverse things of these kinds, were manifested against some
Bishops and others, when now the house being ready to declare them to the King
they that were sick of the Parliament, to shoulder out these proceedings and
find them other work, animated the officers of the custom house, and some
others, to use all extremity (and among others against a burgess then sitting
in Parliament) who being therefore questioned in the house of commons, they
that got them the kings protection on purpose to engage him in that cause as
their manner is in others) had then pretense to cry out, that the Kings
prerogative was infringed, and he obliged to adjourne the Parliament: which
well perceiving that by such divises and shifts they should be prevented (as
they had often been) of questioning delinque^ts, and that the assembly was
like to be therefore dissolved, began to protest more openly and plainly
against such whisperers: who in the mean while, as men guilty, and unable to
stand the trial, labored uncessantly, by all the pretenses that could be
invented, to prove the Commons contemners of regal authority, and the King
obliged on point of honor to dissolve that assembly. Yet afterward their
greatest enemies that counted them little better then traitors, could not prove
their demur insuffifient, nor that they had do^ne any thing against the laws,
whence it came to be held honorable in them all to choose rather to abide in
prison, then to gain offered liberty by being bound to the good behavior:
which may be an argument to the King, that those men, incensed him against
them, to save their own treachery from coming to trial; and that this was
the end of getting their friends chosen Knights and Burgesses, as also of all
their intelligences in the house, guarding the Kings ears, and preventing all
Parliament complaints and procedings, by a prevaricating exposition of them,
and even of the very talk of another parliament. Many of them had got their
honors and offices of the Duke by such services to him and therefore now, to
save their own stakes, and maintain that pride, they have made all this
division, and left the king to get money and hearts where and how he can; while
in the mean time, they account these councels and services trusty,
honorable, and meritorious; and thus as wisdom says, Pro. 20.6. and Ier. 5.1
Pro. 13.10
Many will boast every one of his own goodness: but who can find a faithful
man? Only by pride does man make contention. And hence it was that they ever
geered and scorned the best endeavors of the Parliament: and therefore though
they be many, and of great wit, no marvel, if yet their wisdom have failed
them in many great designs, for as wisdom says, Pro. 14.6. chap. 16.27 28.30.
A scorner seeks wisdom and finds it not. A wicked man diggeth up evil,
and in his lips is like a burning fire: setting whole Kingdoms in division and
combustion. A froward person sows strife, and a tale-teller makes division
among Princes: he divides the head from the members, and the peeves and
Princes one from another. He shutted his eyes to devise wickedness, he will not
be brought to see what is evil, nor suffer others to see it, but to prevent
good men with cunning speeches, he moves his lips and brings evil to pass.
If any thing be never so little amiss in his adversaries, he aggravates, and
repeates it, to keep them from discovering his own greater faults: so he
makes a man an offendour for a word, Isa. 29.21.
and turns aside the just for a thing of naught, and therefore Wisdom says,
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, Pro. 17.15
even they both are an abomination to the Lord. Now since it is apparent, that
such are the Achans that trouble our Israel, through the secret love they bear
to the wedge of gold and babylonish garments, to honors, proffits and Romish
superstition, and that many such are got about the King; partly by reason of
King James his treaty for a match with Spanie, which made him broock none, but
such as praised and furthered it, his favoring of papists, both which drew
them, and other church-papists, lukewarne newters and temporisers about him,
partly through the craft of Gondomar, the Duke his mother and other Agents of
Rome, Spain and France who intruded, into places of counsel and trust,
instruments best fitting themselves and their own ends, partly through the
match with France, for seeing the French King is such a manifest friend and
champion of Antichrist, a Protestants peace and alliance with him can not be so
safe as it was with his father, nor much better then with Spain; partly by
suffering the Duke, the Papists, Arminians and their supporters, Bishops and
others; with other delinquents to pass unquestioned, or at least unpunished;
and principally by reason that by lies and devises, they have daubed up
matters, as they did the losses at the I Will of Ree, guarded the Kings ears and
suffered them to give effectual hearing to none but themselves; hence it came
to pass with him, as Wisdom says, Of a Prince that hearkens to lies, all his
servants are wicked. Every one grows, Pro. 29.12
and hopes to shuffle off his wickedness, as others have done: and even those,
who, if they lived where religion and justice were truly maintained, would be
honest men; they yet, to keep their places, proffits and honors, and to get
greater, are not only feign to connive at the practices of such as the Duke
was, who could help them to honor and offices, but eve^ to excuse and
justify many of them; as Wisdom says. Every man is a friend to him that
gives gifts, Pro. 19.6. Isa. 1.23.
they blind the eyes of the wise: So that when the wicked come up the man
is tried, what he is, as many Lords spiritual and temporal have been who are
found too light, while (though it be true) that He that receives gifts
overthrovveth the Land, yet for honor or proffit they temporise or connive
when delinquents prevail and a Romish or Spanish faction is revived, Pro.
28.12. Pro. 29.4.
though God, religion, Prince, people, state and all loose by it, which has
filled the Land with many secret murmures and groans; in so much that some,
who are reckoned wise men, have not sticked to infer, that there is no
likelihood that God shoult ever give a blessing to such men's counsels, as
have either assisted the Duke and his faction in their projects of betraing
the Palatinate, the French Protestants and the religious endeavors of
Parliament men and other good Subjects; or connived at these vile practices,
and so justified him and his confederates: for (say they) such counselors as
could not see these practices, which every mechanical fellow and very ploughmen
perceived (being so many, so frequent and so apparent) they are blind guides
unfit to be about Kings: and such (say they) as percived them, and did not lay
themselves and their fortunes down at the Kings feet, to show him the
treachery and danger, but connived to get or keep preferment, they were
cowardly and mercinarily base, and unfaithful to God, religion, their King
country and the very State, wherein they were chosen watchmen. Where in
policy popery is connived at, neutralitie and Arminianisme favored,
delinquents borne out, and Parliaments for their sakes dissolved, the King
must needs have such Servants, and them ever false Cum privilegio: for if he
hearken to them that say that these are good policies, to hearkens to lies: and
God says Of a Prince that hearkens to lies, Pro. 29.
all his servants are wicked. Men, that take his word, say, that therefore as
their root must needs prove rotten, so things can never go well with the
Christian world, much less with the religion and state of England, till the
council which has been so Dukified, be in a manner wholly changed, they
therefore count them fools, who think if God should take the King away
issules, and that the injured King and Queen of Bohemia should come to the
crown, things must needs mend; saying that could not be, unles the council
were also changed, and made examples to keep others from the like treachery
and temporising, for (say they) if a King be constant to religion, they also
can make great show of defending religion (as the Duke and others d^d) thereby
to get trust, that they may under hand betray it. And people (say they) had the
like hopes when King James died, seeing our King, that now is, make great
preparations, and for ought we know with sincerity: but, by the practice of
the Duke and his faction, retaining all his fathers counsel which for the most
part were Hispanolished, Frenchified, Roman^sed or Newtralised, and suffering
some worse, both spiritual and temporal, to be added unto them, al those forces
weere soon brought to nothing, things are grown a great deal worse, and, to
the greater grief of all goodness and good men, without Gods special mercy
remediles; seeing that a king who only hears and sees things in such men's
reports can not know the truth, and that no man dares speak for a free
Parliament, that may sift it out, much less for an effectual reformation, for
as Wisdom says of such potent counselors, When the wicked rise up, Pro.
28.2^
men hide themselves: but when they perish the righteous increase. A man that
hardens his neck when he is rebuked shall suddenly be destroyed, and can not
be cured (as God manifested in the Duke) when the righteous are in authority,
the people rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule, the people sigh. Rehoboam
was not strengthened by such counselors, but weakened. A King and his people
are a body politik, and the Parliament his representative body: Now as in a
body, if the faculty of the brain in one side be stopped, that it can not
descend through the sinews to the senses of moveing in the limbs and members,
then those parts have the dead palsy, and the man becomes as it were half
dead, and as unable to do any service effectually, as our men were at the
Palatinate, Cales, Ree, Rochel and in the Parliament house: so is it with the
body politic of great Britain, through the practice of some Iesuited Spirits,
who, being disguised in the sheep clothing of a protestant outside, and
gotten into the place of favorites and counselors, have cuningly infected
many; both Bishops and others; In whom and by whom, the brain for the most
part, is ill affected and the reciprocal passages between the head and the
members are stopped; so that the right faculty can not descend, through the
sinews, the peers, Judges and Bishops, to the senses of moveing in the Kings
body the Parliament; and so his Matie. giveing no life and strength to that
body and the best members thereof, nor they means to him, the whole body is
half dead, and so unable to offend adversaries, that it can not defend it
self, but must needs perish, if those ill humors in the brain of counsel
be not by his majesty purged and removed, whereas if he did agree with the
Parliament, and had a counsel favoring the moveing endeavors of the same, he
must needs grow dreadful to them, who now hope to see his kingdom (by these
continued divisions) easily conquered; witness the Popes Bull to the present
French King, given at Rome, September. 4. 1626. Now then seeing that it is
clear, that in these things, the Kings Matie. himself (who is ruled and
abused by them) is not the least sufferer; but has cause to say of them, as
old Jacob did of Simeon and Levi brethren in evil; Jnto their secret let not
my Soul come; Genesis 49.6.
and that thus divided from his people, which under God are his strength, he
must needs be in more danger of foraigne enemies, and forced to treat with
them on harder conditions, which is one of the secret ends, that some of these
whisperers had to help the Catholic cause (at least under a pretext of zeal
to the Kings prerogative, which zeal they used both as an instrument to work
division, and a cloak to cover their treachery to our religion, and their
secret favor to Rome and her champions) what true Subject but will pray and
endeavor that the King may see and expel these dangerous counselors? which
is the end of these few collections, and reflecting the light of that wisdom,
Mat. 11.6.19.
on their practices, which says, Blessed is he that shall not be offended in
me but wisdom is justified of her children, practices so desperately persisted
in, that there seenes to be eniuitie, jelousie and emulation between France
and Spain, whether shall (by their means) hold the continued honor of
cousening, and in the end of conquering us, wherein yet I should abhor to be so
plain, and indeed to meddle at all, if the many great and manifest wro^gs
done to God, religion, my King and country, with the extreme danger the three
later stand in, did not seem to cry out of silence and banking, and to call
to me for plain dealing what ever it cost me, as Isa. 1.23. Ezech. 22.27. for
1. What a miserable thing it is, to see wicked counselors get such a hand over
their King, that he is wholly ruled by them, and dares not do or say any
thing, but what they like? nor favor a good man and his cause further then
they admit? as it was with Zedekiah, Ier, 38.2^.
who durst not be known of the talk he had with Jeremy, but was forced to
faigne a business, and an answer to stop the mouths of his Princes and
Counselors, so very a child they made of him; though it be said, Eccles.
10.16.
woe to thee o Land whose King is a child: when with a courageous and constant
frown, he might have dispersed them all, and have saved himself and the
city, by being persuaded by Jeremy. 2. Pro. 14.35.
Wisdom says of a true king The pleasure of a King is in a wise servant (this
wise man is one truly religious, not an Achitophel) but his wrath shall be
toward him that is lewd. Such as are our seditious whisperes, the seedesmen of
division. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, chap. 16.13.
and the King loves him that speaks right things. And again: chap. 20.^,
A King that sitted in the throne of judgment, chaseth away all evil with his
eyes. He looks with indignation on wicked men, as considering, that he sits in
the throne of the Lord, to do that which is right, and best for Gods service
and kingdom. 20.26.
A wise King scatters the wicked, Pro. 21.1.
and causes the wheel to turn over them. And why should we not pray and
hope that God may give our King this grace, seeing Wisdom says, The Kings
heart is in the hand of the Lord, chap. 22.10 11.
as the rivers of water: he turns whithersoever it pleases him? for he says
to Kings, Cast out the scorner, and strife shall go out: so contention and
reproach shall cease, and on the other side, He that loves pureness of heart,
for the grace of his lips, the King shall be his friend. Wisdom also shows
that it is for a Kings honor and safety to have wicked men sifted out, and cut
off or expelled, saying, Pro. 25.1.2
The glory of God is to conceal a thing: but the Kings honor is to search
out a thing: to let such come to trial. Take the dross from the silver, and
there shall proceed a vessel for the finer. Take away the wicked from the
King, and his throne shall be established in righteousness; as if he said,
otherwise it must needs totter. O but these cunning Achitophels have many
goodly pretenses, showing, that it is wisdom in Kings to keep down and
suppress these Puritans, as they were ever pleased to call the gentlemen of
the lower house, and all that cry out for reformation, or trouble themselves
with such matters as the treaty and match with Spain, the increase of popery
and Arminianisme, the loss of the Palatinate, and of Shipping and honor in
the Seas; transportation of mumunition and corn, the Rochellers, or the like,
and thereby (say they) tax the wisdom and government of their King and his
council, when indeed this suggestion, and the like, is but a cloak to cover
their treachery, love to superstition, and hate of our religion, yet want
they not a disguise of pretended love to the book of common prayer, the
hierarchy, and such traditions and ceremonies thereof, as do not offend
popery; as if that were sufficient to make them protestants and good states
men whose hearts and practices are for Rome: for as wisdom says, Hatred may be
covered by deceit, Pro. 26.26
but the malice thereof shall be discovered in the congregation; that is, in an
public and free assemb^ie; which shows the good use and necessity of
Parl^aments, which these men's practice could never endure, and therefore they
have still got them dissolved, by hook or by crook, let what would follow,
either at home to the joy and furtherance of the Papists and Arminians, and the
extreme weakening of the King and kingdom; or abroad to the undoing of our
friends and religion in Germany, the Palatinate, France and Denmark: whereby
our Bisshops, and their abettors, have showed they had rather all these should
fall, then their own faction and glory, though popery and pelagianisme have
every where thriven by it, what care they? that being in many of them the
maine end of these their practices; witness Cosens protected for all his
cosening devotions published, and palpable superstition erected; and their
suffering the Appealers book to pass two or three years, and the Author to
be rewarded, that so scholars in the universities, to get promotion, might in
like manner corrupt and be corrupted, and so corruption might spread from these
fountains to all parts of the Land, watered by them and when they doubted that
in Parliament, it might be questioned and they for suffering and furthering it;
to prevent that, they get the King to call it in sleigthly (not a search to be
made for it, as for other books, not left as this to be freely sold in shops
by any that would) and to forbid all disputes, preaching and writing on both
sides, knowing they could thereby hinder all that should write against those
errors, and let books and disputes pass, which defended the same; as they
after did Dr. Iacksons second part, printed before the Parliament, but somewhat
kept in till it was dissolved, whence it appears that though these were points
they durst not maintain in Parliament, and therefore errors; yet their drift
was to save and further them, and to engage the king further and further in the
cause, that so the Parliament might not meddle with them, or if they did, it
might be pretended, the house took the matter out of his hand, taxed his
government, and undervalued his prerogative, that so he, ince^sed thereby,
might show the Arminians more favor. And the like ends have they that get
Kings, in pretended policy, to connive at popery, and stay the execution of
laws against Papists, suffer ordinance, victuals and other provision of war,
to be daily transported to the enemies of our religion; that so if never so
little show be made of reforming these things before a Parliament, and yet
Parliaments complain of them, or of their agents in court, church-papists
treacherous favorites and delinquents, straight it might be pretended the matter
is taken out of the Kings hand, and his government and prerogative is taxed and
infringed, thereby to put off reformation, incense his majesty and get them
more favor. And still to save these practices from coming to trial, and
therewithal to put men out of heart in their trading, make them sell their
ships and therein the walls of the land, they ever find the Parliaments other
work in case of customs privileges and other matters, and then inform the
king that in those things his prerogative is by them grossly infringed, and he
obliged to dissolve the assembly.

The reasons, why the house of Austria and the French have of late prevailed,
are cheifely two, first because they had care to suffer none to be of their
council of state, Agents abroad, nor Generals and Commanders in war; but such
as they knew were sure to their religion, and would strive all they could to
maintain and propagate the same. In all their treaties and wars, this was
ever one main end, they aimed at, as appears by Gondomars practices in his
treating with England; and the care and zeal of their Generals of Bavaria,
Tillie, Spinola and the rest; as he says that writes the seidge of Breda;
Against them it was thought fit our forces should be bent, ^eidge of Breda pa. 8
not for affectation or desire of Sovereignty, but for the reestablishing of
religion, and regaining what they usurped. Now if they had seen like true
zeal and care in the English council and Generals, for the Protestant
religion, they never durst have attempted so much as they have: but they grew
confident that England, then the strongest of all protestant States (and most
likely to work, Romes Ruin if truly zealous) could not to any purpose help
the Palatinate, the French Protestants, nor the King of Denmark; much less
hurt the proceedings and conquests of Romes champions spiritual or temporal,
knowing the Kings disposition, and that she and they had the Duke and other
secret friends in England, who one while would hold the Kings hands (easily
kept from drawing his sword) under vain pretexts of hope to set all right by
treaty, while they of the Palatinate and the French Protestants were loosing
and bleeding; and another while when they could with no color use that course
any longer, would in counterfeyt zeal get forces raised, with great show of
ayding and defending religion and the friends thereof, but with secret purpose
to bring them, for Romes sake, to nothing; as besides delays, the lame
commissions procured, the popish leaders and instruments employed, and munition
and victuals to the enemies transported, sufficiently manifested; that so at
last England might be glad of peace with France and Spain on hard conditions.
And in the mean while, they could, with gifts, presents, flateries, promises,
and some small supplies and services, make show that they were great friends
and Agents to the King for the King and Queen of Bohemia, their issue, the
King of Denmark, and the Rochellers; the easier to cosen them all, and get
the fault laid on the Parliament, that strove most to remove such deceitful
practisers, as by working these things, seemed to hope a rebellion would
follow; and then Romish champions might be called from France or Spain to take
a side, and get all, as wisdom says, Pro. 17.11.
A seditious person seeks only rebellion, therefore a cruel messenger shall
be sent against him. Kings can not bind them from such practices by showing
them favor: for papists will forfeit all other bands to strengthen those of
their religion. Secondly because in Germany France and Spain, the Popish
clergy, high and low, have ever had free liberty to speak and write unto
Princes, and others for the defense and propagation of their own religion,
and rooting out of their adversaries, and to reprove all such as failed
therein, and get them punished, while in the mean time, the Duke and other
their secret friends in England, so labored, and by the help of the Bishops
obtained, that protestant preachers writers should not do the like for their
religion, no not though it were by Gods undeniable word; and that if any did,
it should be never the better, yet till there be the like care and zeal both
in the counsel of state and in the clergy, things can never go well with our
religion and state, nor they be enabled to stand against the zeal and
practices of a contrary religion and kingdom. 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ministers are Christ's Embessadors and Agents: and therefore ought to have free
liberty to speak in the word of the Lord to Kings and statesmen (so it be in
good and reverent sort) for things pertaining to the furtherance of Christ's
Kingdom, and against such practices as hinder the same. They ought rather to
have had this privileidge then Gondomar, the Dukes mother, and such others as
on the contrary labored for the kingdom of Antichrist, and till they have it,
princes can not say rightly that Christ has his Ambassadors or Kingdom
received in their courts. Which some undertake to prove, can not be till the
hierarchy and dominion of the Lord Bishops (never by Christ ordained but
forbidden) be overthrowe^, Mat. 20.2 1. Pet. 5.3
as dangerous to protestant Princes and states; because the great places
thereof, are only baits to make some divines temporisers, instruments and
friends of such treacherous Arminians, church-popelings and delinquents, as can
prefer them; and others to spend their zeal in maintaining the hierarchy and
the fruitles dominion, traditions and ceremonies thereof. Out of all which, he
that will, may see, that the losses, dishonours and troubles that have befallen
this Land, and indeed our religion and brethren also in the Palatinate,
Germany, France and other parts, have cheifely sprunge from these two
fountains. 1. A corrupt council and clergy in England, that were more for the
Duke and his confederates that helped them to honors, offices and preferments,
the^ for the religion and state divided, and kept low, by his and their
practices; which the Pope, the house of Austria, and the French King,
perceiving, took that for a time of persecuting, conquering and depelling all
Protestants. 2. A vain policy of suppressing such preachers, writers and
Parliament men, as sought to discover the mischeife of treachery, and obtain
effectual reformation. In the later (if not in both) the power and flattery
of the Bishops were principal helps, their seeming holy habit, reverence,
and authority, countenanced the projects of the Duke and his co^federates,
while for preferment, they stuck fast to him and them in court and Parliament:
and their power and hierarchy served to terrify, suppress and stop the
mouths of such ministers and writers, who otherwise might by their sermons
and books have discovered the homebred enemies, and obtained releife for the
friends of our religion, which is the service Christ gets by Lord Bishops and
their hierarchy; who hereby showed, that they will sooner let religion,
Prince, State and all go down, then their own usurped dignities and hopes of
further preferment, for these and other courtiers and Dukanists, that have still
pretended the Kings power and prerogative, have not strengthened, but rather
weakened and debased the same. 1. By those fruitles expeditions that they
caused abroad; which were so forecasted that the Sailers and Soldiers,
neither coming to good service nor their pay, should refuse to serve the King
any more, or to be governed by his officers, but be readier to spoil their
country when they returned. 2. By those dangerous divisions that they have
procured and nourished at home. And while they got his majesty to suffer
diverse ambitious divines for advancement, to broach anew, the doctrines of
Pelagius, and to erect popish superstition, to the treading under foot as well
of the divine law, as of the Parliament, have they by all these things gotten
the King and his laws to be more reverenced, or less? Surely less witness the
general murmurs of his subjects throughout the whole Land, and diverse bold
outrages of Sailors and unpaide Soldiers. Would it not greive any true Subject
to see how the Kings authority was of late despised in that outrage in
Fleetestreete, backed by the Templers? Mat 22.34 2, Tim. 2.4
wherein some observed a just judgment of God, that as the King suffered divines,
who are, or should be, Gods lawiers and Soldiers, to tread Gods authority and
law under foot, by slighting some proofs of Scripture, and sophisticating
others; so God suffered Soldiers, Templers and other Innes of court men to
spurn against his laws and authority. God, that often pays by retaliatio^,
suffers people to deal so with Princes, as they deal with him, and their
Servants to be alike faithful to them in their service, as they are to him
in his. If people see their Princes cast away the word of the Lord in diverse
things, they wickedly grow as careless of Gods word, which enjoines subjection
to Princes, and which otherwise stilleth the madness of the people, and keeps
them in aw, God causes the Prince that fears him, and sincerely furthers his
word preached, to be by his people reverenced, loved, 2. Chro. 17 5.
feared and enriched with presents and gifts, as Jehoshaphat was: He therefore
that does it not, but rather the contrary, he must needs find the contrary;
him he suffers to be molested with enemies, and the rebellions of his own
vassals, as were Solomon, Rehoboam, Jeroboam, Ioram and others, wherein that is
fulfilled, which the Lord says, 1. King. 11.14. chap. 26 12.15 2. King. 9.14.
1 Samuel 2.30.
Those that honor me, I will honor, and those that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed: Look then on the dishonours and losses of the State abroad,
the troubles, divisions and outrages at home, and confess them to be the
fruits of their councels, who stand for connivance at popery, favoring of
Arminians, and protection and honoring of delinquents temporal and spiritual.

But though I should reckon up all the fruits of their counsels, some men
would yet commend them for wise counselors, as our Arminians, and ambitious
temporisers and popelings do, who have all thriven by them, for as wisdom
says, They that forsake the law praise the wicked: Pro. 28.4.5
but they that keep the law set themselves against them. Wicked men understand
not judgment, but they that seek the Lord understand all things. It is fit
indeed that Kings should have their counsel: Pro 11.14. and chap. 15.22.
for where no counsel is, the people fall: but where many counselors are,
there is health, that is, if they be honest men, and true as the old men that
counseled Rehoboa^ faithfully; diverse great matters of state may be better
carried by such privy counselors, then by a Parliament, which is more public
and open: but if they be Achitophels, and as the young men that gave wicked
counsel, temporisers or false to the religion and State, they seem to serve;
then the more they are, and the more wit they have, by so much the worse they
being such as Wisdom describes. Pro. 29.16.
When the wickid are increased, transgression is increased, but the righteous
shall see their fall. Such as neither, Fear the Lord nor the King, Pro. 24.21
but meddle with them that are given to change religion and government; for
such while they rule their King are all Princes to his hurt: and so wisdom
says, For the transgression of the Land many are the Princes thereof. Pro.
28.2.
They are the sins of the Land, which reign in the light of the Gospel, as
drunkenness, adultery, prophanenes, oppression and the like, that provoke God
to suffer them to be intruded, and to prevail against the zeal and care of so
many Parliaments. Not all the base treachery of delinquents, nor the wisdom of
so many hundred men, often set in Parliament, to discover them, suffice to make
the King, see their practices, and the danger of defending them, much less
the necessity of expelling them, when the sins of the nation hold them up. If
our sins had not supported them, to plague us, God, that makes men to be of
one mind in a house, Psa. 68.6.
would have made our Kings, as our Parliaments, to hear see and abhor them;
and not have suffered them to be so deaf and blind on that side, to the
breeding of such long and dangerous divisions between the head and members of
the Parliament: Ioh. 12.20.
but for sin, He takes away the speech from the faithful counselors, and
judgment from the ancient. Hence it was that God suffered the Duke to get so
many to be created and made Earls, Vicounts, Barons and Bishops, and them to
be brought into the parliament to uphold his faction, and carry out his party
in the upper house by multitude of voices, after the Popes example in the
counsel of Trent. A strange way and merit to atcheive honor, if I miscall it
not, being so attained by them that justify the wicked for a reward, what
true honor have such men? It is ^ great honor indeed to a man to be made a
Peer of the Realm, and by virtue thereof, to sit as a Judge in Parliament, to
hear causes, and to stablish and ordain laws; matters so greatly concerning
a nation: but that is, if it be for the right furtherance of Gods kingdom, true
religion and justice, Psa. 82.1 6.
and the manifest good of the common wealth; herein they are Gods, in a
laudable sense and worthy reverence: but if by them these things shall go
backward, and the contrary be brought forward; If a man shall attain and hold
honors for favoring popery Arminianisme, or neutralitie, or for conniving at
such practices as those of the Duke, or for justifying delinquents, and getting
Parliaments for their sakes dissolved, or for overthrowing their laws and
privileges, is there true honor in such a one? It is indeed as if one
attained or held honors by murders, treasons, adulteries, thefts, lies and the
like; or by slobering them over, as some write of the smothered murder of
Marquis Hambleton and others, and as if a man should get the honor to be a
Judge by overthrowing the laws. And they that get or hold honors and offices
by getting Parliaments thus dissolved, and providing that there may be no more,
or at least not free to touch all ill practices and persons; it is, as if one
should get the honor of a Judge for overthrowing the court of justice, or for
providing that no causes might be heard, or at least that diverse might not come
to true judgment, but either be smothered and thrown out, or carried by
corrupted voices. What poor ploughman having the knowledge and fear of God,
is not much happier then such great ones with their thus bought offices and
honors? And yet who sees not, that those who for such services to the Duke and
his faction, have been made Earls, Vicounts and Barons are exceeding many, and
three fould more then the ancient nobility? at least then those of them that
have constantly distasted such vile practices, and all communion with them? the
like might be said of Bishops, Deanes and heads of colleges. And therefore I
am persuaded, that who so lives but a few years shall see a greater rot of
Nobility and Prince-like clergy, then ever was seen in this Land, which I
write not as prophesying (for God forbid that I should be so arrogant, Isa.
5.20.23.24.
as to make my self a Prophet or the Son of a Prophet) but as gathering it
from the never failing word and Truth of God in such places of that of Isaiah,
woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good, which justify the
wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous man from
him. Psa. 1.4.
Therefore as the flame devoureth the stuble, and as the chafe is consumed of
the flame, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their bud shall rise
up like the dust, etc. A good Christian should rather refuse and lay down
offices and honors, then take or hold them on such conditions. And yet God
knows very few have of late years attained or hold any great offices or
honors, but on such terms, or at least by reason of some participation with
them. Witness those furthest from court, and least infected, the Leiftenants,
Deputie-Leiftenants, Judges, Justices, Majors, Aldermen and other officers,
made to further or exact, and wringe from the people, benevolences and loanes,
and to strain for them or imprison such as stood out, or make them serve as
Soldiers, or lodge and maintain such unruly and unpaide Soldiers, as were
billited, in their towns and villages, for no other service then to punish
them: things set a foot to hinder the calling of Parliaments, breed
divisions, if not rebellions, make the Land weary of wars for defense of
religion; and so to save the treachery of the Duke and his confederates from
coming to trial: who in the mean while have ever found the commons new
greivances to put the old accusations and proofs out of their minds. Many
great complaints have been made against such men: God grant the King, may
give them an effectual hearing in a free parliament, least otherwise men
fearing to be imprisoned and crushed, as others have been, should not speak
what they know; and so treachery should still prevail, and hinder the King of
the happiness following the due execution of justice: for the throne is
established by justice. ^ro. 29.14
A King that judges the poor in righteousness his throne shall be established
for ever.


