ABJURATION OF POPERY, BY THOMAS ABERNETHIE: Sometime Jesuit, but now
penitent Sinner, and an unworthie Member of the true reformed Church of God in
Scotland, at Edinburgh, in the Grayfrier Church, the 24. of August, 1638.

EXODUS 23. 2 Thou shall not follow a multitude, to do evil. Matthew. 7. 13, 14.
Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: Because strait is the
gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that
find it. VERITAS. JINCET. TANDEM.



Printed at Edinburgh, in King James his College, by George Anderson. 1638.

To the courteous Reader.
COurteous Reader, in these subsequent pages, excuse I pray thee, the
shortness of the matter, and the rudeness of the style, and attribute that to
my calling, being long a Soldier; and this to my education, which has been
more out of my native Country than in it, and make thy use of the matter which
I have set down for thy well, rather than to censure the defect of my
language. Farewell.

LORD be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.
PSALM. xli.
THis day (right Honorable, Reverend, and Welbeloved, in our common Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus) is kept very solemn and holy, by these who equalize;
yea prefer some of their fabulous saints days, to the Lords own day, in
respect of the relation they Pet. Ribadineira in vita Sancti Barthol.
say it has to the Apostle Bartholomew, who being excoriat, should have
suffered martyrdom on such a day; but of You is solemnized, to the end Ye may
behold a poor wretched sinner, pull off and See the 4. chap. to the Ephesians. 11.
22, 23, 24. Ioh. 1. 29.
throw away his old skin of Popish Idolatry and superstition, that he may
compeare in the sight of God and men, with a new garment of righteousness,
dyeed in the blood of that immaculat Lamb, who takes away the sins of the
world.

I know that my presence for this action will be no small subject of admiration
to you all that hear and see me this day, for truly, I find it to my self,
so that I may justly say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 9.
I am made a spectacle unto the world, and to Angels, and to men. To the wicked
world a spectacle of indignation and hatred, for quiting it, and taking me to
the precious blood of my Savior Christ, To the good Angels, at the conversion
of a sinner: To men, Luke 15. 7.
of compassion and admriation. In you, I perceave this admiration to be joined
with joy and gladness, considering the diligent care of your sweet LORD, and
loving Master, in bringing home your lost brother upon the shoulders of His
mercy, to His own sheepfold: in me poor Publican with shame Ioh. 10. 16.
Luke 18. 13. Pfal. 119. 176.
and confusion of face, beholding my long suffering God, and you from whom I
have gone, alace, too long astray. In you with pity and compassion, to view me
thus cruelly tormented with so many ravening wolfes, in me with indignation,
for suffering my self to be deceaved so long with these infernal thieves: In
you, with praise and thanksgiving, to see me brought home again alive, in me,
with fear and trembling of my Saviors wrath for going and straying so long
astray.

Now to give satisfaction in some measure to your admiration, I will let you
understand the cause thereof, that is, my cursed life in Popery, and how it
has pleased my gracious God to convert me from it, exponing these few words of
the royal Prophet, Lord be merciful unto me, heal my Psalm. 42. 4.
soul, for I have sinned against thee. In which words ye may perceave, that
the Prophet having gone astray, touched with remorse of conscience, first he
returns to his God with unfeined repentance, and beggeth pardon for his sins,
Lord be merciful unto me: Next, because his soul was deadly wounded, he
prays earnestly for the health of it, heal my soul; And thirdly, he gives
the reason of his petition, for I have sinned against thee. In imitation of
this mighty King, now turned a humble supplicant, I mind, Godwilling, to show
you these things following. 1. How I have wounded my soul, and sinned, by
following of Popery, I have sinned against thee. 2. How it has pleased God of
his only mercy to heal my soul in his own time: Heal my soul 3. I shall
crave pardon first of God, then of my dear Contrymen, in Scotland, of you
that be here present, and of all these who profess with sincerity the
reformed Religion, according to Gods written word, saying, LORD be merciful
unto me: 4. And lastly, I shall answer to some idle objections against this
my sincere confession, and hearty resolution.

Concerning the first point, the words contain four things worthy of
consideration; 1. The person that has sinned, in the word ( I) 2. The person
against whom the sin is committed, in the word ( thee) 3. The sin it self, in
the word ( sinned) and 4. the madness of a sinner, to oppose himself agoinst
so strong a party as GOD, in the word ( against) Neither will I insist upon
the word ( have) supponing this confession of the Prophets, and mine to be of
bygone sins, whereof remorse of conscience draws us to a confession; nor
mind I to be curious, exponing the literal, anagogicall, tropologicall, or
other senses of the words; because I intend only to make a relation of my life
in Popery, with an abjuration of the same, and not a preaching, knowing that
no man should take that calling upon him, but he who was called of God, as was
Aaron. Heb. 5. ^* ^*


But to come to the words, this particle ( I) first shows the quality of the
person that sins, I that am a King, quoth the Prophet, have sinned against
thee, which consideration does likewise aggravate my sin; for I may say, I who
was brought up of honorable parents, with a most religious Minister of Gods
word, for the space of six years have sinned, renouncing that Heavenly doctrine
which I learned of them; I who had exponed my life in the wars, to all hazards
whereto that calling is subject, sundry years in Germany, for the overthrow
of Popery; was not a year out of the wars, till in my travels passing through
Italy, I was made a prey in Florence, by an English Jesuit, called Thomson or
Gerard, both to his religion and profession. This word may likewise serve for
reproof to those who delight more in descriving their neighbors sins, than
confessing their own, forgetful of our Saviors words, Judge not; that ye be
not judged, Matthew. 7. ^. 2. 5.
for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged. And thereafter, Thou
hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou
see clear lie: to east out the moat out of thy brothers eye.

The second thing considerable here, is the person offended, against whom I
have sinned, and this is God Almighty, for against GOD are all sins which
are committed either mediatly or immediately; against thee only have I sinned;
and done this evil Psalm. 51. 4.
in thy fight. The words may serve for confutation and admonition; confutation
of the Papists error, who confess their sins to earthly men, and not to God,
receiving forgiveness of their Priest. I said (and not to God) whereat I know
they will take exceptions, but they need not, for millions of them confess,
who scarcely know any other God but the Priest, who has his style book of
interrogatories, where to they answer, and thereafter are absolved; moreover,
although they know GOD, yet I am persuaded, that confessing to the Priest, they
confess not to GOD, because GOD desires not the Priests help, for he says
Come unto me all ye Mat. 11. 28.
that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, etc. and ye
shall find rest unto your souls. And the Royal Prophet says, I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid, I said I will
confess my transgressions unto the LORD, and Psalm. 32. 5.
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. The ^poore Publican said not, Ghostly
father, but GOD be John 1. 9.
merciful unto me a sinner: And John gives us this assurance, that, if we
confess our sins, he is faithful, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. Thirdly, all the Jesuits that ever have written
scholastic divinity, agree in one voice, that the remission of the confessed
sins to the Priest, is done by the contrition of the heart, which contrition
must preceed (as they confess) the Priests absolution, either by prioritie of
time, or of nature* and therefore, absolution, and confession of, and to
Priests are altogether unnecessarie, except it be to inform that Man of Sin of
all his clients intentions of heart, and actions whatsoever; for they must
confess to their Parish Priest all their thoughts, words, and deeds, once at
least in the year, under the pain of eternal condemnation; or else to gather
in moneys by restitution, alms; penance for great sins to the Cloisters, and
such like ends: but here I will not insist upon the knaverie of auriculare
confession, hoping in GOD to let it be better known hereafter to the world.

They serve for admonition of my ingratitude toward my good GOD, and gracious
Lord, against the Lord I have sinned, who elected me to glory, before the
foundation of the world; who created me in time, to thy own similitude and
likeness, Genes. i. 27
who by withdrawing of thy helping hand, might have redacted me to nothing
again, and yet by thy Divine providence, thou have conserved me, so long from
many perils and dangers, and given me so large time of repentance; who
furnished me with good education, and bestowed several good gifts of nature
upon me: O more than brutish ingratitude! Thou gave thy only begotten Son for
my sins, when I was thine enemy; and I have gone about to destroy thy glory,
and his kingdom* but yet my comfort is, that, If when we were enemies, Romans 5.
10
we were reconcealed to GOD, by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

Thirdly, I must relate the sins themselves which I have committed against this
gracious GOD. Alace LORD, I have sinned against thee, neglecting that precious
time of my youth, wherein I employed more my understanding to learning, then my
will to piety, attending rather to become a good scholar then a good
Christian, conferring more with Aristotle, and his followers, than with Christ
and his Apostles; I have sinned by curiosity, exposing my self in foreign
Countries, especially in Italy, to occasions in conference, and disputing
with the Jefuits, who knew cunningly how to circumveene me, and can work
their own ends; I have sinned by weak and inconstant facilitic, yielding too
soon to their alluring delusions; I have sinned using too much diligence in
drinking the cup of their pestiferous doctrine, the space of nine years, both
in Italy and France, where I studied three years to their deceitful
philosophy, four years to their sophistical divinity* and two years to
their hypocritical superstition, or superstitious hypocrisy, in their
Novitiate at Rome; I have sinned, desiring so earnestly after my studies to
return to my country, for seducing of others, as I had been seduced my self,
using all the tricks and conceats which the wit of man, or hell could afford
me, to deceave the Godly: True it is, that I had rare masters in this calling,
and good help to perform my duty, to wit, an ample power to difpense with
all things both to my self and others: I have sinned, employing my wits and
travels to seduce GODS elect, the space of two or three years, for the most
part, in the North, amongst my friends, in, and about Aberdeene, Elgin* and
Ban^ff; as likewise in Cathnes, where I lived more as an year Chamerlane and
Baillie to my Lord of Berriedail; (this office I made choice of, that by the
frequent variety of people I might work my own ends, without suspicion.) I
have sinned by wresting of Scriptures, persuading others to believe that
whereof I had no evidence in GODS word, I have sinned, distilling my brains to
find out means, make great journeyes to obtain them, and propone them to
high personages, for the extirpation of GODS true religion in Scotland; I have
sinned; by not living so duerifully to my GOD these three years bygone, (for
so long time have I been a seeming member of the true reformed Church of God)
as became a true and sincere reformed Christian These, and many more are the
grievous sins wherewith laden, with the Publican, I stand afar of, not worthy
so much as to lift up mine eyes unto heaven, but smitting my breast, say, GOD
be Luke 18. 13*
merciful unto me a sinner.

Fourth, and lastly, the word ( against) draws me to a consideration of my
madness, opposing my self against so strong a party as God. What! knew I not
that it were hard for me to kick against the pricks? Knew I not poor Nadab,
and Abibu, Acts. 9. 5.
notwithstanding they were the sons of Aaron, were destroyed for offering
strange fire? And there went Levit. 10. 2.
out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord. Knew
I not, that Vzzah was smote to death, for laying his hand of good intention to
uphold the Ark from falling, being shaken with the oxen that drew it? And the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah, and GOD smote him 2 Samuel 6. 7
there for his error, and there he died, before the ark of GOD. Knew I not
that Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, although they were Levits, were swallowed up
quick for murmuring against Moses? And the Numb. 16. 32.
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the
men that pertained unto Corah, Hag. 2. 6.
and all their goods. Knew I not thy almighty power, by the Prophet speaking
this of thee? And I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the
dry land? Knew I not that thou art the GOD of hosts, having infinite multitude
of Angels for thy soldiers, with all the rest of thy creatures, as
instruments of thy just wrath, and indignation against sinners? O intolerable
madness of mine! This all, and much more I knew, and yet persisted in my
wickedness against so strong a party. O infinite Ocean, and superaboundant
treasure of mercy! What shall I say? I poor naughty worm, yea, dust,
opposed my self to that great GOD of heaven and earth, by such kind of
grievous sins, and heinous crimes; as idolatry, taking away of his glory,
spoiling him of his offices, taking upon me his authority, by forgiving of
sins, and such like; and yet he out of his Fatherly love desisted not to do me
good, preserving me from many perils and dangers, both in pest, wars, and
travels: roborating my memory to receave, and keep great diversity of
languages, and strengthening my understanding to learn the experience, and
government of diverse kingdoms, and Countries. Lord, I continued to offend
thee, and thou continued to bless me; Dear Savior, who will consider these
wonderful works of thine on me, and not likewise confess with me, that thou
art, a father of mercy 2 Cor. 1. 3.
and GOD of all comfort? That not only by nature, but also by miscariage I was
a child of wrath, but Ephesians. 2. 4. 5.
GOD, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved me, even
when I was dead in sins, bath quickened me. Now truly I see most loving Father,
Romans 9. 15
(...) (...) wilt have (...). on whom thou will have mercy, and wilt have
compassion on whom thou will have compassion: And consequently, I may proclaim
Exodus 34. 6.
the Lord, the Lord God merciful, and gracious, long suffering, and abundant
in goodness and truth: and Psalm. 145. 9
conclude this first point with the Prophet David, that thy tender mercies are
over all thy works. For most meek father, although I have most grievouslie
sinned against thee, yet thou have been most merciful unto me, Glory, Honor,
and Praise, be unto thy holy Name therefore.

This my Confession and acknowledgement of the mercies of GOD toward me, are
not done by me to courage others, in the continuance of their sins: For that
same GOD, who out of his free mercy, spared me for a time, he destroyed with
thunder Eusebius.
from heaven that tyrannous apostate Julian in the heat of his sin, crying out
with despare, Thou have overcome O Gililean: and suffered Judas to enter into
desperation, at the sight of the greatness of Matthew. 27. and 5.
his sin, and cut off his miserable life with his own hands. I know that the
Prophet says, though your sins be as skarlet they shall be as white as snow,
though Isay 1. 18.
they be red as crimsone, they shall be as woole; Yet Christ Jesus, the master
of all Prophets says thereafter, but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish; Luke 13. 5
for as GOD, is merciful, so is He likewise just.

That worthy Doctor Austine says, Humanum est peccare, Diabolicum
perseverare, and Angelicum resurgere: It is a humane thing to fall in sin, a
devilish to persevere therein, and an angelick, or supernatural, to rise from
it. Therefore, having in the first point of this discourse shown you, how it
has pleased God to suffer me to fall by humane fragilitie, and devilish
perseverance in that monstrous sin of Popery: In this second I will,
Godwilling, let you understand, how it has pleased God to raise me up, from
that Lithargie of superstitious idolatry, and heal my soul wounded with
Popery, which was the second thing proponed by me in the beginning.

Upon these words, Heal my soul, I might expatiat my self, and amplify this
discourse largely, with two considerations* First, inquiring wherein consists
the health and perfection of man's poor wounded soul; and secondly,
considering the nature and properties of the soul which is healed, touching
the first, I might have to do with three sorts of persons, morale
Philosophers, scholastic Divines, and erroneous Papists. Showing the first,
that the perfection, health, and happiness of our soul does not consist in
worldly pleasures, riches, sensual lusts, carnal concupiscences, adoption of
moral virtues, speculation, or contemplation of Gods creatures, or in the
dominion of the soul of man over his own passions, as many of them have had
these several opinions.

Discoursing with the second, and trying, whether or not that eternal
felicity, and happiness of our souls, does consist in the actions of the
understanding, or of the will, or of both, and in what kind: And refuting the
third in four points; first, Letting them see their error, when they employ
their Saints at Rome, Loret, Galatia, and where they think expedient for health
to their soul, besides Christ, or between them and Christ: 2. Showing them,
that the Sacrament of Baptism is not so absolute a salve, but it leaves
behind it the root and seed of sin, fomitem peccati. 3. Demonstrating to them,
that man's good works, although they be tokens or symptoms, yet are they not
the cure and salve of the health of man's poor wounded soul: And 4. That, that
true mean of the health of our soul, Repentance, is not to be defiled by
their auricular confession, and execrable satisfaction, but is to be understood
of a broken and contrite heart, applying by faith the dear merits of that
precious blood of Jesus Christ, to our poor wounded souls. But all these
points of doctrine, with their several spiritual observations and uses, I
remit to an other time and place, giving them Augustines resolution for all
their questions, Creasti nos Domine propter August. soliloq.
te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in te^: Thou have created
us (O Lord) for thee, and our soul is restless till it repose on thee. O thou
carnal minded, and sensual man! look if thou have this restlesnesse or not in
thy soul; Thou drunkard, glutton, adulterer, fornicator usurer, oppressoui,
invyer, backbiter, liar, ambitious, proud, presumptuous, angry, politic or
atheist man, and the rest of you, whose end is destruction, whose god is your
belly; ^ Phil. 3. 19.
and whose glory is in your shame, who mind earthly things, look and consider
nearly (for it concerns eternity) if ye expect the health of your souls,
from these your particular gods and idols, or whence the Apostle expects it,
when he says, For our conversation is in Heaven, whence also we Ibid. V. 20.
look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: And the Prophet in my text, LORD
be merciful unto me, heal my soul. Take heed I say, take heed, least it be
said to you sometime, as the Apostle said to the Romans; what fruit had ye
then in those things, whereof Romans 6. 21.
ye are now ashamed? for the end of these things is death: Or as Christ our
blessed Savior said, what Marc. 8. 36
shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and loss his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

That which I might have spoken of the nature and properties of the soul, I
pass for the present, remitting the courteous Reader to the commentaries upon
Aristotle's books of the soul; And coming to my particular, I will show you how
it has pleased God, in his own appointed time, to heal my soul from the
pest of Popery.

And therein I find two things to be remarked, the time, and the causes of
this my restored health. As for the first, it is evidently known, that the Lord
has his own time in calling of souls, Calling Matthew. 20. 3. 5. 6.
some about the third, some about the sixth, some about the ninth, and some
about the eleventh hour. Peter, and some other of his Apostles he called, when
they were busied mending, and dressing their nets: Others, as Matthew waiting
upon their customs, Matthew. 4. 18
greedy gain, and dross of the world: Some as Matthew. 9. 9
Paul when they were persecuting his flock: Others Acts. 9. 6. Ridab. 2. 8*
August.
by reading of holy Scriptures, as was Augustine: Some by public preaching,
as the most part of all Christians, and others by private discourses, as the
Queen of the Ethiopians Eunuch: Neither can Acts. 8. 30.
there be given any other reason of this, but the good pleasure of GOD; For it
is not of him that wills, nor, of him that runs, but of GOD that shows
mercy: Who in his own time, without any of Romans 9. 16.
my deservings did call upon me, when I was plunged in idolatry my self, and
drawing others daily to that same precipice, taking up the duties and customs
of Caithnes as Chamerlaine; where it is to be remarked, that this dissimulation
of apparels, offices, etc. is a common policy of the Jesuits, to the end, some
of them may be intelligencers in Kings Courts, as I know two; One as a Noble
man, and another as a Knight in London: the first lives in Clarkenwall, the
second in Drurie-laine; the one is provincial and superior of some five
hundredth Jesuits in England, the other a prime Scholar, and Courteour. Others
go thus, for perverting of Kings and kingdoms, as with Sigismund, late King of
Pole, they went as Hyducks, or infantrie, into Sweden, for the perversion of
that people, which being detected, the King and they were thurst out of In the
histories of Swaden and Pole.
his own righteous Kingdom for ever: or as Demetrius Emperors of Musco, who
taking them in after that same manner, lost his life and his empire, as his
wifes brother in law, Constantine Koribut Duke of Visniovits in Pole related to
my self, and that he had suffered three years imprisonment for it in Musco,
which makes him detest the Jesuits ever since. Some of them go for their own
reestablishment as P. Peter Cotton, to get themselves in again in France, after
they were banished, for attempting to kill, and for wounding King Henry the
fourth: This is no calumny, for one was execute in Paris, and all banished out
of France, and a pyramide of ignominy erected against them, where the treature
was execute, for this business. Some go daily through Venice, dealing with
ambassadors, and making friends to get in there again; others to acquit by
indirect ways the favor of Kings, for they seek no more but presence and
access to pervert Nota been intelligenti pauca.
Kings and Princes. Or if they can not prevail, they cut them off, and are
worse then the devil* for resist the Devil, and he will flee from you, Iam.
4. 5.
but they will not quite their point, till they work the mischief. Beware
therefore Kings and Princes, beware kingdoms and commonwealths. Beware of
false prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, 7. 15.
but inwardly are ravening woolves. And thou Britain especially Scotland, my
dear country, the purest portion of Christ's Church in the world this day,
assure thy self, and I assure thee, for I know it, that thy good people are as
sheep in the mids of woolves, be ye therefore (heads and members thereof)
wise as serpents Casting out this bound woman Mat. 10. 16
and her Son, by the execution of the Law, of Genesis 21. 10
the kingdom, ad amussim, punctually, not granting them a pecuniall liberty
of conscience, or any toleration whatsoever, and GOD will help you, yet
notwithstanding yonr imminent dangers, whereof I shall advertise you in the end
of this discourse; otherwise your liberties and kingdoms are lost, and
Antichrist has prevailed. Concerning the time likewise, it is to be
considered that which an ancient remarks of Paul, to wit that God did call him
being a persecuter, brought up among the learned at Gamaliels fleet, knowing
all their plots and conspiracies against Gods elect, he might better being
converted give antidots again their poison; for it he had done so much out of
blind zeile, for the defense of his Fathers Romans 9. 3.
traditions, much more would he for the true service of GOD, wish that he were
an accursed from Christ for his brethren. Even so think I truly that my
dear Savior have dealt with me, not calling me when I entered to their
errors, nor when I was drinking in their pernicious doctrine, neither when I
was employed to work the mystery of iniquity against the true Church of God:
but when I had learned all their tricks, plots, conspiracies, devices, and
inventions, for the extirpation of Gods true religion; that being brought up at
Vrbanus feet, and knowing their malice, I might the better with Gods grace
provide remedics against their pernicious designs; and as I had taken great
pains for the atchieving of their malicious ends, much more should I labor
now in Christ's vineyard, for the edification of Christ's mystical body the
Church. The Col. 1. 24.
Lord of his infinite mercy grant me his favorable assistance, and powerful
grace thereto.

The second thing that I proposed, was, the causes of the health of my Soul;
and these are four, material, formal, final, and efficient; the first is the
soul it self taken specificative, the second is the same soul taken
reduplicative, ut sanata, as healed; the third or final, is that eternal joy
and felicity, for the which before time God has elected, and in time created,
not only me, but all these likewise who serve him with true sincerity; which
felicity the Apostle thus describes: the eye has not scene, 1 Cor. 2. 9. See
Revel. 21. 22. chapters.
nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, the things which
God has prepared for them that love him. The fourth and last is threefold,
principal, meritorious, and isntrumental. The principal efficient cause of
the health of my soul was the blessed and holy Trinity, it being an action ad
extra, and all such are common to the three persons of the Trinity, as Divines
teach. The meritorious was, the precious blood of my sweet and loving Savior
Christ Jesus, for it is through this only oblation that we are made holy, and
have eternal redemption. By Heb. 10. 14. 2. and 17. c. 18.
His will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ,
once for all. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, See Heb. 10. and Romans the 5.
and their sins and iniquities will he remember no more; now where remission
of these are, there is no more offering for sin. And the Apostle Peter says,
Nei her is there salvation in any other, for there Acts 4. 12.
is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. The
whole new Testament proves this truth; and yet the force of error is so
great, that they who live in that Sodomitish Babylon, do not perceave it, but
run headlong to other cures for their wounded souls, than to the meritorious
blood of that immaculate Lamb, Joh. 1. 29. 36.
who takes away the sins of the world. Away then, away, depart from me all ye
workers of iniquity; away ye that flee for cure of your Souls, to your
Ladies, Psalm. 9. 8.
Saints, good works, reiterat false sacrifices in the Mass, relicts, crosses,
holy water, pilgramages, processions, works of supererogation, indulgences and
pardons, working of true and false sacraments ex opere operato, and to an
infinite number of idolatrous rites and ceremonies, forged by the ancient
Pagans and Popes ancient and modern; away I say, for I tell you, except ye
repent (of these Luke 13. 3
your idolatrous courses) ye shall all likewise perish. 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Away, and see that with Paul, ye rejoice in nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. Remember that it is momentanie which delights, and eternal which
tormenteth. Take heed, that when ye shall compeere at that great day, with
your souls ulcerat, by your idolatrous superstition, crying for cure, that
Christ the only Physician of souls answer you not, I never knew you, depart
from me ye that work Mat. 7. 23.
iniquity: Or as he says in another place, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared Mat. 25. 41
for the devil and his angels. Now God of his goodness open your eyes, and let
you understand the intolerable wrongs which ye do to his divine Majesty, his
Church, and your own souls, that doing unfeined repentance, ye may efchew his
fearful judgments.

I come now to the third efficient cause, calledinstrumentall or second cause,
whereby God wrought this wonderful cure in me. If any man expect here of me
the decision of that philosophical question of Gods concourse with the second
causes, for the production of their effects, being necessare for the
understanding of that contraversie, de authore peccati, of the author of sin: I
pray him excuse my brevitie, and address himself to the interpreters of
Aristotle's treatise, de causa efficiente: But to our purpose.

No man can doubt, but the Lord as he is infinitely merciful in the conversion
of sinners; so is he infinitely wise and rich, in the external means which he
imployeth for that use: I speak not of the internal* mean of the conversion
of a sinner, which according to Divines is gratia praeveniens, and gratia
excitans, a preveening and stirring up grace, quae operatur in nobis sine
nobis, which works in us, without our help, as Augustine August. dc gra. and
llb. arb.
affirms: Of these external means we have many in sacred records. Christ
healing some with a look only, the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter, etc.
Luke 22. 61, 62.
and Peter went out and wept bitterly: Others as the woman diseased with the
issue of blood, by touching his garment, received present health both of body
and soul. Mat. 9. 22.
Some by his divine conference, as the Samarit an woman* Ioh. 4. 15.
Others by the example of his wonderful patience, Luke 23. 40, 41.
and miraculous passion, as the thief upon the cross, Some by touching and
feeling his precious wounds, as the Apostle Thomas: Others by extraordinary
courses, as Ioh. 20. 27 and 28.
the Apostle Paul: Neither need we enquire for any reason of these proceedings
of Christ, but that that Act. 9. 4.
the Apostle gives, when he cries out, O the depth Romans 11. 33, 34, 35.
of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out, for who has been his
counselor.

As for the external mean, or isntrumental cause of my conversion to GOD,
and recovered health of my soul, it was truly the reading of holy Scripture,
after this form, It fell out some three years ago (or thereabout) in Cathnes,
that after I had ended my ordinary superstitions, as Breviarie, Mass, Beeds,
and suchlike trash, I used commonly to read a chapter of the Bible; and one day
reading these words of Paul, Beware least any man spoil you through Colos. 2. 8.
philosophy, and vain deceat, after the traditions of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; and so forth to the end of the
chapter, I was presently seized with a doubt against Popery; that the
Apostles admonition was, that Gods children should beware of them; and that the
same time I was illuminate with an extraordinary light, whereby comparing the
words of the Apostle with their doctrine and actions, I was convicted in my
mind to define Popery to be a superstitious mass of policy, under pretext
of religion: And examining more narowlie I found these four points,
philosophy, vain deceat, or sophistry, traditions of men, and the rudiments
of the world, to be the four pillars whereupon that Babylonish tower of Rome
does stand; or else the four wheels whereupon that fyrie cart of
superstitious masses and heathnish idolatry is drawn through the world and will
be drawn, till it please God, to consume that Man of Sin with the spirit of his
mouth, and destroy him with the brightness 2 These. 2. 8.
of his coming.

I might (and mind Godwilling hereafter) demonstrate, that all the
contraversies between papists and us, may be easily brought to these four
monstrous heads of popery, but for the present I will only indicat some few;
Their transubstantiation is grounded upon that Logical treatise of the
Quantity, where they destroy the nature of quantity, to build their breadie
god, their justification by works, and their free will are built upon that
physical question of Gods concourse with the second causes in Aristotle's
treatise of the efficient cause. That high question of predestination, upon the
foreknowledge of good works, stands upon the decision of that Logical
question, de futuris contingentibus, of contingent things to come; their
fundamental ground of all papistrie, the popes hierarchy is built upon
Aristotle's politics, and taught in the Jesuits moral philosophy. Moreover,
their popes infallibility is but vain deceit and sophistry, as likewise,
their absolute necessity of baptism* dispensation with solemn vows, judging
of Gods word, and the like; In a word, their five bastard sacraments, with all
their superstitious rites and ceremonies, sacrifice of the mass for the quick
and the dead, canonization of saints, invocation of angels and saints departed,
worshipping of images, relicts, and crosses, dedication and consecration of
churches, altars, and days, baptizing of bells, and ships, blessing of holy
water, and sprinkling of it upon men and beasts, to gain moneys (as at Rome
on S. Antonies day, is done to all the horse and beasts in the country whereby
the monks get that day to entertain them well in their leacherous idleness,
till that time twelve month) All these I say, and the rest of that stinking
tr^sh, depend and hang upon these three pillars, vained ceit or sophistry,
traeditions of men, and the rudiments of the world, which to blind poor
souls, makes them bring in that new found distinction of Gods word, written
and unwritten. And as for their philosophy, for by that which I have
abovementioned, their own great pillar Albertin, a Jesuit, has set out
three volumes in folio, where he shows all their scholastic Divinity, and
controversies of religion to be grounded upon the principles of humane
philosophy. O base and sandy ground, for articles of faith, and matters of
salvation! O wise philosophers, or rather 1 Cor. 3. 11, 19, 20.
foolish ignorants! Know ye not that other foundation can no man lay, then
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ? And that the wisdom of the world is
foolishness with GOD: for it is written, He takes the wise in their own
craftiness. And again the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are
vain.

Now if any man ask me, wherefore I left Papistrie? I answer before my GOD, as
the Lord shall save me in that great day, when all secret thoughts shall be
revealed, that no carnal thought, or worldly rentation did move me to take
this resolution; but only, that after serious examination, and reading of Gods
word, by conference with Jesuits in Pole, and Ministers in diverse countries,
although neither of them knew me to have been a Jesuit, I found that
Papistrie was built upon this sandy foundation of Philosophy, Colos. 2. 8.
sophistry, traditions, and the rudiments of the world, and not upon that
invincible rock Christ Mat. 7. 25 16, 18. Romans 9. 33 1 Cor. 10. 4 1 Pet. 2. 8.
Revel. 18. 4
Jesus, And therefore I resolved to come out of Babylon, that I should not be
partaker of her sins, and that I should not receave of her plagues: And hid my
self in the clift of this rock, that is in the wounds of my dear and only
Savior Christ Jesus, denying all other mean of salvation, but that which is
written in his holy word, adjoining my self to the true reformed Church of God,
in Scotland. Whereof if any man ask the reason of adjoining my self to the
Church of God in Scotland, rather then to another church, as England or
Germany: I answer them, that I mind to use a part of the Physicians
counsel, who give for a singular antidote, against the pest of the body three
things to observe, that is, cito, long, tarde; which is so much, as whosoever
will be free of the bodily pest, let him go soon away from the place
infected, next go far away; and thirdly, to stay long away, that the place be
well cleansed before he return: so say I, whosoever will be free of that
spiritual pest of Antichrist let him use three things, cito, long nunquam,
that is, let him go soon away from it, next far away; and thirdly never to
return back again to it: And because the Church of God in Scotland observes
best this infallible rule of any of them all, being farrest from all popish
superstition, and nearest to apostolical purity, therefore I have adhered
thereto, and not to any of the rest. And because reading of the Scripture was
the occasion, and instrumentall*cause of this my recovered health; I exhort, by
the tender mercies of Christ, that every man take some pains every day to read
a portion of Scripture; especially ye blinded papists, to whom it is a mortal
sin to read it, more than the Alcoran, except ye have a dispensation, for both
are alike forbidden, read the Scriptures often, and ye shall surely find
comfort to your souls, so that ye read them with prayer and humility, and not
for contention, as we used to read them: For all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, througly furnished unto all good works.

An other reason which did confirm me in this my godly resolution, was, I
could find no warrant in Scripture for popery; and yet I preased to strain
the Scripture, and throw it to my purpose, but could never satisfy mine own
conscience: As for example, that fundamental point of their tyrannous
hierarchy, of Peter's being at Rome, by what right the popes serve themselves
heir to Peter, more than the Churches of Antioch and Alexandria, which are
more ancient Churches then that of Rome, that Peter's succession is tied to the
town of Rome, jure divino, as I was taught by them, that of the popes
infallibility, notwithstanding their contradictions one to another in
fundamental things, his usurped authority upon Gods Scriptures, and men's
consciences, and all their traditionall trash, have no true warrant in Gods
word: Yea, I wonder that learned men, who know this silence of their opinions
in Gods word, should remain in Babylon any longer; for we are commanded to
search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 39.
as they which testify of Christ. The Apostle Peter says, That we have a
more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto
a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and 2 Pet. 1. 19.
the Day Star arise in your hearts. O poor souls that ly caught in these
snares (and you conformists who run post to them) know ye not, that praestat
obedire Deo quam hominibus, We ought to obey GOD Act. 5. 29.
rather then man: And Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be
right in the sight of God Act. 4. 19.
to hearken unto you then unto God, judge ye: That is as much to say, as when
the obedience toward God, and that toward man, not altogether conform to
that of Gods, are put in balance against other, that there is no question
which of them we should make choice of. God commands thee to search the
Scriptures, and the pope commands thee not to read them, under the pain of
mortal sin: God ordains thee to take the cup at the Communion; the pope
commands the contrary: GOD commands thee that thou shall not make any graven
images, etc. the pope commands thee to have, use, and worship them. GOD sets
thee at Christian liberty, from the ceremonial law, and rudiments of the
world, the pope binds thee with that infinite number of his tyrannous laws:
For they (the pope and his council) bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be
born, and Mat. 23 4.
lay them on men's shoulders but they themselves will not move them with one of
their fingers. Look about thee, and consider the miserable estate thou art in;
be not terrified with boasting, to declare thee an heretic or a rebel;
resolve thy self constantly, and say with Romans 1. 16
the Apostle, I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of
God unto salvation, to every one that believes: And in another place, But this
I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresy, so worship I
the GOD of my Fathers, believing Act. 24. 14. 16.
all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets: And herein do I
exercise my self; to have always a conscience void of offense toward GOD, and
toward men.

I speak nothing of their brutish and Sodomitish life, worse then that of the
Pagans, described by the Apostle, which although it* be not universal through
all the popes dominions; yet it is common and notorious in the privy chamber
(that is Italy) of that Babylonish whore, as is known to the world by
relation, and to me by auricular confession. Neither touch I that superstitious
and hypocritical life in public of their ghostly Fathers, and their odious
licentious lives in their private cloisters and chambers.

I know my old fellows, the Jesuits will exime themselves from this my
censure, casting it upon the bellygod friars, pretending purity from such
things in themselves; but let a judicious man consider their daily good
entertainment, weekly feasts in their houses of pleasure in the fields, and
their frequent banquets upon their saints days through the year, the goodness
of their wines; that they are young, noble, and gentle, quick witted youths for
the most part, having thereafter great notice of sins by auricular confessions
and almost hourly familiar conference with women of all conditions, both
publicly and privately, and then judge what they are, or what they may be.

The third point which I proponed in the beginning, was to crave pardon of
these my rehearsed errors. What then shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and Psalm. 116. 13. 14.
call upon the name of the Lord, I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in
presence of all his people. My vows are first to crave humble pardon at God
almighty, as I do from the bottom of my heart, crying with the Prophet David,
Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee: And
with the forlorn child, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before Luke
15. 18
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired
servants. Again, O Lord, truly Psalm. 116. 16.
I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid* thou have
loosed my bonds, I will pay my vows* unto the Lord, now in the presence of all
his people, Craving pardon at my Countrymen in Scotland in general, at You,
right Honorable, Reverend, and Welbeloved in Christ Jesus, that be here
present, and all these wheresoever they be, that profess the true reformed
religion, according to Gods word, for the scandal which I have given you and
them, by living so long in popery, requesting you to pray my sweet Savior
for the remission of these my enorm sins, and that as his divine Majesty has
begun this good work in me, likewise he will be pleased to perfect it, and I
shall never cease to cry, Lord be merciful unto me, heal Psalm. 41. 4.
my soul, for I have sinned against thee. And with the same Prophets saying I
will conclude this point, Blessed be the Lord, who has not given me as a prey
to, their teeth, my soul is escaped, as a bird out of the snare of* Psalm. 124.
6, 7. 8.
the fowlers the snare is broken, and I am escaped: my help is* in the name of
the Lord, who made the heaven and earth.

Fourth and lastly, against thus my sincere confession, and cordial
resolution, there be three sorts of persons who oppose themselves, some
friends, enemies some, and some adiaphorists. The first proceed out of love
and zeal, the second out of malice and rage; the third out of policy and
craftiness, to every one of these three classes must I answer, before I
closse this my abjuration.

The first sort then may say, that it is heard to believe, than I, who was so
fully possessed with popery, can be truly converted in my heart, having so
many allurements and occasions of tentations to continue slave to the purpurat
whore, and therefore it were good to try me, before I be trusted.

My answer is first, that I had many snares to hold me fast in popery; one
was that I was obliged by their tyrannous Laws, to reject and cast away any
doubt that came unto my mind against the Romish profession, under no less
pain than mortal sin, and eternal condemnation, no less than the thoughts
of murder, treason, filthiness, leacherie, etc. Where it is to be remarked
that the Turks do only forbid hearing, or disputing of any other religion but
their own, under the pain of death, which they and we think very heard; but
these Romanists are much worse, condemning both body and soul to hell
eternally, for a thought only against their profession; This snare is the
strongest wall of Popery: Another snare is, that which intangleth the Doctors
and learned men, who examining the doctrine of their church, and finding their
conscience touched with the evidencie and truth of Gods word, resolve that
these tentations proceed of weakness of their understanding; and therefore
conclude, seeing their church can not (as they allege) err that the
resolution of the church is only true, and Gods true light inspired in them,
but only tentation of Satan, and so preoccupied with a prejudged mind,
continue in their error, This is the secondwall of that babylonish tower, I
speak nothing of riches, and pleasure, contentment of mind for worldly things,
for it is known that the Jesuits (whereof I was one) have the most contented
life in this world of any men whosoever, and therefore if I had looked to my
particular commodities more than to the light of Gods word, and my own
conscience which did press me, I had never come out of popery.

Secondly, I answer, that it is no wonder if they do not give me full trust
as yet, because Paul, Act. 9. 15.
after his conversion, although he was a chosen vessel to bear Christ's name
before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel, was not trusted in
the beginning, yea, neither did Ananias believe Christ's Act. 9. 12.
own testimony of him; then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of
this man, how much evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem. What reason
then should they have to trust me poor sinner, a stranger in a manner to them,
until they try me: In the mean time I request these my friends to suspend
their judgments for a time, seeing exitus acta probat, the event prooves the
deeds, And take Mat. 7. 20
Christ's way a trial, by their fruits ye shall know them: And pray for me,
that as I was a persecuting Saul, so I may be a preaching Paul.

The second, my deadly enemies for rage and despite that I have left them,
will (I know) spew out all the venomous poison that malicious hearts can
invent, especially that I have not left the Jesuits, but that for my odious
and detestable life I have been cast out from among them.

To these I answer, first, that benifaciend^ ne^lnem timeo, doing well I am
feared for no man: Secondly, their evil speeches and misreports, are an
evident token, that Christ my loving master favors me, giving me occasion
(although innocent) to suffer calumnies as he did; he was both God and Man, and
yet he was said to cast out Devils in Beelzebubs name. And that he had a
devil. That he Matthew. 12. 24. Ioh. 8. 48.
was a eater and drinker and keeper of company with publicanes and sinners;
What then should I expect, poor sinful wretch, from viperous tongues, but all
what hell can devise against me? Thirdly, I answer, that they wrong
themselves much more than me, objecting thus, for either they must make me
vicious, and casten out before I came into the country, or when I was in it or
else since I went out of the country. Not the first, because it were great
imputation to their own order, to send vicious men to be Apostles (as they call
them) and convert souls amongst their enemies, who could, and would spy all
their actions. Moreover, it is known by all these who know them, that the first
thing they look for in a missioner (such as I was) is a godly life and
conversation, otherwise the General does not give them their Letters patent;
which I received, and did let not only them, but many others in Scotland, see;
neither without it had I been received and employed by the superior in
Scotland, as I was; which he cannot deny, so many of all conditions, both, in
and out of Scotland knowing it. Secondly, for the time that I was in the
country, concerning my life and conversation, I submit my self to the censure
of these, both Protestants and Papists, with whom I lived at that time, and to
the Letters which the Superior received in my favor from the noble man with
whom I lived; neither suppose I had been vicious, could the Superior in
Scotland, cast me out of his order, for as the reception into their order, is
proper actions to their General; so likewise is the dismission, for he only
can absolve from their vows these that are dismissed. Moreover, if I had been
such as I know out of malice they will call me, they had surely admonished me
as their custom is; but before my God I say it, I was never reproved of the
superior; or any other, all the time I was in the country, but for going to
the churches, in Scotland; and exposing my self and them to danger, by going
openly through the country.

Finally, if they had cast me out, they had not entertained me so kindly at
my departure out of Scotland, as they did, for then the Superior gave me
Letters to go for Doway, and there teach the youths of the College their
controversies, and hear their confessions, moneys to carry me there, and
three of his Jesuits after kind entertainment in this Town convoyed me a mile
off my journey: These all were signs of love, and not of outcasting from their
Society, and they and I know them to be of verity: Wherefore I remit all to
God, let Him be Judge betwixt me and them. As for their misreports, I care no
more for them than for the wind that blows, I being known both in Scotland
and abroad, as well as any of them, both great and small. Thirdly, since I went
out of Scotland last, they could not cast me out of their order, because since,
I was never in any house of theirs, nor kept company with them; And as for
my life and conversation ever since, I am sorry, it was not so good as became
a reformed Christian; yet whatsoever it was, they had nothing to do with it;
and there be many worthy Cavaliers, both at home and abroad, in whose company
I have lived this time bygone, who know that my life was neither scandalous to
my profession, shameful to my Nation, or any ways disgraceful to my
particular calling of a Soldier.

The third sort that is adiaphorists, or CONE-formists, out of their
craftiness and policy, say, that they know not what to judge of me, for
charity urges them to believe me, and prudencie forces them to beware of me;
and there they stand in doubt, as that father whom they paint between Christ
Thus Papists paint Austen.
and Marie, knew not what side to turn himself ^o, Positus in medio, quo me
vertam nescio; hinc pascor a vulnere hinc lactor ab ubere. On the one side I
perceive Christ's wounds, on the other Mary's paps; here I am nourished with
the milk of a virgin, there I am fed with the blood of a Savior. Charity
bids them judge not, and they shall not be judged; Prudencie commands them not
to trust before they try. All this is good, but what trial can they bring in
against me? Have they any thing to object or say against this my resolution
and declaration? Yes, say they, because in respect of the extreme policy of
Jesuits, it may be that out of policy I have been sent out by them, to the
end I may set Reformists and CONE-formists by the ears together, whereby the
Papists and Jesuits may the more easily overcome both, and I received in again
with them, may be thought to have done great service to the church of Rome: The
reason which moves them to judge thus is, because (say they) these who are
converted, and come out of the Romish church, use commonly to take them to a
church, which endeavors to draw Protestants and papists to a conformity,
selecting out the best of both; because not in extremity, but in mediocritie
consists virtue.

This discourse formed by a not reformed Minister of this Town, and related to
me by a sufficient Gentleman, to whom it was spoken, contains three things in
it: 1. The Jesuits policy, whom they suspect might have sent me out: 2. The
end of my out-coming, that is, to stir up dissension between Reformists and
CONE-formists: And thirdly, a question of my adjoining my self rather to the
reformed Church of Scotland, than to that of England or Germany. These be
their politic arguments, to which I must answer, and then finish this
discourse.

To the first then I answer, that I have touched something already of the
Jesuits policy, in sending out their sect*mates like grasshoppers through the
world; And now I answer again, that these who argue thus, know not the Jesuits
policy well; for surely they never send out any of policy, to detect their
own policy, neither does their policy reach that far, as to permit and
dispense with these whom they send out, to renounce and abjure the Romish
doctrine, and profess the direct opposite thereto, as I have done. It is true,
that they have dispensation among Protestants, to live as Protestants; among
Lutherians, Arrians, Henricians, and the like, as they do, for life and
conversation that they may seduce them, but not for their doctrine. They ground
this form of dissimulation upon the words of the Apostle, I am made all things
to all men, that 1 Cor. 9. 22
by all means I might save some: A specious pretext indeed, which blinds the
eyes of many poor souls; but if they would look nearer, they could easily
discover the nakedness of it, and see clearly they pretend one thing* and
intend another: Wherefore (I pray you) do the Jesuits flock so thick to
Mexico and Peru, that new Spanish treasure, but not so to Scythia or Tartarie
and Volinia, to England and Holland in droves, to Scotland and Sweden but
scattered ones; to great towns where they only dwell, and not to dorps and
villages where ignorance abounds? The reason is, that they pretend zeal, and
intend gold; they pretend to gain souls, and intend to gain riches. It is
true, they are cunning tradsmen, and can work well according to their own
ways, but they must have a good fat Subject to work upon; and this for the
Jesuits policy. The second shall be answered after the third.

To the third then I have likewise answered before, and now answer again;
First, because I find the reformed Church of GOD in Scotland to be furthest
from Popish idolatry, and nearest to Apostolical purity. Secondly, because
that I was never, am not, neither ever (Godwilling) shall be a lukewarm
Laodicean; especially Rev. 8. 16.
seeing that my Savior Jesus Christ promises, To him that overcommeth, will I
grant to sit with Rev. 3. 21.
me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in
His Throne. What madness ( I pray you) were it in a Mariner, for to come out
of a sunken ship, to enter into another which is sinking, and may have a tight
one? In a prisoner relieved out of a low pit, to cast himself into free ward,
having his liberty in his option? In a sensible man fled from a pestiferous
town, to reteere himself to another where the same sickness has taken
increase, when he may have with great ease a palace of pleasure, void of all
kind of suspicion of any infection whatsoever? None truly ( I think) would
be so mad, and destitute of judgment, but he, who going out of this valley
of misery, to the heavenly mansions, would stay, and take in purgatory for
his winter quarters.

Yet they say, that it were well done to conform to a middle religion between
Protestants and Papists, because extremeties are to be avoided, and mediocritie
embraced, To these I answer, that if they had studied their Logic as well as
their Politics, they had known, that of the four logical, oppositions, there
is one called Contradictoria, which will admit no mids, Inter propositiones
contradictoria^ non datur medium; such is the state of the matter between us
and Rome, they say that we are heretics, we deny it, they can not prove it,
seeing we believe the Scriptures which are given by divine iuspiration, and are
able to make the man of God perfect unto all good works. We say that the Pope
is Antichrist, they deny it, but we can prove it, out of the prophet Daniel the
Apostles Paul, and John, and so forth in all the rest of controversies,
betwixt them and us, so that there can be no composition, no more than betwixt
light and darkness, God and Beliall; For Christ says plainly, He that is not
with me, is against me, and he that gathers Math. 12. 30.
not with me, scatters abroad. Therefore there is no mediocritie here. And
the reason of this is, because as the Apostle averreth, there is but One Ephesians.
4. 5
Faith, in respect of its formal object, Gods written word, the authority
whereof is from the Author, God himself and so is divine, and what is
contradictorie to it, is not divine, nor to be believed to salvation: And
therefore no meeting nor trysting with Rome. If it be said that the Papists
believe many points common with us, as the Trinity, Incarnation, etc. and
therefore that they must have faith, and so faith will not be indivisible: I
answer, that they have a material faith, as Turks and Jews likewise have,
but not a formal faith; which depending upon the authority of God, revealed
unto us in his word only; and no other faith can be profitable for salvation.

The second branch of this politic objection is, their doubt of my out coming
from Rome, to wit, that it was to stir up diffension betwixt. Reformists and
CONE-formists, for the Papists and Jesuits profit, To these I answer, first,
that their Critic spirits proceed more out of Philosophical, and
Mathematical, than out of Christian or Thologicall grounds, in this their
censure of my sincere proceedings; Philosophy teaches them that, Quic quid
reciptur, ad modum recipientis recipitur, whatsoever is received, it is
received according to the measure of the receaver? And Mathematicians in their
Optics teach that the visible speces passing from the object to the organe
which receaveth them, take upon them the color of the mids where through they
pass, which daily experience confirms; and therefore, according to their
dispositions and affections they judge of me, as their passions transport them,
but not as Christian charity exhorts them, for the Scripture teaches that
it is Christ that justifies, who Romans 8. 33
is he that condemns. Secondly, I answer, that as God is my witness, they
wrong me pitifully, for, as the Lord knows, I desire one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, not only in Britain, but likewise through the whole world, and that
we think always the same, till we all come in the unity of faith, and Ephesians.
4^ 13, 14.
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ; That we henceforth be no more children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they ly in wait to deceave.

Now to let you see that my conversion is not to make dissension betwixt you, I
will briefly let you understand how the Papists ly in wait to deceave you: And
that it may be seen that I am not partial, I speak to all the three
Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland; minding to show you all three that
Papists ly in wait to deceave you by two means, seminaries, and pensions; yet
it is first to be remarked that the ground of both is that Council in Rome,
called, Congregatio de propaganda, or rather extirpanda fide, a congregation of
propagating (or rather) extirpating of Faith. This Congregation has a most
sumptuous Palace in Rome, and extreme rich; the members of it, are the Pope, as
head of the Church, his nephew Cardinal, Francis Barbarine as his Lieutennant,
diverse others Cardinals, the Generals of several Orders, the great Master of
the inquisition, and some Doctors all as judges; they conveene every friday, or
ofter as they please, the end of their meetings is to find out means to bring
all people and Nations under the popes dominion, for thus end they have sundry
means, such as their Seminaries of diverse nations, and their pensions. The
Semenaries are furnished with youths out of their several Countries, by
Jesuits, who have the care of them; These youths are of two sorts, the one
called Convictores, because they pay for their entertainment, and these are
Noble, Barons, and Gentlemen Sons, sent thither by their popish parents, to be
brought up for diverse ends: The other are called Seminarists, and these have
their food, raiment, studies, books, etc. all the time of their studies out of
these colleges; with condition, that after they have stayed three months in
one of these Colleges, they must make a vow to take priesthood upon them, and
to return to their several Countries, when they shall be found fit, by the
Jesuits their Masters; to the end they may seduce others as they were seduced
themselves; And therefore after their studies, they are sent into the country,
furnished with all things necessary, as apparels, moneys, masse-graith, and
the like, as they are thought of, and have moyen at Court* Of their seminaries,
there be five of our nation out of the country, at Rome, Paris, Madrid, Doway,
and Brounsberg; and one promised by the Emperor in Osnabruck, which the
Swedens keep for them; of Irish some, and many and great of English. These
Seminarists Jesuits, and other Priests, send their relation every year of all
what pass in the country, spiritual or temporal, to the foresaid
congregation, wherein all treasons, massacres, and other bloody mischiefs are
hatched, as the the histories of England, France and Spain can testify.

This presupposed as an assured truth, I spoke first to thee Scotland, my dear
country, that thou wrongest thy self mightily, to suffer these scismes and
divisions in thee, which are now with great pity to be seen, and shame to be
heard: That every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, etc. Is
Christ divided, 1 Cor. 1. 12. 13.
was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? One
says, I am a Covenanter, another, I am not. What meanest thou, not
covenanter? will thou not subscribe the contract which thy Parents Godfathers,
and Godmothers, as thy spiritual tutors made for thee at baptism, and
promised to make thee subscribe the same, being of perfect age, seeing it is for
God and his truth only. God is party contracter, the angels were witnesses,
and hell fire the penalty; take heed, and fight not against God, for as he is
Al-seeing, so is He Almighty; and as Merciful, to have spared thee so long,
so is He Just, to punish thy inexcusable wilfulness.

But some will say, that there be great doctors not Covenanters, and wherefore
may they not likewise stand out as well as these learned men. I answer first,
that they are but few, and to my judgment (for I have discoursed with some of
them) not the learnedest of the kingdom, brought up in a town which was never
yet cleansed from popery, and where I have seen an hundredth at Mass in one
time within this few years: Secondly, these Doctors suppose they be both good
and learned, (as I know some of them are) shall not answer for thee in that
great day, wherein there shall be had no respect of persons; for assure thy
self, that Anima quae peccaverit, ipsa punietur, The soul that sins, it
shall be Ezech. 18. 20.
punished. Thirdly, what if these Doctors would maintain popery, and hinder a
reformation, as their predecessors have done, would thou follow? God forbid:
that the doctors of that same town proceeded after this kind in the time of
the reformation, it is manifest by Hollins^ed, page 495. Anno 1561.
our history, the words are these; And shortly after the Lords summoned the
principal learned men of the realm forth of the univesities of S. Andrews,
Aberdeene, Glasgow, and other parts, to give a reason of their faith; and among
other, these of Aberdeene took upon them to dispute with John Knox, John
Willock, and M. Goodman. Neither is it to be thought, that the historian a
stranger, wrote any thing out of partiality in this point against that town,
more as against any other of the kingdom, he being alike stranger unto all.

My counsel now to you that are Covenanters, is, 1 Cor. 10 12.
that, Qui stat, videat ne cadat, Let him that think he stands, take heed
least he fall; for the crown of glory is only for him that overcomes, Qui
perseveraverit usque in finem, hic salvus erit, He that shall endure to the
Mac. 24.
end, the same shall be saved. Yield not in a word, a syllab, a jote, least
thou scandalize thy weak brother, and give occasion to Rome to stand and expect
thy return, she not so much as beginning a motion toward thee: For they
seeing your novations of Bishops, Deanes, Doctors, kneeling at Sacrament,
cross in Baptism, and the rest of these articles, were in assured confidence,
that ye were turning to them again, and used commonly to say, See so feign as
they are to creep in to us again, which did confirm all our people, and made
sundry of yours to follow us. If these points, which sometime by the most part
were thought allowable, did so much harm to Gods church, what their English
mass, canonical inquisition, and the rest of that, almost banished, trash had
done, if they had not been preveened by that Al-seeing God, judge ye. And
finally, grant thou nothing that Rome desires of thee, for it has no warrant
from God, and thou know no conformity to be admitted between God and
Dagon; hold fast then 1 Samuel 5 Rev. 3. 11 13.
that which thou have least another take thy crown from thee.

And to you not Covenanters I say, that of your Bishops I never saw any but
one; neither would I mourn, albeit I never saw more of them in Scotland; and I
am their friend or enemy, as they are Christ's: yea, more I say, if ye knew as
well as they and I know; even the draughts that are drawn against you, the
strength and policy of your enemies without, and your inward enemies, against
this poor church of God, I am cercertainly persuaded that ye would all
subscribe that worthy Covenant, before that ye went out of this Church, or
else I would hold you as internal papists; for there be both internal and
external.

I perceive you all curious to demand me a question, if modesty could permit
you to speak, to wit, what is this that I know more than other men, let us (say
ye) understand it, and we will yield to reason.

To this lawful question I answer, that I know more than any Protestant in
Scotland of this business; for I was employed in it, the year of God 1632. and
gave in (among other points of my commission) a petition to the foresaid
Congregation at Rome* and else where, desiring them to advise upon the means,
for the reduction of Scotland to Rome; diverse were proponed by these politic
heads, who study only to destroy Kings and pervert kingdoms; of many, these
few were most considerable: First, that they should all employ their wits for
the perversion of his Majesty, our Sovereign Lord, and contribute for the
levying of an army, under pretext of giving assistance to some confederate
Prince, and therewith to force liberty of conscience: This opinion was
rejected as dangerous, till all things were surer, and their faction stronger:
2. That if they could not attain to their purpose with his Majesty, they
should endeavor to get two Jesuits in our Prince his service, for his Graces
instruction, and education in popery: 3. That pensions should be given by
mediate ways, through the Universities, and other parts where they might work
their ends: 4. Yet this was all thought little of, by one of our Countriemen,
who advised them to set their whole minds for the perversion of England; which
being nearer to them in points of doctrine, form of service, worship, and
ecclesiastical government, they might work surer, and with greater hope of
prevailing, then with his Countriemen, whom he assured to be of a stubborn
nature, dangerous to be dealt with, and great Puritans, directly opposite to
the church of Rome: And therefore nothing more should be desired of them, but
conformity in matters of religion with England, which the English church would
gladly wish, as if she were a mother church whereof others did flow; neither
could his Countriemen deny it, in respect of his Majesty's Supremacy, and of
the union of the two Crowns and Kingdoms, that they both might have but one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, and one King. For the execution of his counsel,
he proponed mutual intelligence to be procured betwixt England and Rome, which
shortly after was begun by an Italian priest, a great politician, well versed
in the French tongue, called Il Signor Gregorio, who stayed more as an year and
an half in London for that effect, and with whom I conferred in his own
ludging, in the Convent garden at London, and with two great men of our nation,
and now continues there himself, with great grudge to both the kingdoms,
seeing this mutual intelligence was never heard of betwixt Rome and us, since
the Cardinals Wolsey and Polus days* neither is it necessary, as Statesmen
may see. Now, not Covenanter, is thy curiosity satisfied? This I know, and
more, look thou to it in time; and be not one of these, who for vanity or
other ends will be thought singular against Gods cause, and thy own
promise in baptism.

And I will end this discourse, that my enemies say not that I mind to put
dissension betwixt Protestants and CONE-formists, letting our neighbors
England and Ireland see some of the dangers wherein they stand of that Roman
antichrist, and his congregation de extirpanda fide. First then, ye stand both
in danger as well as we, of these our related dangers; especially of that
mutual intelligence between Rome and England. 2. Of your Country men's
affection to Rome, if they be papists, for alleged rights of the popes upon
you both, the one called Peter's penny, the other called Peter's patrimony. 3.
Your extreme great number of Jesuits and other Priests, extending in England
to five or six thousand, so that they are striving among themselves, and
writing books against other (which I my self carried to Rome) for Bishoprics
in your Church. As for Ireland it has fifteen papists bishops alone. This is
a great danger. 4. Your populous multitude of Papists in you both, extending to
many thousands, so that I am of that mind, that in England the people (if not
already) may shortly desire a General Assembly, for liberty of conscience.
5. The education of your Nobility at schools in foreign countries, who
having drunk in the doctrine of iniquity from their tender age, are both more
perverse in themselves, and more dangerous, bringing in their friends and
neighbors, by their Priests to perdition with them. 6. That which is to be
lamented of all, that you have good laws, both of you, against Papists, and
very good reason to execute them* but alace, money break them, granting to all
Papists a pecuniall liberty of conscience* and present banishment to all these
poor reformed Christians, who will not conform with you, and that which is to
be laughen, or rather weeped at, that ye would blind peoples eyes with your
searchers, going on the one side to apprehend priests, and punish papists; and
on the other side; to have your customers to receave moneys, and give
discharges for liberty of papistrie, O God! who does not evidentlie perceave
these monstrous dangers, and not oppose himself with all his power to them, if
there remain but a sponk of true Christianity in him? Truly, who does it
not, I must of necessity think him an internal papist.

The last danger of all the three kingdoms is Pensions, whereof we may
consider four things. 1. The giver* 2. The persons to whom they are given. 3.
The quantity of the sums. 4. And the end wherefore they are given. There is
certainly pensions given in the Country, for priests and intelligencers, and
out of the Country, for Semenaries and correspondents of these intelligencers;
but to come to the particulars. 1. The givers are the house of Austria, and the
foresaid Congregation, de extirpanda fide. 2. The persons to whom it is given
in Scotland, to my knowledge are the Priests (whereof I was one) the man that
goes for it, and the thesaurer or keeper, I know the names and residences of
the rest; and had set them down here, if I had not declared them sufficiently
by writ already: And if there be given pensions to any other as to these, the
superior with his counselors and the Treasurer know it, for me I know
not; but this I am assured of, that there was more sent into the country, than
was bestowed upon the foresaid persons. 3 The quantity in cumulo is best known
to them, I being none of the Superiors counselors, in respect of my travels
for the mission, the quantity that we who were Priests got, was an hundred
crowns in the year from Rome, and eighteen pence every day from Spain,
besides our purchase by our Masses, Confessions, and Pardons, which was more or
less, conform to out employment, and the persons with whom we dealt. 4.
Lastly, in a word the end of these gifts is pretended zeal and piety, but
truly intended Hierarchy of Rome, and Monarchy of Spain, which may appear
by the deposition of M. George Ker, and the Jesuits Abercrumbie, Crighton, and
Gordoun, with three Noblemens letters intercepted with him, and registrat in
this town, the year of God 1592. by his pensions given to us, and his pretended
rights over our native countries. If this be not an evident danger to suffer so
many foreign Princes pensioners in your bosom, God see to it in his own time;
and give me grace that I may follow my sincere and hearty resolution, that at
the hour of my death, I may say wirh the Apostle, I have fought a good fight;
I have 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8.
finished my course, I have keept the faith, hence forth there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me
at that day, etc. And I shall be surely one of these, to who my blessed Savior
shall say in that day, Come ye blessed of my Father; inherit Matthew. 25. 34.
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. To this
gracious Father, with his blessed Son* and the holy Ghost, be all power
praise, and glory, honor, and dominion, for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

