A most excellent and COMPENDIOUS METHOD of curing wounds in the head, and in
other parts of the body, with other precepts of the same Art, practiced and
written by that famous man FRANCISCVS ARCEVS, Doctor in Physic and
Surgery: and translated into English by John Read, Surgeon. WHEREUNTO IS
ADDED THE exact cure of the Caruncle, never before set forth in the English
tongue. With a treatise of the Fistulae in the fundament, and other places of
the body, translated out of Johannes Ardern. And also the description of the
Emplaister called Dia Chalciteos, with his use and virtues. With an apt Table
for the better finding of the particular matters, contained in this present
work.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON BY Thomas East, for Thomas Cadman. 1588.

To my very good and loving friends, John Bannister Gentlemam, Master in
Chirurgerie, and practitioner in Physic. William Clowes, and William
Pickering Gentlemen, and Masters in Chirurgerie, Ihon Read wishes prosperous
success in your doeings, health of body, and after this life eternal
felicity.
THis part of Physic which is called Chirurgia (my true and loving friends)
is the most aucie^t and principal part of medicinal practice, so highly
commended of Hippocrates, Gallen, Celsus, and other learned men, that they
account i^ a heinous matter for any man to meddle with the same, which in deed
is not a Physician. For Surgery is maimed, and utterly imperfect, without
the healpe of those other parts, which consists in prescribing of inward
medicines, and convenient diet.

And is so near linked with these in a lyance, that no man deserves to be
called a Surgeon, that is ignorant in Physic.

For ulcers, Apostumes, or any other extreme affects of the skin, have their
original from some inward cause, and nature expels them from thence unto
the skin, as unto a natural clensing place. Likewise in wounds that are
inward, there happens oftentimes ebullicion of humors by means of anger, or
some other passion of the mind, whereunto if due regard be not given, the
Chirurgians labor is in vain, and his topicall medicines applied to no
purpose. If this seem obscure or false unto any man, let him read Hippocrates
touching the stuff which a physician is to use. For in that place he sets
down most evidently, what emplaisters, Unguents, and other instruments, are
necessary for the Physician. Let him also consider that he shows that the
very roots of ulcers and apostumes, ought first to be plucked up. Let him
also weigh how he teaches, that special regard is to be had, to the
appointing of convenient diet. And so shall he well understand that Chirurgians
ought to be seen in physic, and that the Barbours craft ought not to be
termed chirurgerie.

But why am I so tedious herein? when as the very difinition of physic,
does agree with chirurgirie. Wherefore if chirurgerie be physic, no wise man
will deny but that the chirurgians ought to be seen in physic, considering
they work both upon one subject. Wherefore they ought not to be termed
chirurgians which have learned nothing but the composition of two or three
emplaisters out of Barbours shoppes, neither yet Barbours themselves, nor
unskillful women, besides a number of blind bussardly bayardes, which master
Wiliam Clowes has most properly painted forth in their right colors, in
his book entitled de Morbo Gallico, wherefore I omit them, although they
confidently crack and brag that they can cure any thing.

And with great boldness do take upon them the practice of this science,
insomuch that they deptiue men of learning of their due commodities herein.
Giueing out that such are physicians and not chirurgians. As though the
chirurgian ought not to be seen in physic, or that he could be a physician,
that were ignorant in chirurgerie.

But oh good God, is it tolerable that the ancient glory and renoume of
chirurgirie should be so defaced or that such men as have spent all their time
in it, should so injuriously be put from the benefit of the same.

If therefore these men that have all their time bestowed their studies in
chirurgerie for the relief of such as are diseased: doubtless they may freely
(notwithstanding the gainesaying of carping crackers and blind empericks)
undertake the practice of this part of physic in any place. Considering the
beginning of these ordinary chirurgians, which commonly we call barbara
chirurgians, read Vesalius in his epistle which he set forth before his work
of the frame of man's body.

In which place he sets down the reason why in these our days,
chirurgerie is divided from physic, not without great hurt unto mankind. I
write not these things unto you (loving friends) for that I would in any wise
abolish the ancient privilege which has been granted in times past unto
the Barbors of the City of London, for there are in the said City (which
also use Barberie) that are very expert and skillful in chirurgerie.

But for my part let them practice this art such as will, and are disposed to
keep them from hunger and cold.

Only this I note, the abuses herein of our present time, yielding altogether
the practice of this noble art, (to the great hinderance of the common weal)
unto men unlearned, and I do withal affirm that all chirurgians ought to be
seen in physic: and that the Barbors craft ought to be a distinct mystery
from surgery. I thought it good (loving friends) to discourse unto you
something at large in this matter, that ye might understand how far this art
in these our days is fallen from the ancient and true chirurgerie, and how
much the beauty of the same is blemished and defaced, by these obscure and
base emperickes. Neither is it without cause (loving patron^) that I have spent
all this time with you in these matters.

For you are they, which in most delighted in chirurgerie, you are they, by
whom chirurgerie being decayed may hope for reformacion, you are they which for
your singular skill herein, are able to judge of all such imperfections as
lurk among these busardlie empericks. You are they that are able to defend the
true and sincere chirurgerie, against the false and corrupt. In consideration
whereof I thought it not amiss herein to publish unto you (my courteous
friends) these ^uctors which I have translated, hoping thereby that the ruder
sort being alured with the facility and easiness of the same, will more
earnestly apply their minds to the learning thereof. And that many will be
moved hereby the sooner, whom otherwise conceit of difficulty might have
feared away.

But I am assured that I shall hereby incur the hatred of the envious, and
the reprehencions of carping quarrellers. But that some profit may come by
this my pains, unto such as are studious in Chirurgerie, I esteem nothing of
them, for I know I shall be easily able to put to silence those unnatural
persons.

It may be that some will think me of Antisthenes faction, that laid
platformes of every man's life, and yet the Philosopher was more wise in his
precepts, then wary of his own government and say, I have reached above my
skill, in limiting other men's doeings. But if I have intermedled to far, it
is (courteous friends) not in censuring the actions of the good and virtuous,
but in discovering the abuses of the lewd. For I reprehend not as one thinking
generally all bad, hut persuade, as one wishing perticularlie every one should
live well, and dye better.

And therefore (my courteous friends) I am most earnestly to crave your
assistance (in protecting this rude work, being the first fruits of my
trauaills. For Damydas caused his Parret to pearke under a Dragon of Brass, to
defend it from the vultures tyranny.

And I shrowde this simple work, under your courteous patronages, that the
malicious, whose toungs cut like swords, may like the Serpent fear to offend
that hear be, whereon the beams of the Sun does rest. And therefore do your
endeavors that this noble Art of Chirurgerie (now languishing and decaying)
may by your good means and asistance, begin again to flourish.

And being as it were heretofore dead, recover her life and decayed estate, and
that by your good assistance, learned professors may be appointed in all
convenient places, to publish and set forth the same. For so will it come to
pass, that in short time this famous Art will be restored to her ancient
perfection, unto the great commodity of the common weal.

If any that are envious grudge at my doings, I straight for refuge fly to
your good Cencure, which I count as a sufficient defensorie against such as
love to backebite. Committing therefore my books to your patronage, least the
gates being to big for the city, the mountain should seem to swell and
bring forth a Mouse. Thus wishing you all such happy success as you can
desire, and I imagine, I end.

Yours in courtesy bounden, JOHN READ Chirurgian.

The first Preface to the friendly Reader.
ALthough (as I doubt not) every good man will enterpret this work to none
other end, but to be for the comfort of them that are wounded, sore, and
diseased, and will esteem no less of me, by whom they profit, then they
will be glad to receive the benefits. Yet forasmuch as it is impossible to
avoid the teeth of malicious envy, I thought it not unnecessary to prevent
the furies of some, which are ever gnawing and biting upon them that further
any good sciences. To those I protest, that in all my labors and studies, I
never intended or yet do entend to satisfy the minds of any such
picke-faultes, which will do nothing but detract and judge others, snuffing at
all that offends the no^ses of their momish affections, how laudable soever
it be otherways.

But as M. Hunton in his Epistle to M. Bannester said most true, that envy
lies always at virtues gate, and tread^n on her heels when she goes abroad.
And as the deaf cannot discern the sweetness of Music: so the ignorant
cannot look into the excellency of knowledge. For there is in these days
many that are so wilful in their wickedness, that being reproved for their
ignorance, stick not to threaten with words, swords, Curtelases, and
Daggers, to wound, cut, slash, yea and kill such good men who are painful
studients and laborers in the Art.

As I red of that good man Master John Hall of Maidstone, who although he were
a skillful man, and of excellent virtues in the Art of Chirurgerie, yet for
speaking against the deceiptfull sorcery of one Robart Harris, in An. Dom.
1556. He had a dagger drawn at him, as himself does declare in his
expostulations. And also it is credibly reported, that in Anno domini 1574. One
Master Bactor a man of good knowledge, both in Physic and Surgery, for the
reproving of the great abuses of one Four Akers, he had a sword drawn at him
as he travailed on the way, and likely to have been spoiled, had not other
trauailers asisted him. I may well veryfie the sayings of good Master
Bannister, who does explain their devilish practices, having neither learning,
knowledge, modesty, nor honistie. And yet practice abroad their accustomed
deceipts under the color of admittance from the Hall of London, and some from
others being in aucthorytie, of which sort I could name a great number, which
for modesties sake, I omit. A thing greatly to be lamented that those which are
or should be the fathers of art, and vpholders of good artists, should so
slightly pass their license to such ignorant asses, to maintain them, not
only in coosining her Majesty's subjects of their money, but oftentimes
deprive them of their lims, yea and also their lives. But it is no marvel,
for money is sweet, and what is it but Lucre may do? for I my self talking
with one of the same company and fellowship, complaining upon the abuses
thereof, in passing their licenses to such, made me this answer. In deed quoth
he it is not well, but we were as good to take their money, for they would play
the knaves nevertheless. Surely his answer was truer then he wist, although
a matter most lamentable. For whereas by the good and godly laws of the
realm, they are prohibited from practicing or meddling in the art without
license, (before the which should go and approbation as well as examination)
now for sooth for money they may buy them a cloak to coeuer them from the
law, and to play their parts at will. Yet among the rest, I know some one of
small learning and less knowledge, who having travailed 180. miels to fetch a
seal weying four pound besides the a purtenances thereunto belonging, whereby
he is grown so far in love with himself, and so vndiscretlie doteth over
his own doings, at his return, that he makes is travel and conquest as he
thinks, ordinary table talk, for he walked from Tavern to Tavern, and from
Alehouse, to Alehouse, with his license at his girdle closed in a box, as
though he had been the proctor of some spiteful house) aggravating the
matter so monstrouslie, as if he had endured the very labors of old
Hercules, and no marvel, for when he had made his market, and received his
letters of mart, falling in company with some others, and grew in speeches of
practice (for there upon he stands, but his method is small) did not stick
to confirm, that Arsenick and rusty Bacon, was a present remedy for wounds
made with goonshot. And being an other time demanded by a learned Doctor in
Physic how a wound came to be an ulcer, was stricken dum. And yet of like he
might answer his examinations well. For that (as he says) he was used so
familiarly, and plast amongst the best. A mean surely to embolden him well.
For he was but bashful when he was before the worshipful Doctor. And yet will
not stick to make himself comparable to any, and will impudentlie crack,
that any man shall never attain to do the like cures as he has don, with a
great deal more of shameless co^pariso^s. There are others of the kind of
young Cuckoose, or as nuseled Snakes, which fly with Isops Crow, which haing
pluct the wings, would feign devour the bird.

But leaving them to their blindnesses, and praying unto God for their
amendment, my purpose is here to do them good that have need, that is to
distribute in english to them that are unlearned, part of the treasure that is
in other languages, to provoke them that are of better learning, to utter their
knowledge in such like attemptes: finally to declare that to the use of many,
which ought not to be secret for lucre of a few, and to communicate the fruit
of my labors, to them that will gentlly and thankefullie receive them, which
if any be so proud or supercilious, that they immediately will despise, I shall
friendly desire them, with the words of Horace: Quod si meliora nouisti
candide imperti, si non his vtere mecum.

If they know better, let us have part: If they do not, why repine they at
those which mean well? why condemn they the things that they cannot amend.
Or if they can, why dissemble they their cunning? How long would they have
people ignorant?

Why grutch they Chirurgerie should come forth in English? would they have no
man to know but only they? or what make they themselves? for if Galen the
Prince of this art being a Grecian wrote in the Greek: King Auicene of Arabia
in the speech of the Arayans: If Plinius, Celsus, Serenus, and other of the
Latins wrote to the people in the Latin tongue: Mercellus Ficinus (who all men
assent to be singulerly learned) disdained not to write in the Italian tongue:
generally, if the intent of all that ever set forth any noble study, have
been to be read, of as many as would: what reason is it, that we should
huther muther here among a few, the thing that was made common to all? Christ
says: no man lights a Candell to cover it with a Bushel, but sets it to
serve every man's turn; and these go about, not only to cover it when it is
lighted, but to quench it before it be kindled (if they might by malice) which
very well veryfieth the sayings of Master William CLOWES in his last edicion
De Morbo Gallico, whose words are these. No man can lead so just a life,
No work be writ so true:
That can escape their sqinting eyes,
Or pass their ^luish view.
which as it is a detestable thing in any godly science: so me thinks in this
so necessary an art, it is exceeding damnable and devilish, to debar the
fruition of so inestimable benefits, which our heavenly father has prepared
for our comfort and innumerable uses, wherewith he has armed our impotent
nature, against the assaults of so many sickenesses, whereby his infinite
mercy and abundant goodness is no thing else more apparently confessed, by the
which benefits, as it were with most sencible arguments, spoken out of
heaven, he constrains us to think upon our own weakness, and to knowledge
that in all flesh is nothing but misery, sickness, sorrows, sin,
affliction, and death: no not so much strength as by our own power, to relieve
one member of our bodies diseased. As for the knowledge of medicines, comfort
of herbs, mayntenance of health, prosperity and life, they be his benefits,
and proceed of him, to the end that we should in common, help one another,
and so live together in his laws and commandments, in the which doing, we
shall declare our selves to have worthelie employed them, and as fruitful
servant, be liberally rewarded. Otherwise, undoubtedly the talent which we
have hidden, shall be dug up, and distributed to them that shall be more
diligent, a terrible confusion before so high a Justice, and at such a court,
where no wager of law shall be taken, no proctour limited to defend the cause,
none exception allowed to reprove the witness, no council admitted to
quallifie the gloses, the very bare text shall be there alleged.

Cur non posuisti talentum in fenus? Why have thou not bestowed my talent to
the vauntage. These and such other examples have enforced me being oftentimes
exercised in the study and practice of Chirurgerie, to follow the good
endeavors of other good men, who have tasted of the same cup of envy, as
their predecessors have done. And shall I persuade my self to escape the
same? No, for as I am credibly informed by my very good friends, that my book
was not so soon at the press, as envy even ready to repine at the same. But
being warned, I will be the better armed, and with my friends and
predecessors, stand to the brunt of their brutish and malicious tongues. And
nothing be discouraged at them, for I know those that are godly and well
disposed, will courteously except of every good and laudable attempt. And for
the malicious, small regard is to be given, for I do perceive that now in our
time, no good enterprise can be gone about, but false detraction and envy is
ready to overthrow the same. For what are they that have written both in
ancient and later times, but they have tasted of this beastly brood, and
envious sect? Yea and of such men that have as it were dandled them in their
lappes.

For I cannot only speak by experience of my self, but also by certain
knowledge of some others, that breding up under our selves such impes, who we
did not only give sufficient maintenance unto, but also did impart unto them
those things which we by long study and chargeable labor had found out. But
when (as they thought) there was no more to be gotten, and them selves
sufficiently furnished, being gone from their Masters, were presently puffed
up in pride, and being better persuaded of them selves, then of their careful
teachers, forgetting from whence they sucked their milk, go about by all
means (as much as in them lies, to the advancement of their own glory) to
seek the overthrow of their Masters credits.

But unhappy are those men which nusell such whelps, or has such fire
brands, but surely they do but kindle coals to burn them selves, for their
reward shall be to have the like servant, to serve their own turns.

For as our Savior Christ says: such bread as we break, shall be broken to us
again.

But no douht as we hatched evil servant, so some have bred good.

And as in reproouing the evil, I wish not the good to be offended,
contrariewise, in praising the good, I wish the evil no part thereof. For if
good men in times past have beeue moved with good concience, for knowledge
sake, and for the better maintenance of their common wealth in setting forth
this Art (in our vulger tongue) for the relief, comfort, succor, help, and
health of such as are sick, deseased, or otherwise wounded and hurt in the
wars, or by some mischaunce, why should they be so envied at, yea even of
those which have plucked fetherse from their wings, and has not been ashamed
to use them among their own. But these that have so learned of Dedalus, to
frame wings by Art, which could not be had by nature, let them take heed
least by playing with other birds feathers, not skilful to use the same, they
receive the reward of Icarus.

But as the wise man says, it is a skabbe of the world, to be envious at
virtue: for envy grows up among virtues.

The poison which Serpents continually do keep without any harm to
themselves, they spewe out to others destruction. But the malicious
contrariewise, hurts no man so much as themselves.

But I count him most wicked, that it malicious against his friend. But envy
walks not alone, but is commonly conjoined with his associates, as slander,
ignorance, foolishness, lying, and flattery, which I will knyt together in
these verses following, in as brief manner as I can, hoping that when they
shall feel their imperfections touched, they will the sooner forsake that
vnchristian-like vices, and imitate the godly and virtuous.

Envy and slander, are two mischievous vices,
And knit still in unity to a wicked end,
To defame or kill, they are full of devices,
They regard no estate, be he foe or friend.
Envy all empayreth, and does nothing amend,
Dignity, wealth, and worldly felicity,
Does cause cruel envy to be in many.
Ignorance of the soul, is very madness,
Which while it alboureth, the truth to attain,
Is confounded and wrapped in heaviness,
Through self knowledge and feebleness of brain.
Yea, this is also mosT evident and plain,
That as ignorance is bred by idleness,
Even so is error by ignorance doubtless.
There is to mankind, no greater enemy,
And that more hinders his estimation,
Than the loathsome burden of beastly folly,
Which plainly appears in each condition.
Fools are overthrown with their light affection,
And as Corn upon stones is sown in vain,
Even so are good counsailers to a foolish brain.
The soul with lying is often infected,
As with a pestilent and hurtful malady,
The soul in that state is known to be wicked,
Whereof shame or reason is thonelie remedy,
And as great tellers of news are seldom credited,
So liars and bosters, are always despised.
Of slaunderers and flatterers take heed if you will,
For neither tame, nor wild beasts can bitte us so ill,
But of all wild beasts slander is the most bitter,
And of the tame, most biteth a flatterer,
For a man much better is among raueners,
To fall, and betaken, then among flatterers,
For Ravens but of flesh dead bodies do deprive,
but flatterers deuore men while they be alive.
Flattery from friendship is hardly disseuered,
Being mutuallie knit with the affects of the mind,
Busy bodies and pickthankes are not to be trusted,
As wise men their subteltie will quickly out find.
Nobles by flattery are often made blind,
And as worms in soft wood do breed most gladly,
So gentell and noble wits, are hurt by flattery.
Irefulnes or wrath is a most cruel vice,
Accursed of good men hateful and ouglie,
Repugning peace that sweet virtue of price,
Which knitteth both God and man in amity,
It is contrary also to humanity,
And as the Godly and wise does detetest it,
So the wicked and foolish does embrace it.
But envy is so sprung up in these our days, that it greueth the enuiouse to
see another do well, and less does their own mishappes trouble them then
their neighbors good sucsesse. And therefore the Philosopher Archelaus said
unto an envious man which was very sorrowful. I know not well whether evil
have chanced to thee or good to another: signifying thereby, that enuiouse men
are as sorofull for others prosperity, as for their own adversity. Well, I
can but lament the abuses of these days, for as soon as God lays his
visitacion on us, we forthwith run to some witch, or sorcerer, who forthwith
affirms the parties are taken, or else if they can hearer of a runnagate
stranger skumming over the Country, although they neither know from whence he
came, nor whether he will. He shall be sooner trusted of them then their own
country men, be they never so learned or skillful. Yea, and will rather trust
them with their lives, then with an obligation of xx. pound. And no^e truly so
welcome now as they. As for example in this year 1587. There came a flemming
into the City of Gloceter named Woolfgange Frolic, and there hanging forth
his picture, his flagges, his instruments, and his letters of mart with long
lybells, great tossells, broad seals closed in boxes, with such counterfeit
shows and knackes of knauerie, ^oosening the people of their money, without
either learning or knowledge.

And yet for money got him a license to practice at Bristow: But when he came to
Gloceter and being called before some being in authority, by my self and
others, he was not able to answer to any one point in Chirurgerie, which
being perceived, and the man known, the matter was excused by way of Charity,
to be good to strangers. And besides as I understand there is in the City of
London one Peter Ballet, a Duch man borne, an impudent bragger, for by chance
he was called to a Gentilman to cure a Gangrena, and for that he would have
strange remedies, instead of others, he applied to the grieved place Butter,
small Ale or strong bear, a medicine sure fit unto his skill. And no marvel
it is, for I had thought the flemmings ad either devoured in their own
bellies, or send it some other way, our english Bear and Butter, but I
perceive as it is good food, so it is with them wholesome medicine.

And that makes it with us so dear, and especially where they dwell.

But let any of us go about to practice among them in their country, they
would sone expel us either by law or by sword.

But we cherish them, that devour us. There is an other springing up, who
degressing from his country guise immitating the Spaniard, and leaning so nere
the same, that he got the healpe of a French man to be his Barbar, who studied
so long in the school of falsehood, that by his deep insight in mineralls, he
obtained such knowledge, that he passed Paracelsus, for by his skill, he
framed such a Pill, that as many as receaueth the same, he shall never more
after be sick nor lame.

And for the great virtue thereof, I thought it good to set down the
composicion, because all men shall either use or shun the same: and it is this
Rec Turbith Simple, g.iii. antimonij Preparati, g.30. Mercuri Sublimati,
g.j.ss. this was appointed to be given in conserua Roses, for all diseases, the
pestilence excepted.

And then to give it in Theriaca and Romachi. The experience of this pill cost
some full dear. Well I say no more but a pair of good Peter's, which pearce
Plowman never knew. But these abuses reigns not in Surgery only, but also
in Physic.

For now whether he be scholar, or scholar not, Bacheler, or Bacheler not,
Master, or Master not, Doctor, or Doctor not, all is one, and as much is the
one excepted as the other.

For if he has but served any worshipful Doctors, or other learned men in
Physic, will not be ashamed to take unto himself as good a title as his
learned Master, yea although he were a Conny keeper. As I hard the judgment (of
one that takes upon him the highest title of a Phision) that he gave in the
urine of a woman that was deaf, that she had about her heart, an impostume, or
a piece of flesh hrowing which stopped her gearing, and therefore she was not
to be cured, but he could ease her.

This I leave to the learned to judge, whether he be a Doctor, or Doctor
not. I will therefore forsake the proving of so manifest a thing as this vice
is, and return unto thee (god reader) whom I have already offended in
exceeding the length of a preface, like unto a wayfaring man, who when he had
undertaken a long journey, stumbled even in the very threshold of his door.

But I know not how it comes to pass, yet we see it daily, that ridiculous
toys, and absurd pamphlets being put forth, are very pleasantly excepted.
Whereas a man being moved with honest care to profit his country, and to leave
some testimony of the same behind him, do publish any work, it behooves him
to show some reason for his doings, or else it will not yield his hoped for
benefit.

Which is to be construed and perused with humanity, so that if a man covet to
have his books favorably excepted and read, he must behave himself in
writing, as Solon did in framing his laws.

Who (as Plutarch says) did not fashion them according to the true line of
equity, but set down such as he thought the people would willingly observe:
even so the iniquity of the time has brough to pass, that those books which
are generally perused and read throughout, must not serve the time, but
satisfy the opinions of men.

A man may easily discourse of this, but the fantasies of men are to variant
to peruaile a whit in diswading them.

But if it might, I would persuade some one from his purpose.

For it is secretly given out, and wih no little ado, that CALMETEVS shall in
have be published in ENGLISH, but I would the good man who has taken the
pains, had at his convenient leisure, first have read Master Bannisters books
of ulcers, and of tumors against nature are wounds, and conferred them together
with Calmetius, might so have saved his laobur, for there shall he see the
flowers of Calmeteus so clean gathered, that he which comes after shall be feign
to brouse upon the bare shrubbs. Unless he do it again for tery-fiyng the
good old Gentleman (who has already taken the pains) and to bring him out of
conceit with that he has done, which I think will hardly be. But for mine
own part that I may now end, I have not sought or hunted after vain glory
by the publishing of this my labor, but only I have endured by this means
being unable any way else to do some good to my Country, which desire of
mine shall sufficiently comfort me, though I want the outward approbation of
the world. And yet this one thing I would crave at the hands of the learned,
that if my boks by chance come under their censure, they will either give it
their good word, or else suffer themselves to be Judged off by perfourming the
like labor.

Vale John Read Chirurgian.

Aluarus Nonnius, to the renowned preacher Benedict Aria Montanus.
IF, according to the old saying of the Stoickes (most learned Aria) men are
begotten for men's sakes, then are those to be esteemed greatest, and had in
highest account, that which daily most do profit the common health of man.
Which, though by sundry skills, it may be performed, yet by none more amply
then that of curing diseases, the Art whereof, has made her students
immortal, or of eternal memory.

And seeing your Arcaeus is of this number, and one who in following, and
exercising this art, has made himself so famous in his country, as no man
living the like: how much more renowned (think you) shall he be, if those
things he has practiced with his hands amongst the unlearned, may in writing
be testified also unto the learned? surely (as one says) he should advance
his head among the stars. But this glory gotten by such industry,
diligence, labor, and incredible cunning, shall together with the auctor,
languish and perish in oblivion, unless by your means it be brought abroad
into the light.

Make common therefore that which the common Chirurgians know not, and let not
such healthful remedies lie secret by you, least your readiness in
communicating the benefit, should seem less, then was the aucthors
willingness in bestowing it. And that I may not seem as of no force to beg
it, but even by good right to demand it at your hands, thus do I judge, that
the book of wounds, is not only profitable, but also necessary. For it not
only teaches those things, which with many faults, and monstrous errors,
are unlearnedly, and unskillfully written off by the barbarous, but also so
reselleth the ignorance of our Chirurgions, As well in England as in spain.
that he seems unto me, to have delivered mortal men from their tyranny,
whom Galen rightly compared unto thieves.

Moreover our age shall learn some things, which other antiquity know not,
or left as impossible to be set down, namely to cure happily, and with an
easy method: yea and that with remedies either gotten by much practice and
judgment, or else fetched from Hippocrates and Gallens fountains.

As for his order, though it be not so exact, because of his continual
practice and curing the sick, yet is it likewise, for a great comprehension of
Art, to be commended, for the distribution is perpetual whereby he deuideth
wounds into their general differences, and into simple and compound, as into
their branches.

Also the proper prognostications are noted, and lastly the particular method
of curing added. Then which order none could (in my judgment) have been
set down, or devised better.

After this general Chapter, follows that of wounds in the head. For this,
because of the greatness of the danger, and worthienesse of the party,
offers it self first.

Next to that, are the wounds of the breast and belly, in such sort delivered,
that nothing can be further wished, to the knowledge, either of their danger
or healing. The rest of wounds inflicted upon other parts then those, are
either comprehended under his simple wound, or else omitted of the aucthor as
over light to be written off. The temperature, placing, knitting, substance,
figure, action, and use of every affected part, he handles in a certain
addition of physic to the end of this book.

Which is notable in this, that almost no accident can happen to a wound, but
from thence may be found a ready way of curing the same.

But to come again to his chirurgerie, his wounds being finished, he
propounds the curing of ulcers, comprehended in one only Chapter. Here was
some oversight, for there are ii. or three Chapters thereof.


And here I think good to admonish, that the same Chapter is all but a matter
of remembrance, and as a thing taken out of his table, notes of memory in like
sort, as are also most books of Hippocrates that are carried about. Where
hence it comes that neither all things are defined, nor yet enclosed in the
walls of method, and yet every where a perfect curation shines forth. But
this brevity is recompensed with a fine curation of the french disease: in
which this is notable, that he shows the true manner of decocting Salsa
Parilla, taught heretofore by no man. All which things are declared with a
brief exposition upon every Chapter. But to end my Epistle as I began, you
shall do a work worthy your condition, if, as you are example to others in
wisdom and holy life, you do also help mortal men in this liberality.

Fare ye well.
A Complaint of the abuse of the noble Art Chirurgerie.
A Midest the waves of Ocean seas,
to memory I began to call,
The famous art of medicine,
that daily does to ruin fall.
A gift of God most excellent,
to cure each man's infirmity,
Whereby his name extolled is,
with praise and thanks continually.
For what is he that does behold,
the sundry things that longes thereto,
As gummes of trees, herbs, seeds, and fruits,
with stones and mineralls also.
But will advance his power great,
to see their hidden property,
And operations wonderful,
upon the parts of man's body.
And to fulfill this Godly gift,
he has ordaned members fit,
Chirurgians I mean which to
the sickly may deliver it.
But out alas I am constrained,
with grief of heart for to declare,
That such a worthy art shoud be,
in pieces rent and left so bare.
For to record the present state,
it makes me grievously to moan,
Since Galen and Hippocrates,
did exercise it all as one.
In elder times there were but few,
that had therein experience,
But such in deed as did excel,
in learning and in diligence.
Wherefore they were accepted then,
as treasures rich and precious,
And also to the common wealth,
accounted most commodious.
But now there are so many that
this famous art do daily haunt,
And such as for the most part are,
both blind and very ignorant.
That for their hurtful practices,
it were better they were never borne,
Appearing to their country dear
as Caterpillars be to ^rne.
Surgery moreover is,
abhorred of the Physician,
Who does esteem it as a thing,
to vile for his profession.
The other does account this art,
a part of Physic for to be,
As for those parts of man alone,
that are apparaunt outwardly.
And therefore does he not regard,
in learning to be studyous,
For that he does suppose the same,
unto his art superfluous.
How can the Surgeon well dissolve,
the thing contained in his cure,
Except he do euacuate,
and purge the same that is vnpure.
Or is he able for to cure,
all wounds and ulcers redylie,
Without the administration,
of diverse medicines inwardly.
Or can he take away the grief,
that unto nature hurtful is,
Without the aid of diet due,
and purging that which is amiss.
How can then Surgery I say,
from Physic well detracted be,
Since that in every action,
according lie they do agree.
But as it ws without advise,
disorderedlie distinct in twain,
So now the same divided is,
by wicked impes in parts again.
Some for the rheum forsooth will deal,
and some to heal th'affected eyes,
Some for the deafness of the ears,
and some to cure the stone likewise.
Some for the strangury, and some
to cure a fever skillful are,
And some to beautify the face,
some also agneales for to pare.
Some for an ulcer, some a wound,
and some the Fistulae alone,
Some for the pockes, some for a wenne,
and some to cure a broken bone.
Some for the dropsy others eke,
that for the gout alone do deal,
Some for the tooth ach expert be,
and some the rupture for to heal.
Thus every one does catch a piece,
and gadding goes from place to place,
Like pedlers prating in their pumpes,
which daielie do the art disgrace.
But to maintain their Idle lives,
they rather seem to practice it,
Then by their studies for to live,
in common wealth as members fit.
And further more a grief it is,
to see how things are brought about,
And only to subvert the art,
and utterly to root it out.
For they that do profess the same,
and should most excellent appear.
Their callings greatly do neglect,
in riot, pride, and belly cheer.
Not once regarding that they ought,
in readiness each thing to have,
Whereby the grieved limbs and life,
of the aflicted they may save.
But some will say I have a salve,
most excellent for each affect,
When he the bodies state, disease,
And Countries force does not respect.
Nor yet the number that is hurt,
by present chance ensuing then,
So that in curing five or six,
perhaps he spoyleth nine or ten.
Some will a mixture make of druggs,
yet they their uses do not know,
Which when they are in practice put,
their strange effects do truly show.
And othersome in stead of books,
do study at the bowls full hard,
And when they should their cures apply,
do run to plays, to Dice and Cards.
Some take delight to jest and skoffe,
in whoredom and in idleness,
Some covet greatly to be rich,
and some delight in all excess.
Some are of such a currish kind,
They are not, so that they may gain,
Nor takes regard unto the sick,
that languisheth in grievous pain.
Some occupations three or four,
have also joining thereunto,
And when they have great substance got,
their studies quite they do forgo.
And some moreover papists are,
some nulli fidians likewise be,
Some atheists temporifers, and
some machiuells a grief to so^,
And some so stained are with vice,
that they more likely do appear,
Incarnet devils for to be,
then such as live in Godly fear.
And some there be that prentises,
(to page it after them) do take,
And ^ather then they will them teach,
their only drudges do them make,
Whose years when they expired be,
to practice straight they do prepare,
As wise as woodcocks in their works,
without discretion or care,
Some buy their medicines ready made,
not knowing how to make the same,
Or else do take it in disdain,
thereto their fingers fine to frame,
Through which abuses this our art,
is brought in ruin and decay,
And many thousands spoiled be
whose cause I do lament this day,
Yet no man here I do accuse,
to be the private cause of this.
But every one I do exhort,
to mend the thing that is amiss.
Who deals not with brutish beasts,
but man that is Gods Image dear,
Regard therefore your calling great,
and keep your conscience always clear,
For whosoever does decay
through your default in (...),
His blood in the last (...),
shall at your hands (...).
God grant therefore that you may all,
in studies grave be deligent,
And lovingly likewise impart,
the skill that he to you has ^ent.
To one another mutual use,
as Christian brethren ought to be (...),
And not to sell Gods blessings, which
he freely did on you bestow.
Root out all runnagates and such,
as daily do their (...),
The noble Art Chirurgerie,
most wickedlie for (...),
Let modesty be your delight,
let virtue still maintained be,
And frame your selves in each respect,
to lead a life accordingly.
That so the world regarding ^is,
to God may yield eternal praise,
And those that be to health restord,
your honest name and fame may ^ise.
And whilst I here on earth remain,
to pray to GOD I will not cease,
Till I return to dust again,
your knowledge daily to increase.
FINIS.
John Read.

The form or figure of an instrument, serving for the cure of the distort
foot, with the (...) ^rtaining to the same. In Cap. 13. Lib. 2. Fol. 66.
depiction of surgical instrument for treating distorted feet

The two books of Franciscus Arceus, Doctor of Physic and Surgerie,
concerning the right order of curing or wounds, and of other precepts of the
same Art.
WHere as by long and continual practice of curing, I have through the
beneficial goodness of almighty God, attained unto the knowledge of many and
singular things, in both parts of Physic. I have therefore determined with
my self for the profit of the public utility, to set forth in writing
both mine own knowledge in curing, and also certain most excellent remedies
in either kind, and adding thereunto, the cures of certain discases, as also
of wounds and ulcers, which in the ancient books of Physicians were either
utterly, forgotten, or hitherto wanted. Our books therefore do contain,
besides all sorts of green wounds, both new and old ulcers, and the same
which commonly are alled Fistula^, or continual running sores in the breast,
the mean of the which cures being now in ure, does (...) the patientes
oftentimes into p^isickes, and many times also to consumptions, and also to
feebleness of body. Of the which Fistulae^s we will (God being car guide) set
forth in this present work, a certain and most wholesome order of cu^ing,
and will do the like also in our other works, which we trust shall be allowable
through the cures of many diseases hitherto omitted, and now set forth in the
same. But this order shall be observed of us, that we will show from the
head to the feet, both which is the briefest mean or way in curing every
member, and what remedies are most agreeable for all kind of wounds.

Of the wounds in the head which happenth as well by incision as by contusion,
which nevertheless have not perced beyond Pericraniu^ or Almocrati Cap. 1.
OF those auctors which in our time have set forth the order of curing wounds,
none in my judgment surely has written either better or more largely therein
the^ John Vigo, both whose learning and art although we especially allow, yet
notwithstanding, as much as (...) be by deligent study and long practice, (God
giueing us leave) we will endeavor to a^ unto his and other men's inventions,
many things, which may more briefly and more certeinlie be brought to pass
and dispatched. Therefore as the respect or cause of the wounds in the head are
diverse and of sundry sorts, so are they also to be cured by diverse and su^drie
means or ways, for there are some sorts of the^ are made by incision or
weapons ordained to cut, as with sword dagger, hartchet, knife or such like.
Another sort of the same are made by contusion, which chance either by club,
mallet, stone, or bat, or finally, by some other chance, as by fall, or such
like: a^ which sorts generally we ca^ co^tusio^, or brusing. Of these kind of
wounds some are greater and some are lesser, and they are known one after one
form and manner, and another after another sort, all which kind of wounds
notwithstanding, have not passed beyond Perieranium, and to the curing of these
kinds of wounds there are wont for the most part, commonly to be sent for,
either barbors or unlearned chirurgions. To whom these especially is a common
rule in a manner unto them all, that all wounds made in the head, they open and
make manifest, (and that I may use their own term) by an incision in the
form of a cross, and so uncover the scull, and then after bind up the wound)
which there themselves made) with ^owe and lint s^eepid in the whites of eggs,
as if the bones of the head were ^ured or cut. But the cause of their error is
a certain common rule among them, I having no certain or notable author for
the same, whereby they affirm that all wounds in the head ought to be opened
and made manifest, that at the second opening, (...) certainly ^wen whether
any bone of the head be ^acti^ed or ^ut. By which their error, m^
discommedities do happen to them which are so wounded. For (...) of (...)
needed w^w, that the cure of them is more st^ictelie done, and ^otracted to
longer time, for being done according to a^, the ^bundes may be well cured
within bili^or at the far d^s^ in tenn^ days, although they were great in
quantitie^, whereas otherwise these do s^an^ (...) their cure in ii. or iii.
(...) n^thos, of the which fault Galen does reprove. Thessalus. in Lib. 4.
Meth. Meden. Furthermore, the wound be^ing thus opened to the skull, they
oftentimes cast the patient into great hazard of life: for of necessity it
comm^th, to pa^e, that no small part of the head bone being corrupted with the
cold air tainting the same, must be (...) from them that are cured in this
order: the which bone else was neither fractured nor cut. For it must needs be
that the superficial part of currin^ bone of man's body, which the air does
touch, be corrupted. And it happens oftentimes also that not only the
superficial parts but the whole bone it self according to the thicknes
thereof is corrupted, besides that which was touched of the air coming to it.
For besides the discommoditie of the air; there noth accr^e also the
discommoditie of their digestiues, and oils of diverse sorts, which they^dd
apply in great quantity, whereas they are utterly ignorant whether the wound
be digested or not. For which cause we to help so great prolixitie and
discommoditie, will adioyne that order of euring which is allowed both of the
best learned of the ancient Chirurgions, and also of those of our: time,
adding thereto a ^rtaine medicine to this day set forth of no other (...),
whose wonderful virtue any man may make experience of.

And first to begin, we will discourse of simple wounds which are made or
happpen by insicion, then afterward we will also entreat of other kinds of
wounds.

That we may know^ therefore by certain conjectures, whether the bone of the
head be fractured or no, he who has received the wound is to be demanded
with what weapon he was wounded, and whether as soon as he had recceyued the
same, he fell not down withal unto the ground, and also whether he were
not astonished in his mind. But if the wound do not pearse to the skull, first
of all the hair about the wound is to be shaven away, then the flesh to the
flesh, and skin to skin, is to be joined the one to the other as even as may
be, and if this may be done without the use of the needle, it shall be very
well so to do. But if the wound shall be great in length, then either you must
use the needle, or else the wound is to be bound up with somewhat a long
thread, so that the co^enencie and situation of the place do suffer the same:
and that may be done or accomplished, if the brimmes of the wound be committed
most euenly together. And surely this kind of binding in all sorttes of
wounds (if it may conveniently be used) is best allowed, for the brimmes and
parts of the flesh being separated, do by those means close best together.
When this is done, if the wound be somewhat great, there is then to be left
in the lower part of the wound an Orifice, wherein is to be put a fi^e linen
cloth dipped in the white of an egg, with your probe or proouer, laying upon
also, double linen clothes dipped in the white of an Egg. Then bind up the
wou^d orderly not with to any clothes, and so let it remain until the next
day. Neither is it (...) the safeguard of the pacient that his dressing or
opening should be deferred until the third day, as many vnskillfulie use to
do, but at the second opening there needs neither any digestiues nor yet of
oil of Roses, which are wont commonly to be used, for we have proved by
daily experience and certain obseruacions, that such things do rather harm
then good, and we do think that the use of such digestiues to ^e
superflo^ous, not only in these, but also in all other kind of wounds:
wherefore by this mean following ye shall find a sure way of curing. Let
there be prepared in rediues that emplaister which is set forth of Vigo in his
Antidotarie, whose descripcion is as folowith.

Rec. Olei Rosati omphacini and completi. Ana.ij. Olei Masticini. Ana..j. Olei
Mirtini. Ana..j. Pinguedinis hircini..j. ss. Succi Betonicae..j.
Let them all boil together to the consuming of the ioyse, then let them be
strained, after adding there to

Masticis..x. Gu^mi Elemij..vj. Terebinthinae..ij. ss. Cerae Albae. q.s.
Then let them again boil at the fire a little, ^ according to art make
hereof an emplaister, and beside this also the use of a certain liaiment
invented by us, shallbe very ^dfull, the virtue whereof is such, that it does
concocte, digest, mundifie and incarnate, whose most certain use in all
dangerous cases never ^ited me, and besides, as many as made proof of the
same, has given it most justly the name of a balm, whose descripcion is as
follows.

Rec. Terebinthinae Clarae. Ana..j. Emplastri gu^mi Elemij. Ana..j. Pinguedinis
castrati,.ij. Pinguedinis porcinae antique..j.
Let them be melted at the fire and make thereof a liniment, and as often as
need shall require being liquified at the fire, the wound is tenderly to be
anointed with the top of a Hens fether, and after that the emplaister before
mentioned is to be laid on the whole wou^d without any lints. Then the day
following thou shall find competent matter concocted, and sufficiently enough
digested. But if after ye first day you shall find larger store of corruption,
it shall be convenient that the wound be dressed twice in the day, neither can the
force of this liniment be sufficiently commended, for besides that it procures
sufficient good matter, it also suffers not the parts whereunto it is
applied, either to be impostumed, or inflamed, more then the course of nature
and medicine requires, neither does it suffer the wounded part in any other
place to open or chaune, which thing does oftentimes happen also in smaller
wounds, which manner accidents for the most part are hardlier cured then ye
wou^d it self, and moreover, by the virtue of this liniment the pacients feel
very small grief, and by these means the cure is finished a great deal sooner
and better then by any other means now set forth.

But the wounds which shall happen to be made with stone, clubbe, or fall,
which wounds we call contused, and yet the bone not fractured we will cure in
this order. First let the wound be washed with Aqua vite, or wine decoct with
Myrre, francl^cence, or Surcacolle, that by this means all ye filth may be
cleansed away which was gathered either by ye stone, or dust, or blood concrete
and congealed in the wound. The same locion also is available to consound the
flesh ye sooner. The wound being thus made clean, then are the parts so to be
joined together as we have before specified, which if they seem so to be rent
or tor^e that they cannot be joined together, then ye must use boulsters three
square, or four sauare, ye same being dipped in the white of an egg, adding
thereunto pieces of of linen, such as we described before when we speak of
wounds being made by incisio^. But if ye parts of ye wounds neither can by
these ^ies be closed well together, then it shall be expedient to use the
needle and third, and to stitch up the wou^d, lea^ning in ye nether part an or
(...) wherthrogh the excrements may be p^ged, if y^ wou^d be great. The next
day after this, let the cure be handled in the same order as we have taught you
in the wounds made by ^sion, that is to say, the sides of the wound to be
^o^tly an^nted with that our balm, and the emplaister saye^ there on, for by
these two remedies wounds are thoroughly brought to the ci^a^ize. But in greater
wounds being first artificially stitched, there is to be left an drifted in
the lower part, into ye which a fine linne^ cloth may be put, which linne^
cloth or flam^l^ must be put in both at the second dressing, and afterward in
the rest, being diped in that our balm, but the emplaister which shall be put
thereon, is to be made clean twice a day. Lastly when the wound shall be known
to be well digested (but that shall not be known by the ^lthie corruption, but
by the good matter coming forth at the orifice) there shall be no more need to
use the linen cloth or fla^mula, but only ye emplaister being oftentimes
cleansed. But in those co^tusious in the which no wound does appear, besides
the tumor and softnes of the flesh, nor yet shall appear any suspisio^ of any
bone broken. (But that thing is to be sought out by the signs before rehearsed,
and also by the judgment of the diligent Surgion) it shall be expedient that the
cure be done in this order.

Rec. Albumins vnius^. Olei Mirtini Ana.. ss. miss^antur Pulueris Mirt^n Ana..
ss. miss^antur
Spread these being well beaten together upon ^owe being first wet in water and
vinegar and wro^e out again hard with thy hand, this towe with these
fomentacions applied to ye grieved place, and the next day by gods help it shall
do well, but if you shall judge it not to be whole th^eughly, apply the same
remedy again, which being thrice applied, it will cure the contusion be it
never so great.

Annotations upon the first Chapter.
1 Igitur vulnerum in capite:] Therefore of wounds in the head, whereas there
be diverse natures and shows of those wounds which are made in ye head, as
which are take of some particuliar place thereof and are gathered by the singes
adherent: namely by the pain, of the simptoma or accident, the
distemperature, the inflammation, (as Galen in his third book of the method of
curing does more playnelie show) what caus^s are most usual, and in the manner
of curing chifest. Such are set forth by our aucthor whereas ^e made a division
of the wounds that are given by any manner of weapon, which duo consideracion of
weapons is of Hipocrates so highly esteemed, that be thereby does measure and
estimate the wound. For those wounds says he which are made with a sword or
edge tool* do either part* the flesh only, or riue the bone, also in such
sort as the hurt and place of the wound are oftentimes all one: but such
weapons as are round, heavy, smoth and blou^, do more press down, riue and
crush the bone, wherefore he wills us in these kind of hurtes, to be
allwaies careful, but in the former not so often.

2 Name secundum art m^] for according to art.

Neither is it any marvel for simple wounds are offered to be cured which
ought so much the sooner grow together, by how much the head is more dry and
does receive into it the fewer superfluities from other members.

3 Acce^t (...)] that abundance of (...) gestures to (...) heere^

What great (...) y^ patients ^ce^ by the^ ^mo^ ^f oils, no (...), they make
the (...) fresh (...) they ^word ^he cure, and cast the (...) into diverse
dangers, (...) will (...) things the to be avoided, not only in the ulcers of
the head, but also in all other parts. For wounds are not cured before they
wax dry, as writes Hippocrates in his book that is of vices.

4 Igitur an os fractum sit] therefore whether the bone be broken or not. These
things are rea^ at large in Hippocrates in his book that is of wounds, and in
Galen in his (...) book called Therape^es, (...) Aegine^d and in Celsus (...)
his (...) book to where I (...) the reader.

5 Quod ^i] (...).

If ye wou^d ta^ either by stro^ or by cut, be of such greatness is the (...)
cannot be conjoined or brought together by ^gature, Galen in the third of his
method teaches, ^he (...) of that wound to be adjoined by sowing or (...).

6 Exte^ Imo-a^ (...)] of the flax with the white of an egg: Common p^a^e has
so prevailed, that to (...) green wounds the white of an egg sometime beaten
together said upon a (...) is applied, and not (...) good cause, for as ^th
as it suppresseth the (...) of blu^, astwageth pain; abaceth the heat and
^reth no inflamatio^s to rise, as witnesses Galen in his second book de
Simplic^ medicamentorum facu^tatibus; of the verues of simple medicines.

7 In secunda curatione] in the second dressing.

There is no ^de of oil of roses, because without any other at accident the
^tion of unity is simple: But yet where either pain or inflammation is feared,
or to be doubted, it is wont to be ^fed, as Paulus says in his ^ii. book and
Galen in his second, does a^e the oil of Roses with the Rose:

8 Omnia gener^] all kinds of sword^ digestiues.

That is to say, we refuse the yolke of an egg, Turpentine and oil of Roses,
whereof we s^ake, last, the yolke makes the ulcer continual and filthy, and
is not Ros^ refused of Hippocrates (in his book of Articles) where any ulcer
is (...) Further, this general kind of mingled emplaisters in in Galen, and
has force to co^ct, make rotten, to (...). and to make (...) or matten.

9 Lenimenti cuiusdam] of a, certain lenimente.

This Leniment invented by the aucthor, is most singular, and chiefly in that
wound which has in it any contusio^, pain, or inflamacion. For swin^s f^tte
does appease, the pain, and because of his oldnes or being, it is putrified,
it has by that means (...) singular virtue abst^rsi^s.

10 Primum Aqua vitiae] first with Aqua vitae.

After this sort Arnoldus does most speedily make whole or cure, fresh, blood,
and (...) wounds, washing them first with Aqua vitae.

11 Ca^tionem hoc ^do] the ^ure this manner.

There be many indications to be observed in a contusion, (as says Galen in
his (...) book of the method of curing) and the chiefest among them is to
ass^age pain, and to strengthen or comfort the hurt m^ther, least there
follow a flux, whereupon it is used and observed in common practice, to
apply the white of an egg with My^tilles, so says Lanfraneus and Razis, but
they do first infuse or perfuse it ^o, oil of Roses.

Of contusion with fracture of the bone, without any apparent wound. Cap. 2.
IF thou shall think or judge the skull to be fractured without any apparent
wound, thy judgment is taken by the falling down of y^ man, and by the
trenble of his mind, or co^sequent, vomiting, and sometime by the dimnesse of
his eyes, sometime also by considering the staff or (...) or such like (...)
wherewith the (...) was stri^ (...) ^uring the (...) of the pl^e from whence
the we^ was thrown, by the (...) wrath of (...) and (...) the hurt (...) he
that strikes his (...) being through^e moved (...) with (...) and stranger
(...) to the (...), by these and such like animaduer^tous, (...), known
whether the skull be (...). The which thing Al^ce^ (...) ^eheth Fen: 5.
Tractatum 3. et. i^ fracturae cranij. For oftentimes it happens (says he)
that the skull is fractured and the skin whole: yea and that the flesh is
impos^ and swolen and the skin also which is upon the skull, and this example
of judgment was given by them in (...) like case, which com^eth now to (...)
remembrance, and this it was. Two men falling out the one with the other in
abru^ the one was stro^ of the other with a stone but he which received the
bl^w, had armed his head with a steel cap, who notwithstanding being a^ha^sed
with the blo^elice of the ^w, fell down forth with ^o the ground, and being
(...) like^ by he to vomiting, by these con^es and by the beholding of the
steel cappe, (being somewhat bruised (...) his head) I judged the skull to be
fractured. When I had then opened the place, I did facion the incision
according to the contusion. The next day I p^ced the skull with the trepan,
although ye rift in the bone scan^ appeared a hair br^th and very little. But I
found a great deal of congeled blood and marvelous foul, which was falen
down upon Dura matter. By ye means therefore and in that order, he was in
short time cured and perfectly healed, as we shall put down in the chapter
following, without any great ^raunce or s^ne passion or other accedents
troubling him.

The Annotation of the second Chapter.
It is holde^ for a great question among ye learned Surgions, whether it be
possible that the skull may be broken and no solution of continuite in the
skin appearing. Celsus and Paulus opinion is, that it must appear in ye skin
if the bone be cut. Notwithstanding, Hippocrates, seems to be of another
opinion in his book which Iacobus Petusi^as^on, affirms, by arguments
drawn from nature it fulse. Search further, Viduis Vidus a Florentine, which
has written a Coment upon the same. book.

Of the fracture of the skull Chapter. 3.
THe unlearned and unskilful Chirurgions (whereof here in England have no
lack) do oftentimes notwithout great danger of the pacient, offend the
fracture of the skull for lack of knowledge in the art, and for want of
judgment, whiles they do nothing consider of the fracture of the bones, and
do neglect to search out thoroughly whether any thing be hurt or perished in
the right Mirabile, or any of the other pannicles or compactions of the brain,
for the parts of the liver or innermost bone (which men call Vitrea tabula)
oftentimes happens to be cut in sunder, shiuered, dashed, and broken in
pieces, and moved out of their places, and that fault is found more oftener in
the inner Table, then in the upper. Which things first most grievous panges
and griefs, and after death it self does ensue.

But there are very many to whom it is a very light matter where no suspicion
nor any kind of fracture is to move them, does open ye head with incision, when
a man may justly suspect or mistrust certain fractures, then they open nothing
at all. The cause of these things is ignorance of the art, the necligence to
understand, and the eschewing of labor and trauaill in considering of things.

(...) out. But although there be nothing fractured without yet it is not to be
doubted, but that something has been bruised within, as the fracture of some
vein has followed the same bruise, out of which vein the bruised blo^d being
shed and congeled, is p^triffed and turned into impostumation and matter, for
the which when there is no place open to purge and issue forth, it comes to
posse the pannicles enuironing the brain, yea and the brain it self is
inflamed and corrupted, and of this thing manifest signs shortly after do
appear, which being come, then is the party, cast away. It may be also that
although the veins be not fractured, yet by reason of the vehement bruise,
stripe or grief received, much blood within the veins themselves may be
drawn forth and stirred up, and therefore an inflammation of the place and
corruption also may ensue. In all these cures therefore the cure may be done
by no other means better then by the trepan, for when the skull is once opened
by the trepan, and that the pannicles may be perceived, although the place be
inflamed and fastered, yet for the most part it happens, the wound to be
cured and healed, and the same blood so congeled by the corruption or
concussion of the bone, is disceuered and wipte away. Therefore in such
mishappe this thing is to be foreseen especially, that the wound be opened,
and the place cleansed, and with towe soupled, and dipped in the white of an
egg, and so to be made up. Then from the next day after, until the seventh,
this sirupe ensuing, is to be ministered to the patient, the use whereof shall
supply the right office of a convenient purgation. For we have found by good
experience, that other purgations greatly to hurt those that are in this case.

Rec. Sirupi. Rosaru^. ij. Aqua Plantaginis. iij. Misseto.
And so long must they use this diet exquisitelie, until you perceive they
have need of flesh meat. The next day, that is to say, the next after the
first dressing, at the se^de opening, it is to be dressed with our Balm, and a
plaster of Gummi Elemij, laid thereon, and so to be arti^ially bound up
again. But the third day ye must use the trepan to open the skull, the ^se
and reason of which instrument shall be declared of us in his convenient place,
But the skull must be opened from the lower part of the wound with the trepan,
and presently as soon as the bone shall be opened with the same spoone which
shall be in the Surgions case, ye shall apply upon the pannicles of Oleum
Rosarum, Lactis Mulieris, et Mellis Rosarum, ana parts equalis. Being warmed
at the flame of a Candell in your foresaid spoone, as soon as this is done,
put between the bone and the pannicles of the brain, a round piece of stike
which the Spaniards call Sendall, that the pannicles of the brain be not hurt
by pulsation or beating against the bone, being ragged by means of the
fracture. The^ handsomelie make up your wound with Lints, ^n^dynting she bone
with that our Balm, being liquished at the ^er, then fill your wound with
your foresaid Lintes, not with too hard depression, and so finish your
dressing with an emplaister of Gummi Elemij, or de Minio laid thereon.

In this order the patient being dressed, the next day after the matter or
corruption of the wound being very well and commodiously gathered together and
putrified, is easley confected, whereof I think we shall not need to use
those digestions, neither to these nor yet to any other wounds, which are
commonly of the yolke of an egg, oil of Roses and Turpentine, neither to
anoint the head with oil of Roses, neither any other member that is wounded,
for by this our Balm the corruption is soonest brought to perfection, and the
place not inflamed, and I can easily witness yt I have long used this order of
healing which I have declared, and never repented me thereof in most dangerous
wounds, whether the pa^nicles of the brain were corrupted, or some part of ye
brain it self perished, and as far, I can judge (...) used of those digestiues
and anointings to, are wont to be the (...) that the cures of such wounds are
prolonged to the second and third month: for the wounds are corrupted and
pu^sted more then needs, ye complexion is made the worse, the member weakened,
which happenest otherwise, if the (...) be done in that order which I have
declared. For by this means the time of healing does seldom (...) month, and
the bones (if any are to be drawre forth) the xxv. day or before, are loosed,
according to ye quantity of the fracture, for if the fracture be the larger or
greater, then are they drawn forth the s^er.

The Annotation of the third Chapter.
The breaking of the skull, is a division of the same whereof there be so many
differences as follows, a riuing or rifting, a cutting out, an expression, or
a depress^re, (...) infants called a contusion, or a brusing. Galen adds
hereunto a diversity of seperations, called Cameratio, this fracture should
be (if it be manifest) thus proved, with a small knife or other apt instrument,
wrought or cut out, until the rift no more appears, but if we should
believe, or follow Hippocrates in this cause, we should proceed further, as to
mark, or color the skull with incke, and the next day to wipe it or fret the
(...) away, as it was his accustomed manner, it is not out purpose, to deliver
the whole circumstances of every thing y^ appertains unto this matter, but
to show or direct you* in what place ye may find them.

Et si nihil omnino rup^ fuerit] and if there be nothing torn, I know not by
what means we found at Antwerp in this year, y^ very many perished by
certain, abundance of ^f blood issuing forth of the veins, by shaking or
disturbing the brain, or the pannicles, without hurt appearing in the skull,
which will (...) much the more perrilous and (...), for that those people so
grieved, did not fall into the accustomed apparent afflictions and accedents
that are wont to appear in those cases. For seeing that neither in the vii
day, nor at the farthest on the xiiii. day, this mischief (...) vew^a^ it
self by the Simptoms or singes describe^ Hippocrates, those people ^rt began
on those days to amend, not to be greiued with any fever, neither did vomit,
but on the (...) day, and the xx. day, yea and that is more to be wond^ed at,
on the xxv day, these singes did then appear, and the parties all died. Upon
this matter read Celsus, and Vigo, upon this proper chapter.

Illud igitur] that therefore.

Our work in surgery we thus begin.

We first shave the place, to the same wound, we make way by two incisions,
parting them selves, to two straight corners, as we term it Transeue^sim,
which Paulus desscribeth by the form of this greek letter X.

S^pis oui albo maceratis] with pleagants dipped in the white of an egg. Paulus
Aegineta ministereth posca which is water and vinegar boyld together, and
applies to the place wine mixed with oil of Roses.

Iam diu exquifita dietae] now using a very spare diet.

I say a diet that res^eth inflammation which the ancient writers term a
fever.

Tercia die] the third day.

Hippocrates warns that it should not be deferred until ye third day,
especially if the co^stitucion of the air be inclined to heat. And Galen in
his second book de officina medici, would have the order before perscribed to
be used the second day, unless any n^w accident thaunce in ye mean while.

State^ vbi (...)] (...) when the bone is discovered. And rightly (...)
presently, for that the membrane must be out of h^ cleansed and dried. Unless
the same moistning wax ^ll a^ be (...) fall out, it is to be fear^ the (...).

Oleum Ros^] oil of Roses.

It is manifest that Galen did use (...) where (...) is discovered, (...)
inflammation, but to auoi^ pain. In his second (...) think him worthy of
great observation, for (...) commands Pigions blood warme^ to be ministered to
the place. Whom Appol^ following, willseth the same blood to be taken out of
the wing of a Pigeon.

Of the use of the Trepan or Percer. Cap 4.
THe third day after the wound is made, it shall be expedient to use the office
of the Trepan or Percer, the Trepan is of two sorts, one male, and the other
female, which the gre^kes call Abaption. First of all (...) the male Trepan is
to be placed upon the skull along by the lowest part of the wound, so that it
touch no part of any ^ssing of the wound. This Trepan being always set as it
were by even counserpoyze, we must turn it round still until it has perced
the bone so much as the thickness of a Spanish Royal of ii.s. and somewhat
more.

The T repan male has a double edged ^gue in the middle, which they call
Nepsula, and dosth perce in the manner of a ^th^ d^ or square boarer. And the
same does fashion a Center in the bone, and the circumference of the Trepan
does set forth the circle in the bone.

There is nothing in the middle of the female Trepan, whose circumference
notwithstanding must be like the male Trepan. This (...) being plac^d by e^all
poyze. We (...) turn it round (...) and (...) gently until the Upper cable be
cut through (...) the (...) the (...) while as occassion shall serve, the small
pieces of the bones that be cut off, (...) ^ple (...).

Just like wise we must (...) into the lower table, but before the Trepan does
part through, the left ha^nd which holds the Trepan, into be ^owned ^ward
some part of the (...) described; (...) ^the the whole bone may (...) and that
(...) no fa^der.

(...) instrument which (...) seem meet for the purpose, is to be taken, that
the same whole circle so appointed fo^rth and cut off^ (...) drawn forth
without any hurt d^ing to the (...) of the brain.

After all this we use Instrumentu^m Lenti^olare, being somew (...) armed at
the (...) of a Candle, and do scale (...) about (...) that (...), the small
and sharp pieces of the (...) moved with ^in^all puls^tion, any thing should
be perished with those sharp pieces of the (...).

But let the place be prepared and dressed with red Sanda^l and the liquid, of
Balsam^, as we have taught you al^e^die, be applied.

But when the (...) in the bones shall be great, so that the skull (...)
together, ye shall not need to use the Trepan, but the bones are to be reduced
into their natural place. For I have seen many in this case being to ^taken
in h^d of the Surgions with the Trepan and alenatories a^r named, to have sped
very evil.

For whereas the operation or cure cannot be done without great depression^
of the bones, for it comes to pass that the pannicles eft^nes are broken,
and the brain also perished.

And furthermore whereas also the bones are not plucked forth by them, but are
suffered to putrify until they come forth of their own accord, the patient
are cast into the danger of death. Therefore the (...) are to be reduced into
their own place as artificially as may be, and of the (...) bones some part
is to be plucked forth, that there may be some orifice into the (...) be
perished (...) should want a place (...) whereby the (...) purge themselves and
so be cured.

Neither must (...) plucked (...) out all the (...) that are broken, for so
(...) does much anoy, (...) about within (...).

But we must consider deligentlie and peruse thoroughly, least any part of the
inner Table ^wardlie vnw^es to us either broken or bruised dounely ^at or upon
Du^, matter, (as they call it,) for we have perceived (...) that a greater part
of the bone is ^ored and broken (...) in then without: as it often th^neth in
(...) that are broken. And it has diverse times happened unto my self, that I
have found a greater part of the bone removed within, then I could pluck
forth of the orifice of the wound, which thing when it happens, I hane
accustomed gently to break the bone with instrument^, and (being doubled unto
many (...)) so to phick them forth.

We must therefore diligently peruse, whether it be need k^ for any part of
the bone to be plucked forth, which, except thou pluck out, it must needs he
that the pannicles being bruised with continual beating are broken, (...) this
thing is easily known, if a man do^ look diligently into his business. For
the pannicles being more bound in and p^nd up then they should be and distant
from the^ (...) more then inconvenient, do appear. Therefore the bo^ being
reduced into their place, and those things being pluck^ forth which are
needful to be drawen^. If any asperite be left, at the which dura matter with
her continual laboring may be hurt, it shall be necessary for the same
asperite to be taken away with that lenticular instrument. But the next ^ay
following after the bones shall be corrected and plucked forth, if the color of
Dura matter shall second to (...) Mel Rosarum (of the which we (...)) (...)
only that Surgions (...) Mell) Rosarum at the flame of a Can^, (...) Dura
matter and the (...) thing in ^itable, both that all matter with (...) putri^,
(...) purged the better, and that Dura matter by (...) be not hurt.

For by this M^l Rosarum Dura matter is most easily maund^ (...) if (...) do^
beel^ (...) or (...) lea^ by the contu^, but which the (...) Mack^nes shall
begun (...) ^uerted (...) to a better (...), in st^ of Mell Rosarum, (...) ye
shall use this ^guent which I (...) by (...) to be more excellent a more
present (...) which are (...) Vigo.

Rec. Sirupi Rosarum per infusione..j. ss. Florum ^ follow^ hyp^ti. Florum
Rorisimarini. Grani* ana palulum. Terebinthinae ^ire. ij. Vini odoriferi. ij.
Olei Omphasini. lib.ij. Croci, Parum.
Let them boil together to the consuming of the wine, then let (...) he
strained, we (...) the oil Omphacine both for the ^cellencie of the liquor,
and also to delay grief (...) although the aucthor himself has let pass
this manner of oil, yet do we commend it as not to be let pass, we do add
also of a ^ne divise sa^torne to ye flowers while^ they are in boiling, for by
this vnguente, all the pannicles of the blaine are ^nt to be restored fully
before the fortenth day.

But in the (...) with ye (...) in the wound, (...) the bones^ (which (...))
are to be (...) forth (...) the (...) which time they (...) place to the (...)
little. The (...) much. (...) it dri^ forth the (...) into the (...) within
the (...) for the (...) of the wound (...) also added very (...) to the flesh,
and keeps (...) shall (...) ^ture. And by these (...) the wound^ (...) to be
opened (...) all the (...) be (...) which being done, it shall be lawful for the
(...) out of his bed, after the which time he is to be dressed twice every day.

But of our Balm digestive, this is the description.

Rec. Gummi Elemij. Ana..j. ss. Trebinthinae abi^tinae Ana..j. ss. Sepi
castrati antiqui.ij. Et liquefacti..ij. Pinguedinis porcine antiquae lique
factae..j. Miss^ et fiat linimentum s.A.
With hal^e an (...) of thi^ Balm, (although the bound be never so gre^) it
may be cured. The (...) of is in this sort, (the wound being hand so^ (...)
clea^ and those things before prescribed (...) to the (...)) thou shall melt
thi^ Balm at the ^e an some convenient vessel (but not to hot for hurting the
patient) and with a Hena ^ther anoint gently all the (...) of the wound, with
the brimes, and the very bone (...) the (...), and when thou have anointed it,
fill the wound with dry (...) and emplaister de gummi Elemij, (...) may find
in the consi^tor diffirencia. C.j. For (...) by long use found out this kind
of emplaister to be most fit for the curing of wounds in (...). And this is the
d^ipeion of the same.

Rec. Gummi Elemij..iij. Resinae (...). Ana..ij. Gummi Ha^moniaci. Ana..ij.
Gummi Hed^. Ana..ij. C^ae. Ana..ij. Terebinthinae iij. ss. Olei Rosarum. j. ss.
Let the (...) ^oyle together, except the Gu^me Armoniack, with one (...) a
half of odoriferas wine, unto the consuming theroef, adding in the end the
Armoniack, desolued in vinegar, and your Gum Hedere finely poudered, and being
sufficienfly Boiled, let it be wrought in wine and Aqua vivitae, and so ^ade
up. in colles. Of no less use also I have by often exprience proved that
emplaister to be, the description whereof thou may find in John Vigo, in the
chapter of the Francture of the skul, the which he gives to name Emplaistiu^
Betonice. This emplaister is likewise most profitable to the same thing, which
Alcelinus de Ianos, gave to the Surgio^s of ^arcino, the descripcion whereof is
in this order.

Rec. Terebinthinae clare. lib.j. ss. Cere albae..v. Resine pinae..vj. ss.
Make hereof an Emplaister according to art, which being done, let it (...)
white vinegar, in the which it must be in^ed the space of six days, adding
thereto, two pares of the ioyse of Betony, and one part of the ioyse of (...),
so le^g it lie until it be thoroughly steeped. The^ let it be melted (...) ^ger
and other (...) for (...) ^ten agains and (...) milk, (...) made up and
reser^ed.

There in no greater use (...) all the (...) of this emplaister, of the which I
never as yet repented my self. Therefore (...) now be restored, there shall be.
no (...) the use of the same liquor, which I have described after this anis
more, but the pannicles and also the wound it self is to be anointed gently
with a fether di^ped in the said ba^e, until the whole bone be covered over
with (...), (for the force of this medicine is a most present and sure (...) Or
this purpose) but these lintes and tow are somewhat gently and tenderly to be
laids on the wound, least the (...) hard depressure of the same, the growing
and com^ together of the wound be hindered by the same. Neither does the
growing over of the st^, hinder any whit at all whereby the corrupted bones
(if any be) should be (...) in time. But the convenient time for this purpose
is the xxiiii. or xxv. day, yet in some before this time also they do come
forth, but when the wound is great, and the place boared through with the
trepan, for the most part the bones are expulsed the xxv. day. Neither ought
we to enterpret these things which we have spoken of the plucking forth of
bones in such sort, that we should think that the ^es will come and break
forth of their own accord, as the most part of unlearned Surgions do, but
it is needful they be drawn forth of the Artist with that instrument of
Iron which commonly is called pes caprinus, that is the Goats foot^, for
(...) thou have taken this in the hand, (...) strained it a little; pres^
(...) place, and follow. But if at the first time it does take none effect the
day following the matter will as easily be dispatched. Therefore we must take
heed that the (...) forth in due time and season, and when they are once
drawn forth, then may the patient rise out of his bed without danger, after
these things again in healing the wound it shall be expedient to use
exciccacions casting on the powder of Allom burnt, and lints laid thereon, and
thereon some emplaister, neither the use of this powder ought to be common, but
must use it seldom, and by this means within the space of xxx. days, wounds
are cured with no great trouble of the pacient, nor business to the Surgion.

Annotacion of the fourth Chapter.
A Trepan has been known unto the ancient writers, and as I remember, the
same has been twice mentioned by Hippocrates, in his book of weundes of the
head. The use whereof, to them of old time has been thought very
perrilous: whereupon Galen allows rather of a small incision knife, which
being wariely directed through the hollow seals, safely comes to the taking
away of the bone. The same excision being gently and leysurely done, is
greatly commended of Galen. See further in Aegineta in that proper Chapter.

You must note that the use of this instrument is very star^ge and unmeet,
where bones be vehemently and thoroughly broken, or where by themselves they
be weak or broosed. Hippocrates excepteth always childrens bones, which be
not a little^ weak and infirm.

Nocit enim] for it hurts.

Most learnedlie hal^ this annor observed that which Galen says in the eight
book of the use of parts, namely, that broken bones are with all expedicion
to be cut out, least they bring present detrement unto the brain.

Postera autem die] Upon the other day.

In this he follows Paulus Aegineta. Here is to be noted, that if there
appear a voluntary blackenesse, and that it continue so deep in the wound
that it reach unto the bottom, it betokens mortification of the natural
heat, and so consequently, no hope of health.

Of wounds made in the head by incision. Cap. 5.
WHether the wounds in the head, which has also attained to the skull, be
deep, and inward, we easily know by the length thereof. For of the roundnesse
of the head and of the place in the which the wound is, by sure conjecture and
reason the depth is taken. Therefore if the wound be deep and inward, it is
to be framed forthwith and fashioned, neither shall it be needful to cut
the head ouerth wart. But it shall be sufficient to open the brimmes or Lips so
cut together, with Pericranium on both sides, and to confirm it into the
fashion of a Triangle, and the day following we must begin to cure the wound
with that Balm, (as we call it) being melted and warm, laying thereon an
emplaister of Gum Elemij, but the third day we must use the Trepan, but the
bones are to be boared through from the inner part, although there be cause
of suspicion that all the pan be cut, for out of that place all matter,
corruption, and hurtful humors is purged. The place therefore being now
opened, thou shall cure the pannicles with Mell Rosarum together with the
liniment (which they call Balm) to enduce the flesh, as we have already set
soorth, For by this liniment Dura Matter is more mundified, and the flesh sooner
induced. But the whole place that is cut, is to be anointed with a fether,
that all places may be searched, and mundified, neither is the use of the
Rasour instrument, which they call Legra unprofitable and superfluous in these
wounds. For so great a portion of the pannicles being cut away by shauing and
paring, would receive hurtful air, and neither the pannicles themselves
should be so handsomelie made clean, or gather so convenient flesh over them,
as the same is best done by the use of the Trepan. For the wounds being cured
in this order, are most easily purged, and best covered with flesh. And do
cast forth the bones, if any be to be drawn, in manner at the same time, as
the broosed wounds do. But if these wounds do not in manner extend beyond
the former table of the Skll, in such wounds to be known and cured, there
needs great judgment and diligence, for it comes very often to pass,
that these wounds are made of that man which knows not to use his swoorde
strongly, neither in cutting nor in wounding strikes with his hand lightly,
but does rather broose then cut, and so does hurt as if the wound had been
made with Clubbe or Staff, or by some other contusion, by which blow the
head is rather dashed together then wounded, and the Skull it self through
the concauitie, and that part by the which it does touch the pannicles, is the
more shaken and moved, then any whit touched or cut in the upper part, so
that it is more grievously hurt with the swoorde, then if it had been done
with a Staff or Clubbe. It happens also that often times of that contusion
many veins are broken, out of which the blood that bursteth forth is easily
corrupted, and consequently not only the signs of death, but also very
death it self ensues. Wherefore when any of these things shall happen, it
is the chief part of an expert Surgion to consider of all these things which
we have spoken off, and also if conveniently it may be, to view the swoorde or
other weapon wherewith ye wound was made, whether it were sharp or blunt, and
also to consider the man which gave ye wound, whether he were more in
actiuitie, or in strength, likewise also to consider what we upon he used,
sharp or blunt, a Dagger, an axe, Darte or Iauelin, or any other, rather then
a sharp weapon, many things of the like sort are to be considered and waied,
and the signs also are to be observed, which have ensued in him that has
taken the wou^d, if he did straight way vomit, or if he fell down, or whether
he were in a foune, or troubled in his sight with dimnesse or in any other
sense, for no such thing is wont to happen where the wound is lightly received,
and nothing else made then an incision or cut, but to take it so lightly that
he seems to have had the stripe not in the head but on the hair, and that
happens by reason of the light contusion. Therefore when any such thing
happens, whereas the conjecture and the judgment thereof is very difficill,
do think this to be the surest and most wisest way, that the place be opened
with the Trepan. For we do fear no danger hereof, (although we find
nothing hurt within the skull.) I say, no danger nor any delay of cure.
Contrariwise, if this thing be not regarded, then most great and most certain
danger, yea and often times death it self does ensue. And truly I do think
that the most part of men which dye of any wound in the head, dye for this
cause. For in such chances the Surgions have accustomed no other thing then to
scrape or shave, and to use the Legra, until they shall think that they are
come to the end of the Scissure, and so they think they have satisfied
themselves, and discharged their office. And when they least fear, then
begins to appear the signs of death, whereof they have small knowledge,
and by this means all do perish, so that none can escape these dangers:
neither may this seem a thing marvelous or incredible unto you, seeing there
are very few in our coasts unto whom the use of the Trepan is known. Although
they have long professed the art of Physic and Surgerie, for I do hear
say, that the most part do disalow this order of curing, and do condemn it
as full of danger and hasard, which do not perceive this thing that of two
sure instruments and for certain members most fit, this Trepan to be the one,
which is commended especially of John Vigo and Guido, and of other auctors, for
(that I may use their own proper words) the Trepan in the cures of the head,
and the Falx or hook in the cure of the tail is greatly allowed of them. But
what this Falxe should be, or what is the use thereof, surely I take it to be
a thing utterly unknown unto our country Surgions, and if it were at a venture
and upon the soddaine brought forth before the^, I think it would not be
known. But let us return to our purpose, I do thinck therefore that when
there shall be no fear of those matters which are set forth of us to be
observed in the wounds of the head, the^ there needs no other instrument
besides the use of the Legra or Rasoure instrument. Now therefore this
instrument must be of three sorts: a greater, a middle, and a less. Of which
this is the use. If the cut shall pierce as deep as the former table, or else
deeper, then we most go to work with ye greater instrument, after that with the
middle, and then with the least. But if the incision in the bone shall be
something less and not deep, it shall be sufficient to make ye place smoth and
plain with the least. Legra: least there should be left some recesse or
co^cauitie, whereunto the corrupt matter being gathered together might pierce.
And when it could not be taken away, should thereby putrify the bone. But when
this is once performed, in the second opening, the Balm must be applied,
although the matter be not yet brought to his perfection, for by this medicine
the corrupcio^ shall be brought to his perfection and ripeness in very good
time, as we have taught you before. After this let ye place be filled with
lints not to hard depressed, and add thereunto one of the emplaisters which we
have set forth to you before. By this means therefore all kinds of wounds
are most rightly and sonest cured, oftentimes without any loss of bones, for
although they are sometimes fouched with the air and hurt, the power of this
medicine is so great, that if the pacient be of a good constitucio^ of nature,
all things be easily corrected and restored, as by experience made it shall
manifestly appear, but what appertains to the order of diet in meats and
drinks, and the conuenience of the place, thus it is. If it shall be in the
winter season, let his chamber be in ye upper part of the house, in some high
chamber if it may conveniently be, so that the roof be well fenced either with
plaster or with Tome other lofte above it, and not near the tyles only, from
the rain, for if these things may not be had it shall be surer that his chamber
be prepared in a lower place, but in So^mer season a lower chamber is best,
least the pacie^t be hurt by heat, let the chamber door be always kept
shut, and hang a cloth before the door to keep off the air that comes
into the chamber. Furthermore let there be a Candel burning in the chamber day
and night, whose heat is sufficient to temper the air that is in the circuit
of the chamber. But if the place do seem somewhat cold by reason of the
winter, let there be burning coals brought into the chamber sometimes, for it
is not good for the chamber to be over hot, therefore we do commonly use to
have a candle continually burning in the chamber, the doors being shut and a
cloth continually hanging before the same, for it happens oftentimes, that
those which comes in and out, does neglect to shut the doors, many Surgions
have accustomed to cast a cloth over their heads that stand by, in manner of a
tent, and so to go about their cure: but surely I think that there is no need
of any such things, if so that the place be prepared as we have said, for I
think that oftentimes, the same hurts. For the heat of the candle is
reflexed, by reason of the cloth stayed against them, and does not suffer the
vapors fuming out of the pacients head to breath forth, and it is evident
that thing to be very noy-s^me and hurtful, and especially in the hot
countries, but in cold countries it may be better borne withal.

It chances oftentimes in the wars deep wounds of men's heads in the open
air to be cured, and without any house, where neither chamber, nor sheet, nor
fire is, therefore we think those things to be sufficient which we have
spoken of touching preparing the place.

But when the time of opening is, it will be much auaillable to hold two
Candels above on both sids of the wound, as near as may be, that the air
enuironing the thamber, may thereby be warmed and tempered, and the same two
candles shall both give light enough, and shall conveniently keep of the cold
that may hurt, for there shall be no cold in a manner in the chamber that is thus
prepared, as we have told you, and if thou suspect that there is any, the
candles being removed to and fro about the pacient shall remedy all that
matter, which thing surely very experirnce does teach us.

In the very beginning of the cure, we do feed them which are diseased of
any wound in the head with raysons and a little bread both at dinner and
supper, and with water of Anise and Barley, or with that which shall seem best
to agree with the complexion of the pacient, and we use this diet until the
seventh day, except necessity does enforce any other thing either in the
matter it self, or growing of any other foreign cause. But if the party be of
a choleric complexion to suffer him once a day to eat the flesh of a pullet
or cockerell, until he have passed the seventh day, but utterly to forbed all
such as suffer any such griefs to eat the broth of the flesh, because it is
wont to hurt very much: from the beginning of the cure we do give him to
drink every day in ye morning the sirope of Roses made by infusion..ii. mixed
with Plantain water..iii. and this we cause to be given vii. days together. We
must also diligently foresee that every day he go to ye stool whether it be
of his own course or provoked by some Clister. But we exhibit no medirine
purgative, nor yet Cassia. For that we have observed by often proofs, that
thing to be hurtful to them very greatly, although it be a very simple
medicine and have no solutiue at all admired. If any man stand in doubt or
will contend to the contrary, he shall find it by proof. For whereas the
head is the chiefest member, it cannot be but that it should be troubled of the
purgative medecin, by reason of the community which the brain has with the
belly, whereupon it comes to pass, that it can do no good but hurt very
much, and surely this order these fifty years has had good success with
us always, whereas before that time it did so well take place according to our
expectation as long as we did accustom to give Casfia fistulae to the patient,
it shall be sufficient therefore with the use of these sirupes to atteunate the
humors, to temper the heat, and refresh the strength, to help the virtue
concoctiue of the belly and the liver, and to repress the boiling of the
blood, and of other humors. But when the fracture of the bone is not certain,
yet it is to be suspected that there is some secret rupture or blood effused
out of the veins, which being corrupted, may cause death. This thing we may
with certain experience find out by a certain Pileote composed which we will
declare after the mind of Bartilpalia although it be not plainly set forth of
the same author.

Rec. Cerae nouae Citrini. Thuris. Santali..ij. Terebnithinae. Aceti Fortisimi.
Ana..j. fiat empl. s.a. Farine Fabarum Ana..j. fiat empl. s.a.
Let this emplaister be laid over all the head in likeness of a Cappe, the
head being first shaven. For on what part soever the fracture is in the bone,
upon the same part the Sere-cloth shall be found deminished and dried up. And
that shall be apparent within the space of three days. But in the other parts
where no fracture is, the plaster shall appear uniform and all one. But if
there shall be no fracture (...), the plaster shall appear^ ^ll one.

Annotacion of the fifth Chapter.
Na^n cal^riam peruadant.] For be it that they pass through the Skull.

There be many ^ignes to be regarded. In the first Chapter he gahtereth the
tokens from the kinds of weapons, now from the part which by them is wounded,
as if it may seem, or in the forepart of the crown, from hence both
fore-wittings and the manner of cure is delivered by Hyppocrates, for these
fore-partes be most feeble and weak, the hinder parts not so weak, because
the bone is harder, and less substance of the b^ine contained under it.

Trianguli figuram] a figure triangle.

You must ever (...) ware, that none of the temples be ever ^t, nor no higher
part near the artery that is carried by the temples, for then a distention of
Nerves must need^ follow, which we call a con^ion, those mus k^es which
Hippocrates in his book of his con^extion of sinnues, calls Crota Phitas.

Si statem vomuit] if he presently vomited.

These things ye shall read off in Hippocrates seventh book of Aphonfimes in
the 59. of the sa^e. And in the 50. of the vi. books, beside mut^ more written
in his coaicast fore knowinges, ^n^ his book of wounds in the head. Once a
day with flesh, C^e^i^e (...) rather need nourishment and less bear fasting,
as Hippocrates says in his second book of diet, in sharp diseases. The
inconveniences that comme^h by fasting, is sounding, giddiness in the head,
feed ^enesse in the ^ke, all which in that part of Hippocrates, and in the
co^t which Galen makes upon the sa^e are expressed more at ^ge.

Purgati^ar nullum] no purging medicine.

For since the brain after a sort does (...) all other parts, and is not
governed or contained of any, it ought not to receive the supersluitie of any
other part, and therefore it needs no pu^ gi^g medicine. Yet notwithstanding
I will add that purgative medicine which Hippocrates wills to be given. If
the hend be troubled with a collericke impostumation called Herisipelan then he
thinks it convenient to purge by such a medicine as has the properti^ to
avoid th^er.

Of Contusions in the heads of Infantes and Children Cap. 6.
THere are in Children oftentimes (...) years of age, co^tusions made ^ither by
(...), or by some stripe, or by some instrument or (...) like al^aies to
ap^s^u^es or to those blemishes which we see in brazen or leaden ^e^el, so that
the skin to not perished, and the hinder table of the skull nothing broken, the
former table is many times hurt (...) for the tenderness of that bone by
reason of the age is sometimes the cause that the skull being not hurt at all,
and oftentimes hurt and broken is bruised down, and the pa^i^es enuironing the
brain be broken, which we have often found out, and an example of the matter
was set forth of late, wherein the town of Lierena of the pro^ce of Granado, a
chi^ of ^oure yee^es of age was brought to us to be e^eed, who^ a woden door
falling from a window, had grieuous^ wounded (...) under that closing of the
skull that is called Coronall, of which stripe both b^s, and also both the
skins were broken, and also part of the brain th^ise in the tone of his
(...) came forth, yet was the child healed without manifestation of the
wound, and without any loss of bones, ^eyther was the cure thereof pr^l^ged
above the twenteth day.

To such co^pressions in childrens heads to be cured, we shall not ^de any
greater opening of the wound then is made by chance, and if there be no wound
made, nothing is to be opened, although all the bones be known to be perished
and broken, and this shall be a most suer order of curing in such wounds, for
whatsoever is done otherwise then this among the common sort, it has most
certain danger. And this is the suer order and way of this cure, besides the
temperate and wholesome diet of the child, or at least wise of Nurse if he be
as yet nourished with Milk, it shall be meet to make some diuersions, either
his arms, or his thighs are to be scarified, if the con^on shall show no
manifest wound at the first, we use this remedy.

Rec. Olei Rosarum et ana.. ss. Camomille. ana.. ss. Olei Mirtinj, et.j. pull:
Mirtini..j. Albuminis vni^oni cum vitello. Farine fabarum. ana palulum. Farine
hordie. ana palulum.
Let these be well mingled together and be made in the form of an emplaister,
and put unto the bruised place. The next day after, we do apply another
plaster, the place notwithstanding being first well shaven with a Rasour,
which plaster is as follows. Take of the dross of an hiue of Bees, or if
that cannot well be come by, of new drossie wax and of common honey
puluerizid..j. of the stone called Haematite or blood stone.. ss. of Cumin, of
Absinthiu^, of the Pumice stone, and of common brannes..ij. mingle all these
together at the fire, and let a plaster be made, which put upon the place
being depressed, brother in compass by the space of two fingers, for there is a
great virtue of this plaster, to that within (...) it will take (...) the
(...) and depressed bones (...) ^ind (...) do think that (...) i^ not any
remedy more (...) for this matter, then this is. But if besides the depression
and fracture of the bone, there shall be also a wound, first of all he is to ^ee
d^es^ed with the white of an ^gge, and the yolke beaten together, covering the
wound with soft and thin boul^ ^s towe. The next day after we shall use
that Balm of us in this book so often commended, and the wounds gently to be
anointed with a fether, whose most present remedy and virtue shall easily be
pere^ued in this kind also. For it does (...) and (...), and (...), but it
(...) be motten, and yet not (...), least the pa^ient us (...) therewith, or
else any thing deminish from the strength of the medicine, by too much heat.
And of this must we most of all take ^eede, that no bone be taken forth at
all, although it be evident that all be broken. But the wound is to be covered
with dry lints, but not to hard depressed. And upon all these things ye
plaster which we set forth unto you even now, is to be applied and that
warm. Which surely with great pleasure and admiration of the patient without
any danger, does suck out all the corruption which is gathered together within
the wou^d, and in most short time does take up all the con^used bones, and does
restore them into the place, whereby nature they should be. For we may safely
^ir^, that for these fifty years ^ above, we have with most often experience;
used this and the other kinds of healing which we have already set forth, and
have had good success in the same, even as we would wish. And by the help of
God (unto whom we do referra all things as received) we can testify that many
have been hereby delivered of very many and most grievous wounds, among whom
hitherto there are ix. remaining in whom no small part of the brain was
perished, but in a manner a great number in whom the former risme of the
brain was greatly rent and torn. But of these ix. which we have (...) of the
Dioce^e of (...), there (...) friend of John (...) dehi^ (...) in his head with
a (...), by which wo^d, ye (...) or ^nnicles being broken, (...) much of his
brain did (...) as the quantie of two ^ain^s of wheat; (...) a pal^e^y and a
be no^ing (...) one side of the b^y, and (...) the ^gus, whereof he was ^cke to
the ^oue^h (...), of (...) disease notwithstanding after the (...), he began to
recover daily more and more to (...). The second was a certain^ chi^e, (...)
ten years ^de stricken in the forehead with ye store of a Mule, that with the
^ain of the iron sho^e (...) bones were beaten (...) for ye space of six (...)
contin^e there and perish ^o much of his draine as (...), and (...) same but
the wound ^ely. The third was of (...) called Fuentes (...) Deon, which (...)
with (...) shot forth of a ^osse ^owe, and ha^oth the hair, the bones, and
the flesh, dri^ together upon the (...), a^ the first, second, and third (...)
away by us, (...) die the verse pu^ and (...) self, they were expelled by (...)
and (...) came forth also the^wit^, wherein (...) one thing not to be ^ightly
passed over of us. And y^ was, that the twelft day a certain soft and white
thing beg^n to grow ^w^th within, like to fat, which at ye next dressing did so
abound, y^ it appeared above al^ the flesh, but we did (...) the power of
Hermodactiles thinking yt thereby it would be aba^ and ^rought back again, but
when at ye third dressing we did perceive that it was risen above the skin. We
thought it good to deal in the master with some instrument, wherefore we did
cut it off with the ^isord even with the skull, and that which was cut off
did exceed the quantity of a ^a^at and more, but there c^ed neither blo^ nor
any thing else. And the next day after there appeared nothing, but all things
were (...) yet (...) the (...) evil, the (...) the (...) whitest (...) lived
(...) of age. But the (...) of (...) of the Marquis of (...) the (...)

(...) had ^iken (...) coronall ^e of the bones all that part of the (...) waht
^e received the wou^d was broken in (...) dri^en fore together upon the
brain. It was (...) therefore to be looked vnt^ Even to the second, (...)
fourth time. It behooved also all these bones to (...) which being (...) their
pla^ did (...) upon the (...), but most of all they (...) the (...) which were
within the lower (...) in the substance of the draine. Of the which (...) of
the haues were so great that they might (...) of the wou^d, and by these (...)
the (...) self were corrupted. Wherefore (...) from the second to the (...) or
(...) of the substa^e of the waine at (...) time (and that not a little) did
come forth.

There was present while we did this cure. Bene^ (...) Arias Mon^a^, the (...)
and our countriman, which at that time learned Surger^ of us, rather for the
art^ sake then for the practice. Fi^ d^e^ continually ^o^s and portion of the
brain did issue forth, which were expelled with the pulsacion and laboring
thereof.

And this young man was ve^ed with grievous ^a^^es and panges whiles he was
euring. For in the right side ^e suferred a ^o^v^on or ^ampe, in the left side
a palsy, and also the kings evil. All these panges coming upon him the xi.
day, did continue until the xx. day, and that with (...) began some what
better (...) he escape^ altogether.

Whi^ (...) did (...) (which is a town (...) and (...) public (...) of the
peole thus (...) the authority of ye (...) honest ^iet alsowed, there hap^ened
a (...) at the town of Valnerde ten miles distant from L^rena, which we have
(...) heer^ (...) ^ep^r^ (...) heering the (...) of that man being (...) to
health, but that he (...) give praise to god the au^h^ and ^elie president of
h^aine he^ the

(...) did (...) very gerat stones with (...) and (...) into the Tower which
then was in building (for ye work was now brought well forward did rise (...)
height above ye church whereto it did wine) one of the stones falling down, did
strike one of them on the head which did ^de theg^, where the Sagittall
commissure is, but he fell suddenly down, and together with the stone lay on
the earth, a^h^ s^ne was a cubit broad and long, and in height xii. ^ers, and
of xxiiii. li. in weight. The man lay in the same place half an hours feeling
nothing, and from thence he was c^ried home in a manner for dead, or at the
leastwise like to die. Within one hour, he suffered the passion of ye brain
three whole days together, not only speech^es, but also without any moning,
and was moved and ^urned of the standers by no otherwise then if he had dene
dead. And a great part of the ^one^ being bruised down, lay upon the brain,
and the blood brake not at his eyes and nose, his head and his necks was
swelled, and in coulont black. after the eight da^e, the head did open of his
own accord, from the ^orepart and the hinder part upon one of the (...) also.

For ye (...) were now ripened, we the^ did restore ye bones into their (...)
men of a troubled mind are wont to do, his eyed were open and (...) the
^a^ing (...) a (...) saw nothing at all, (...) xx. d^, (...) that his (...) in
his (...) after the (...) month, he (...) see (...) as when he (...) in
health. (...) as his wound was now healed, for to the xxv. day many bones came
fo^rth and he rose presently out of his (...), although he co^ld not then well
go, and so by the help of God more their by the help of man, he was healed,
And he escaped his eyes looking a squint. One, one way, and (...) other,
another way, the which also (as the (...) did pr^eede) at the fo^rth m^eth
(...) and l^kes right, he ^neth as yet, and has married (...) wise. For he was
then a young (...). But his (...) we did re^oore by other helps.

Annotations of the sixth Chapter.
Those things that (...) of childrens bones, are more largely expressed by
Galen in his vi. (...) of the Methood of ^ing.

Ad huin somodiantem (...)] for unto these kinds of compre^ions or (...).

That kind of (...) not to be enlarged, nor to be opened, (...) yet i^ the
(...) wh^e, although the skull be broken, there must be no incision made: this
^eemes to (...) the opinion of Hippocrates, whereof besides his authority, he
adds this ^e^n. For where the bone is broken the skin (...) whole, the heat
cannot (...), and nature (...) as able to digest the matter, and to knit the
(...) most (...) in fractures, when fragmentes or spelles of bones be not
discovered, they (...) the skin, ever or most commonly reconsiled.

Ex quo vulnere tantum cerebri] out of which wound, so much of the brain.

Of what part soe^er the brain is wounded, if the weapon have perced deep, as
Hippocrates witnesses, it appears to be deadly. But amongst diverse
aucthors, diverse things do chance: as this aucthor does record. Galen
writes that many have recovered health, whose upper part of the brain, has
been only touched or wosided with the weapon, and he produces a young man of
Smyrna in Ionia, that was healed, who had a hurt in one of ye fore vntricles of
ye brain.

Of curing wounds in the face. Cap. vij.
THe wounds which are made in the face, are to be healed at the first most
perfectly, and that shall be done if we foresee that ye brims of the wound be
well closed and joined together with a needle and thread, and not with more
stitches or less then is needful, so yt the flesh to the flesh, and the
skin to the skin, may aptly cleave together no orifice left in the wound,
except it be so great and deep that it porce to the dones, for when it shall be
so, it shall be expedient to leave some orifice where into there may be put
some Flammula or linen cloth, where by all hurtful humiditie may be purged
forth, and the matter also which is consected, where the wound is great and
deep: otherwise we shall not need to look for any matter or corruption, if
the cure be done in right order. And it chances oftentimes that there is no
need of the needle, when the wounds are not exe^ed crossewise, or overthwart,
but in length, which thing we have performed oftentimes in this wise, We do
make fast from the ears one end to the other of a long thread and twisted
together, such a one as we are wont to sow withal, and cast it oftentimes
round about the head, from one side to the other upon the very wound^ who^e
drinks are rightly to be ^t together, with often winding about, and almost
touching one another, (...) ye whole wound be set even and cont^yned and so
closed up. For by this means the brinkes or ^ppes of the wound do most ^tlas
clean together, after that we do put thereupon square pleagen^s of ^ax with the
white of an egg, and after seven hours the white of the egg being taken
away, we lay thereto emplaistirs on both sides upon the th^ids, which when they
that be ^ried up, (which is done within four hours) they are to be sowed
together with needle and thread, y^ (as much as may be) they may clean
together, and then the other threads which went about the head and ^id close up
the wound, may be broken off. But the emplaisters are made as follows.

Rec. Boli A^onia^..j. ss. Th^is. ana..ij. ss. Mastieis. ana..ij. ss. Sa^le.
ana..ij. ss. My^lie. ana..j. ss. Aloes. ana..j. ss. Tragaganti Pisti. Sanguis
Draconis..ij. Farinae hordei, et fabarum, ana..iij. misceantur.
Hereof let two plasters be made and put to the wound both on the one side,
and on the other, let them be distant on both sides from the wound, a singer
vreadth, and upon the wound it self, we do put Stuphes of Flare dipped in
the white of an egg, so broad as is between the emplaisters and the
defaultes until the next day, for the next day after, the Stuphes which we put
upon the wound, being dipped in the white of an egg, we take away. And v^e do
anoint with and fether the wound with that Balm which we have set forth unto
you, laying the^on a thin plaster of that Cerot which has been always most
approved by us, by the description of John Vigo.

Rec. Olei Rosarum. ana..j. Olei Myrtinj. ana..j. Terebinthinae cla..ij.
Pinguedinis vituline..x. Masticis..j. ss. Vini odoriferi. Cia th. j.
Rorismarinea. ana. m. ss. Mill folij. ana. m. ss. Plantaginis. ana. m. ss.
Symphyti, mi. ana. m. ss. Centaureae maioris. ana. m. ss.
Bulliantus omnia ad consumpcionem vinj: deinde colentur et cum cera fiat
cerotum et malaxentur cum vitello vni^o^i. And if you proceed right with this
one order of curing, within four or five days the wou^des are cured, without
any s^arre. The same thing is brought to effect with that great and royal
ointment which is ^et forth by John Vigo in his Antidotarie, the same thing
also is performed with a Cerote of Sinople or red lead^, so the place be
anointed over with that ou^ Balm. But if of necessity we must use the needle
and thread, there must be chosen very fine needles, and thread that may be
correspondant to the same. For many of the Barbors (which commonly among us do
cure wounds) and wont to sow the wounds of the face with such needles as they
are wont to sow the thigh or ham, and they suffer the stitches to stick
there so long, until they being broken of their own accord, do break out
the flesh with all. They do their cure in such sort, as they are wont to cure
the wounds made in the body. Using digestiues and oils, and so of a simple
wou^d they make a compou^d. The wounds being then set together with needle and
thread, Stuphs of flax being dipped in the white of an egg beaten together are
put there upon, and so let them be all the next day, and then are the plasters
to be joined together, as it has been said, and the wound is to be anointed
with a fether with our Balm, and some one of those three emplaisters which
(...) have rehearsed before is to be laid on, and so the wound is to be
bound up. The next after we put to a plaster withal, we cut the sowings and
stitches with a pair of Cisers, and anoint the place with Balm, and so add a
Cerote. And this is the briefest and surest way of curing all manner of wounds
in the face.

It happened unto us in the Town of Fraxenall, that we did cure a man whose
face was wounded with a swoorde, from the very joining of the nose and brows,
to the top and opening of the lips on hooh sides, so that the nose with ye
upper Iawbone and teeth, fell down upon his chame, but they that waited upon
him at home did use themselves very ^nwi^ely. For stopping the wound with a
linen cloth, did suffer that part of the face which was fallen down, so to
lie without all consideration. When we came thither being sent for, we found
that part, I say, the nose and the Iawbone now cold and almost dead, so that a
needle might scantly perce, yet we set the whole place together with a needle,
and so that the bones of the upper Iawe did agree within to his own bones, as
nature requires. And y^ we did after this sore.

We honnd a fillet two fingers broad about his forehead, which had on ye nether
part a hem, whereunto ye third might be strongly fastened, to ye ^let toe did sow
two other, from the fore part of the head to the hinder part, and from ear to
ear in the manner of a trosse, and those somewhat narrower whith only might
how ye brother fillet. When these things were in a redines, we did put into
somewhat a great nedle a log shred, and made it fast from the fillet which did
enuiron ye head between the ear and the forehead, which we did put through
between the first check tooth, and the tooth called Caninus or dog footh, and
brought it back again to ye fillet which did co^pas ye forhead. After y^
again going to the teeth straight over against, and by this means sowing up
the chawe to the nose, we commissured them to the other bones to the which they
were agreeable. Then so^ed we the utter skull with a needle, and so as I have
toulde you being bound up, we kept it until all the parts were grown
together, and at the length by the help of God, we did restore him, that he did
seem never to have received any wound. In the same manner there was a man
likewise cured of us, whom a Bull had stricken, and with his horn under the
chin from the ear to the upper iaw, had opened that part of the face also
which does separate the left eye from the nose, where ye tippe of the horn (as
they which were there present and especially the man himself did affirm)
eppeared forth more then ten fingers breadth, we did sow up the place with a
needle where the horn went in and where it came forth also. But we bound up
the chaw, as it has been declared in the former cure, and healed it outwardly
according to the order of our precept, and gave commandment, that his mouth
within should be washed with a decoction of Barley, Roles, and the flowers of
Pomgranades, and Mell Rosatid, strained and mingled therewithal. And so in a
very short time he was cured, yet many bones falling from ye roof of his mouth
which were broken with the horn, and there was left in the roof of his mouth
a hole as great as the Thumb of a man's hand might go in, when all things were
healed, and the skin covered, we stopped the hole over with a smoth rine and
made fit artificially to the place with a linen cloth also wrapped about it, by
which means it was provided that he might speak, eat and drink well, yet
he did foresee that in the night time it should be taken away least the hole
thereby should be made wider, and some times he laid it aside. Thus ends the
first book.

Annotations of the vij. Chapter.
Hippocrates reports that the wounds in the forehead and other parts of the
face, do differ much in cure. For wounds in the head are cured after
Hippocrates and Galen only with drying medicines. Galen especially propound^th
two kinds of tures between themselves, quite contrary, as he writes in his
first book of Therepe^ticke, of a certain thing called Eudeani, which he
would use if he lined in Asia, which and take to be a certain liquor or wine.
But Hippocrates in all his book of wounds of the head, refuses utterly win^,
and all kinds of Leniments and Cataplasmes.

The second book.
Of wounds in the breast, Cap. i.
WE have seen oftentimes very many which taking in haud to cure deep wounds
in the breast; yet dos they either never heal, them or else bring death to the
parients very spedely although the wounds ^e not deadly o^ their d^ine nature,
because they have not received the workmanship and order of such cures of
expert masters of ye art. But if it happen any of those yt suffer such
griefs to li^e, yet we set them diseased with fistulaes (as they call the^)
during their life. When the Phisicions have had these persons in hand and all
in vain, they put in a hollow pine of heade^r of filuer into the wound, and
leave them, comforting them with this speech, that they would not shut up the
place in any wise, because the putrified humor being stopped within, when it has
no place to issue forth, it would bring certain death, and that it is
expedient for them that the same pipe be always kept open, that the corrupcion
and super fluous humors of the wound may be expurged, and by this means they
will linger forth life, as long as please God, and so leave them uncured. But
the cause is that they know not how to cure the wound being yet green, neither
do they think that any other thing may be done in that case, then that whith
is dove of themselves. Wherefore we have thought it good to set forth that
order of curing which we use in those kind of wounds, and whereby we do cure
all wounds which are brought to us when they be green so they be not deadly of
necessity, such as are set forth by writers percing the Diaphragma, and the
stomach: all these wounds are of manifest danger to every man, and are so
reconed of the learued Doctors every where, but all ye other (although the
body be perced through) yet by Gods help they may be healed. Of which sort it
has happened unto us to heal by his help innumerable, as well taken at the
first in hand, as also forsaken of otheres, and that within the fortith day.
And the same thing shall happen to any Physician which will follow the order to
be set forth by us, whether they be green wounds and new, or of longer
continuance and forsaken of others, neither shall he need the help of many
hands to the matter. The common opinion almost of all our writers is, that all
wounds received in the deep breast, be for the most part incurable. The danger
whereof if any happen to escape, yet do they affirm that he shall labor of a
continual Fistulae or consumpcion.

Or this opinion esperciallie is Vigo, who although he has very well set
forth those things which do belong to that cure, yet for lack of experiments
and practice (whose praise is most chief in Surgerie) yet he does promise a
desperate cure.

But we (God helping us therein) do promise certain help, even in most ha^
events; yea, and though the Lungs be perced. And this is, the ^der of the cure.
If the wound be green, he yt has taken the wound, is to be laid naked in his
bed, but when ye wou^d is perceived to be deep and percing, let him be laid
ha^dsomly and commanded to lie with his legs stretched forth, with his body
plain, and the wounded place downward, that all the blood which is needful
to be powered out of the wound may run forth, and none of the clottid blood
remain within the breast, for it cannot be but ye very much blood be congeled
within the breast, as well from the inner as the outer veins. The pacient
therefore being thus ordered, let him lie until the Surgion has made ready
those things which shall be thought good to appertain to the cure, when all
things shall be ready, let him see again if the blood do issue forth, and if
it do run forth, suffer him to lie still, and in the mean season to cough,
and command him to stay his breath now and then, until you do thoroughly
perceine that whatsoever corrupt blood is within the breast, shall be run
forth. But if the wound be great, or made with a Lance or broad Sword, it
shall be needful to be joined together with a needle, leaving a stitch or two
that there may be so much lest open of the orifice, as a finger may go in,
into the which orifice a small Flammula or a linen cloth dipped in the white of
an egg may be put, yet so that all be not put in, for it must be longer then
for the course of the wou^d, and part whereof may hang forth, but if we use
the Flammula, there is no fear that the whole should be brought whithin the
wound. But contrariewise if we use the tent, for such a thing may easily be
swallowed up of the wou^d, which like danger did happen not long since to two
of our Phisicions, for one of them unawarely did thrust a great tent as much as
ones singer into the breast, which we the tenth day after (not without some
business and diligence) drew forth, and straightwaies the man was healed of
his wound, and to another the stalk of mallows lapped in thrids or lint, fell
into the entraills of the breast, and lay hid within of long time, neither did
it profit any thing at all to go about to draw it forth, but the lint only
the second month after was drawn forth with much ado. But the stalk by no
means might be drawn forth. For the wound was over deep, and had an orifice
like unto and fooke, the pacient therefore being brought ^rie sow, and d^itute
of all strength, died. Therefore when thou shall put in the Flammula, let it be
dipped in the white of an egg, and so conveniently bound up. When he is thus
dressed, let him lie upon the wound, with cusshions put to him on both sides,
that the wound may rest or lie upon the void place between the eu^ions, and
the orifice of the wound to lie downward, that (...) tho hurtful humor may
issue forth. And we must put in no tent at all, for that does hurt two ways:
both for that it hinders the dowing of the h^nors, a (...) greiueth the
pa^iont, and the often vsuing to put in the same, cau^h the (...). But a small
(...) cloth being put in keeps the wound always open, as much as is
sufficient, whereby the hurtful moishnesse of the wou^d may issue forth, and
it causes no grief, nor yet lets in the air.

It shall be needful also to open a vein, first on the contrary side, and
then on the same side, as the Physician shall understand it to be needful and
expedient, and ^dering the strength of the pacient at shall be convenient also to
give him the pocion, which may repress the blood and purge, and the same is to
be given him in the morning the fourth day.

Rec. Rhabarbati electi.. ss. Rubi tinctorum. Mumie. Ana..^. Terrae
sigillatae.. ss. Aquae sca^tosae. Buglossae. Vini Granatorum. Ana..j. fiat po.
s.A.
(...) also for suth a bec^ton to be pr^paren, (...) may be (...) the (...) is
(...) and medicine, and drink, whereby (...) wound is (...).

Rec. Hordei (...) cont^. Passalar^m mundata^ (...) ana. p.ii^i. Radicorum
Buglossae contusae. iij. Glyseryzae rasae contusae..i.ss. S^minum C^ioi..ij.
(...). N.(...) Pruno^. N.(...) (...) contu: M.j.
Let there be a decantion made according to art in xiiii. lib. of (...) water
to the consum^g of a third part, after tha^ let it be str^ng by strained, to
the which add:

(...) iij. Sirupi rosar: or de duabus radici: sine aceto: an^. iij Saccari
albi. lib.ss. Cinam^ p^loerisati. j.ss. fiat apozen^a.
Or (...) his shall (...) ^nerie fourth house a pound weight, (...) that war^
if it be Winter, it shall not be lawful for him to eat or drink any at her
thing whole three ^ye^. but those thoee daye^ are to be measured by hours,
for this does sufficiently norish, and does heal ye dificultly of breathing
which thi^ all they do suffer that have any deep wound in the breast, for it
does repress the flowing down of reunies, and does correct and purse the
blood which remains within, we m^st proc^ also that every day he may
discharge his belly either of his own accord, or else by the healpe of some
glister. The fourth day he may dine with the flesh of a (...) with parsley
roots putting thereto Saffron and Cinnamon, but in the evening he (...) ye (...)
taken (...) thing at all. But at the second (...) the matter (...) dispatched.
Let there be pr^pared a fine limen cloth, or fla^ia as the first was, which was
put in at the first dressing, let this cloth be put into the wound being dipped
in that Balm so often repeted of us being liquified, for it has bane ^roued
that medicine to concoct and also to bring flesh. It is put into the wound
until the percent substance of the flesh do extend or couch a certain entry
out wardlie appering. Upon this, let there be put the emplaister. Basilicon,
after the description of Vigo or Gracia de^, about the wound, or the defensive
spread upon linen, yet a hole being made where the wound is, so that the
defenciue may be distant ^oom the wound on every side three or sour fingers.
But the Defenriue shall be made of the substance of Roses, of Viniger and Bole
Armoniacke, and so let it be dressed once every day, until corruption enough be
gathered together. For the next day there shall be matter and that good. But the
fifth and ^ixt day there shall be more also, and then we must dress the wound
twice or thrice, or more often in the day, but yet ye ^idst pro^ide that the
patie^t (as much as may be) lie upon the wound, as long and as co^modiou ^y as
may be, that the pu^rified cor^option may issue fourth. But ye must not suffer
in any wise yt a tent be put in, for by such means ye shall precure a
continual fistulae in the place. But when ye wound has gathered flesh, (and
that shall happen the tenth or at the farthest the twelfe day) nothing at all
is to be put in, neither Flammula nor any other thing, but it is convenient to
use that emplaister which you have used from the beginning, or Emplaistrum de
Minio, of Vigos description, and that is to be cleansed oftentimes in the day,
least the (...) abounding to much ^ne (...) inward, at the last when there is
(...) more (...) shall be, now on crea^, the powder of (...) Allome is so be
added, and a^ escar to be procured. The (...) which are se^ forth of writers
to be obserned, whereby judgment may be (...) either of ^eath or of life, of
th^se which have re^ea^ed wounds in the breast which do penetrate are these.
Signs of death of the wounds in the breast.
For if his Heathing he a like hard, or harder and harder, that is a Sign of
death, if otherwise, it is a good sign, and worthy of good fore-iudgme^t; And
we may well affirm that none shall perish which shall be healed in this wise,
although the lungs be perced through, except the wouned be next ye heart, or in
the very heart, for that thing brings death most presently. Conuulsio.
Tremor cordis.
Secondly if those which be in this case suffer a convulsion within three
days, or the passion of the heart; death may be signified to them before hand.
If in the first days, when he shall now have drunk up his decoction it
happens that a more abundant portion of matter do run forth of the wound
then before, Signs of a Fistulae.
it is a great sign that the wound is growing toward a Fistulae. And yt the
pacie^t is brought to a consumpcion in the Lungs. And that thing is to be
feaced also when the bruised blood shall run out of the wou^d, within the
breast, for the bruised blood when it issues forth of the beines, does rouieale
together, and after that it incorrupted into a watery color and substance. And
such a water as is left after the washing of flesh. After that there does
break forth great abundance, with grieuousnesse and s^inke also. And the
breath also is grievous and tedious to the pacient himself. But the water it
self does issue forth every day ^ener and cleerer, and such a water does
tend also to a Fistulaes and to retain death if it be not forefeene. But what
in this case is to be done, we shall show you in that place where we shall
entreat of percing Fistulaes in ye breast.

If in the first days the paci^nt shall be fore grieved in his breast or back to
the fourth day, we shall easily help that evil with such on empliastes laid
there unto as is sectfoor thereof (...) Vigo, (...) the certain thapter,
whereof although we had very small use, in many wounds which we have cured in
the breast, yet is that use thereof known to be certain and most present. For
it once channced me to use ye same when in (...) town de (...) Canibs, we did
cure a certain young man being wosided wish two arrows on ye right side shot
through the concanite of the breast from before to the part of the back
directly behind, and appearing forth on both sides, and the man was so
grienously pained that he could in no wise lie down, but he sat in his bed
with his feel hanging down^ upon the ground, but by the help of this
plaster, and of the decoction set forth by us, and cutting of the veins
before the third day, he was better recovered of his pains, and also lack of
rest, and the cure taking effect, as I would desire it, he was thoroughly healed
by the xx. day. The plaster is of this ^ort.

Rec. Camomillae. Melliloti. Aneti. Absinthij. ana. m.j. Furfuris contusi p.ij.
ss. Farinae Fabarum. Farinae hordej, et lentisti. ana. vj. Rosarum. p j.
All these being beaten together; and with sufficient sape and a little white
wine, let there be made a stiff plaster thereof at the ster, adding thereunto.

Olei Rosarum. ij. ss. Olei Camomille. Olei Aneti. ana..ij. Cerae..ij. ss.
Croci..ij. et fiat emplastrum. s.A.
The place where he is to be laid, must be warm, the doors being thut and a
deyle hanged before them, and within the Chamber a fire of coals. For it is
hurtful for deep and percing wounds to be troubled with cold air, we are
bound to give God thanks because we have cured more by this (...) which one
was in the town of (...), which (...) thrust through with a swoorde behind
his back on the left side, besides the back bone, and the sword did appear
forth three fingers beneath the left pappe more then two handfulls, and the
man had taken also two wounds in his head, of which the one did come to Dura
matter. We did cure another also in the town of Combres baxas, and he was
wounded with an arrowe empoysoned with Heleborum on the left side, four
fingers above the pappe, but the arrowe did show forth behind the back
between the ribs called Mendosae, hard by one of the hanches or loins
between the second and third ribbe, for he was stricken from somewhat an high
place, and he was cured of us in this sore.

When we saw the wounds, to euart the poison, we gave him this potion, Rec.
Cassiae lignae. aristrolochiae rotunde, ana.. ss anisi. Piperis..j. Let them be
bruised with a little wine, and given him to drink. By and by on both sides
where the arrow went in and came forth, we did put to a hot cautery with an
instrument called Delatori. After that we did also apply two other Gladia^i
Cauteries which were made ready of us and put to the fire, from the legs to
the shoulders on every side. Before on the breast, and behind on the back we
made more then two hundred wounds in the manner of scarifiynges, distant the one
from the other the breadth of a finger, for all that part of the body being
teinted with the poison, was now already swollen, and was soft like the lungs,
when these things were dispatched, we had a plaster ready for the whole body
and back, where the violence of the poison seemed to come, and where we had
cauterized. The description is this. Rec. of Mill somewhat tosted, li.j. of
bean meal li. ss. of brannes bruised..viii. of Camomill, of Mellilote and Dil,
somewhat bruised of each in handfuls, of Corianders, of Cumin, of each.ij. of all
these let there be made a stiff plaster with sufficient sape or new wine
boiled led to the third p^rt, adding thereunto oil of Camomill, ^yle of Dil
non..iiij. of oil of Bays, of oil of Rue, ana..ij. we used this plaster for
three days, ye which as often as we did remove, we wipt away abundance of
water drawn out of ye scarifyings, of wa^ color. And all these iii. days
space ye patient did suffer grievous panges, and passions of the mind, and
loss of ^aso^, and some time also in the manner of mad men, he did catch at
the clothes and pallets with his teeth, and tossed all the bed over like a
furious body, and without all quietness. Such was the great perplexity and
grief through y^ veheme^cy of the poison. But first of all we did offer the
man to drink this decoction, and we used the same to the fourth day, so that we
gave nothing else to eat neither of meat nor drink.

Res. of ^leane Barlie bruised, of Raisons stoned and bruised, ana. p.iiij. of
the roofes of Ox tunge..iij. of Licorize shaven and somewhat bruised, oun^.
(...) of Cumin seeds, ounc.ij. of ye seed of Ormg^um. i. of Peper, C^ssis
Lignea, of Castoreum, ana..i. of wine of Granates. li.i.ss. Iuiu^bes. N.xx. of
Prunes finely cut N.xx. of Parsley roots (...) M.i. Make hereof a decoction
according to art in (...) li. of r^ine water to the co^suming of a third part,
then let them be strained with a strong or passion, adding there unto of
Penedise, oun^. iii. of sirope of Roses, et de duabus radice bue fi^e aceto,
ana ounc. iii. of Cinnamon in powder. j. ss. sach^ Rubi. li. ss. make here of
your decoction after the fourth day the patient took rest, but we did
confirm his strength more and m^, giving him the broth of birds, in the which
Anise, Cassia lingne, and the roots of Parson were, boiled, his wounds also
healed better every day, so that by the xx. day he was by the healthful help
of God thoroughly restoored.

Annotations of the first Chapter of the sconde Book.
There is great, difference between the inward wounds of the brea^ in that
they be either shallow or deep, for some reach unto the hurt and perishing of
the bowels or parts within contained, and some without any detriment unto
them, but some difference there is between those (...), that reach either to
the fore part, or to the backer part of the breast, where hence the Physician
must needs gather the ^tentie of his conjecture and fore knowledge, for those
wou^des which chance in the backer part, are more dangerous and deadly, for
that they chance so near a number of Nerves that spring from the Vertebres,
and also for the vicinite of neerenesse unto the Spine and Midrife.

Communis omnium scriptorum] the common opinion of all writers.

What wounds soever ^ea^h unto the perishing of the inward bowelles has ever
been thought to the greek and latin writers very lamentable, but some of
them do seem more dangerous then other. For the heart being once wounded,
can never be cured, but the hurt in the Lungues, may yield some hope of
recovery. But Galen (...) hand constantly beleeu^th as it appears in his
fifth ^ooke de Meth. meden: that (...) a wound in for ^ungs be eldsed and
conjoined within three (...), They all so (...) do fall into supporation of
the L^ngs, (...) is in (...) a very consomption. If the Midrife happen to be
wounded, it draws with it ^ continual (...), and a phrentie, wherevpo^ the
ancient (...) Phienas a con^eion, and insta^ation of the Lungs, which com^ng
^o supper^tion, kills presently.

Curations (...) est] out the manner of the is this,

The opinion of (...) is double or of the (...) in this case. There be some
that wound presently have the orifices of the wounds closed and conjoined,
least the heart should be opposed or man (...) to the colonesse of the (...),
and least also by the gaping of the wound, the vital spirits should seem to
(...). Some other Child (...) be of the opinion of our aucthor, and follow his
neither.

Perspic^ (...)] lat it be well marked whether them be any issue of (...).

This aucthor would have a man very ^fully to see that the (...) bring shed in
any inward receptac^e of the breast should be taken away, which otherwise
remaining there, whill bring a man to the supporation of the Lungs before
resited. This is Hippocrates opinion in his book of ulcers, more largely
explained by Galen in his fourth book de Me. meden. which this aucthor
expounds thus. That a man must ever have regard to the strength of the parry,
which if it seem by two great a flux^ of blood to be impaired very much, then
present^e it must be stopped.

Petiae oui albo intinctae cum puluiscusis] a fine men cloth dipped in the white
of an egg, and laid in with pleageants.

I do not intend that those pleageants should be very restringent, for so ye
might force that blodd to the region of the heart, and so suffocate the same,
as says Albucrasis.

Sanguinem reprimere] to restrain blood.

It is well said of him to restrain, or if there be any fear of coniealed or
chagulated blood in the breast, Galen exorteth to give the sick to drink much
vinegar mixed with water, commonly called Poscum.

Signa, bure ab auctoribus obse^anda traduntur] those fignes which of the
aucthors are set down to be observed.

Many takens are written of by aucthors, namely as for those that are to be
marked in the stiuation of the part, or of the matter or ^ubstance that comes
from thence, first whether the heart be in the right, or the left side, or
whether their blood that issues forth of the wound be black or no, or if
there come great abundance, or whether it be white and thin, or frothie, and
further it is to be looked into if there be any difficultly in breathing, or
whether any part of the breath do pass throng, it he wound or no, in this
the aucthor seems to imitate Albuerasis.

S^ pino^ diebus] if in the first days.

If (...), the parties seems nothing (...), and the (...) appear very (...)
it is an (...) that the (...) expel his corrupt (...), and so (...) it (...)
the (...) of the dressed, whereupon grows a supporated app^st^ called Empyema.
Aegane^a in his books vt consumption of the kings, handieth this ma^er more at
large.

Of the curing of fistalaes which are wont always to be left in the wounds
of the breast ill healed, whereof it comes to pass that the patientes do
fall into a wasting of the lungs, and the fever Hectica or consumption. Cap. ij.
WE have found by experience that such hind of Fistulaes are given over
without all hope of many of but country Surgions, and of strangers, and these
remedies for the s^ne which are read of in writers, to lebt forly of nond
effec^. And that there has (...) none of these Fistulaes brought to us this
forty years, but that we have easily cured them by the help of almighty
God. For many that have ^ne dise^sed, out of ^alin also and France, and from
all the p^it^es of Spain, have come unto us, which through w^sids received in
the (...), were now ground into this (...) nature of Fistulaes, that of the
which also great (...) continual (...) abundance of corrupt (...) issue of
well out of the wound it self, as out of thou (...) also, continual sewers,
and learnes withal did still accompany them. All this affection of the body is
cured within festie (...) in any manner, without any great trouble of the
pacient, and small trouble to the Surgion, and is changed into a very good
health and a strong state of nature, both in the color of the fa^e old the
good liking of the body to declare the same. Neither let that trouble (...)
because it is known evidently that the natural stren^th is almost exhausted
and spent through the continual (...),or because that there is some bone of
the ribs corrupted. For if that may be conveniently drawn forth, the ulcers
wit^e very eastly and spoudely restored, the flesh being brought over the
place. But if there be no bone corrupted there needs no other thing but that,
that the ulcer be cured with laying an a black plaster, or our yellow of
^oonine color, or with both mixed together. The patcie^t himself shall cause
the same to be oftentimes wiped, and by this means ulcers are cured, but of
the inward places this is the, order of curing. Let the patient which is to be
purged of us, drink of this strope three or four days in the morning. Rec.
Sirupi Rosarum ex infusione, Millis Rosati Colati, ana..j. Aquae
Scabiosae..iij. Miss^. Let these pills be exhibited. Rec. Massae Pillularum
Aggregatiuarum, et de Agarico. ana..ss. Acuantur cu^ diagredij. G.iij. et pill.
v. forme^tur. Whou he shall be thus purged, let this decoction or apozema be made.

Rec. Polipodij, quircinij probe contusi..ij. vel. iij. Radicum helenij
contusarum. M.ij. Hysopi, capillorum venoris recentium. Liqueritiae secundo
puluerizati. ana. M.ij. Folliculorum Seen. p.j. Epithimi.. ss. Passularum
enucleatarum, been contusarum. p.iiij.
Let there be made a decoction according to art in xii. lib. of water until
there remain viii. lib. afterward let them he strained with a strong
expression to the thing strained. let there be added Sachari Rubi. lib.ss.
Mellis Comunis. lib.j. Let it boil a little and skimme it, of this being luke
warm, let there be drunk every morning. xii. ounces. And in the evening as
much, and when he has spent all his decoction, he she purged (...) those two
pills defore mentioned. But the next day following, and afterward he shall use
that kind of decoction made of that holy w^de called Gua^a^ sha^en wish a
(...) file and so brought unto powder. Take (...) of the bark of the (...)
wood, not that which ^a^e^h so the wood (for the (...) thereof is drawn (...)
and exhausted of the very (...)) but of that which is parte^ from she wood,
and brought (...) the new found land df the great Decan..x. well podded and
fifted with a riddle or line, abding thereunto Se^nis Anisi. And of Lettice
ana. p.j. Of Licorize bruised.ij. And ^et that be put into a po^ un^sed with
nitrum in tee inside, containing half a Spanish Arroba (that is xij. li. ^.
s.) with two cups of old white wine of the natural grape, which by the
measure of the old Physicians are viij li. Let there be ^nt thereunto also so
much of usual water, and le^ them infuse a whole day, that is xxiij. hours,
after that le^ shem be boy^ed with a soft (...) a third part be consumed. But
at the very point of the last heat, put there to of Roses new or dried. p.j.
and of Hermodact^ in powder desolued in a Mortar, with some of the same
decoction..j. And there withal let them beremoued from the fire when they
shall have boiled a little with one boiling. And let all stand being close
covered until if be cold, and when they are cold, let them be strained, and
let that which is first powered forth, (being pore and without dregs) be put
in a clean dessell, whereof, as often as he eats any meat, be shall drink
certain cups, and let the rest be set by sufficiently ^ained in another
vessel. But of this latter drink which is less and thicker, let the patient
drink every day xii. ounces, vi. in the morning, and vi. in the evening. And
if it be winter, let it be warmed, if it be Summer, let it be cold. But we
mean in ye evening, the second or iii. hour after noone in the Summer season.
But in the Winter, in the night season (...) third or fourth hour after
Supper.

The vessel is always ^o be ^red, that that which is selles may ds troubled
and mingled, and so let all be drunk. For the chief strength of these
medicines is in this. Of the ^hor form and c^ret drink, let him drink at
dinner and supper that which is ^o^cient, for to drink to little is hurtful
also. And let this be the order of his diet. If he be very weak, if shall not
be hurt^ to ea^e (...) in the day the (...) of birds either fodde or roast, or
the flesh of a wether, or kid If he be not able ^o bear the charges of the
other, but if he shall be of a better construction of booie, and of less
weakness, let him use flesh once in the day, but at night let him use ra^ us
and a litte bread; it shall be good also for those that are in health sometimes
to use Raisons and Almonds all the day, and to abstain from flesh. Finally,
let all these things be ordered by the counsel of a scarned Phi^tion, yet must
we be careful for xii. days at the least, that he may live very temperately
and with a more spanng ^iet, for the abstinence of thirty days may easily be
borne: neither shall he therefore become the weaker. For the decoction is able
of it self to nou^sh and to maintain, and a^o to cause fatneise, as thdugh he
use only (...). Yea, and although also he be diseased of a continu^ll ^euer or
consumpcion. But he must ^iterly be forbidden all other drink; neither,
although it seem unpleasant at the first time, therefore is it not to be
mist^ked, for the third day, or at the farthest the fourth day, he shall find
it more pleasant, and not to be less e^emed then any other excellent wine.
Therefore we do commit all the order of the diet to the coun^ell of the
Physician. So that this is to ^e considered, that there is a great force in
this drink to nourish. And although otherwise the pacient have a great
lothsonneffe, yet hereby a great desire of meat is to be moved. Thirty days
being finished, the pacient may eat flesh twice a day to the forti^h day, it
shall be necessary that the first thirty days continuing he ly still in his
bed, but if he cannot endure so long, in the fair and warm days (...) none
let him arises (...) ^uening let (...) the (...) of the (...) let him so (...)
of the cold, but his chamber must (...) be shut and a (...) that the (...)
war^e, and the (...) veil being, ^ged (...) the door let him be suffe^ed to
use no other meat if ^e (...) to be healed. But the curing the Fill^lae it
self shall be (...) thoroughly and finshed with (...) plaster spread and said,
upon a linen, cloth or upon lether which notwithstanding must oftentimes
eueryday be made clean, for that hel^et^ (...) of this sort.

Rec. (...) Lithargarii. Ana..ij. Olei comunis antiqui. Aceti fortissimi. Ana.
lib.ss.
Let them ^oyle with a (...) or gentle, fire stirring the same up and down
with a sta^e until it grow to a small ^cion of a cerote. With this so small a
portion of this Cerote being spread upon a linen cloth, the ulcer will be
healed, which the pacient himself shall wi^e and make cleans often times
every day. By this means he that is (...) although he be thus diseased of
these Fi^tulaes shall come to be healthful and well lykeing, and also some
what fatter. (...) though he were spent with the ^euer Hetica, or consump^ion
of the Lungs. And he shall be as well as ever he was in his life in the powers of
all the parts of his body, and of all other organs or pipes nutritiues,
spiritual, or animal.

A Decoction or Apozema, for the wounds of the breast and Lungs, and for those
that are in a consumpcion.
Rec. Hordei mundati, co^tuse. Passularum mundatarum contusaru^. Ana. p.iiij.
Radicoran^ Buglossae, contusae. M.iij. Glyceryzie ralae, modice controuse. j.
ss. Cardui Benedicti. M.ij. Seminum Cumine..ij. Iuiubas. N.xx. Prunorum. N.xv.
Radi^m petruselini, contu: M.j.
Let shem be boiled ac^eceding coarte, in xiiii. li. of rain water, to the
con^tning of the third part, and let them be strained with a strong
expression. To the which set there be added:

Penidicrum..lij. Situpi Rosarum. et de duabus radicibus sine aceto. Ana..iij.
Sacohati. lib.ss. Cinamomi..j.ss. fiat apozema.
Of the which let him take entry day in the dauning of the morning xii.
ounces, and as many at night, until it be all done.

This also is to be noted, that as often as the pacient must drink, there must
be made a moving and stirring of the De^oction in the vessel, that that, what
is sunken into the bottom, may be mingled.

When the Decoction is done and drunk all up, let there be giu^n him the
^illes of the man of the aggregatiues and Agarick, that that, which is commoned
and concocted, may be euacuated. For the day following and af^warde, let
there be had also in a readiness, another water with the which he shall be
made whole altogether, and shall receue a very god estate of the body. The
prep^racion whereoff is in this so^.

Rec. L^oi sancst. ill est guai^ci.viij. (...) lignj. x. Seminum ch^mi. j. ss.
Glyseryze raze modicu^ ^ontuse.ij. Passularum enucle^taiuua contdsarum. p.ij.
Let them be ^oyled in ^ii. lib. of water, and as many of very good wine to the
third, then add Hermodactilorum..ij. vere well bruised, and (...) in the (...)
on, let them (...) which, and let them be (...) left till the next (...) then
v^ry early let them be strained, first of the purer water, which is to be set
aside in some vessel, this is to be given in steed of drink at dinner and
supper, the rest that retnaineth of the same, let it be strained with a strong
orprission and set a side in an other vessel. For of this every morning very
early the pacient must drink vi. ounces; and as many in the evening: two
hours afte^ none, he shall use ye former in steed of drink at the table, and
the same water which is to be made ^edia the second (...) the more force. Let
^ter be (...) to the lee^e that romined of the first decoction which must be
added and boiled together to the consuming of two posid. For unto this colatar
(...) put to wine for the preparation of the second decoction.

Whiles the pacient drinks this decoction, let him eats bread and raisons for
eight days and more, except he be weak, for this (...) much (...). After that
he may-eate flesh every day (...), at supper let him be contented with Raisons,
until ye thirtith day. Then he may eat flesh twice a day, until the shrtith
day. ^it be winter, he must not see forth of his chamber, (...) the thirtith
day, which must he very well shu^ and kept warm with ^er. By this remedis the
consumed are healed, and such as have Fistulaes deep in the breast.

Annotations of the second Chapter.
That kind of Fistula which the Greeks call Surynga, is so termed for
resemblance it has of certain reeds or hollow canes: as says Aeginata, a
Fistula is a hollow concauite or corner which in time is environed with a hard
callus substance, so that the parts once separated, cannot be united. Galen in
his little book of Tumor unnatural says, that a Fistula for the most part
happens of an impostume not well healed, and it may happen in any part of the
body which draw with them peculiar Symtoms, as Celsus and Aetius do testify
in the xiiii. book. This auctor sets forth only the cure of those
Fistulaes which fall out by the ill handling and bad curing of wounds in the
breast.

Quod si nullum os.] If no bone.

The ready cure is of the simple fistulae, and lately happened in the flesh,
otherwise if a fistula have hurt either a bone or a gristle, or a muskie, or if
it light in any ioynte, or if it chance in the bladder, or in the Lungs, or in
ye orifice of the Matrix, or if it happen on any principal vein, or that it
pearce any howell, it is ever very perrilous, and often times kills the
party. As Paulus says in his vi. book and 78. Chapter.

Ex ligno sancto,] of Lignum sanctum, or Guaiacum.

This cure is approved and writ by Tagaultius, and sertenlie not without
reason, for this kind of wood has a most manifest force in drying, and
resists putrefaction of peculiar virtue, and has a singular property in
strengthening the part.

All which Scopes and intentions are very requisite in a filthy rootten ulcer
of long continuance; as fistulaes commoulie are.

Ipsius fistule curatio] of the cure of the same fistulae.

The applicable remedies are very many.

Which from Galen, Paulus Aetius, and Celsus may be drawn. I will note unto
you the remedy that Hippocrates writes in his book of fistulaes. That the
root of Seselis applied, does take away the callouse, which virtue Paulus
emputeth to the root of splondilion.

Hecteca febre et ptisi] of the fever Hecticke, and the Ptisicke.

What the differences of these are, those that have studied Physic can best
discern. I will only add this yt an Ague is to the Ptisike always
associable, as Marasmus that kind of consumption follows A Trophia a difect
in nourishment as Galen in his book de Marasmo has set down.

What farther this aucthor does promise, I neither have seen nor red protested
by any other. For all men hold this generally, that that fistulae that is
bredde by corrosion, or fretting, is incurable, as Hyppocrates in his book de
Glandulis, and Galen in his fifth book de methodo medendi does report, that
unless this hurt receive cure within three days, the estate of such are
thought desperate and pitiful.

Of the curing of the Canker happening in women's breasts. Cap. 3.
CAncers do happen most especially to women, and to those above others that
are barren either by nature or by election.

Of which sort are Noonnes, and others that have chosen a continent and single
life, they do happen also to men, but that seldom. The healing of these
seemed to us worthy to set down in writing in this book, because it is a
great deal more easy to those that shall know it well, then as the ancient
writers have set it forth, where upon this is a common song every where
almost among all the Physicians of our time, that the secret or hidden cancer
is not healed at anis time, but if it be to be cured, they judge it necessary
to use the pallatiue cure, as they call it, and that it ought not to be cut
off, which thing if it had been put down in the cancer exulcerate, if had
been well spoken.

For to such exulcerate cancers the pallatiue cure only profits. For if they
be cured otherwise, a more present and assured danger is to be feared. For
they are wont to be eaten away and consumed a great deal sooner by laying to
medicines, especially if corrosiue medicines be laid thereunto, or by any
means it happen any blood to be powered out of them.

But to cure the rest which are not erulcerate, it is not so hard a matter as
they think which do set forth nor teach no cure of cancers at all, nor
show how they may be drawn forth, whereas they may notwithstanding be
drawn forth whole without any danger, although it happen the same to be
great.

But that cure of Cancers which is taught by writers, whereas their intencion
is all about resolving the same, that is altogether without effect. Which we
have found very often to be in vain, although we have been diligent in
preparing and practicing the same with diverse resolutiues.

Which sort of remedies are taught us of Vigo, and of Celsus, Guido, and
others, wherefore how such manner of cancers may without harm be both
drawn forth, and also thoroughly cured. I thought it good to put it in
writing for the behouse of the common utility, and this is the breefest order
of curing which we shall teach you. First of the whole curing of those cancers
which are not exulcerate, and scondly also of those cancers which are
exulcerate, we will (with a very ercellent palleatiue cure) declare, whereby
we have long prolonged many men and women, and least they should for that cause
perish, we have taken deligent care, and inspecially a certain man a priest we
did so preserve above xx. years with this kind of cure, that before he ended
his life, he was thoroughlie cured. And when he deceased, he was more then
four score years of age, first at ye beginning, the most certain signs of
this disease are the increasing of these cancers bigger and bigger, for when
the same be first bred, they do not exceed the greatness of a Chiche, but in a
year or two or somewhat more, they become greater and harder in feeling.

There are other signs also set forth of writers which ye may seek for in
their books. Therefore when we will cut forth the Cancer, we must first of
all prepare the diseased body with a purgacion, ministering thereunto such
Sirupes for four or five days, whose nature is approved concoct, black, and
adust color. For of those humors does this evil first grow and increase.
After this some purgation is to be given which shall be judged best to agree
with the complexion of the man. The third day after the purgation, the second
or third hour after dinner, let two youlkes of eggs with the whites be well
beaten together, adding thereunto if you please a little Rose water. There
shall be also in a readiness great plenty of plageants made of the most fine two
of flax.

Furthermore, small Cusshions or Boulsters, with a roll or fillet five fingers
broad, and a good portion also of frise or dags waine, and a great roulling
needle and a good strong third and that doubled. Let the pacient be laid bolt
upright either upon cushions or else upon a matris. Let there be upon both
sides two other men which may hold his arms strongely, least by strength and
striving he be a hinderance to himself whiles he is in euring. Let ye Surgion
sit over the man, and with his thighs hold in ye pacie^ts thighs his own
knees, being fixed and surely pitched upon the matris whereon the man is laid,
and let ye man be naked from the girdle upward, and a linen cloth ready on both
sides, upon which the blood may run down, but the Cancer it self hold fast
with thy hands, which if it be against the nipple of the breast, it is to be
turned aside warely, least the paps should perish when it is cut off, but if it
be toward the armepit, it is to be diuerted also, least any of those muscles
which rise from the arme-holes, should be perished, or hurt, but when the
Cancer shall be thus ordered and caught fast with the left hand, let so much
of the skin be opened with a very fine Rasor, as the Cancer is, let the
opening of the skin be made in length, after that upon the other side of the
Cancer, let the flesh be cut away and separated, but so the Cancer be not
stricken.

But if the blood do burst out, the place is to be stopped with a little round
ball of silk, which (if it be needful to be done) let the one of them which
holds his arms, keep down with his finger, and part the flesh from the
Cancer on the other side. But this piece of work requires most speedy
dispatch of the Surgion, yet notwithstanding joined with great diligence and
heed taking, and materite, least he should offend in any thing unadvisedly.
But when the Cancer is detected on both sides, and parted from the flesh, let
him be thrust through with a needle and thread, let it be committed to one of
them that stands by, of whom it must be holden streite, lifting up his
hand, and to be turned both on the one side and the other against that part
which the Surgion cutteth. But when the Cancer shall be well separated on both
sides from the other flesh, it is utterly to be cut off from the nether
part, and that with the most expedicion that may be, putting to our fingers,
that the whole Cancer may be perceived to be cut off, and nothing to be
left behind. And that may be done very well with that kind of knife which
the Italian Surgions use to open Apostumations, the fashion whereof is like the
scarifying knife, but it has a sharp edge on both sides, but we must use the
edge that is bowed in, and having a most sharp point, for that part does more
commodiously cut of those things which are beneath, and that is done with no
hurt either of breaking out of the blood, or any other thing, and we will that
the operation be so swift that there be more delay in thrusting the cancer
through and in knitting the third, then in plucking out of the same. When the
cancer is utterly cut off and drawn away, we must search diligently that there
be nothing left behind in the body thereof, but it is so hard, that that thing
is seldom to be feared, when all things are dispatched, let all the blood
which was in the wound be diligently wipte away, and forthwith put in
Pleageants dipped in the white of an egg, but yet so that they be not to hard
pressed together, to augment the grief of the pacient, neither is the place
within wholely to be stopped with over thick thrusting in of pleageants: then
is the place artificially to be bound up with convenient rolling and boulsters.

The next day after at the same time he is to be opened, and to be dressed
with a digestive, or with yt our balm whose effect is great to concocte,
mundifie, and to enduce flesh, which is done by anointing the place with a
fether gently, adding there unto dried lints, yet not to hard pressed together,
that the flesh may by little and little grow together, and close up.

But about the wound it self, and on the pappe there must be added a
defenciue confected of Rose water, wax and Bole Armoniacke, but with the use
of that Balm which we have told you off, the wound will most spedilie be
cured, and the flesh brought over and healed, but upon the Balm, we put the
plaster Basilicon spread upon linen cloth. At the last when the flesh shall be
sufficiently enduced, the place is to be dressed with dry lints and
Basilicon laid thereon or the plaster called Leoninum, or of the plaster
compounded of Gummi Elemij, but whatsoeur plaster it be, it is to be wiped and
made clean oftentimes every day, but for the vlcered Cancers there is no
other cure but the pallatiue, for whatsoever thou shall lay there unto it will
hurt greatly, but in this kind of Cancer this is the order of curing, let him
which is troubled with this disease at certain times in the year when it
shall seem good, be purged.

After that every month let him use two or three pills purging black
choler, in the night about that season that he goes to rest. But those
Pillula are best de fumarie, vel de Heleboro, vel de Lapides lazuli, vel
Epithimi, vel Fetidae, or those which are de nitro set forth by Alexander
Tralianus, for by these, the body is kept pure, and the humor is rather
deminished then increased, but in the wound it self we put vnguentum
Pompholiogos, or that which is set forth of John Vigo in his Antidotary, we
use that with out lints spread upon a linen cloth, for we do find that the
little thrides of the lint do hurt, for if they cleave somewhat to the wound,
they make it bleed, and the same blood does hurt. Finally, this unguent
chiefly is that which we have always found most auailable for this purpose.

Rec, Olei Rosati, olei Omphacini. Ana. lib.ss. Sepi hircini, et vitulini.
Vnguenti Rosati, et populionis, Ana..ij.ss. Succi acetosie, Ana..j.ss. Vini
Granatorum..ij.ss.
Let them all boil with a soft fire even to the consuming of the ioyces and
wine, then let them be strained, adding thereto:

Ceruse..ij. ss. Lythargyri..v. Plumbi vsti, Antimonij. ana..x. Tutiae
Alexandrinj..j. ss. Camphorae puluerizati..j. Cerae Albae. q.s.
And let there be made a soft plaster, that is to say the wax being molten
with the oils, and let the minerals be put in a cullender, driving the
substance of the unguent, two hours with a pestle in a leaden mortar. And this
is the best medicine of all others in this kind of cure.

Annotations of the third Chapter.
That disease which is called the Leprosy, corrupting or infecting the whole
body, if the same light in any one part of the body, it is termed a Canker. As
Galen says in his second ad Glauconem, you must understand that this name of
Canker among Physicians has diverse significations, and bears the name of two
several diseases, namely a swelling Canker, as well growing in the outward
part, as in the inward part of the body, lurking and as it were lingering. The
other, is an vlcered Canker always creeping, fretting and gnawing.

Of both these kinds this aucthor handles in this Chapter.

For both these kinds proceed of Melancholy, or of a Melancholy ioyse much
like as liees seem to wine, and dregs to oil, I mean the like difference
and comparison is between Melancholy in respect of pure blood. Galen in his
xiiij. book de Therapeutica, handles this question more largely.

Cancri Feminis] Cankers to women.

That question is entreated often by Celsus, but cankers happen to those men
chiefelie whose accustomed hemerhoids and purging of Melancholy, that wa^ is
surprised, as Galen reports in his second book ad Glauconem.

Vnde illud] where hence that.

It may seem marvelous wherefore or by that memanes the aucthor should here
seem to alter the cure of both Cankers as well vlcerate as not vlcerate. For
the vlcerate canker requires that manner of cure which is done by excision or
cutting out. The other nothing so, as Hippocrates teaches in his vi. book of
Aphorisms. 38.

For says he, it is better not to seek to cure the Canker that lurketh or
lies still, for by curious curing of that canker, the party most commonly is
kilde. Whereas if they had been let alone, life might longer have been
protracted. Experience daily confirms this very well.

For as Galen says in his Comentary, it has been approved that those that
have attempted those cankers by sections, or searing, has rather stirred them
to more malignite, and so in short time hastened their ends.

For does not our aucthor cure those cankers which breed in the superficial
or outward parts of the body by cutting. Which Auicen allows off and Galen
before his time, but not the lurking or hidden cankers, he cures in that
manner.

Cura Palliatiua] a pallatiue cure.

We call a pallatiue cure. That wherein we presently have respect unto the
pain. For sometimes the Physician must convert all his endeavor to appeasing
of the accident and simptoma, and not unto the cause in cases of great,
extremity. As Galen warns, and I would have that observed which Paulus
mencioneth in his 67. Chapter of his third book.

That we must minister medicines that ass wage pain in cankers that remay^
(...) the m^d part of the body, as the d^co^ider of common (...) and March May
(...).

Nanque huiusemods canci^] for in such cankers.

Now the ancte, haudieth only those cankers which lurk and are hidden in
inward parts of the body as here after shall appear.

Qu^ a (...)] what due of cankers is appointed by another.

For by reason of the thickinsse of the humor it neither can be repelled nor
scattired. And so great is the malignite or venum of that desease, that gentle
remedies^an nothing prevail. And vehement things rather provoke it to more
bitterness. As fat or wide break into f^ame, by ^ious and scorching ^er.

Igitur vbi cancrum] when you will cure a canker.

Now the aucthor goes about to show you, the manner of cure of that canker
which is done by Chiruegery, which Galon allows in his xiiij. book de Meth.
medeo: approved by his own words as follow. If at any time you will go about
to cure a canker by Surgery, you must begin by purging and avoiding me
lauchaly humors. And when ye have quite rooted out the corruption of that
humor, so that no part renaine thereof, and that some flux of blood do seem
to follow, yet shall ye not stop it suddenly, but rather seem to press or
strain the parts near adjoining, that the gross and thick blood may be
from them expelled also.

Now may ye cure other ulcers in like manner. It seemed good to produce these
places out of Galen, that the reader might understand how, ready the aucthor
could call these ancient aucthorities to memory, that other Chirurgians
might study to do the like.

Exulceratis cancris] in vlcered cankers.

Seeing we have spoken already of those cankers which grow without any ulcer, it
shall not be inconvenient if we somewhat touch those that be contrary. In an
vlcered canker beside the pain, the hardness, and the vlcered fretting humor,
and the inequalities of ulcers that do appear yet there flows from thence on
every side both out of the swelling lips, some ingratfull filthy corruption
breed of the combining of many putrified humors, both fulsome to smell, and
loathsome to behold. These things we must endeavor gently to shadow and lenefie,
all those intencions we must thus purpose. First purge melancholy with
Epithemu^ very gently, then if years and strength permit, draw some blood,
and that discretly. Afterward, purge again melancholy and that very gently.
All this done, proceed to stronger purgations.

Appoint a spare diet, and of those things that are most opposite to
melancholy. Administer to the party the joyce of nightshade or Diapompholiges.

Recepit olej rosacei]

This medicine Galen uses against the ulcers called A^ora, following therein
the authority of Apolonius in his first book de pedum doloribus. And
Theodoricus has used the same in cankers, whereupon this aucthor reduces it
into his own practice.

Of wounds in the belly and the parts thereof, with penetracion and without,
Cap. 4.
Whatsoever wounds are made in the belly, which notiwhtstanding do not hurt
nor yet penetrate the members contained in ye same, those I say if they be
rightly cured are without all danger, except those which are taken about the
navel within two or three fingers breadth, to the which there may happen much
hurt by reason of those eight sinowes which reaching to the Navel, do come
through those p^ates. And also those wounde^ which are taken in the h^nder p^
of the belly nigh the back do bring some danger, although they do not
penetrate, for it may be that those Neru^s, which have their beginning from the
Nuca be hurt. Therefore it should wisdom to fear of such wounds, for they
are woom sometimes to bring does. But of the other wounds, although they do
penetrate, yea and although they do disclose the zirbe and beweils, so that
the same us not perished, there is no danger to be feared, so that they be
well cured, but when the members contained in the belly have recoaued hurt,
there is present dan^ger. Yet it does happen oftentimes notwithstanding that
many be delivered. Therefore of those wounds which have brought no hurt to
those parts, this is the curs. The bowelles which do appear or hang forth,
and the zirbe also is first of all to be washed with a decoction Vini
Camemille, Melliloti, Absinthij, aneti, Rosarum. And afterward to be brought
and redueed into their own place, but the part of the zirbe which hangs
forth, is yet to be drawn farther out somewhat, and upon that part as it is
equal with the skin of the belly, it is to be bound fast with a sure
thread, with that knot that is called Suillus, or the swines knot, or the
chifterling knot, for it is a very sure knot, the which does not slip at any
time, but above the knot let the zerbe be out off half a singers breadth, and
let the section be cauterized with a hot iron until it almost touch the knot,
and let it be put in again straight ways, and some part of the string be
left hanging forth, but if the Orifice of the wound be somewhat great, let it
be artifically stitched up, leaving an orifice whereby the ligature may come
forth, and the cure finished. But of the four ways whereby writers do teach
how those parts called Mirach and Sipach, ought to be sowed up, all that is
most allowed of us, and by daily practice and utility most commended, that is
to say, that first Mirach and Siphach being thrust through with ye needle on
the one part, Mirach only be thrust through on the other part, and let these three
be fastened with a knot, and then let the third be cut, and of that part where
their work is begun, let Mirach only be thrust through, Siphach being left,
but on the other part Mirach and Siphach being thrust through, let the second
knot be made, and the third stitch and then the fourth, and so forth until
the work be finished. And so by this means Mirach and Siphach are joined best
together, so that never afterward the bowels can start forth any moore upon
that part, which thing oftentimes has been found to happen, except the cure
be done, as we have toulde you. When these things are thus duly done, the
white of eggs well beaten together is to be put thereto, neither shall it be
needful to use any tent, the place whereoff that Ligature wherewith Zirbus is
bound up together does supply. But the next day after the wound is to be
dressed with a Flammula dipped in that our balm, whose force is to concoct, to
munditie, and to bring over the flesh. Laying thereon the emplaister Basilicon
Macistrale or Minium, for both those are very good. But this is to be
confidered both in great wounds, and also in small, for those that are somewhat
narrow must be concocted and digested also as well within as without. But it
shall not be needful to use either oil of Roses or any other oil. The third
day after or at the farthest the fourth day, the Ligature does slake of his
own accord. And if then the corrupcion do not abound, it shall be sufficient to
use one of those emplaisters, if there shall be any matter, it is to be wiped
away oftentimes in the day, and by this means the cure shall be dispatched
within the xv. day, but in the very first beginning of ye cure, it shall be
convenient to let blood, according to the disposition or state of the pacient,
and to give him Sirupi Rosarum ex infusione, cum Aqua Plantaginis, and let the
order of his diet be sle^der, with a little bred, but not very much water is to
be given him, and the same to be decocted with an hot glowing iron.

But if besides the wound of the belly, if shall happen any of the bowels to
be broken, and the same of the smaller forte which are on the right side above
the nauill, all those things which soever they be, are judged of all auctors
deadly, and so for the most part we must believe, of the which sor^e it
happened ^ee to have one only he thereto in ^ure, whose small guts were
broken, but he dyed the fourth day: but of ohters to whom it happened the
greater guts to be perished, we have cured three being wounded in the gut
called Colon. And the fourth, the gut Longanon being hurt. Of these one had the
gut Colon broken in three places, yet all of them by Gods help were restored
before the tweneith day. All these bowels we did so^e up with a needle and
thri^ with that kind of sti^ch which the glouers do use. I did use also
toward them all that kind of curing which is delivered unto us by John Vigo,
which we do judge best of all others if a man use it well and with a pleasant
delicate hand. We have therefore followed all his precepts, this only thing
excepted, that we have given no meat, and have used the Pocion only ^este
forth by him, for that we did consider those whom we had in cure to be
somewhat strong and of a more ^ustie nature, and able enough to abide from
meat.

For out of Spain we would not enterprise to use so thin a diet, where both
the meats are weaker a great deal, and their bodies more delicate. And less
apt either to take much meat, or to take none at all. But the decoction is of
this sort.

Rec. Pomor. citonior. mu^datoru^ et subtilite incisoru^. N.iiij. Caudae
equ^nae, lumach, myrtillorum. Ana. M.iij. Rosarum p.ij. Baulastiarum..ss.
Let them be boiled in sixteen pound of Rain water, to the consuming of a
third part, then set be added thereunto:

Thuris, Masticis, Sarcacollae. Ana..iij. Croci..ij.
Then let them be strained with a strong expression, adding thereto:

Mellis Rosati colati, et sirupi Rosati. Ana..vj. Tragaganti puluerizati..ss.
Sirupi Mirtillorum..iiij. Fiat decoctio. S.A.
This Pocion we used for meat and drink, and also for medicine to
consoldiate the inward parts. On certain of those men whereas he nothing else
for the space of twelve days, did notwithstanding easily bear it. After these
things we did give the broth of a bird boiled in the same water: many times we
did allow also to the broth a little cromme or portion of bread, (the Italians
call it Panatella,) when we did perceive it to be needful, by this means we
did cure a certain priest also, whiles he was in the Church recaued a wound
with a Lance, meeting by chance certain men which sought another being their
enemy, and lying hid in the temple, and thought the priest to be the same. But
the wound was made in the belly in the vppeer part on the right side.

We cured two also, one having his Liver broken, the other his Spleen, and a
third having his bladder broken which dyed the third day. All the rest by Gods
help were saved, who himself is the author and helper of medicine. But there
seemed to us a certain thing worthy, which we should not pass over with
silence. For it may minister argument and matter to set forth the wisdom
and mercy of God, as all other things do, which have so great force of
nature, and so great efficacy to be in his creatures.

There happened a thing at Guadalupa, I my self being present, in the year of
our Lord God, 1516. And thus it was.

There came a certain foolish desire upon one of the servants of that
Monastaire, (who had the charge to keep the Gotes whiles he was in the ^elde)
to thrust into the cundute of his yard a stalk of corn with the ear. The
ear was now dri^ and all the corn b^ten out, and he did show me that whiles
he did thrust it in, he felt no grief at all, but when he would have plucked it
out again, he could not, because the beard of the ear being fastened in the
flesh he was meruailously grieved, at the length he thought it better to thrust
it all forward, then to draw forth ye part which was thrust in. And within few
days that it came through into his bladder. But when a whole year and a half
he selt no grief, he thought it converted into water, that he made. After that
time he began to be troubled with an impostume in the lest thigh. For the
curing whereof he came to the hospital of that Monastery which was appointed
for the curing of the poor. In which place whiles he was in curing, and the
impostume was now ripe and opened of us. It happened that upon a certain day
in the morning when we had made clean the wound, by chance we saw a hull in
the very ulcer, but I thinking the same to have been mingled in with the lints
the day before, and so to have sticken fast to the flesh, did cause it to be
taken away with the Mullets, and at the last the stalk with the ear did most
easily sollow as I drew it. But all we the Physicians being amassed at the
strangeness of the thing, and also others that stood by, we could not guess
what that matter should mean, until that old man being noued with our talk,
lifting up his head, and seeing the ear sticking in the foreceps, said unto
me. I my self did thrust it into my yard, a year and a half since, and so
declared all the whole matter, how it was done, and the times in which it was
altogether thrust in: In which place great admiracion came upon us, and most
especial occasion to praise the divine providence, for thus God provided for
the man, that the skin of the bladder should be broken by little, and little,
and so should expel the ear from the bladder being broken, to the flesh that
was next, and after that the skin of the bladder should come together, and
the flesh being impostumated should ripen, and the unpostumation being ripe and
cured, the ear should come forth, and at the length within very few days
the old man should be delivered, for he was thoroughly cured.

Annotations of the fourth Chapter.
Those wounds discussed which concern the upper belly, he hasteneth to those
which concern the nethermost. Hippocrates in his second book of the order of
diet in sharp and dangerous discases, deuideth the bellies into two,
containing the uppermost by the Middriffe, the other, by the cell called
Omentum. The learned Chirurgions divide them into three, that is co say the
uppermost, the middlemost, and the nethermost. Whereof the first two agree with
the other division, the third comprehendech the ventricles of the brain. For
this cause look Alfonsus Ferrius, in his third book de Scolopatorom
vulneribus.

Ab huiusmodi ergo:]

These wounds must be divided, as we have done those of the breast. Either they
do hurt the inward parts or not. If the inward, the stomach, the liver, ye
spleen, or ye bowels. If the inward parts be wounded they are veny deadly, as
witnesses Hippocrates in his vi. book of Aphorisms, if the bladder etc. If
those inward parts be not hurt, although the wound be inward, it is less
dangerous. But if on the hinder part there be any wound received that perceth
inwardly, it is the more perilous, for the affinity of the Vertebres, the
Spine bone, and Nerves that spring from thence the case is not a like in the
fore-parts of the body, all circumstances considered.

Igitur eorumque.] Therefore of those which.

This manner of cure is set down by Albucrasis, and is very worthy of noting,
that in all wounds it is very profitable that there be some flux of blood,
saving only those in the belly which Hippocrates excepteth in his book of
vicers. Which place we thus expound, least we should seem to speak that which
is contrary to our selves in our treatise of wounds of the breast. Hippocrates
fears least by the great plenty of blood which breaking forth of the ori^re
of the wound, should fall down into the nether region of the belly, it should
breed very many inconveniences. For as he says in an other place, whenever
any unnatural issue of blood chances to fall into the belly, the same must
needs come to suppuration. For blood being out of the veins loses both
natural quality and virtue, as Galen testifies. Wherefore wounds of the
belly are in that place to be understood. Those which reach to deeply in any
inward part, whether it is to be feared least the blood issuing will presently
convey it self. But those wounds that chance in any outward part of the
belly, require no especial eu^e, but must be heedefully looked unto for fear
of inflammation, and so must suffer a sufficient issue of blood as well as other
parts, by which means they are safely cured and free from danger.

Tictus autem ratio tenuis.] A spare kind of diet. You must not only observe
an order in diet, but also a reason of your medicines where in you may be
directed by Galen in his fourth book of Method of curing.

Of wounds, simple and compound, Cap. 5.
ALl green wounds generally in whatsoever part they are made, except those
which are made in the head, are wont to be cured of our inexpert Surgions and
practicioners after one sort and with like remedies, whether the same be
simple or compound.

Yet I do not deny but that there are in Spain many learned Surgions who^ the
knowledge of the art, industry, and faithful dealing has made worthy of all
commendations, but all the rest for the most part besides these, do use one
order, all one sa^ues, and do take one way which they think that by no means
else any man may or ought to pass. That thing truly comes hereof because
neither they understand those things which they have read, nor yet account it
good to ask of them which do understand, nether do they think it convenient
or honest to ask counsel of those that are better learned, neither to seek
to them that are more expert, and to follow them as guides. But oftentimes it
comes to pass that to such kind of men their cure does not prosper
according to their mind, in which thing when all there common remedies being
assayed are in vain, this one thing is a common refuge at the last for them
all, that they send men away being spoiled of their money, with a plaster of
Diacilon which they call Socrocium, as if they were utterly whole.

And would to God the same reward of their imperfect cure, did not pass the
estimation of a most perfect cure: we have seen many of that sort of men
which do not cease to set forth with great bragges such their cures, or rather
corruptions, declaring their names to whom they have done the same. But the
fault of this mischief is in the public Maiestrates. But how all such
wounds are wont to be cured of them, is especially to be noted of us. Whether
the wound therefore be made with sword or lance, they dispach their first cure
with stitching. but some of them are so hard hearted in this point, and so
cruel, that they hurt more with sowing, then he that gave the wound with
stricking. For using gross needles they do take more hold of the flesh then
needs a great deal, the orifices of the wounds being wrested from their
course, they leave mumled together after that they have made their knotes. For
the skin is by this means closed to the skin, but not the flesh to the flesh,
because they place the skin in the midest between the flesh, and many times
also they take up the skin so lightly and from the very uttermost side, that
the orifice of the wound do not join.

For the extreme parts being set together, the rest remain hollow and empty,
by these and suth like means, their first cure is always finished

But if it happen by chance that any bones be cut, albeit all be not loosed,
yet do they utterly draw forth the same with no small grief to the patient,
but with very great hurt unto him, abusing that sentence common among them
(but not well understood) to cut of the superfluity, And also if any of the
flesh be cut and yet not clean cut off, they notwithstanding cut it clean
away, affirming that it is not to be received of nature, and espetiallie if the
wou^d be in the hand, although part of the fingers do in some part cleave
fast unto the flesh and the bones being cut, they always cut it off.

For they think that it cannot be by any means, that the bone being cut may
grow together. And thus they use their cruelty also, if the hand where it is
anexed to the arm be cut or wounded, and yet not clean stricken off or the
foot, or any other of the members of the whole body. They make their second
cure in all kind of wounds with a digestive of oil of Roses and an egg.
Furthermore the stitchings and sowings which are made of them in simple wounds
they do so neglect, until they of themselves do break out ye flesh, and so as
well by digestiues as with great abundance of oil of Roses, oil of (...) said
thereunto, and that many after their (...) with stitchings and sowings, of a
simple wound, they make a compound. And also with great detriment and loss of
the substance, they bring ulcers. And for that cause also in the wounds which
are cured of them in the face, there is a fowler deformity left of the
^kar^es, by reason of the sowing then of the wound it self. But after that
they have used their digestiues so long together, that the place it self
cannot only be concocted and digested, but also does begin to ^utrifie, then
they put to very much (yea over much) Mell Rosaru^ to cleanse the same, and
power in thereof largely. They do add also lints with Basilicon. But if the
wounds (because they are putrified being corrupted by them) are not
sufficiently nor soon enough mu^dified with Mell rosarum, then it is a solemn
matter among them to put thereto Vnguentum Apostolorum, being the very last
refuge of their blind ignorance. And this they use a long time. But forasmuch
as the force and nature of this ointment is hof, and ex^lcerating, and also too
ready to eat, it comes to pass that (the humor being drawn to much to the
place) the wounds may rather be called rotten and filthy then green, and
especially if such order of diet be given, as we have understood to be given
of many which were had in estimation, who whereas they had no certain or
constrant either art, or reason or knowledge of things wholesome or hurtful,
yet following their own wills, have so wrought of themselves, that the same
parts where the wounds are, be inflamed, and in diverse other places do
chaune and break forth, and so of a small evil is made a great.

Therefore all green wounds in what part of the body soever they be made, be
they great or small, or else shall be in the joint or in any other part of the
whole body, may be healed by that means which is set forth by us, with little
or no grief at all to the pacient, and with little trouble of the Surgion; and
without any fear^ at all of hurtful pangs, I trust that the knowledge of this
thing in^ented by us to the utility of men, and by very often experim^te
approved, shall be well taken of all men. GOD the a^thor of all good things
enstructing, us, in finding out and disposing of which thing we have followed
nature as our giude. If the wound be small, and it shall be thought necessary
that it be closed with the office of the needle, let the stitches be made in
fleshie places, and not in the sinews, and by and by let there be laid
thereunto the white of an egg upon flax, but first the blood must be suffered
to avoid forth, for that, if it be not too much, is found to do good, but in
such small wounds, except they be in the joints, ye must not put any linen
cloth, but being sowed (together and dressed with an egg, they must be well
bound up. But the next day they are to be cured in this order. (So it be not in
the face, for we have spoken of those things in their place) let the wou^d be
anointed gently with a fether with that ointment so often repeated of us for
the utility of men, called Balsamum being melted. After that let there be
laid on, the plaster Basilicon called Maiestrale, without any lintes, but
spread upon linen cloth, the description whereof is in John Vigo.

The next day following there shall be found good matter, and perfectly wrought,
and in this sort shall the cure proceed until the flesh be perceived to be
gathered ever, and then let the stitches be cut and plucked away, and it
shall be thoroughly healed with that plaster Basilicon being often times in the
day made clean and wiped, but if it shall seem good, ye may use that which is
called the black plaster: But if the wound be great, first of all it must be
sowed up in that order as we have set forth. And in the lower part of the
wound to leave an orifice, whereinto is to be put your flamula, dipped in the
white of an egg, laying also on the wound linen clothes dipped in the same. But
the next day, it shalb^ used (...) the contrary side, and give him for the
space of six or eight days following sirupe of Roses, with water of Pl^eine,
and if the case shall so require, purge, let hun use a thin diet all those
day^, as Rais^ns, Almonds, and a little bred, costed Apples, or the Apples
called Pepins, which thou may give him raw (...), and other meats (...)
like sorts, but give him water decoct with Barley, and put in the decoction
Anise, and let him drink after dinner and after supper only. But if the man
shall be of a weaker nature, he may eat once a day of a Cockrell or a Pullet.
But the curing of the wound is of this sort.

First of all, Dry stitching
let there be laid thereto plasters which the next day after they shall be
dry, and cleave fast,let them be sowed together, and at the second you shall
use your fla^a dipped in that our Bu^e liquified, and put into the orifice which
is le^t for the purging of the wound laying thereon the plaster Bas^licon
(...), being spread upon a linen cloth, or that plai^ter which is called Gracia
Dei. And so let the cure proceed until the seventh or eight day. For in this
time the concoction, clensing, and bringing together of the flesh, is wont to
de finished.

But when the flesh is brought over, and the brimmes of the wounds do
conioyne on both sides, we remove the plasters, that which remains in the
cure, we finish with a plaster of Sinople, or the black plaster, or of
Leonine color so called, or which is best in this kind, with like portions of
black and Leonine mingled together. And ye must cleanse the wound and plaster
ten or twelve times every day, according to the quantity of the matter that
is made, but the skarre is to be covered, as it is accustomed with the powder
of burnt Atome, and dry lintes.

And when the skin is now perfect, and the skarre abated, it shall be
convenient to comfort the place with the plaster called comfortatiue, which
is described of John Vigo in hi^ Auti^rie (...) does (...) this behalf, which
thing (...) in (...) them all does not perfo^me: Therefore in that (...) which
was have taught you, all wounds as well the small (...) also the gre^ are most
casili^ cured, without much inflammation of the member.

Neither is it ^efull to anoint the member with oil of Roses, or with any
other oil at all. For as I have said, there is no cause to fear any overmuch
inflammation. But in the beginning ot the cure, it shall be expedient to lay
thereunto a defensive of B^e A^cke, or (...) linen cloth wet in vinegar, adding
thereunto a double quantity of water, and when that in dried up it must be wet
again.

If the wound be made in the s^nowie places, as are the hands, the feet the
joints, us the heads of the muskles, then is it to be cured in this (...)
^ssoone as ye green wound shall come to ^our (...) and ye shall find that
there is too much blood issue (...) of the wound, let be spread a linen cloch
upon the wines, and (...) your finger, let rest^nt of the blood be made so lo^
until it be stayed. But if us perceive that it has bl^d as yet but a little,
it is profitable that ye let it issue a little more*

We have learned that as well by experience, as also by etc authority of (...)
says he the course of blood, in moderate quantity is or pe^ient in ulcers,
(...) by this means, the member is not inflamed (...) Let the wounds after
this be set together with needle and thread, but yet so that the needle ^ee not
thrust in deeper then is suffi^ient, nor yet in much of the shinne taken up,
but let them so agree to that the co^issures may little be conjoined.

But if any of the sinews be cut, let the^ be i^yned and aptly set together
but so that they be not fou^hed of any ne^. For there is danger of most certain
grief in ye part, and also a convulsio^ especally to be feared he shall
nevertheless be cured, nay, the member therefore shall less escape if the
sinews be sowed. And some small orifice is to be left beneth where you may use
your ^lamula dipped in the white of an egg: but upon the very stitches let
there be laid pieces of linen cloth dipped in the whites of eggs, and so bound
up. But if it be the hand or the finger, some flat thing is to be made fit in
such wise that the member it self may be left stretched forth,
notwithstanding the wound being made, in the lower part, needs not any flat
thing or table, but the member is so to be ordered, that it be suffered to be a
little plucked in, and the hand half closed together. For by this means the
sinews which are beneath shall more easily join one to another, for the hand
being stretched ont, they neither can be joined nor yet made agreeable one with
another.

Furthermore the letting of blood, which shall seem necessary, is to be
procured, and the member it self, because it is subject to fretting and
suffering of grief, because the place is full of sinews, is to be prepared
with this defensive.

Rec. Olei Rosati, et Myrthini, Ana..ij. Olei Camomillini..j. Boli
Armoniaci..ij. ss. et cum cera. q.s. fiat Em:
This is to be laid to, that it be distant from the wound four fingers, but
beneath there is none to be laid too. For they which shall lay any to beneth,
shall err greatly. After this the wound is to be bound up as we have taught
you. That ointment of Balm shall address the second cure, a little linen
cloth dipped in the same, and put in by the orifice, and the whole wound ano^ed
with a ^ether with the same Balm liquified. And upon all this a cerote to be
put being spread upon somewhat a brother portion of linen cloth, in which kind
and also in others, we find this of all others to be a most present remedy.

Rec. Olei Rosati, Violati, et Cammomillini, Ana..ij. Axungiei Galina^i.
Medulle Crun^m Vituli. Ana..j. Vermium Terestriu^, Vinu Nigro Lotorum..ij.
Butiri Recentis..j.ss. Mucilaginis Althec. lib.j.
Let them all boil together to the consuming of ye mucilage, then let them be
strained adding thereunto.

Lythargirij Subtiliter Triturati..v. Minij..vj. et cuma cere al^e. fiat Eempl.
cum Terebinthinae..ij.ss. Masti^is..j. fi^t.
It is very profitable for all green wounds. And by this means the corrupt
matter is best concocted, and drawn forth, and the flesh at length agiane
without any danger or displeasure of violent pangs, and without all ranckling
also of those parts where the wound is made. When the wound shall be now
sufficiently mundified, and the flesh well brought again, let there be put
to the black plaster, or the Leonine plaster, or both com^ed together: which
is to be made clean oftentimes every day. And by this means the skin is
conjoined most easily, and also most speedely brought together.

I think it good also to add the composition of those plasters, which are so
greatly commended and al^wed of us.

Leoninu^ Emplastrum.

Rec. Cerusae..iij. Olei Rosati. lib.ss. Vnguenti Basiliconis..j.
Let them all boil together with a soft fire to the point of a cerote, after
that let there be added. Veridis eris puluerizati..iij. And let them boil
again until they receive a yelow color or somewhat Lion tawn^ red, and so
make up your Cerote.

Emplastru^ Nigrum.

Rec. Lythargirij. lib.j. Olei Antiqui. Aceti fortissimi. Ana. lib.iij.
Let them be mingled in Caccola, until they be thick, and afterward let there
be made a plaster at the fire, but after the wound is healed the member it to
be comforted with the plaster comfortatiue whether it be the hand, or any such
place, or any part that needs strength or restitution, we are able to report
that this plaster which we worthily call the Comfortatiue plaster, and which
we have used this fe^tie years and more is very profitable both for this
kind, and also for ^uring of fra^ures and dislocations, and to ease the grief
of all the members.

The descripcion whereof us shall find in the end of the book.

Annotations of the fifth Chapter.
Our auctor here seems to agree with the Arabians in distinguishing a wound
from an ulcer, for they will have a wou^d to be a fresh solution of continuite,
blouddie and with out any matter.

An ulcer is termed to be a solution of continuitie, conjoined with matter. As
Auerroise faith in his second and third book, but the Greeks and those that
have interprited their works in Latin do confound those two solutions of
continuite, and would have them signify both one, as the diligent reader may
more plainly observe. The differences of wounds are to be noted from the
di^rs manners and means of solutions of con^i^uitie which A^icen^ handles
more at ^ge in his second book, etc.

Those will I rehearse that belong to the absolute explication of this Chapter.
Wounds are divided according to the parts that they light upon, as Galen in
his third book of compendious art does write. For some be in those parts
which by kind are a like, and some in those parts which by kind are
differing as our aucthor perticularly makes mention of both parts.

They are either reco^ed of by the subject in which they be, as Galen in his in
book de Mithaned: by which means that wound is called simple whereunto there
is neither sickness nor accident a (...). Contrariewise that wound is called
co^pound which has any of those accidents adjoined which from the other are
(...), as in the iiij. book the Meth Med: more plaine^ does appear. Some
times (...) take their names (...) the quantity of that which is divided or
cut, and those wounds (...) aucthor handles also, but more largely we have
entreated of them in our a^otations of wounds in the head.

Secundam curationem] the second cure.

Simple wounds do not desire those kind of medicines which do so much
conglutinate, as the compoundes do, they require very drying as Hippocrates
in his book of ulcers says.

Prius sanguis profluere] first suffer the blood to issue.

In the cure of these wounds the aucthors purpose is to use drying medicines
and to foresee by all means possible, that no inflammation do follow, where if
any such thing fall out, it will keep the wound from healing. Which o^ aucthor
regarding, is of this opinion, that the blood if of it self it do not issue,
must be forced either out of the wound or of some part near unto it.

For he thought it would so come to pass that if the impedimentes were taken
away which by accident might hinder, the wound will the sooner be healed.
Which opinion not only Hippocrates was of, but also the best learned and
wisest aucthors besides in his time.

Si forte magnum vulnus] if happily the wound be great.

Great and dangerous wounds are by Galen divided into three kinds, in his. 4.
book de Meth Med: either for the vehemence of the passion, or for the
excellency and principal use of the part affected, or for the virulency or
venemed humor that haunteth the wound, as commonly those wounds be full of,
that chaune in any ioy^t: a great wound as our aucthor says with Galen, where
the strength is very great of the party, shows that it is ^cessary to let
out more blood, although he that is wounded make no great show of abundance of
blood.

Not only for that, least the part wounded or any near about should be
affected with any inflammation, but that the vehement recourse of the blood
haunting to the place might be diuerted, and the extreme flux appeased.

Postera autem die] for the other day.

Neither it is necessary in all wounds to open a deinc, for Hippo. says, it
needs not in wounds of the head. The reason thereof is in our book of
Annotations out of Hippo. declares. And our aucthor seems to pass over his
speeches unto compound wounds, because they are commonly either with pain or
inflammation conjoined.

But whether they have either one or both of those, Phlebothomy is very
necessary.

Purgato] purge.

And that with a medicine very easy and gentle, that may agree to the
proportion of the humor in the body and member wounded.

Si in locis neruosis vulnus] if the wound happen in sinewie parts.

These kind of (...) requira a more exquisite (...) the another, as (...) in
his us (...) and ^^en in his (...) books of medicine does set (...). Verily
these kind of wounds require almost diligent care in the curing, (...) parts
(...) wounded or prict by reason of their nicete and sharpenes in feeling are
^ly in ^ed, (...) with (...), whereupon spring convulsions and (...), yea and
many times ra^ing and d^tage, for that there is so great a co^itie and a^ netie
between the ^trues and the bra^ne, as Galen report^th ^n the third book of
the art of Medicine. The cure of these kind of (...) is common with the other
this only excepted that the point requires the counsel of some (...)
Phi^itioned appease the some.

Then intent (...) are to (...) all outward misha^es that may chance to
reconsile the lips of the wound that already (...) those ^ce brought together
so to re^ (...) fourth intencion^s to preserve the part hurt (...) that the
(...) decay not. The other circumstances are more at large to be observed out
of the aucthor.

Of ulcers, and of the cure of the same. Cap. 6.
TH^s are very few Surgions which will take upon them to cure old ulcers, and
many there are which know not the means to cure the same. And among these
there are many which when any such ulcer shall come to their hands, do counsel
him that is the pocient in any wise not is be cured and they bring this reason
for to, persuade them, that it will come to pass if the ulcer shall be healed,
and shut up whese as it is so old the him or which was wo^t to issue and
cleanse out of that part, running into some other part of the body, would hurt a
great deal more, and cause the pati^tes death. Which their opinion and mind
leans upon (...) other thing then upon ignorance of the cure, for although
if were true that the humor which does flow and (...) to the part being ^rned
(...) her way, were very hurtful, yet herein they do greatly err, because
they think it may be possible that the ulcer may be made sound, the humor
being not first purged and corrected. For except the humor be purged, so that
it be made to forsake the part which it has kept to many years, and except
also it be corrected with other good means and remedies, the ulcer it self
cannot in any wise be brought together and closed up. And if it be shut up, it
breaks out again of fresh.

For whatsoever (...) ^uous and hurtful humor is in the body, i^ expelled
and sent forth from all other stronger parts of the body^ to that which is
weakest and feeblest of all the rest. And this in suffcient enough to reprove
them which are of this opinion.

There is also another kind of Surgions which are called practicioners (like
unto our English runagates, whereof there be swarms in every country which
M. William Clowes in his worke^ Mumbo Gallico has very well set forth in
their colors.

And also M. John Hall of Maidstone in his expestulation a^exed to his
translation of Lan^aelie, with diverse others, although to small purpose) these
I say after their order wander from place to place, do follow an other way
fitter for their own private gaynes, then for the commodity of the patient.

For there is no kind of ulcer offered unto them, be they never so cancerous
or filthy, or else utterly incurable, which they will not brag and promise
to be very easilye cured and in a very short syme. And perfixing a certain
time to finish their cure, and that not long.

First of all they do agree with the pac^ents for the price, and require the one
half of their many agreed upon to prepare their Oynta^s, and other things
meet for the cure, which when they have gathered together, they go their
(...) to another place (without either leave of host, ho^esse, or pacient)
giueing no ^emedie to the pacient. And all these evils only ignorance
causes. But if any of these (brood of ^dyterers) the endeavor to bring any
such thing to pass, they all take one way, and ganerally they heal^ all
kinds of wounds with like remedies. Wherefore we think that we shall do a
thing worth our travel, if we shall set forth that means whereby such ulcers
are wont to be cured by us, which is now to us known with continual and most
certain use.

We have therefore determined that the universal nature of ulcers is completid
in four into ^ions, and chiefly the use of purging, being observed. For this
part is always most necessari^, and not once, but oftentimes to be called
upon, and besides that a moderate order of diet with convenient meats and
drinks ought to be had. But the intencions are these, first of all, the ulcer
(if the matter require) is to be digested, that is to say, we must use meets
digestiues, as in a sinewi^ place, an egg and Turpentine, but in flesh^e
places, oil of Roses and an egg. But we must take heed that this which we
call digestion, be not prolonged to long a time, it shall be sufficient so long
to have digested the ulcer until there us confected very good and landable
matter, white and of one equal substance. But the second intencion is finished
with (...), but this (...) diverse abs^ersiue remedies according to the sundry
constitucions of the ulcers do bring to effect. For all remedies are not meet
for all ulcers. But the third intencion is accomplished by incarnacion, and
convenient bringing on of flesh, and the fourth intencion by consolidation, but
to this thing there is need^ of diverse and (...) is things according to the
diverse and sundry natures of the ulcers, and affections of the same. Yet
notwithstanding this is a common thing to all ulcers after the mind of Galen,
that at all times they require drying medicines and abstersive. For all ulcers
generally do abound with a double fault of humidite, the one humidite is
grosser, and the other more subtle and thinner. These faults except they be
corrected, the ulcers cannot be healed.

It is a great matter also to take heed least such drying medicines which are
needful in the curing of ulcers be not to hot, least that part be over
heated, of the excessive distemperature. Whereof this shall be the sign, the
same place wherewith the ulcer is enclosed to be inflamed, read, or wanne
colored. And it is no less to be eschewed that we use not over cold
medicines, if any such of necessity must be applied. For the native color
being debilitated with this kind of medicine, is an occasion of the corrupcion
of the member and ulcer. And of that thing this is a token, that the very
color about the Ulcer is more black and darcker.

Futhermore, there are many kinds of all these ulcers, for some are corrosiue,
some virulent, some rotten and corrupt, and some also filthy, and many hollow,
and some very grievous, and many other sorts of ulcers there are besides
these whicih we read off, and know by experience.

It is also needful for the Surgeon that he avoid pain, (or as much as
in him lies to cause any pain.) Take h^de (says Auicene,) of grief, because
nothing does so greatly cause impostumation. Therefore he must take heed that
he cause no grief to the pacient, neither with his medicines, neither yet with
his hands. Wherefore we, since we practiced this art, did at no time use any
kind of cauteri^ing, because to whatsoever place such things be applied, they
do cause no small grief. Of the grief ensues an attraction, of the
attraction the^e follows a debilitie of the same member, and an affection of
an evil quality, by reason of too great and hurtful a^arice of humors
co^flowing to the same place. Therefore in such corrosiue and vir^ulent ulcers,
this is the order which we commonly observe. First the pacient is to be well
p^ged, then ye ulcers (if they be not old) but are beginning of one year or
less time, are to be mundified with that powder of John Vigo, which powder we
use many days once every day, putting thereto lintes and vnguentum Basilicon
laid upon. But if the ulcers be hot, upon the powder and lintes we use the
ointment Lythargirium, and we use this powder so long till the ulcer be purged
and mundified which the very sight of the flesh and the color does easily
show. For the color in ye flesh is read and shining, and in the which there
appears a certain grained thing to the likeness of the grains of a
Pomegranate. And there is seen also matter and that pure and good. Furthermore
it is known also by this token, when the plaster is removed from the ulcer,
if the powder do cleave fast to the vicer together with the lintes, and the
matter that issues forth be little or none at all, and be like the thin
spittell; that thing is a sign of mu^difiyng and cleanes in the ulcer. When
the ulcers are ordered in this manner, we do put thereon the plaster called
of us Leonatum spread upon cloth, the powder whereof is such, that if there
remain any filthiness behind, it does purge it forth, nor yet does suffer
the flesh to grow any farther then is need, and also does meruailosly
cicatrize the ulcer. This is to be wipte and made clean oftentimes in the day,
but especially if it draw much corrupcion from the ulcer. But generally this
cerote does help cold ulcers, or placed in a cold part of ye body. But if ye
ulcers be hot, in steed of that cerote we apply the black plaster, which is
the very best surely in this kind. And it shall avail also to wipe y^ often
times. But if ye flesh wax proud, cast on the powder of burnt Alum, putting
thereto lints, but what day we use the powder, we dress ye ulcer that day but
once. And by these means the ulcers which are neither old nor hard, are wont
to be cured. But if such kind of ulcers be old, cru^tie, or of an evil
affection, and be in men of an euel temperature, they will be hardly healed by
these means which I have spoken off. But if that fall out, it will ask a
longer time, esp^ially if they grow of the french Pox, as the most part of
them commonly do. Therefore the surest means to cure such kinds of ulcers,
is to use burning and cauterizing, all the corrupt flesh being first cut off
which is in them, but the hidden cauernes (if there be any) must be made
manifest and opened, and the utter parts of the ulcer cut away. Neither is it
needful to the dispaching of this matter, that the pacient be either bound or
holden of many, but in this order it shall be expedient for you to do. Whether
the ulcer be in the shinne or in any other part, the body being with some
commodius medicine purged, let the man that is the pacient be set down in some
long seat, (as on a form or such like) the leg whereon the ulcer is, being
laid along upon the seat behind the pacient, let another man sit down, on
whose legs the pacient may lie with his head, his neck, and his shoulders,
and let him have his arms to hold, and let a third man sit down upon the
thigh of the pacient, and hold his leg with his hands, and there shall need
no more. But let the cauterizing instrument be an inch thick made in the
facion of an Olive bone which are called Oliuaria. With the which the ulcer is
to be cauterized, as much as shall be thought good. But in ye end we must use
another third kind of cautery iiii. squarre like a dye, greater also then ye
others, wherewith the sides and all the parts in the same are to be coeuened
and made plain. When this shall be dispatched, let there be applied to the
ulcer, a great many pieces of linen cloth dipped in the white of an egg and
oil of Roses, and upon the same ^hes or houlsters soked in Oxicratum, (that
is water and vinegar sodden together) and pressed forth with your hands, let
the^ be put there unto, but on ye very member on ye upper part of ye ulcer let
there be put a detensiue of ^oole Armo^m (...), byle of Roses and wax, or in
steed of that, linen three or ^ower fould doble and steeped in Oxcicratum and
pressed forth, which when it is dried up, is to be wette and applied again.
The day next after these things are do^, the white and yolks of eggs beaten
and mingled together in the which let there be a great many pieces of linen
cloth, dipped and laid on the ulcer, adding thereunto also as we have said
before a defenciue. But we do use this medicine two days only. After that let
there be applied unto the ulcer twice every day Butter spread upon a linen
cloth until y^ es^ar be re^dued, when the escar is taken away, we must use
digestiues to the (...) of the matter, if the place be fleshie, the digestive
is made of oil of Roses and the yolke of an egg, but if the place be sin^wie,
ye shall put thereto Turpentine. And in four days at the furthest the wound
is well digested, which afterward is purged with the powder of John Vigo. For
the same powder both mundifie (...) en^ently the groser and thinner matters,
and that is done without and gr^fe, if the powder be made according to a^te. We
put upon the powder or ye lintes, and we add there unto upon the ulcer, of
the Cerot of Sinople. For that, or in the steed thereof Basilicon is best and
meetest in this kind. But after the ulcer is sufficiently mundified, that our
plaster called Leonatum shall be very good both to bring on flesh, and to
Cicatrize, adding the powder of burnt Allow. When ye flesh shall now be grown
out, lay thereon pure lints, and upon that the cerot Leonatum. And to that
purpose also the black plaster is very good. For both these do meruailously
mundifie, and bring on good flesh, and both if thou do apply them must be
cleansed oftentimes in the day. Finiallie pu^ified and root ten ulcers are cured
(...) well also with cauteries and in short time. All (...) and superfluous
flesh which is found in them being first (...) a way, as we have decleared in
the former order of ^ting. For the power of ye natural (...) does bring many
profitable things to pass in such kind of ^ures, (for the potenciall fire is
of far less and woor^e efficacy then y^ natural fire and in ye mean time
of greater hurt, and the cause of greater diste^perature which we do less
allow) for ye grief yt proceeds from y^ pote^cial fire is both mo^e grie^,
also of toger co^tinua^ce. But the g^iefe that is received of the natural fire
is vehement, but it does so long only end^e, as it does in act burn the
member, which commodities of the natural fire, have been truly observed of us.
For it both very greatly comfort the member to the which it is applied, and
corrects the ^fection that to b^d and (...) the same member, and does
rectify the completion, and does ^pe under and restrai^ the corruption that it
shall proceed no further. Furthermore it sucketh and dries up the evil and
corrupt matters and flu^s, finally, it (...), and enforces venomous fluxions
to issue forth, as in the raging Carbuncle it comes to pass. And in the
cancers, if that which is evil and dead be cut away.

And the place bur^. with an actual cauterie, that which is of an evil and
corrupt affection in the member, is de^ded from that which is good, and the
member it self is made more lusty and of a better disposition, and the same
is done also in ulcers where the (...) is corrupt, the which if thou do burn,
it does ^uide by (...) all that part of the bone which is corrupted, from that
which is sound. The vii. effect of the first is, that it restrains that
fluxion of blood which the escar makes. The viii. use is, in the opening of
cold impostumations, for the fire of the actual cauterie does corr^borate and
increase the (...) heat of the members in which the impostumes be. The (...)
use of her, being taught by Mesue and Arno^) has (...) observed of us by often
experience to turn away those (...) or (...) which some times descend from the
head into the eyes, and the breast, for that is presently done (...) a (...) in
use in the coronall comissure, or with a (...) drawing a bristle by ye hi^der
part of ye neck, above the ^uke. But the (...) of the fire, is to amplify any
(...), and to take away any callosis^ or hardness. The ^ is of power to conform
(...) and hard ulcers into (...) fashion more apt for the (...). By the xii.
also if there be any super^ons or rank flesh in the ulcer, it is burnt out with
the (...) in good order, (...) also which are (...) to trouble the (...) are
stated, the th^ples being burnt with a ^tery. And finally if any evil or
hurtful humor does corruptly (...) of one place into another, is turned another
(...) very (...) with the fire.

What things, we (...) and ^bserued of the use of fire, partly by (...), and
partly by long experience, we have though (...) good to put it down in writing
in this place because we were desirous both to provide for the ne^lig^nce of
some persons, and thoroughly to satisfy the reasons of this cure.

Annotations of the vi. Chapter.
When our purpose was and should have been to speak of wounds, we fell
likewise into the discourse of ulcers and their natures, now therefore it
shall be sufficient to express and declare that they; as other kinds of
imperfections or passions unnatural have their double cause, antecedent as
they term it, and co^uncte. As for example, in the ill ordering of a wound
oftentimes there remains an ulcer. Or if by great disorder in diet it fall not
in any one member that an ulcer break out, the same distemperature of Galen is
called in many places the coni^ cause, which the Arrabians does call the
malignite (...) ill disposition of complexions.

Vniuersam igitur vlce^ ^rationem] Therefore the general cure of ulcers.

Many things may here be spoken of ulcers, and of their cure which are ^rie
largely expected by Galen, in his third and fourth book^ of the Method of
curing, whereunto I refer the reader. For the manifold differences of ulcers,
and the diversity of causes, with the variable manner of curing the same.
Cannot in this compendious treatise be expressed, nor yet perfectly be showed.

Purgationes omnino] wholly purging medicines.

For the most part these be the causes of difficult and rebellious ulcers in
cure, either the bad disposition or distemperature of the flesh, in the which
ulcers do light or chance, or the bad quality of the humor that haunteth the
same place, or the abundance of humors that have their recourse thither. All
which causes although they cannot quite be taken away with purging, it
certainly they may thereby be much deminished and impaired.

Quarta porto consolidando fit] the fourth intention is accomplished by
consolidation.

And because the superfluity that abounds in ulcers is of two kinds, I will
note unto you that the thinnest is called Sa^ies. The other which is more
thick, is called Sor^es.

Which two excrementes or superfluities, require a double cure, for by the
thin matter, the ulcer is made moist, the cure whereof requires drying
medicines. The other thick excrement makes the ulcer filthy which craves the
help of mundifiyng or clensyng medicines.

Multa preteria] many besides.

Our aucthor handles those ulcers which be called venomous or poisoned, all
which Galen terms hard to receive Cicatrise.

For in truth they are marvelous hard to be cured they be so intricate, so
ill disposed, so rebellions, all which when they wax something old, they are
counted past handling, and without hope. The perfect definition and the best
opinions of all these ulcers is to be found in Galen in the iii. and fourth
book of his method of curing. In Celsus, and Aegineta. If I should speak my
opinion of those ulcers which Auicen terms (...) to be healed, I think with
him that they have some obscure and hidden mallicious property. For says he,
they be not rotten ulcers, nor fretted, nor yet creeping or stra^ing. But they
be as of neither disposition plainly, sometimes closing, and sometimes
kind^ing a new ve^ome, sometimes opening them selves, and breaking out a fresh.

Of hollow ulcers and their cure. Cap. 7.
THe hollow ulcers so called, come oftentimes of swelling contrary to nature,
and by some great impostume which being suffered to ripen to much, are opened
either with the knife or with the cauter is, and a tent of linen dipped in the
white of an egg is put in and then a digestive of the yolke of an egg, and
oil of Roses is daily applied, besides this to (...) the ulcer, tents of
linen cloth fully soked with Mell Rosarum are chrust in, the oyn^ment
Basilicon, or some other of those which are in use put upon, but they are
dressed every day once, or at the most twice, but when he is do (...) the
tents being drawn forth, and the matter which is within being expurged, they
are stopped again, and this manner of dressing is so long delayed, until all
being wea^e, the patient is left unhealed. Whom y^ they may lean with some
honesty, an emplaister of Diaquilon or of some other i^ put thereon, whereas
they are plainly ignorant, whether the one or the other do hurt, or help,
And by this means perfect health is promised to the pacientes being commanded
to cleanse and wipe the same twice a day.

Some ulcers being ordered by this means are s^e cured, and some are
protracted above a whole year. But such hollow ulcers are made sometime of
green wounds, and (...) of the sinews, and in fleshie places also (the
wounds being not well healed) we have the same come to pass. And of a simple
wound and that very small we have seen not only a great and cauernouse ulcer
to have foor^, (out of the which ulcer to great abundance of filthy mat^ has
run) but also those that suffered such ulcers, at length to have been taken
with a consu^ptiue ague. But our state is now brought unto y^ point, y^
whereas all these things are done daily, yet are they little regarded of those
who ought especially to look thereunto. I think it comes to pass for the
iniquites of our people. But how the hollow ulcers of this sort are to be
cured, if is plainly taught, part y of other ancient aucthores, and partly of
John Vigo. And are all best healed that way as he has taught. For first he
does put down two mundificatiue medicines, by either of which the ulcer by a
syring may be washed, and afterward an absterciue made of a decoction of barley
and Mel Rosarum, then some of them which may induce flesh, and at last
convenient ligature being added in that sort as it shall be decleared of us. All
those are healed very soon, and the cauites and hollow places do cleave
together, and flesh to flesh is consounded. And we having used this cure of
John Vigo, have healed almost innumerable of this sort, but whereas we did
perceive that by this means, and by these Locions set forth by Vigo, these
old ulcers although Callo^ and hard, and subject to make and cast forth much
corruption may be easily healed, neither to be any excess therein, yet we have
devised another way more easy of curing and brie^er, which we use in
appostumacions when they are opened, which way has taken very good success,
and according to my mind in all thing through the great benefit of God. Which
thing whosoever will make proof of in curing apostumes, will with great
pleasure allow ye same certain and most easy, for the third, or at the most
the fourth day, all that cauite of the (...) being (...) a conglutinate, is
healed, and nothing is left (...) but the apercion which was made by art, that
the filthy matter might run out and be expressed, and that without either
danger or pain, or difficulty of the pacient, although the swelling be great
and with many cauernouse holes. But that cure is of this sort. If the swelling
or exiture, or ye apostume be great, first of all it is to be opened very
perfectly, so yt the little finger may be put into the orifice, and let all the
filthy matter which is within, be suffered to run forth, and be expelled,
crushing the place together softly, although this seem to be repugnant to the
common precept of writers, for it is a thing manifest to them that consider the
matter well, that the filthy corrupcion retained, may more hurt them if it be
euacuated. For Nature, as long as the filthy corrupcion is entermedled, cannot
conioine and conglutinate the flesh to the skin.

Therefore when the corrupcion is expulsed, let there be put into the ulcer a
tent made of tow and as great as the orifice whereby the corrupcion may flow
down, upon this let there be put a stuphe and afterward bound up, and so let
remain until the next day. The next day, let it be opened, and the ulcer
cleansed of all the corrupcion which is therein, after that let a pipe of lead
be put into the orifice as great as the orifice it self is, which may reach as
far as the ^nite, neither let it be forced any farther. Upon these things ye
may lay a cerote of Basilicon, spread upon a linen cloth, a hole being made at
the very mouth of the lead, whereby the lead may be kept that it fall not
out, after that upon either side of the co^cauite, let be put stuphes or
bolsters made triangle wise, that the whole breadth of the cauite may be filled
with the boulsters, but let the orifice of the ulcer where the leaden pipe is,
remain free, neither stopped with the stuphes, nor touched with any Ligature,
that all the corrupt matter which is within, may be expurged. Then let the
place which is kept in with the stuphes, be bound up with a ^o^er or fillet of
breadth, pressing it down softly, so that the pacient may feel no grief. But
the Ligature is to be begun at the farther part of the Ulcer, pressing it
down softly, and sorting the corrupt humor which is within, toward the
orifice.

But the fillet or rouller is to be bound about on both sides of the ulcer with
both your hands, and by this means all the corrupcion is pressed out. And so
the ulcer being bound up, is left until the next day, in which day, the
Ligature being loosed, we do measure how much hollownesse has been left, that
we thoroughly may see whether there be any place, which the stuphes have not
comen unto.

For all places which were under the triangle houlsters, shall be found conjoined
and conglutinate, when these things are thus found, the stuphes again in the
same manner and place not changed but laid as they were before shall be bound up,
and so left until the next day after. For at the same day all things shall be
found to cleave together, and to be conjoined very well.

But if much humor or corrupt matter shall seem to be left in any place,
there in the same place the stuphes are to be opened with the rouller and your
boulsters placed upon those cauerns, and by this means all the filthy matter
shall be pressed out, and the place that is open shall grow together, and all the
parts of the ulcer very well closed up.

But when these things are in this wise cured and done, let these boulsters be
removed and a linen cloth be put upon the wou^d being spread with the Leonine
Emplaister or some other as shall be thought best, and this Cerote is to be wiped
and made clean seven or eight times a day.

And this is the best and most surest way to cure such kind of Ulcers, which
can never deceive the Surgion, it they be duly executed.

Neither shall the pacient be troubled with any (...) or grief, in which thing
we by long and continual experience are able to witness, almost innumerable
such ulcers caused of swellings contrary to nature, as soon as the apostume
was opened, that I have taken in hand to heal, and the end to have had such
success as I would desire Although we were driven to strive, through over
great a deflu^e of corrupt humors. But of other old ulcers, that way of
healing which we have preserved unto you is best and most excelent. For whereas
by reason of the continuance of the disease, the same be Call us and hard
within and like to fistules, and the whole place of a very evil affected
nature they did require especially that kinds of cure. But after the ulcer is
healed, ye must apply upon the place that emplaister comefortatiue whereby
the member may be refreshed. And this every third day being removed, and the
moistnes wipt away, it is to be laid to again until the member be restored
in his former state and vigoure. But such as are apostumes or exitures, are
thus healed, and by this means sonest. As Soon as there shall be cut and opened
with the instrument, let there be put into the ulcer a tente dipped in the white
of an egg, which the next day after is to be taken away, after that, let there
be put on a cerot of Leonatum, or Minium spread upon a linen cloth, and the
ulcers ten times or oftener every day be cleansed. For by this means through
gods help it shall be sonest cured.

Annotations of the vij. Chapter.
A hollow ulcer which the latinests do term Sinuosum, has the mouth very
stricte or narrow, but at the bottom, is more large and has many by ways, and
crooked, corners, but without any callous substance, or hardness by which only
means it differs from a fistula, For that is alwyes adjoined with Callouse
or hardness. Plerumqu^ (...) ril^us pret^r naturam] for the most part outward
tumo^ unnatural or swellings.

The aucthor yeeldes a reason and cause of those ulcers, which either come by
apostumacion or else by suppurated affect opened somewhat to late, or of wounds
ill cured. Those wounds which are made either with a iagged, a flat, or
especially a round weapon, as Hippocrates deemeth by reason that they retain
the corrupted matter somewhat to long in a ripened impostumation, or in a deep
wound, which cannot well from thence be ^idde, or conuaied, but there
lingereth and lurketh, and as it were recouereth some sharp nature and
fretting disposition, (...) into holes which either never or hardly can be
filled with flesh or be conjoined. For the part affected receiving so great a
weakness, from the parts thereunto adjoined therein bestowing their
superfluities do likewise draw from all other parts of the body such
abundance of humor^ as thereby the ulcer is made incurable and or at the least
very hard to be cured.

Quanquam comuni foribenci^m pr^cepto] although by the general rule of writers.

Here the aucthor teaches the cure of this wound which is according to the
opinion of Galen Aectiu^, Paulus, and Guido.

For if the hollownes of the ulcer tend directly downewardes, or decline to
any side, or be carried inward, if I say by no situation ye can procure the
corruption to issue, ye shall never prevail any thing either by breeding of
flesh, or by hastening to consolidation, unless ye first devise some means to
dispatch that putrified corruption that in the center of your ulcer is
collected. I mean by making some incision into the bottom of the ulcer, or by
cutting open the whole concauite or hollownes thereof, but you must take beede
that ye observe not this manner of cure always, as for example, when the ulcer
lies so intricately dispersed that no incision may be made to the part without
great hurt. then we (...) all our (...) ^nes, as we are (...) by Galen a^
(...), whose opinion is (...) and honey (...) together.

Of the ulcers in the head which grow either of a scirrose hard swelling like
kernels; or by reason of the French pox, with the corruption of the bone. Cap.
8.
THe ulcers of the head which for the most part come of hard ^ernelly humors
grown by reason of the French Pox, do con^ upon Penerarium, to the which the
y^ bring great pain because it is sinew^e, and of too quick sense or feeling,
and coupsed with Dura Mini^ called the harder pa^icle. Furthermore such (...)
or apost^es when they are about Cranium, and the humor where upon they do
depend, is gross and cold and of a heavy nature, it both forth with putrify
before the ^pening of the same. And when the putrified humor is bred, and the
corrupt matter fully made, the apostume uses to break of it self, or else is
opened by the diligenes of the Surgion. The method of curing the same if the
bone be corrupted, which a cunning Artificer will ea^lie know by feeling only
without view and by that which is apparent without discovering of Peneranium.
For it is agreeable to reason, the rotten humor lying upon the bone,
(especially a long time, as in such evils it happens,) that there must
needs be a corruption thereof. Which thing if it be so, ye must needs open
Cramum, the apostume being opened in the manner of a cross, according to the
length thereof.

After that, the ulcer is to be dressed up with the lintes dipped in the white of
an egg and oil of Roses beaten together, so that there (...) to this intent
that Co^ium which we suppose to be corrupt, may remai^e (...): The next let
there be applied a medi^ to ripen, confected of the yolke of an egg, and oil
of Roses with a little Saffron. And the ulcer being ripened, which ^wor^ be in
four (...) space, (...) forth with to the extraction of the p^trified bones
which may be done in this (...). Let there be put upon Cr^nium (corrupted) on
every (...) Pulu^ris Vitrioli Romani conibusti, but take heed it touch not
overmuch the (...) of the ulcer where the flesh is, and thereupon let there be
put dry lints which may fill the whole ulcer that the brims come not together.
The putting to of this powder ought to be done every day until Craniu^
begin to wa^e black which being black, ye must procure the soft^ing of the
same, that ye may redilie cut it, which shall be done very well if there be put
to Cranium it self ^intes dipped in oil of Roses, let the rest of the ulcer be
filled with dry (...) and upon all those things let there, be put Vnguentun
Bisilicon spread upon L^ther, and these things shall be done until the bone
seem to be parted on every side, which thou shall perce^e if being handled
with the mullets it shall appear divided on every side about the brimmes,
which being done, and the corrupted bone past off, ye shall apply thereunto
that Balm which we describe in wounds of the head.

The bone being an (...) gently with a fether with the same Balm being ^ified
at the ^er, for this liniment does bring forth flesh be ^eene the putrified
bone and the whole.

Which growing in the middle, the bone does use to rise up. Wherefore it is
necessary in the m^ space and in the distances of time, to take up the said
bone with some instrument of Iron and that strongly, for a light apprehencion
of it is not sufficient, by reason of the hard (...) forth; and the (...) with
the (...) the (...) be (...) with lin^s, and (...) Sinople.

But if the before (...) and through the ignor^ce of the (...) the whole Gran^um
be pu^ (...) that the (...) or hard pannic^e partly with gro^e matter, and
partly with super (...) such an ulcer (...) with the pou^ of John Vigo, in such
(...) rest of the ulcers be.

But least (...) head is the (...), and of much (...) to prepare the (...)
before in this order following.

Rec. Puluer^ (...). In a br^sen (...) the which let (...) be wrought together
a (...) with the (...), and of (...) the water being (...), let the (...) at
the (...) the (...) of water being (...) in, and (...) with the powder in the
Mortar (...) the water (...) and the powder dried at the (...), as before.

The said powder may (...) put to the hard (...) Meninx very safety, and
(...) perfectly. But if this thing (...) happen, ((...) ^oth) that between
(...) and the hard (...) much corruption is gathered by reason of the (...)
^munion between the matter lying upon the Cranio, (...), which through the
(...) being (...) to Membrana, as I (...) have seen in (...) persons.

Ye must them (^pping their ^thrilies hu^) (...) hold their breath (...) or
(...) day, (...) filthy matter may come forth from the hard (...) or Dura
Meninx, and so I have proved it to be done, with good success, Giueing them
in the mean time, a decoction of Lignum Indicum, according to that method
which we will show straight ways in the chapter de Morbo Gallico.

Annotations of the viij. Chapter.
If Ulcers differ from wounds, for that wounds be fresh and blouddie, and
ulcers of long continuance and yeedling more putrified matter, in so many
respects the cures of them do differ by how much the one is moyster then the
other, whereupon they reqire so much the more drying medicines. But since the
auctor here undertakes not the cure of simple ulcers, but of compound: It is
necessary to set down the compound cure that unto them belongs. Which
ulcers if they spring of the French po^ks, they have their beginning from the
infection of the Liver.

Wherefore by blood letting and purging, the malignite of the humor is to be
let out. And after to come to the part affected from whence we must inhibit al
ill accidents, whether it be inflamacion, tumor, or pain. And to perfect and
finish the cure, you must use drying medicines, as Galen reports in his
second book of Ulcers.

Curationis methodus, si os corruptum fuerit.] The method of curing, if the
bone be corrupted.

The manner of cure of a corrupted bone is very ready if a man may plainly come
to the sight thereof, as Celsus in his viii. Book and second Chapter. But if
the same be not to be seen, you may proceed to the cure by probable
conjectures. As if after many days labor the ulcer will not close, as it comes
nearer the bone being corrupted as Galen says in his book de Vsu partium. In
which place you may understand the reason thereoff. Or if you list to consider
with your self by the breeding of matter, or by retaining the same long, the
bone received harm; or whether it be by reason that there is bred more thin
matter or putrefaction then ye greatness of the ulcer may aford. For these
causes read Galen in his third book of Fraun^es, and of the seperacion of
bones. Oporter Cranium Manife^a^e] you must manifest ye (...).

Unless some chief vein, artery, or nerve do forbid: otherwise the cure is
the more ready and less painful. As Celsus in his fifth book and second
Chapter. But if in that part the bone be so altered that the ulcer cannot be
dilated, so as the bone hurt and corrupted cannot be seen, then with small
tents reaching to the bost (...), or with a sponge dippe^ in wine, or with some
med^cine that will eat away y^ flesh, you must emarge the sore.

Ponatur vitrioly Romani.] Use or apply some Roman Vitrioll.

Foresee ever that before the use of these medicines, the body be we^ purged,
for fear of inflammation.

Quo denigrato procuranda est.] Which being black, you must procure.

But in every alteration of the bone, you may not provoke blackness, for that
were to add one mischief to an other. For euerybone that is altered without
mortification, may safely be stalled with a small knife as Paulus says in his
vi. book and 77. Chapter. Which you shall so long ^eale until you see she
blood appear, because so much as is corrupted is very dry, as Celsus says.
Let therefore the dilligent reader observe what our aucthor says of ye
alteration of bones which are corrupted. All which are to be cut off, by the
manner and means in this case prescribed. And in such like as Paulus writes in
his book and his chapter of Fistulaes.

Ex vitello oui et oleo Rosac^o.] Of the yolke of an egg, and oil of Roses.

Some one peradventure, will marvel why the auctor disalowed of this mixture
in his chapter of wounds of ye head, and here seems to commend the same. This
scruple or doubt is easily taken away if you do but mark the definitions of
both. For a wound that is only a division of continuite, requires quireth
nothing but glutination.

But an ulcer besides solusion has matter which must be concocted, and
cleansed. A chief medicine in this case is requisite, which is ^raught with
both these properties.

Of Curing the french pox. Chapter 9.
THis french pestilence did not beging at the first after one sort to trouble
miserable men, but in diverse and sundry sorts. And threfore y^ inuencion of
the cure thereof was not so easy, as well the Phisicions as the Surgions being
moved with this stragenes of the evil, and seeing this pestilence joined every
where with every disease, to rage among the people, they labored gratly to ^de
out some way, whereby so grieuouse a disease might be put off. Therefore when
they had diligently considered that this french disease, did bring with it a
kind of vniuer^all Skabbe, oftentimes with ring worms, with the ^oulnes of
all the body called Vitiligo and Alopecia running sores in the head called
Acores, and werts of both sorts, and many times with phlegmatic or
melancholic swellings, or ulcers corrosiue, filthy and cancrouse, and also
running over the body together with putriffyng of the bone, and many times also
acco^pained with all kind of grief, with fevers consumptiues, and with many
other differences of diseases.

They found out at length diverse ways of curing the same, so that none is
vexed with this disease, which may not easelie and safely be delivered of the
same. If he will receive the fumigacions and ointments, which are applied unto
him not without great travail. But because the poor people are not able to
stusta^e ye great charges theroff through poverty, I thought good and a thing
worth my travail, of the two ways of curing which. I thought best and always
proved, and with the which I have brought (...) many poor diseased people
(very hard to be cured) to the haven of health, yea and such as have been in
the dry consumpcio^ called Mirasmus, first to set forth that which is done by
ointments. Therefore the body being prepared three or four days with this
Syrope following which is in this sort.

Rec. Sirupi Fumiterre et Mellis Rosati. Ana..j. Aque Fumiterre..iij. Miss^.
Then shall they be purged with these pills which are called Hermodactilis, et
Arthretice, vell Sipocius tib^ cum Catapociis Aggregatiuis, aut Aureis, aut de
Nibro secu^dum Alexandrinum, aut de Fumoterre, aut de Agarico, according to the
complexion of the pacient, and of the quality of the disease. But if a pocion
to purge does rather like them, ye shall give him to drink, Catholicon, aut
Electuarum indum, Hamec Confectio, aut Dia Seen cum Agarici Trochiscati. Vell
Similia. In the mean time, let the pacient eat every day Wethers flesh, or
roasted Hen, and in y^ evening Raisons. The body being purged, let him take of
this decoction following every morning early.ij. and as many at two of the
clock in the after none, but in winter the fourth hour after supper, the
decoction is made as folowith. Rec. Polipodij Quercini.ij. Folliculoru^
Seen..j. Th^i, et Epichimi. p.j. Let the decotion be made according to art in
ix. li. of water to the consuming of the third part, adding thereto Sacchari
Ruby..viij. Mellis Co^munis. li.j. And so finish your decoction.

With the pocion of this medicine the diseased pacient shall be purged without
any labor. And with good concoction of the humors, which decoction being
finished he shall take two pills at the discrecion of the Physician in the
dead time of the night.

But the third day after, his body is to be anointed in the night after
supper with this ointment ensuing, the which among the rest seems to me to be
the chief.

Rec. Auxungie Porcine..viij. Butiri..j. Olei Laurinj Camomille. Anethi
Dialthae. ana.. ss. Argenti viui extincti..iij. fiat linimentum.
Let this ointment be anointed on the joints, if it may be with the patientes
own hand, for this is excellent and chiefest, the feet, the ha^s, the knees,
the flanks, the loins, the armehooles, the shoulders, the elbowes, and the
hands. And all the impostumes, so that they possess not the head.

But the ointment is so to be rubbed in that it may utterly sink in. And let
the patient tarry in his bed quiet, and reasonably covered with clothes, so
that when he eats he may be suffered to use one hand only. The day also and
every day following, let the anointing be applied in that order as has been
told you until his mouth and gummes begin to swell, which sometimes happens
within two days, sometime within three or four, as soon as therefore the
soreness of the mouth and the swelling of the gummes shall appear, ye must
leave off from anointing and not before. But at what time the body is anointed,
let the patient eat Wethers flesh, or Hen, or Kid boiled or roasted at noone
and evening, and let him drink white wine delaied with water, (but with us in
England, we rather allow small Ale) but when his anointing is finished, let him
refrain from flesh and other things.

Let him dine only with Rice Potage, with a crumme or two of bread, let him
suppe with meat made of Almonds, drinking a decoction of Anise and Licorise,
neither may it be lawful for him to drink any wine all the next month
until he be restored to health as much as appertains to the mouth, but
after the mouth is healed, he may eat once a day, the flesh of a Wether, or
Hen, looking daily for better strength of body four days or there about. For
the patient ought to persevere in this order of diet. In the mean while until
be begin to utter spittle out of his mouth. Because if he keep a contrary
diet to this, and eat more then is convenient, the patient should be hindered
of that euacuation which we greatly desire.

Annotations of the ix. Chapter.
I did not think it necessary to give any Annotations, upon this Chapter,
because no man that carries but the name of a Physician is or can be ignorant
or inexpert in the cure of this disease.

And also for that I see so many that have both written and gathered all that
may be said or in that can be spoken, so that I cannot say more effectually.
The disease ^aylie dying and wearing away by the exquisite cure thereof.

Notwithstanding, because the aucthor has set down unctions, fumigations, and
Guaiacum, I will briefly set down the manner, method, use, and effectual
handling of them.

Whosoever therefore that intends rightly to cure this disease, must first
take this occasion by the way (for the causes, effects, and essential marks
of this disease, are to be gathered out of their works, that have undertaken
publicly to treat and write of the same.)

First know whether the sickness be newly taken, or have been of long
continuance, how far it reaches, and what parts it has infected. Whether
Nerves, bones, or joints.

Whether the pains be mild or cruel, whether the substance of the
corruption be much or little. Whether hard, knottie, or gentle in handling. If
inward, or outward. of the ulcers or whe^kes be many, or with much pain, ve^e
few appearing. Or if whether Pustulus matter or Gummie substance appear.

To be short all the signs of this grief must be very readily discorned
and distinguished. All this foreseen, know that that imperfection which
catches the bone, cannot be helped without v^ion or burning. Therefore they
either be never cured, or else only so palliated that they break out again.

Preparato igitur corpore] Therefore the body being prepared.

For as much as all things are intermingled as well in the seminary, as also
in the material parts, by reason of the flimish humor, we must search
whether they be together both pustles and hard swellings. And whether there
be one invention and remedy which may perform all, and prevail in all
things.

Or whther more may be required. And of what sort they be. For there be some
that have assaied by only purging to cure the whole grief: some likewise by
unctions: some by fumings, some by those means which does convert the matter
through swette. Some by that means which does resist the matter: some verily
by one means, and some by other diverse helps, as the cause requires.

But our aucthor sets down the order how the matter is to be prepared, and
digested, and soonest to be taken away. But they ought to be hot, and
attenuatiue, and as we say pearcing or abstersive.

Purgato semell corpore] the body being once purged.

The first euacuation being done and ended, they seem in mine opinion to do
very well, which give again dygestiues and so purge the body. For we have
seen some which being exactly well purged, have thereby been very well cured.
There be also which give the second time sirupes laxatiue, by putting unto them
either Seen, or Agaricke, or Hormodactales, namely such as the Apoticaries
shops do yield us.

Tertie deinceps die] the third day afterward.

I would advise the Surgeon to try all other remedies before he proceed to
these sharp kind of curinges. For this manner of crew is very loathsome and
dangerous. And who would not fear the force, the pearcing and power reflexiue
of Quicksiiluer. For whiles you do anoint the legs and the arms, you drive
the matter inward, and contrary to the method of Galen, for you force it from
the ignoble or outward parts, unto the chief and principal entraills.

And yet it is by experience well proved, that many whose health was dispaired
of, has been well recovered, by this extreme manner of curing. And least
such an experiment should seem to be without reason, my judgment is that
these kind of medicines consist of such things as do burn the roots, and
seeds. And do dry up, absterge, desolue and turn into sweat the whole
mass or matter of this disease, as shall plainly appear to him that
considerately wayeth the composition of the medicine.

Quam primum igitur apparuerit] as soon therefore as it shall appear.

This spittle or flux of the mouth is not to be stayed, but suffered to have
his course, and the mouth must be washed with wine or with Alome water.

And sometimes there follows such exulceration of the mouth, that the
patientes for certain days at the first can neither eat nor drink.

Their teeth be loosed, their breath stinketh, and it is known by experience
that many have gone away shinering and trembling after the manner of a Palsy,
and after the unction to have come again to others for help.

I will here report what I saw at Parris. A certain young (...) with a staff,
died the third day of a (...) being opened, the bone appeared corrupt and
foul. Wherein was found a quantity of Quicksiluer. And therefore it is to be
observed that in any wi^e the head be (...) anointed. And that there be no
great portion of the Quicksiluer in the medicine, but let there be used in some
more, and in some less, as occasion serves.

The order of curing the French pox, by fumigation or perfume. Cap. 10.
FIrst of all let there be a cha^ prepared perforated in the (...) like a
stool, in ye which (...) are wont to (...) our b^les. Let there be also
prepared a p^ili^ of (...) streigned out with a round (...) made of ^wigges, or
some other matter, to that the whole come wherein (...) is to (...), may
contain the mea^ure of three palms. Let the p^ition be (...) covered over the
head, that the ^ume may be suffered to go out no where. Where the pacient
shall sit, let there be appointed in some v^ssell burning coals under his
chair, into the which there must be cast one ^ittle (...) of their which we
have prepared (...) time. And after he has swet an hour, we must take great
heed that he take no cold. But let him be carried to his ^dde, being wrapped
with the linen and sheets wherewith he was covered in the pa^ion, wherein let
him lie the whole day and night.

This same shall be done in like wise two other days continually, and for
every fumigation let there b^ applied three little b^ls in their order, until
the (...) which we will tell you off be ended and consumed. But all manner order
of diet is to be observed which in the last said Chapter is set forth.

For the pacient shall (...) fumigation is (...).

Rec. C^la^ij..ij.ss. (...). Thuris, (...) liquide, an. j.ss. (...). Et fiant
(...).
Annotations of the 10. Chapter.
The (...) likewise a cure by ^umigacion, they place the p^ient upon a hollow
Charie, they cover him very well over with shetes or clothes, that no part of
his (...) French^se^, with whick (...) ^ume the pari^ (...). It is a most
dau^g^rouse kind of medicine, which I never d^st apply, but (...) to certain
parts of the ^die, (...) l^gges, (...) when there are in there some pla^ ^ding
to morti^ation, as Spas^lus, or when then (...) or swellinge, or (...) or
r^bellions. Then to use ^umigations to these parts, I think it must
necessary. But I for my part do will you to abstain from it, and not to
(...) nor follow (...) practicioners, who do (...) they presume to give ye
pills made of quick silver (...) (...) paciente. In which (...) v. read
Brassa^olus, a most ^ned Physician, sometime to have been. They (...) use this
Cinaber, because there is in it the faculty and power of quicksiluer.

Of the order of curing the French pox with the Docoction of Guaicum. Cap. 11.
THe drinking of this medicine has a great pr^ogatiue in ^ling the French
pox, whether it do oppress us with Ulcers, or with griefs, or swellings,
^abbe, ague, consumpcion, or with any other aff^.

Yea, I my self have healed with this medicine, such as have been diseased of
the gout, and very man wasted and consumed away with the French pox, and
^epriued of all moving both hand and foot, which daily did (...) away with
greatness of pain.

Then the body being prepared with Si^pes applied to the hurtful humors, (...)
(...), mell Rosirum, (...), opithi^, et simillia. The body is to be purged
(...) catap^tijs. aggregatiuis, aut de Hermodactilis, aut de Arei^, aut
Arthreticis, aut Fr^oterre, as shall be expedient. And the purgation once done,
let him be prepared again to a second purgation with this decoction following.

Rec. Poligodij Quircini mul^ Co^si..iij. Folliculorum sen^.j. Thimi, Epithi^.
Ana. p.j.
Let there be made a decoction in vi. li. of water unto the consuming of a
third part, whereunto shall be added, Pulderi. Hermodactilorum in modum
Tritorum..j. and after in the str^igning and colender strongly made, add
thereunto Mellis Communis. li.j. Saccharj Rubri. li. ss. And let them boil
till they be clarified, and so every day in the morning and in the evening two
or three hours after noone, let him take of the Sirope li. ss. unto the whole
be drunk up. Yet so that every time the decoction be first stirred together,
which preparacion being performed, let the body be purged the second time cum
Dram semis Pillulis Catapotioru^ dictorum. The second day after the
purgacion, he shall begin to take the decoction of Guaiacum prepared in this
order.

Rec. Ligni sa^sti. ^a^e Molli^..iij. Corticis Ide^ Ligu^ apod Iodor
(...)..xij. Vi^i Albi (...). A^quae For, (...).
Let them (...) together for xxiiii. hours in a (...) of glass, and after
that let them boil by little and (...) with a soft fire, and the pot close
covered until the con^ing of a third part, whereunto (...) Hermo^ctilorum
Valde Tritorum..ij. The which thou shall also (...) in the pot with the
decoction, that they may be mingled the better together. Then ^er it and remove
it straight from the fire, which when it is cold and ^elled together, be made
two Cal^ures in two (...) the out of a greate^ quantity, and the other of a
(...) and let the (...) clean vessel for common drink at dinner and supper.
Let the other be made with a (...) expression and be set aside also in the the
other vessel, of the which ^arely in the morning and in the evening two or
three hours after none, but in the winter four hours after supper, he shall
take viii. ounces (...) in the winter as aforesaid, but in the summer ye shall
not need to (...). But if thou meanest to make the decoction aforesaid more
affectual, in steed of water, take the fecis of the decoction and boil it to
a third part, and put thereto wine, and let the rest be done as we have told
you in the decoction before set forth, until all be drunk up.

An order of diet is to be kept, at what time the body purged and prepared
with ^upes, then do we grant to the pacient at noone Weather (...) ^o^de, and
raisons at night, But at what time he do^ drink ye decoction of Guaiacum, and
enters sweat, he must lie in his bed dul^e covered, and shall eat and
suppe with raisons and a little bread, if his strength be able to ^ide it.

But if the (...) and more delicate then ^e is able to (...) to (...) a diet,
the pacient may dine with a (...) without pot^, but let him sup only with
(...).

By this only dyer, the (...) is to be governed to the xxx, day: which pasted
over, he may eat. (...) a day. That is to say, at dinner and supper to the
(...) ^ay more or less according to the condition of the dissease. Let heed
be taken notwithstanding in the mean time, that the pacient do not drin^ wine
or any order water. And if it shall please him when the wether is warm to rise
out of his bed, let him rise, when xx. days be passed over, and two hours
after his sweat.

For thus it shall come to pass, that the said order being kept, the pa^ient
shall be restored to his ^ealth with a very good temperature of his members, and
an excellent fair state of body. And in like order we may redute to ^ealth,
such as be troubled with the Gout, the Pa^ey, and also the convulcion or
Crampe, so that we have this in remem^rance, that is, that the bark of this
Lignum sanctum is to be barked off among the Indians, because that which is
barked with us, is of less ver^e. Likewise the wood which is brought to us
without the bark, is not allowed, because the strength thereof is exhausted,
and being dare without the bark, is ^oone corrupted, and the wood also without
heart, is not allowed for the same cause.

Annotations of the xi. Chapter.
When this disease began first, the common practicionerse used presently for
the cure thereof unctions which are made of caustic medicines. Being instructed
as these learned of the Arabians, that those cacoethicall ulcers, and such like
are cured by such kind of medicines. But I truly do think it far better to
apply such remedies which our later Physicians (...)

THis (...) to make the ^doction as meet is. For they err greatly (...) in
lib.iij. of water to the consuming of (...) others bid boil (...) which
things in my judgment, either the Physicians and not (...) content with (...).

Who if they (...).

I have (...) v. lib. of water to the (...). By which (...) they get a hot
diste^perature of the (...) and (...), and for that cause do easily reuerse
into the disease again.

For this Rubus is of a hot and dry temperature, almost to the third deg^,
which (...) it is boiled in to small a quantity of water, and (...) long a
time, and the thing so ponderous, it does (...) a great deal more. And
therefore is not so good in the healing of this disease now become so
melancholicke.

But if as we shall declare unto you, it be boiled in a lesser dose and a
greater quantity of water, and less time, they may use the decoction as well
in the evening as in the morning, as well lying as walking, without swet, or
sweating, in hot weather or cold, so that they abstain from other drinks, and
be content with that only at dinner and supper. And furthermore, by this only
order of boiling Rubie, it shall easily come to pass that ye pacients may be
healed with one only lib. although they be loosed in all, their joints, and
with less cost. Without the us of bisquet bread, and without the keeping of so
slender a diet, as that is which others do use.

First of all therefore the body being prepared with the order aforesaid, and
purged according to the state of the pacient, and quality of the disease, ye
shall give him the Apozema set forth in the former chapter, and shall be purged
the second time also.

These things being finished, he shall begin to drink the Decoction prepared of
Rubie Vittigine, otherwise called Sarza parille.

Rec. Rubi parille,.iij. cut into small pieces and bruised, Seen.. ss. bruised,
of water lib.xii. in a clean vessel, in which let them be soked, xxiiii
hours. And afterward let them be boiled with a soft fire to the consuming of
iii. lib. of the water, or more, at what time put to the same decoction
Hermodactilorum tritorum et subactorum,.j. And mingle it together with the
other things covering the pot, and let them cool being removed from the fire,
and let this decoction be given to drink of dinner and supper as ye think
best, and if thirst, shall be great, at other times also, but in less quantity.
When thou will make the pocion somewhat stronger, boil again in a pot full of
water that leese of the first decoction which remained after the (...) to the
consuming of ii. lib. And (...) the rest of the things as aforesaid. And the
other decoctions shall be made in this sort until he be perfectly cured. Which
the pacient shall attain unto, within the space of xx. days, eating the fodde
flesh of Mutton, or Hen, supping always with raisons, and drinking the
aforesaid decoction.

Annotations of the xij. Chapter.
Salsa parilla, takes his name of the Spaniards in their native tongue, of a
certain likeness it has with rough Smilax, and for as much as it is of the
same force, and does resemble the nature of Smilax, I can the easelier consent
to refer it to some kind thereoff. Mathiolus thought it to be the roots of
E^us, but he does not constantly affirm it, neither is it to be affirmed. For
as much as the roots of Ebulus is more thicker, as in Dioscorider may apeare.
Neither was there ever brought unto us, of so great a ^nesse.

The use of this root is so common, and the medicine so usual, that you may
find the decoction made of this root as common among the Spaniards, as the
water or decoction of Licori^. And now men are of opinion, that it is not only
of force against the French pox, but also does cure singular well all affects
or sicknesses which proceed of cold matter.

It is brought forth of new Spain, albeit ye kind of Salsa parma is now
refused, and and there fort far better being sold out in the same coun^ie,
which the Spaniards do call Honduras. For this kind is more thick, and is not
so white, but more yellowish, and is more bright within.

That is best liked which is newest and not putrified or corrupted, and being
broken in ones hands is not brittle. Our auctor both (...) this roole to be hot
about the third degree. But Mona^ which has written at large of this matter,
says it (...) no (...) then to the second ^gree: whose judgment in my (...)
i^ the better. For being fasted, there is felt no sharpnes at all, neither when
it is boiled, does it yield any such taste. The manner how to boil it is written
by the aucthor, in the which place he does justly condemn such extreme heates
in the boiling of the root. For when as the root is boiled in extreme sort
with the fire, and does grow exceeding hoote by external bea^, in such sort
that it hurts both the liver, and the reins.

And there be other reasones wherefore not only this root, but also other
ought not to be boiled in such extreme sort, which are to be sought of such
aucthors which have written of the composition of medicienes, as of Montanus.
Roudoletius, Motuus, Busdorpius. For we shall seem to have done enough if we
show the places from whence a more plentiful knowledge is to be sought and
attained.

Of the curing of a distort foot of a child, lame from his nativity. Cap. 13.
IT oftentimes happens that a Child is borne with one foot or both
distorte, or crooked, or turning backward, so that he may hardly go, and for
that cause. I would deliver an order in this place, by the which I have
delivered very many being lame, among whom there was onemost hard to be
cured, dwelling at Llerena, but yet by mine industry he was cured, and in the
order heareaster to be declared, he was restored to health.

First of all, therefore let the child use a due order of diet, and let his
feet, be washed with ^ pleasant hand for xxx. days with this decoction
following.

Rec. Radicum Altheae. ^.j. Seminis Ferrugreci. Seminis Lini. Ana..iiij. Plo^
Chamomell. et Me^. Ana. M.j. Caput cum pedibus veruice cum lane et p^le
co^^use.
Let them be boiled in sufficient water to the seperating of the bones, and
when they be strained, let there be a bath shade toward the fouth (...), and in
the spring time, because in the winter it is not good, least the neruouse
parts and the joints be hurt ^ith cold. When this ^on (...) bath is finished
(which shall so long endure as it continues warm) the moisture is to be wiped
away with a linen cloth, and let his feet be anointed with this ointment
following.

Rec. Olei Vulp^. Olei de Lilio. Amigdalarum Dulcium. Ana..j. Vnguenti
Agrippae. Vnguenti Dealtheae. Ana..j.ss. Medulle Crurum Vituli, et Vaccar^.
Ana..ss. Pinguedinis Ga^ae. Anatis. Ansens, Ardeae. Ana..vj. Pinguedinis V^ine,
et taxi. Ana..j. Pinguedinis Porcinae..ss.
Let them boyse all together a^ ss.. of the foresaid deco^on to the consuming
thereof, and after the colature, (...) there be made an ointment with a little
wax, and it is to be rubbed on until it seem to be drunk in. These things
being done by the space vt xxx. days. Let a seranune sit down, and take the
child upon his knees, his hands, and legs bound backward, or his hands
holden. Afterward the Surgion coming, st^t let him loose or put out of joint
the lame foot with great force, then let him labor to put it in his due place
(...) right order again, which shall be done very easily, partly for the
preparation before made, and partly because of the tender age of the child.

This reposition being made, let there straight ways be put to a fine linen
cloth dipped in the oil of Mirtes warmed upon the whole joint without ^rinliles,
least she binding do trouble him with grief, and after that, let there be put
thereupon plasters dipped in the liniment following and duly wroung out again.

Rec. Trium Ouorum Albumina. Olei Omphacim, et Myrrthini, ana..j. Pulueris
Triteceae farinae; et hordiacei, ana..ij. Boli Armeni Triti.. ss. Sanguis
Draconis..iij. Pulueris sequenti..iij. miss^.
The description of the which powder consists of these things following.

Rec. Boli Armeni..j. ss. Thuris, Masticis, Sarcacollae, ana..ij. ss. Myrrhae,
Aloes, ana..j. ss. Tragaca^ti, Sanguinis Draconis, ana..iiij. Farinae hordiei,
et Fabarum, ana..ss. miss^ et fiat. p.
Therefore these plasters upon the said linen clothes being moystned, let them
so^e again in Rose water and Vinegar, and so wrong out, let them be spread
abroad upon the join with a measurable heat, straight ways a galage or
patent of wood made even to the foot and somewhat greater, and a thing quilted
and pla^d thereupon is to be applied to the soole of the foot, and to be
bound to the foot with a swath of three fingers broad, although they strive to
draw the foot contrary, beginning from the lower part with a barie few
rollinges about, Again, above upon the plasters bound down in this order,
^e must apply three s^ntes which will not easily ^end made of ^llow, of the
length of five ^agers, and one in breadth, which when they shall be artificially
covered with two, they ought to be wet in water and vinegar as the plasters
were, and afterward the first splint must be put in the hinder part, so as it
may seem to be put into the wooden patent, and the other two upon both
sides, upon the which all the fast^ninges is to be made, nepther loose nor yet
to hard.

The next thou shall cure the other foot in the same order, letting it so
remain until the seventh day. Which being done in the order following, either
the other foot or both (if he be lame of both) are to be ordered.

Rec. Terebinthinae..ij.ss. Olei Myrrthini..ij. Olei Rosati..j. Thuris,
Masticis..j.ss. Myrrhae, Aloes. ana..ij. Sanguinis Draconis. Boli Armenij.
ana..ss. Pollinis, et. Pulueris rubei ante discripcionis..j. Miss^.
And let it be applied warm upon the plasters, with the splintes and swathes
in the order aforesaid. After this is done, this order is to be renewed every
seventh day, to the xxi. day, from the first week, and we must take great
care that the feet remain straight, this frame following being made in
proporcion with the shoe.

Take a plate of Iron the breadth of a flager, in thick nesse of a Dolor of
silver, of the length of the foot of the same child, and somewhat less, bow
it like a spur, and so make it fit for his heel to the which, on both
sides of the ancles, thou shall fasten thereto, two other plates of the length
of six fingers. A third like in the hinder part.

After this, thou shall with another plate compass, as the nether plate is,
enclose the upper end of the straight plates being fastened thereto, yet so
that it be open before, and close behind, and so the whole frame made sure.
Upon this frame must be set the shoe for the lame foot, of Gotes skin
without, and sheep skin within, with a double sole. Yet so that the frame
be between both skins. And the necks of the shoe may touch to that round
plate. Whereby it is evident y^ the shoe ought to be open before, and where it
rests upon the insteppe of the foot, and that it should be fastened with a
lace from the instep upward.

Therefore before his feet be shodde, let the plaster comfortatiue of Vigo ^e
put upon the whole joint, that the swellings and humors cleaving fast within
the joint, may be desolued, and the joint made more strong. Then shooeing the
foot above the plaster, the pacient shall not have his shoes put off, but
every fourth day, and the plaster must be mundified, and mollified.

But if that emplaister shall be desolued in the mean time, let another be
newly applied. And the patient may go in this order, until six months be
passed, the which being passed over, and the plasters removed, the shoes are
not therefore to be left off, but rather let him pass over six other
months being thus shodde night and day. Except that time in the which it
likes him to be bathed. The description of the plaster comfortatiue is in
this sort.

Emplastrum comfortatiuu^.

Rec. Olei Myrrthini. Olei Rosati omphacini. ana. lib.ss. Succi radicum alth^.
lib.ij. Radicis fra^me, et foliorum. Radicis Symphiti, et foliorum. Myrrthe et
foliorum eius. Foliorum salicis. ana. M.ii.
Let all boil being somewhat bruised in like quantity, Vini nigri et aque, ad
consumptionem medie talis, cum my^rho et thuris, ana.. ss. Postea coletur
addendo seui hircini liquefacti. lib. ss. Terebinthinae..ij. Masticis..j. simul
coqua^tur ad consumpcionem decoctionis, et in sine addentur lithargirij auri et
argenti, ana..iij. Boli armenij, Triti subtiliter, Terre sigillatae, ana..ij.
Minij..x.

Let be boiled together with a soft fire continually stirring it, and with
sufficient ware, make thereof a Carote.

An example of the wounds in the head. To the healing. Cap. 14.
HOw much both harm and delay to healing the common custom to open the place
contrary to that which we have taught in the beginning may bring to simple
wounds in the head, in the which Cranium is not broken, besides many other
examples, this one does sufficiently confirm. Which was proved and set forth,
in Ioh. Gemetius de columbis Cazzalensi, at the charges of our Sovereign Lord
King Phillippe, does search the mo^taines and lands to find out Mines, whiles
he does diligently apply his business to seek together with his fellows in a
very deep Mine, perceiving a piece of earth which had a show of metal, he
stouped down hastily to take it up, who^e his fellow unawares struck a slope
with the other ends of his Mattocke, as he lifted up his stroke suddenly, and that
not grievously, in the right, side of the head upon the bone which is called
Laterale, neither did the wound touch to Craniu^, nor gave any significacio^
of ye bone broken because in deed the bone was not perished. An unskillful
Surgion opening his wound, made it a great deal more, and did cut a cross in
his head three fingers square, and uncovered Cranium at his pleasuer enough.
After that he used digestiues and oils so largely many days, that he is
reported to have bestowed in oil and eggs to apply to the wound, above xv.
rialls of plate, so that not only that part of Cranium opened, but a much
greater part also was putrified. At length after one month when I was sent for
of master Mondosus (which by the kings commandment was master over the
accounts and works, and all the mettalls) to see the man, I commanded him to be
brought to Llarena, (where upon a common fee I did practice Physic)
forasmuch as it was needful to pluck forth a great part of his bone, which
notwithstanding by reason of the narrower opening of ye wou^d, could not be
brought forth. And whereas I did refuse to open so much, I made an orifice with
the Trepan, to the greatness of a silver money called a Royal, so that the
membrane did appear, and the filthy matter which was corrupted and made from
day to day, might be purged at that part, and so by that Balm of me set
forth, and the emplaister of Gummi Elimi, and lints, I did so long procecute
in the cure, until I understood by proving with my instruments, that the bone
was clean separated away on every side, and Dura matter to concist with flesh
over covered. Therefore that I draw out so great a bone at this so little a
hole, I got me an instrument to the likeness of a trepan, wherewith I might
make a hole as great as an iron spindle, of our country women might make, with
which instrument I did perforate all the bone corrupted in manner of a cross
very near one to another, I began my work from the middle of the place where
the upper bone of the wound did disclose, which I had prepared to the
greatness of a silver plate. The space between the holes I break off with
the Leuatorie, which yielded as I brake it very easily, when I had now
dispatched these things, first of all lifting up one of these four porcions
with my instrument, I drew it out, and then another, and so the third. The
fourth which was the greatest I left until the next day, which at length I
drew forth. All the bone called Laterale and a good part also of Petrosum on
that side, and no small portion of Coronale which beneth to the former part was
drawn forth. There comes forth of Petrosum so much in a manner as
extends toward thoriginall of the ear, when these bones were drawn forth,
Dura matter which had begun now in ye mean while to induce flesh, had induced
so beyond all measure, that I was twice forced to cut of the rank flesh from
the orifice which I had of late made. After this when he began to mend, he
departed to Cazzalla, of whom after a month I was sent for, because his head
about the bone of the hinder part he had a great swelling and full of
corruption, which when I had opened, I found bones which were corrupted a great
deal more then those that were spoken off before. Then I bad him come to me to
Llerena. The next day after artificially I drew out three bones as great as
those were before, but much more corrupt. And so he was left lacking all the
bone in the hinder part of the head in a manner, and no small portion also of
the other side of the left bone. But the wounds were covered with skin and
flesh on every side, but yet of a tender and soft constitution, which by little
and little waxed hard. And the man himself is well, being thus delivered by
the benefit of God.

An example of Barriga. Cap. 15.
BArriga, a man well known among the men of Llerena, received a wound in his
breast, with somewhat a long sword which they call Verdugu^, under the left
pappe the space of two fingers almost distant, the sword came forth the right
way beside the back bone called Medullaris, swaruing from the back bone as much
as is ye thickness of one finger, coming forth a little under the bone of
the back and the pan or left wing of ye lungs, was thrust through not far
from the heart, as the sight of the place shows. But he was cured in that
order, which is set forth of us in the first chapter of the second book, and
whiles the cure proceeded, the tenth day after he was wounded, a great abundance
of blood did issue out of the wound of the lungs, by reason of the continual
mocion of the same. Which conflowing within the breast, was congeled. The next
dressing great porcions of congeled blood, together with corrupt matter made of
the wound came forth, not without marvel of the standers by, because they
were greater porcions then should be believed that they might be received as
they came forth, or sent forth of the body. These accidents considered, when
I saw the pacient power out every day twice too great abundance of corrupcion,
I determined to change my purpose, meaning to prove that way as I taught you
how Fistulaes should be cured, and forthwith I began.

And when two days together I had given him that water to drink which is
there set forth, at length all the congeled blood together with the corrupted
matter came forth, in two other days the corrupted matter consumed away also,
and by and by he was delivered of his ague, and being in most short time made
whole, he became so very fat, that great matter was offered to the^ that knew
the man, to praise God.

An example of a certain familier friend of Lodouike Zapata. Cap. 16.
THis man being a familier friend of maisher Lewis Zapata, was wounded with a
broad dagger four times behind his back, and stricken on the left side, but
of those wounds one was received the breadth of six fingers under the shoulder
bone, the dagger yelding back, went down between the flesh and the bone as
much as I have oftentimes measured to be seven fingers breadth, until the
dagger passing through all the shoulder, and thrust between the spaces of the
ribs came to the very holownesse of the body. Before that I came thither
after I was sent for, I did conjecture by those things that happened after,
great abundance of blood gushing out of all parts of the wound, to have run
into the holownesse of the body. But that blood could not come forth, because
the wound being covered with the skin and the flesh, did penetrate downward
which way it is very like that the fluxes did also tend. For ye first opening
of the dagger was deeper the^ yt the blood might well break forth. So I when
I had begun my first cure, nor could find no direct going down, would have
thought that it had penetrate no more then the rest. After I had serched the
place more diligently, and thrust in my finger, I perceived that the wound did
go down farther then I could follow with my finger. Therefore when I had
perceived that the wound did penetrate to the concauite, I opened the place
over against the ribs cutting the skin and the flesh directly against it,
so that putting in my finger I might easily come to the innermore parts, and
touch also the lights which is nert the back bone. But he was cured in that
order as I have showed you in the penetrating wounds of the breast, and at the
first dressing there was no corrupcion or matter made, but a certain small
humiditie did issue forth, but the fourth day water of a sanguine color
flowed out as that is in the which flesh is washed, and daily as his dressings
did follow, it came out more abu^dantly, so that every dressing it did fill a
vessel which they call a saucer, and that it might issue out the better and
more speedily, I had the pacient to cough and hold in his breath, he was
dressed of me four times a day, and beside that which ran out at every
dressing, the issue stayed not day nor night, so that his bed was like a sink
or ditch. Therefore at the fourth day when I perceived such flux of water to
continue without any token of matter, I did determine to give the patient that
water set forth by us in the last example. And by and by as soon as he began to
drink thereof, by the continual space of twelve days, a greater abundance of
water or mattrie substance came forth without any hurt of the man or any great
feeling, but so that the second day it came forth somewhat white and liquid.

But the third day a great deal whiter until it came forth so white and
thick, cleaving fast to the vessel wherein it was received, that it would
skantly run out being turned down, but it ran forth every day less and
less until the xii. day, in the which at length it stinted, and the entrance
of the wound did suddenly close up in the utter part thereof, which although
I did oftentimes open with my instruments, yet did it send forth neither
matter, or any such humor, neither came the breath forth there as before, and
so the cure proceeded, the pacient being yet possessed with a continual fever.

Wherefore three days together, I added to that water of whole barley, and
Raisons bruised with their kirnells, and of Tamarinds..ij. And by this means
the fever ware away. The tenth day after I found the man troubled with great
pain in the breast, and with a fever. And when I found that great abundance of
water or watrie substance came out of the breast without matter, after I had put
in a tente, there came forth as yet more watrie or filthy corruption. And so
it was six days after casting forth of the wound less matter every day.

After this the flax stinted, and the wound healed. And the man as yet by the
help of God lives, and is very well.

A general rule for the Physician and the Surgion.
THose which will take upon them to make any confection or to minister
Physic, ought most especially to understand the commodities coming of
medicines, and the same may be read in Auicene and other writers, the qualities
of simple medicines are to be known also. And what parts of the body they
do respect. For there are medicines which do corroborate some peculiar part of
the body, as Mentha does heat all the body, but especially the stomach,
which comes to pass through a certain sympathy, that is to say a mutual
combinacion in natural operacion of that herb and the stomach, as in an
other place we have spoken of Betonica, Melissa, Cucurbita, Chamapithi, Nux
Muscala, Camedri, Lauro, Centauria, which respect the head, ye must consider
also in prescribing your decoctions, that the things which be of a groser
substance be put in the first place, for roots are to be decocted first and of
longer time, in the second place herbs, in the third seeds, in the fourth
fruits, in the fifth flowers, in the sixth spices.

And this is to be noted also, that roots and seeds are measured Pondere,
herbs Manipulis, flowers, Pugillis, and fruits, Numero.

A treatise of the Caruncle or Carnositie: growing in the yard, or neck of
the Bladder.
ALbeit, ulcers and fores are wonted to rise upon diverse occasions not here at
this time to be repeated, yet do they come no way more commonly, then by the
long continuance of the Gonorrhea, If it be not orderly and perfectly cured.

And of ulcers either neglected, or else not well cured, certain increasements,
and unnatural swellings of the flesh which we call Caruncules, or Carnosites,
are accustomed often times to proceed.

The signs and tokens of the Caruncule.
THe signs and tokens of a Caruncle either in the neck of the Bladder, or in
any other part of the vrinarie passage, are these.

1 A great difficulte or hardness in making of water, the which water having
his course readily to the place affected, is stopped and stayed there so much,
that it cannot have his issue, in any other sort then dropping wise.

And that also not without the great help and enforcement of our selves.

2 And therefore such as are tormented with this desease, whiles they go about
to make their water, are constrained in the mean time, at the same instant
sometime to void their other excrementes also.

3 Also whiles then chance to do the act of generation, their nature stays
in the middle way of his course. And being stayed, destilleth or trickleth from
them so faintly, so coldly, and with such small delectation and pleasure, that
as touching generation, they may be judged unfortunate, and therein to leese
but their labor. For it is impossible for the time that any man has this
disease, he should begette any issue.

4 Again, when the patient makes water, in the very water it self something
stays beside the Caruncle, which cannot well be put forth or expelled,
except the root of the yard be pressed hard with the pacientes finger.

5 Moreover, the urine it self in this case comes not forth with a direct
and straight course, but a slope and in crooked sort either on this side, or
else on that, yea and sometime it is divided as it were into two streams. For
if the Caruncle be on the nether side of the yard, then the urine coming
forth, bends something vpwardes. If the Carvncle be on the upper part
thereof, then does the urine incline his course downward. If it be on the
right side of the yard, then the urine bends toward the left side. If on the
left side of the yard, then contrariewise, it yields it self toward the
right side. And when the Caruncle possesses the breadth of the vrinarie
passage, as it were overthwart it, then in the coming forth, it deuideth it
self into two streams or courses.

6 It chances also oftentimes that the vrinarie passage is so stopped and
choked, that the urine being not able to use his ordinary course and issue,
breaks forth by other ways, and in this case nature seeks wonderful
shifts to help her self, for I have known many that have made their water
between their codds, and some again have done it at their fundament, and
other some, out by their flanks and parts called in Latin Ingume.

7 Yet again there is a very good argument of the Caruncle, which is this.

If ye put in the searcher or probe, for so I will call the long pipe or
Siring, or Catheter, by which the urine is wont to be conuaied out, if, I say,
you put this searcher into the vrinarie cundite, and if then it cannot get
through, but finds a certain stay or stop which is in deed the tumor or
Caruncle it self, beyond the which you cannot pass, without a certain rub,
or iump as it were of the instrument, then it is to be suspected to be a
Caruncle. Now sir, when for the great straitness of the place or passage,
nothing of the urine can be pressed or gotten forth, or else if any thing do
come forth, yet is it only taht which is the thinnest. Then it is very
likely, that the bladder is stuffed and filled with great store of clammy and
slymy superfluities, which being carried with the urine to the very neck, there
sticking and remaining, they do make the greater obstruction.

To know the Caruncle from the stone.
IT is very easy to discern a Caruncle from the stone, which lies in the
neck of the bladder.

1 First, by very feeling and touching, for you may touch the stone, and
perceive it to be one, by the Probe or sercher.

2 Also you may know it to be a stone by the great itching, which is accustamed
to be in the very root of the yard.

3 Moreover, the stopping of both their vrines is not alyke. For if it be a
stone, when they piss freely and abundantly, as some time they d^e, suddenly
in the midst of making their water, their urine stops, for that the stone
rolling from the bottom of the bladder to the neck, there it closes the
passage.

4 And therefore if the pacient be laid upright in such sort that his thighs,
may be higher then the rest of his body, and then be iogged and shaken too and
fro, the stone will remove from the neck of the bladder, and the urine will
come forth easily, the which thing never happens so where the Caruncle is.

The way of curing the Caruncle.
THere are two ways, or two methods of curing the Caruncle. The one violent
and not without danger, of the which Galen speaks in the first of his books
entitled de locis affectis. Which tends to this end. That putting in some
instrument of Tin or the like, we should pull the Caruncle up by the roots.
In such sort, that not only urine, but blood also it self, yea and gobbetts
also, and fragments of flesh, should be brought forth.

The other way is more gentle and easy, and without al danger, which is not
done by the violence of iron or instruments, but by the operation and wor^ing
of medicines, and this way the old writers did not know. And of this we will
speak at this time.

If then we have a patient in this order troubled, his body would be skilfully,
and sufficiently prepared, and euacuated, and his good diet and order of life
prescribed. And in this point the pacient must altogether be directed and
ruled, by some dsscrete and learned Physician. Who must altogether change the
same according to the variety of the constitution, and other circumstances of
the pacientes body. For it is not enough to make him loose bellied, or to give
him many stools, as the common and foolish opinion thinks, but he must be
able to vary and change his medicine according to the age, the sex, the
temperature, the humor offending in the pacientes body, and such other
considerations. And therefore especially the common and rash dealings either
with ordinary pills, or with usual electuaries, which are always ready made
in the shoppes in this case, must altogether be avoided. And you must never
attempt to purge or move the humor, but with good dauise. And with some such
proper purgation devised for the purpose, as may both respect the humors
offending, and also the place affected. And therewithal in no respect inflame
and chafe the body, as the common electuaries given at adventure does. For as
no one salve, can agree with every person, and every disease.

This point therefore of this cure must be refered to the discretion of the
Physician. And this once being done, the first thing after to be done is this.

To take a fine tender Mallow stalk, or a smallage or Parsely stalk, for
alwaie it is best to begin with the most gentell and easy things, and
anointing it with oil of sweet Almonds, tenderly and soft to make proof of
the neck of the bladder, having good regard, that in no case, you provoke
much, or pain extremely, those parts of our bodies, that be so sensible,
whereby oftentimes unnatural sheuerings and shakinges, dangerous agues, and
great fluxes of blood, and other grievous accidents do happen to follow. If
it so fall out that the foresaid stalk chance to pass without any force or
great pain, so far as the cauite of the bladder, then may we thereby
conjecture, that the Caruncle is not of any great quantity, or much grown.
And therefore there is the better hope to be had of the cure. But if it chance
to stick by the way, so that it either do bend, or offer to break, then is
it to be drawn out again forthwith, and the Caruncle to be mollified, and
relaxed by such discret ordinary means, as it may become more plylant and
ready to yield and give place to the probe or searcher. the way to molifi the
caruncle.
It may be mollified by fomentations, by collyries, and by emplaisters
appointed and prescribed for the purpose. For examples sake let this
fomentacion following twice ^ a day be appyed. That is to say, in the Morning
before dinner, and in the Evening before supper.

Rec. Foliorum Maluaru^. M.j. Radicorum Althe Ana..iij. Apij. Ana..iij.
Feniculi Ana..iij. Sem: Citoniorum. Ana..j. Fenugreci. Ana..j. Lini. Ana..iij.
Florum Chamomille. Ana. p.j. Sticadis Ana. p.j. Pulegij, origani. Ana. p.j.
Ficuu^..j.ss.
Let all these sees so long till in a manner the roots be disolued, and then
let the sick man so, ^ ever it, that he may easelie and conveniently receant
the fume or vapor, about his privy members, especially about the very root
of his yeard. He may also in the mean time with those herbs and roots, in
the decoction, gentely rub and souple those parts which be agreeued, or dipping
a sponge into the decoction, foment the said parts himself. And while as these
things be a doing, let him prove to make water if he can.

When he has been thus fomented, then let that moisture be clean wiped away,
and that being done, then let all these parts which do serve by natures
appontment to the making of vrin, be anointed with this oyntme^t following.

Rec. Vng. Dialthae. Ana..j. Agrippae; Ana..j. Butyry Ana..j. Oesipi. Ana..j.
Olei Amigdalarum dull. ana..ij. Chamomille. ana..ij. Liliorum. ana..ij. Gum.
Ha^moniaci..j. ss. Suc. Ebuli. ana..iij. Apij. ana..iij. Muccilaginis Altheae.
ana..ij. Fenugreci. ana..ij.
Let them all boil together till she joyce be consumed, then let the muccilage
substance which remains, be strained and wrought into an ointment, putting
thereto Cerae nouae. q.S. The parts being well anointed, let them be covered
with wool vncarded having his oesepus or natural fat in him. Also let this
collyry, or else the like, be oftentimes. iniected.

Rec. Radicis Althe. Seminis Lini. Fenugreci.
Let them be sodde in.vi. of running water or there about, till the third part
be consumed, and when the Muccilage is strained, then put there unto Oleum
Amigdalarum dulcium..iij. And so use it. When all these things have been thus
in good order done, then prove again whether ye can put in the foresaid
probes or searchers of the stalks of Mallows, or of smalach, or of Parcely,
so far as the very cauite of the bladder or no, if you can do so, then it
is to be hoped, that the tumor or Caruncle, will in reasonable time be
disolued. And that it may go from the root of the yard, to the capacite of
the bladder, the stalk that must be put in, must be a spanne long and two
inches at the least. If by this means the Caruncle will not yield, but
remain obstinate and rebellious against the searcher or stalk, then a wax
Candle must be put in, and that of such bigness, as the vrinarie condite may
easily receive it. But for that it may be feared, least if the Candle should
break within the yard, as in winter especially it may come to pass for the
hardness of the wax, some portion thereof might get into the bladder, and
either skantly be gotten out again, or else should anger and exasperate the
parts alredie painful and exulcerated. Therefore it were to be wished that
the Candle were made of a strong kind of third, and not only of wax, but of
wax and Turpentine artificially mixed together. Our Candle being thus made,
when we have so rebated and blunted the end that it cannot hurt, or gale, then
we must anoint it with oil of sweet Almondes, and then something bending it
toward the smaller end, we must put it in often times into the vrinarie
condit. And if we perceive once, that the Candle get beyond the Caruncle,
which is perceived by the rub, or as it were a little iumpe by the way, and
by the estimat of lenth of the portion, that is gotten in, then may we think
that one half of our cure is obtained.

For the Candle being compressed and hard held of the Caruncle, as it were
with a cord or string, it will manifest and show the place affected.

Afterward in that part of the Candle which you shall perceue to be as it
were marked and something dented, you shall put on your plaisher fit to
consume the Caruncle, and in this case the Candle will serve the turn, of
linte or other pledget to apply and convey the medicine withal.

If there chance to be many Caruncles in the yard, then so many parts of
the Candle you shall perceive to be comprest and marked, as there be
Carnosities.

And moreover it will make also so many rubbes or ^umpes as it were in the
going in.

If it shall fall out that the tumor shall be so hard and stubborn, that it will
not yield and give place to the candle. Then may you make a probe or searcher of
lead, of the length and bigness. Anointing it with the foresaid oil, so to
use it. For lead is not only an easier and mitigater of pain, but also it
has the property and faculty of drying of ulcers. And besides that also,
with his very weight it presses them, and causes them some thing to stoop
and shrink in.

The flesh may chance to be so hard and rebellious, that a leaden instrument
shall not be able to master it neither, and then in that case, you must use a
silver or a golden Catheter or Siring. And yet before we do use any such
either of silver or gold, my council is, that you do make trial again and
again, by the forenamed means. For the use of this Siring has this
discomoditie, it being nothing pliant and flexible, and hitting upon those
most tender and sensible parts, it causes oftentimes great and terrible fluxes
of blood, which does discomfort both pacient, Surgeon, and the Physician
also.

How to stay the flux of blood.
But if any such notable flux do chance, it may be stopped well with this
medicine following.

Rec. Aquarum Plantaginis. Rosarum. Albuminis Ouorum. N.j.
Being well mingled together iniect it with your syring, and about the very yard
it self, and all the other privy parts requisite, put this Cataplasme
following.

Rec. Aquarum Plantaginis, vel Succi ieusdem. Rosarum. Ana..iiij. Acetum
Rosarum..ij. Albuminis ouorum. N.ij. Boli Armeni. ana..^. Sanguis Dra. ana..^.
Corallae. ana..^. Terra sigigll. ana..^. Rosarum. ana..^. Mirtillorum. ana..^.
Cortix Grana. ana..^.
the length of the siring or catheter.
Make thereof a Cataplasme, and use it as is aforesade. Because there is great
diversity of bodies, and all are not a like, it is expedient to have diverse
Catheters meet and convenient for every age, as also for every sex. For that
women also sometimes, are troubled with the same disease. For men therefore it
will be expedient to have three in a readiness, and for women two. And of those
that be for men, the greatest would be of xv inches of length, the mean of
xii. inches, and the shortest of ix inches.

For women the longest would us ix. inches, and the shortest vi inches. Those
for women would be something bowing or bending, but those for men, more bending
for the neck of men's bladders is shaped more crooked and writhing then women's
be.

The patient while he is to be searched, is to be placed in some convenient
place, his face being upright, and the Chiurgian standing on the right side and
holding his yard in his left hand, let him put in and direct the instrument
with his right hand, and when he is come to the neck of the bladder, then
something bending down both yard and instrument, let him fair and softly
force it foreward into the bladder.

Chirurgians are wont to tie a sponge with a wier, or the like third, and so
thrust it to the very end of the instrument, or Catheter, and then pulling it
backewarde imediatly urine is wonted to follow, by the reason of the avoiding
of emptines which is grounded upon the Philosophers principle called Vacuum.
When ye have thus past the Caruncles, or got beyond them all a long the
vrinary condits even to the bladder, then that instrument wherewith you have
done the feate, whether it be a candell or the leaden searcher, or catheter
must remain, and be left within for one whole day, and the pacient must be
enforced so to make his water if the pain be not to to intolerable. For by
that means partly, by the reason of the coorse of the urine partly by the
instrument it self, the water passage will be enlarged and amplified. Your
catheter or searcher of lead being drawn forth after the long tarrying there,
if by them your work be perfected so far forth, then must your candell be
put in last of all, and suffered there to remain, till such time as it does
receive some print or mark by the compression of the Caruncle, and that will be
a good help to apply the medicine withal to work the cure. The candle being
drawn out, it must be curiously looked upon and vewed, t espy in what part it
seems to be printed in or compressed.

For upon that very part of the candle must the emplaister called Emplastrum
Philippi be put which in troth is of a wonderful faculty. For it defends
the whole parts and keeps them sound, and as for those which are ouergrowen
by the reason of the ulcer it consumes, and eats away without any great
pain. And this is his descripcion following.

Emplastrum Philippi

Rec. Aeruginis. Ana..ij Auripigmenti. Ana..ij Chalcitidis. Ana..ij Alluminis,
To. Ana..ij
and being well moistened with very excellent strong veniger, let them be very
well labored and ground, between two Marble stones, or Alabaster stones, and
being brought in to most fine powder, let it then be fet in the sun in the
dog days, or about that time of the year, and when that fine powder is
dried well, let it then again be well labered and ground a fresh, putting
thereto viniger as before, and then again in manner set it a sunning, and thus
shall you do for the space of viii. or ix days, so long till it become passing
fine and smoth, and have lost all his acrimony, and bytting quality. For this
is a most true and certain rule, that strong medicines and sharp, being
ground in veniger for certain days, deminish and abote their biting and
sharpnes, and yet thereby do increase their strength and operacion. Which rule
is also observed in Metals Combusted. Albeit in troth those which be
Combusted, do participat and get some kind of biting quality, by the means
of the fire, whereas contrariwise, they being washed, by washing, do leese
their biting and smarting qualytie, and therefore in soft and tender parts,
and such as be very sencible, and also in such bodies as abound with ill
humors, we ought to use medicines prepared by washing.

When the powder is thus prepared, then take the froth or scunnue of Silver
which is called Litharge.iij. of oil of Roses..iiij. and when they are boiled
to a reasonable consistence of an emplaister, then mingle. ij. of the foresaid
powder with it, and incorporate it so, that it may become something an hard
Emplaister, that when it is put upon the candle, or the lead, it may cleave
thereunto and not remove from the place, no, though it be pressed.

But since there be many complexions and constitutions of bodies, and therefore
one medicine cannot agree with all persons indifferently, but the more tender
and sensible they be, the more gentill medicines they must have.

And the harder and ruder bodies, must require the sharper and quicker remediss.

Therefore it will be good to have always in a readiness, two compositions of
the said Emplasters. One very gentle and mild, and that to be used to very
tender, delicate and s^ncible bodies. The other sharper and stronger, to
corrode and consume flesh, and that is to be applied to the stronger
constitutions, and so tempering them together, as occasion shall serve, you
shall by your own discretion, make diverse compositions to serve your turn.
For if of each of them you mingle equal proporcions, then shall your medicine
rise of equal strength and faculty between both. And look how much more of
the one or of the other you do mingle together, by so much shall your medicine
either rise or fall in strength, and sharp faculty. For example sake, the
strongest compositions, and therefore fittest for the strongest bodies, is this.

When ye take of the foresaid powder so prepared..ii. and likewise.ii. of
Litharge, and with.ii. of oil of Roses, bring them to an Emplaister.

Again the gentlest is this. When ye take of the foresaid powder ounces two,
and of the Litharge and oil put to twice as much, that is to say, four
ounces, and a mean between both is: when you take two ounces of the powder
and put thereto four ounces of Litharge, and likewise of oil of Roses, and so
of those two, well and sufficiently labouned together, and wrought into a
plaster, to make one body.

Now sir, If ye stand in doubt which of these it were best to use in this case,
the habit and the temperature of the body will help well to direct us.

But always the best rule is, to begin with the miledest, and so to increase
by little and little, till ye come to the strongest, if the case so require.

Since therefore we cannot apply, neither liut not pledget unto ulcers which be
hidden in the inner parts of the body, so as we might do if they were in the
skin and utter parts, and therefore cannot conveniently apply any plaster
either, therefore that commodity is supplied by the wax^ candle, for the
medicine being put thereon, it does lead it as it were with a line, to the
place affected. But the candell must be something hollowed, and pretely pared
away in that place where the medicine must be placed. Least if it bear out,
and be not even and equal, it cannot then get through to the place where the
Caruncle is.

Ye may also if you please, put the plaster at a leaden instrument, in case
that the vrinary condit be narrower, then that the candle may be admitted.

Some use, when they cannot pass through to the bladder, to take the medicine,
and put it to the top or end of the candle, and so to convey it in, thinking
to were away the sore by the continual touching of it so. But seeing that the
top of the candell, cannot in that order continually cleave to the sore, for
that it gives back and resists, in my judgment they do either no good at
all, or else very little that way.

To conclude, our chiefest care must be to get the medicine to stick finely to
the place. For so in five or six days, it will consume it by little and
little, and convert the sore into a certain mattery substance. Provided
always, while these things be thus a doing, if any intolerable pain or
unaccustomed sheuering, or cold, or ague, or any other greuouse accident do
chance to molest and torment the pacient, straight ways, the candell is to be
taken out, and the vrinary condit to be washed with Goats milk, or Rose water
wherein a little Camphere is to be mingled, and so long, you must cease from
all other actions of Surgery, till such time as all such accident and
impediments be removed and taken away.

to know when the caruncle is spent and consumed.
You shall know when the Caruncle is fully rooted out, partly by the biting
which will be about the parts exulcerated, and partly by the abundance of the
flux of matter, with the which the Caldle it self, when it comes forth,
will in part be be rayed. The which if it can once go in with such ease, that
with the greater part, it can get even as far as to the bladder, then may you
think that the Caruncle is not only rooted out, but also utterly consumed and
spent. And again if beside this, the party make his water freely and
abundantly, and that also with a straight and direct toorse, and stream: and if
his nature also do come from him with some speed and roundlye, then without
doubt at all, the ulcer is consumed. The Caruncle being thus spent and
consumed, the ulcer is then to be cleansed. Iniecting this colliry following
with a siring of some good reasonable length.

Rec. Centauri, minoris. ana. M. ss. Apij. ana. M. ss. Candae equini. ana. M.
ss. Hordei contusi. j. Aquae. lib.ij.
Let them be boiled to the consumption of the half, then being strayned, put
there unto Mell Rosarum, or else Mell Centaur, and so use it.

Also, the destilled water of snayles and green leaves, into the which is put
a little Mel Rosarum, is singularly commended to skoure filthy and rotten
ulcers in the vrinarie passage, and neck of the bladder. If the foulness of
the ulcer be so great, that it can scarcely be cleansed, it shall not be amiss
to use with those foresaid things a little Vnguentum Egiptiacum. When the
ulcers are become clean and pure, then you may fall to cicatrizing, with this
receipt following being iniected.

Rec. Aquarum Plantaginis. ana..iiij. Rosarum. ana..iiij.
Whey of Gotes milk..ij.

Cerucae..vi. Allumims to. ana..j. ss. Alabastri. ana..j. ss. Spodij. ana..j.
ss. Cristalli. ana..j. ss. Camphorae,.j.
Let those things that are to be powdered, be brought to very fine powder, and
searsed. Then let them be well and diligently mingled, and as it were
incorporated with the waters. When the Caruncles be gotten away and consumed,
then must the course of his diet be altered by little and little.

For then must it be something more thin, and more ^riticall, or tending to
provoke urine then before now, especially when there is no fears, that such
humors as pass unto the bladder, by the medicines vreticall moderatly used,
shall any more stop and choke up the neck thereof, which by this time is
reasonable wide, and clear from such impediments, as might hinder the voyding
and passage of such excrementes as resort thither, be they never so gross and
thick.

By these few notes and instructions, any skillful Chirurgian may be able to
judge and diserne a caruncle: and be also sufficiently instructed, by the might
and power of GOD to cure the same. Who as he is wont to punish mankind with
innumerable diseases, to the end to abate his pride, and to make him to know
himself, so is he also accustomed to help and succor those, who flis unto him
for comfort, and do trust in his mercy.

There be certain other ways and devises belonging to the cure of the
caruncle, and serving to the good conueyng in, and apt applying their
medicines. As for example sake, some do use the long tent, othersome the short
one, made conveniently to that intent and purpose.

But these, and the like devices, I commit to your own good discretions, and
leave it free for every man to use his own judgment therein, either in using
the same, or in devising the like as he shall think best.

But my intent and purpose is only to put down this good aucthors intent or
meaning, and thereby to deliver, a general methood and order of the cure of
the said caruncle. And so committing this short treatise, to your good
courtesies, and your selves to the almighty.

I end, remaining yours to use and command.

FINIS.
Here begins a treatise of the Fistula, in the fundament, or other places
of the body, and of Impostumes causing Fistulaes, and of the office pertaining
to the Surgeon: with certain other things.
By M. John Arden.
Prologus. Anno Domine. 1349.
JOHN ARDEN from the first pestilence that was in the year of our Lord God
1349. Divelled in New-warke in Nottingham shire, unto the year of our Lord
1370. And there healed many of the Fistulae in the fundament, of the which the
first was Sir Adam Eueringham of Laxton in the Clay, besides Tucksfurd, which
was in Gascoigne at that time, with Sir Henry named Earl of Darby, who after
was made Duke of Lancaster, a noble and a worthy Lord.

This sir Adam having a Fistulae in ano, asked counsel of all the Physicians
and Chirurgions that he could find to Gascoigne, at Burdeux, at Brigerake,
Tolouse, Norbon and Poyters, and many other places, and all forsook him as
vneurable. Sir Adam seeing this aforesaid manner, speedely returned home into
his country, and when he came home, he put of all his knightly apparel, and
clad himself in mourning clothes, with purpose to abide the curing, or loosing
of his body. At the last I John Arden came unto him, made covenant with him,
and so cured him by the help of God. He was healed perfectly within half a
year, and afterward continued his life the space of xxx. years and more. By
the which cure I obtained much living and great credit through all England, to
the great admiration of the Duke of Lancaster, and many other Gentlemen. After
him I cured Hugon Derling of Fendwik, in the vale by Snayth.

Also I cured John Sheffild of Brightwell beside Tekyll, and Sir Rainold Gre^e.
Lord of Wilton in Walls and Lord of Shirlond beside Chesterfeelde, which
asked counsel, of the most famous Chirurgions that were in England and none
auailed him.

Afterward I cured Sir Henry Blackborne Treasurer with the Lord of Walls,
Prince of England. After I cured Adam Humfry of Shelfoord, besides Nottingham,
and Sir John Priest of the same town. And John of Hello of Sherlond. And Sir
Tho. Hannildon parson of Langare, in the Vale of Beuer. After I healed Sir John
Mastie, parson of Stoppert in Cheshire.

Afterward in Anno. 1370. I came to London, and there I cured M. John Colin,
Mayor of Northamton, that asked counsel of many skillful persons.

After I cured Hugh Denny of London Fishmonger, and William Polle, and Ralphe
Dowble, Thomas Brown, that had fi^fteene holes, by which went out wind with
the excrements. There were eight holes on the one side of his fundament, and
seven on the other side, of which some were distant from the fundament the
space of a hand breadth. His buttocks were so vlcerated and so putrified within,
that the ordure and the filth went out each day as much as would fill an egg
shell.

After I cured four Cross Friars preachers, that is to say, Friar John
Writtell, Friar John Haket, Friar Peter Brown, Friar Thomas Apperley, and a
young man called Thomas Voke, of which foresaid, some had only one hole
distant from the fundament, by one ynth or two or three, and some had iiii. or
v. holes proceeding to the cods. All these forenamed persons by their own
confession, before I finished this book, (thanks be given to God) were
perfectly healed, with many other which it were to long to set down. God
knows I lie not. And therefore let no man doubt of this, though all old
famous men that were great students, have not confessed the same that I say.
They had not the way of curing in this case. For God yt is the giver of all
wisdom, has hidden many things from wise men, which he vouchsafes afterward
to show unto the simple. Therefore know ye, all that come after, that the old
Masters were not busy in practicing or serching this cure, because they could
not take away ye callosite at the first, they forsook it, accompting it
incurable, though some auctors make doubtful opinions thereoff. For as much as
it comes to pass that in hard things students and practicioners should be
more busy to seek out the secrets of nature, and to try their wits. For
knowledge and cunning abounds not in slothful students, but in the ingenious
and painful.

Therefore to the honor of almighty God, that opened knowledge to me, that I
should find treasure within the field of knowledge, that with long time and
panting breast, I have sweat and travailed, and full busily endeavored my self
as my faculty suffiseth, to set forth this work faithfully, for the
utility and profit of those that come after.

Wherefore it beehoueth all those that purpose to practice herein, to have in a
readiness, these Instruments following.

1 The first Instrument is called Sequere me, which is the first Instrument
pertaining to the work: for with the same we do both search and prove every
hollow sore which way the cauitie or hollownesse runs.

And it ought to be made in the same fashion and manner as Women do use in
their headdes, and of the same metal, and it ought to be very small that it
be lightly plied and replied, and the head as little as may be, or e^ they
will not enter into the orifice of ye Fistulae, for oftentimes the Fistulae in
the fundament, has very small holes.

2 There is another instrument called Acus Rostrata. i. snowted needle, for it
has the one end like a snowt, and in the other end an eye like a needle, by
the which thrids ought to be drawn through again by the middle of ye
Fistulae, as shall be said in his proper place. And it ought to be of Silver as
it is pictured, and it ought to be no greater in proporcion then it is
pictured, nor longer in the snowte. It should contain in lenght. viii. inches.

3 The third instrument is called Tendiculum, and it ought to be made of Box
or other like convenient wood, no longer nor bigger then his shape is pictured,
and it ought to have an hole in the side in which there is put a wrest, by
which wrest in the upper end shall be a little hole through the which shall be put
two ends of a third four fould, going out first of the fundament and the
orifice of the Fistula, which third is called Frenum cesaris, and the which
also going between the wrest and the wresting the skin of the fundament
betwixt the Fistula and it, and that it be fast contained above the snowte of
the needle until the incision be made.

4 The fourth instrument is a Syring holow in the middeste, and it ought to be
made of the shape as it is pictured, which instrument is common.

FINIS. Prologi.
Of A^stumes in ano, causing Fistulae, and of the Cure of them. Cap. j
THough our pr^pall intent was to treat of the fistulae in ano, nevertheless
it is necessary first to touch somewhat of apostumes breeding therein or nigh,
fith oftentimes apostumes breeding there, do cuase fistulaes. For when an
apostume breeds in any place of ye body, if it be not healed within three or
four months it is turned to a Fistulae or cancer, therefore when there
happens apostume in the fundament, or nigh, you shall know it by these signs,
by swelling, pain, pricking, and burning. And the patient for the pain and
anguish may neither sit, lie, nor sleep.

Which once appearing, first labor to ease the foresaid pains and other
accidents without repercussures, for in that place ought none to be used,
because it is one of the Emunctories, for in these places ought no repercussiue
to be ministered. And after the opinion of Gilbertine, that apostume being
within ano, is cured with the infusion of Oleum Rosarum, in which is Ceruse
mixed, or burnt lead, or Litharge, or all these together, or with the yolke of
an egg. But ever take heed that your patient be not costiue. If he be, ye
shall mollify his belly with an emplaister of Mallows and Swines grease, or
with the decoction of Mallows and branne, with oil of new fresh butter, and
put it in a glister. Therefore take oil of Roses with the yolke of an egg by
even portion, and minister it in ye form of a glister, this swageth the pain
of pricking and aching, and comfort the place in causes both hot and cold,
for after all aucthors, oil of Roses cools a hot member, and heateth a
cold, and it has many other properties both there, and in all other parts of
the body, and therefore a good Surgion ought not to be without it, since it is
so necessary for diverse purposes, for to every pain, hot oil of Roses is a
mittigatiue, and to every apostume outward, it is good to use a maturatiue of
Diachylon dissolved with oil of Roses or Lillies, or Camomil^, or De^lthae, or
common oil olive, or swines grease, Malards, or Hens grease, for Diachylon
thus ordered and applied, resolves and mollifieth hard tumors, or this
unguent, take of Mallows. M.i. and bruise them in a mortar, and put thereto a
^uart of oil Olife, and infuse them eight or niene days after, sees them
very well, then strain it. This mittigates the pain of the Apostume greatly,
and it mollisteth, being applied with Lana Succida, it opens and consumes.
The oil opens, draws, and swageth pain, if you have no Lana Succida, take
a linen cloth and apply it thereon warm, binding it decently that it fall
not away, and a plaster of Mallows is a good maturatiue and mittigateth pain
of the Appstumes in ano, and of women's breasts, and other Apostumes it brings
to supperation, and is thus made.

Emplastru^ maluarum. Take of Mallows. M.i. sees them in water until they be
tender, then strain them and cut them small, then fry the^ in common oil,
butter, or Swines grease, or if you will with ye foresaid oils, and applied
with clean stuphes warm, also wormwood prevails greatly therein, if it be
made in some emplaister, for it mittigateth pain of the breasts, and
comfort the place, and makes the matter to euaporate by the pores. And for
certain it avails in all apostumes in every place of the body, and also for
contusions. For with this emplaister in the cure of the breasts. I have gotten
much credit, for it is very, Sovereign as writers witness, and I have proved
it by experience. And this note that Apostumes breeding near ano, ought not to
abide until they break off them selves, but the Surgeon ought diligently
to feel with his finger the place of the empostume, and where is found any
softnes, there he ought artificially to open the place that the corrupt blood
be let out, least Intesti. number rectu^ that desendeth to ano, in the mean time
grow to putrefaction before the Apostume break, which when it happens, it
dringeth a hard cure, unless there be an expert Surgeon. For then it may be
called the first days Fistulae.

Since a Fistulae is nothing else but an ulcer which cannot be dried up, for
that cause it is incurable. For no wou^d nor ulcer, except they may be dried,
are not to be cured. Sometime it happens some men have an drifice appearing
only outward, pearcing through the longacion within ano, by the space of an
ynch or two, and beside that another hole without not percing the longacion
within. And I have feene some to have eight or niene holes on the one buttocke,
and five or six on the other. Of which none pearred the longacion but one. And
I have feene some have two or three holes on the one buttocke, and two or three
going down to the coddes.

And some have one hole or more in the one buttocke, and one or two in the
other part of the yard, percing as well the longacion, as the yard. And in
this case as I think, it is incurable. The Fistulae in the yard may be
known, for that sometimes the seedepasseth by the orifice, and sometime urine,
and sometime both together, nevertheless of these I cured a Priest at
Lincoln, in the house of M. Geffrey Scroope, that had an Apostume in his yard,
of which as well urine as matter came down to his codde, and sometime blood
went by the passage of the yard Fistulated, and his testicles were swollen
exceedingly. Therefore first I put upon the codde a ruptorie and made an
orifice, where through came forth both urine and matter, whom I cured
perfectly, God be thanked: for his ano and longacion were not hurt.

But yet note, that this cute is hard, therefore let the Surgeon be very
circumspecte to enquire diligently of the pacient if he feel at any time
either wyndinesse or excrementes to pass by the orifice of the Fistulae, or if
he feel any pain or heaviness in his head, or if he have Vertigo, or can
scarce forbear from falling, or if he feel pain and heaviness in his lungs,
and feebleness in his stomach.

Also tell you the patient, yt this kind of fistulae is such, that sometime it
is opened of it self, and auoideth matter, sometime thick, sometime thi^e,
sometime watrie, sometime bloody, and sometime closed, yt it runs not at
all. And eftsoone it begins to ache and to cast out matter, and is opened of
it self, and runs as is said before.

And by these prognostications and tokens showed unto the patient, he will
judge you the more expert in your cure. For this note, after the opinion of
Barnard or Gordon, that the nerve in ano has affinity with the stomach and
brain, and for this cause the patient is sometime vexed in the head and
stomach. When you have thus conferred with the patient, and that he desires
to be cured, first it behooves you to have a sight of his grief, but beware
you put not your finger into his fundament, or show any privy instrument
whereby the patient is put in fear, or peradventure the patient have brought
in some other Surgeon to epsy your dealing.

But consider diligently the manner of the fistulae, and whether it be curable
or not. Yet you ought to foreshew unto the pacient the hardness of the cure,
in that the sickness asks long time of curing. For that the medicines
applied thereto, may not hide long for purging of the belly, and for much
moisture going out of ano, and for many other causes, as the place being
straight, and the buttockes too great or hard, or the pacient is weak, or
disobedient in his cure, or in his diet, and many things you ought to instruct
him of. Which if he be conformable unto, you may proceed in gods name unto
your cure, with this caveat, to take for your cure as much as you can with good
assurance for your money when you have done. Which being done, you must have in
a redines these necessaries. First, two or three Sponges, a lance or a sha^pe
(...) knife, with other instruments before rehearsed, as Sequere me, A^u^ roast.
Tendiculum, and silk thrids, Linen clothes, with apt roulers, have also
restrictiues, with water warmed, with all other necessaries. Taking great heed
that the sign be neither in Libra, Scorpio, or Sagittario, neither the Moon in
9 or 8 of the Sun.

Of the definition of a Fistulae, and the places that it is bred in, and
whether it is curable or not. Cap. 2.
NOw let us proceed to the curing of a Fistulae, and after aucthors in
Surgery a Fistulae is a deep impostume having one orifice or more breding
in each member of the body, of an Apostame or a w^m^ ill he aled: casting out
matters of diverse color, and of diverse substance, as now white and thin, now
waterie, sometime as the washing of flesh, now clotted, and sometime little,
sometime closing it self, and after a fortnight or a month (with a pain
going before in the place) opens it self again.

And when such manner of Fistulae is bred in the arms or ney the breast, or in
the knees, or in the thighs, or legs, or feets, or head, or in the joints,
then it corrupts the bones of tentimes, and they are thrust out by the holes
of the Fistulae. But a Fistulae of the joints not proceeding of outward ca^ses,
is called the festred g^ut, and such Fistulaes are cominited vnturable,
especially in women and young men, for it vexes them by long process of time,
if Nature be not showed benificial. The Fistula in the legs and in the feet
may be cured in the.7. 14. or 22. years.

For after Hippocrates, all sticknes is ^ermined after the moving of the Moon,
or of the Sun.

If it be after the moving of the Moon, then it is ended in the 14 day which
is the ending of the sharper ^knes, and beginning of a lingering disease: If it
be after the moving of the Sun, then the (...) shall be in the.7. month or
7. year and ^ending upward by 7. And know well that all young men having the
foresaid Fistulae, if they be in fevers and lean of body full seldom
abide.14. year.

That which a noyeth them most, is the using of milk, fruiet, leche^y and such
like. If the Fistulae be in a fleshie place of the body only, it is possible
to be cured. And therefore the Fistulae in ano or breding nigh, may well be
cured whiles it is not over old or deep, which may be known by the hardness
of the place, and discoulouring of the skin, and much going out of the
egestions, and feeblenes of the pacient, or whe^ether it pearceth the condictes
of urine, and therefore let not ^etousnesse blind your eyes, that you may
rightly discern between a Fistulae curable, and incurable.

Of the cure of the Fistulae in ano. Capter. 3.
WHen thou see that he that has the Fistulae in the fundament or nigh is
strong, and the place well colored, and all things (...) ^ingly convenient,
have your pacient to a convenient place, having with you one or two to the
helping of your business, and all things prepared as before, let proceed to
your cure in manner following.

Let the pacient be decently laid upon a bed against a fair light window,
and if the hole be on the right side, lay him on the left, and if on the left
side, lay him on the right. If on the right bone, or other place, lay him as
you may most decently come to your work. Which done, let the chirurgian put
the fore finger of the left hand into his fundament, and with his other hand,
put the head of the instrument ^lled Sequere me, into the hole of the Fistulae
that is next to the fundament. If there be many holes, prove with your
instrument diligently in every hole, your finger remaning in the fundament. If
you feel the instrument to penetrats unto your finger, it is a manifest sign
that the longcion is perforated. And know ye for certain that this cure is not
to be done without insicion or freting with a third strongly fastened, if the
hole be not from the fundament above the space of an inch, then is it done in
this order.

Take the instrument called Acus Restratum, and put that end which has the
eye into the hole of the Fistulae next the fundament, your finger of the left
hand being in the fundament, and when you feel the needle against your finger,
labor diligently to bring out the end of it at the fundament, by bending it
gently. Which done, put into the eye of the needle, a strong silk third,
folure or six fould, which we call Frenum Cefaris, and draw it through the
fundame^t into the hole of the Fistula with another spare single third, that if
the Frenum Cesaris happen to be cat, or break, then with the same space third
ye may draw in another with great ease. Which being done, you may choose whether
you will cut it, or fret it out. If you will cut it, then shall ye take Acum
Rostratum and put it through the mids of the instrument that is called
Tendiculum, beginning at the greater end, after take ye Fren^ Crsaris ^awen
through the midst of the sundament, and the hole of the Fistulae, and through
ye hole of the instrument called Vertile. That is a wrest. Let them be drawn
through and be fast knit in proporcion of the lenght of Frenum Cesaris as it
behooves after the distance of ye hole of the Tendiculum. And put the snowte of
the needle in ye hole of the Fistulke strongly, afterward of take the wrest
with Frenum Cesaris and put it in the hole of the Tendiculum, that is in the
side of it, which done, put your finger into the fundament, and with your hand
thrust first the. Tendiculum with the snowt toward your finger, and when you
see opportunity, turn the wrest about, that Frenum Cesaris hold first the
Tendiculum that it goes not out, and so labor until you bring out the point
of the snowt by the midst of the fundament, and that ye strain the flesh
fastened, in the Frenum, with the wrest and the Frenum Cesaris. Which done,
take the in strument called Cochleatia or a spoone, of which the hollow head
must be put int he fund^ment against the point of the snowt, to that the point
of the snowt stand in the hole that is in the spoone mouth through perced, and
that to be holden of some standing by. This shall defend the fundement that it
be not hurt through ye (...) moving, or striving of the pacient. Which done,
put the point of the Rasour or Lance in the hollownes of the snowt that is in
the spoone, and as soon as you may boldly cut the flesh fastened in the Frenum
above the snowt, even by the mids. And when it is cut by the mids, the
snowt with the Frenum shall ye keep away out by it self. If there be many
holes that ought to be cut, ye shall do as is aforesaid. Or you may ^efor them
until another time. For in some case the other may be healed without cutting,
or freting with third, as shall be spoken of afterward. Then must you labor to
restrain the blood. First applying a sponge wette in warm water, and well
wrong out again, into the insition. Holding it fast to restrain the blood.
And when it is full, remove it if need be, and put in another. And then raise
the pacient and let him sit on it in a convenient place. Afterward remove it,
and whether the blood be stayed or not, put into the place some one or more of
these restrictiues following. Sanguis Draconis, Aloes Hepatice powder of Hens
feathers burnt, linen cloth burnt, hears of an hare burnt, Puluis Ebuli,
appyed with the white of an egg upon stuphes with apt and convenient
boulsters and bindinges, for in this case it profits very much. And when the
blood is restrained, on the second or third day, then take the yolke of an egg
with oil of Roses, or Camomil, or Sanguis veneris, or in steed of these, take
common oil and convey it into the fundament, in the manner of a glifter, so
that the wound be filled therewith, then bind it up conveniently, this order
shall ye use for eight or niene days which done, ye shall proceed to the cure
as follows. First ye shall put into the incision Puluis sine pari, upon that
apply lintes, and so make it up, and let it continue for two natural days
without moving, except it be that the necessity of going to the stool cause
it.

But let the patient refrain as much as possible he may, or else it will hinder
the operation of the powder, but when he has been at the stool, let the
place be cleansed with warm water and a sponge, and very well dried again,
then apply your powder again orderly, warning your pacient to abstain in all
that he may.

Let this be repeated the third time, and afterward it is not material
whether he abstain or no. The place being well cleansed and dried, let the
fundament be anointed within and round about with thy finger, dipped in
vnguentum Viride well molten, in all places where you see the skin excoriate.
For this ointment takes away all smarting and pain, and excortacion of the
skin, this unguent is called Salus Poluli, then shall you convey into the
fundament the yolke of an egg and oil of Roses, and in this order shall ye
continue at the least.

About the xx. day, or xxiiij. or xxvi. or sooner if need be, you shall put
within the fundament of our powder Sine pari and fill the place of the Fistulae
within and without (the place before being well dried) and when ye move it, let
the place be well washed and dried, and anointed with Salus Poluli, and after
to be conuaied in by a pipe, the yolke of an egg, and oil. And if the party
can refrain from stool, let it not be removed in two days, or else when it
is need, and consider diligently if the place be well mundified, and be
without hardness or evil color, and that the flux of matter do deminish,
which being perceived, you may proceed to in^arnatiues, and after to
cicatrize, of the which shall be spoken in their proper places.

And this shall be a token of the perfect cure, when the clothes are taken off,
and that the emplaisters appear or y, and the more drier they be, the better
sign. And this iustifith of the cutting of the fistulae, and c^ing of it. Thus
by diligent means, and wise industry, you (by Gods assistance) shall finish
your cure.

Another manner of working in the same Fistulae, and the cure, with diverse
examples. Cap. 4.
IF it happen that the Fistulae be deep, and yt there be distance between the
hole of the Fistulae, and the fundament, or if the pacient be fearful to
abide cutting, or for some notable cause being there, then may thou with a
thread drawn through the midst of the hole of the. Fistulae, and the
fundament, cut the flesh. And it avails as well as by cutting with a knife,
but that it asks longer time.

For though ye bind it right straightly in the beginning, yet it will be a
month or three weeks at the least, or the fretting be complete. If the
patient be delicate, feeble, or weak of heart, let the thread by which the
Fistulae is knitte, be so bound, that if need be, it may be lightly loosed
without cutting.

Let the pacient have some pleasant company or exercise to drive away or
mittigate his pain, then let there be conuaied into the fundament, the yolke
of an egg and oil warm, and let the party be anointed with the same,
without putting any other thing thereto.

When he goes to the stool, put into the fundament, some ^yle what you
think best, whereby he may be the better eased, and when you apply the yolke
of an egg and oil, you must mix them together, and when you have put them in
a bladder, let the bladder soke in warm water until it be warm, and then
minister it.

For those things that be warm ease the pain best, and thus as the t^eed
loses, let it be made orderly straighter and straighter, until it be thereby
fretted through the flesh, and when the patient has gone to the stool, let
him be laid upon a bed, and his fundament well cleansed and wiped with a
sponge and warm water, afterward let him be anointed between his buttockes,
and round about the fundament with Salus Populie made warm, and every day
put into the fundament, the yolke of an egg and oil, and after upon that, let
there be applied this plaster.

Rec. Succi Apij. Absinthij. Tapsibarbati. Ebuli. A Sparage. Plantaginis.
Artemesiae. Gariophillate. Peti consound. Caprifolium.
Of all these herbs if you have them, take even portions (except Caprifolium,
whereof take but a third part) If you cannot get all, take of the first
three with Caprifolium.

The confection will be as follows.

Take the juice of these Herbs and mingle it with as much clarified Honys,
always stirring it on an easy fire, and sees it to a full decoction, then
take it of the fire and let it cool and keep it to your use, this may be kept
a year or two, and when you will use it, take as much of the white of an egg
well beaten and skinn^ed as of the unguent, and mix them together, with wheat
meals, and oil olive, and a little wax, and incorporate them all together
adding in the end a little turpentine, and so make it up and reserve it to
your use, this being put upon stophes or linen clothes, let it be applied upon
the fundament, and then with convenient lygature blind it up. This vlter is
called Dia flosmos, for Mulleyne is called Flosmos, it does not only avail in
fistulaes, but it cures all other wounds though they be horrible, also it
cures swellings and bruses: And note, that the confection of Apij Absinthij,
Molleyne, Sparage, with clarified honey sodden together, and kept by it self,
is called Tup^imel.

But when you put together all the things above said, it is called
Diaflosmos, and thus it ought to be compounded. Take Tapsimell, of the whites
of eggs well beaten and skummed, ana..iiij. Wheat flower,. iij. Oleum Cere,
ana. iij. Turpentine,. ij. And if there might be had, in the time of the making
hereof a little petty Morell, it would be much better. If there be many holes
pearsed together, then ought the Surgion as soon as he may with this thread to
knit the holes together, but it is better that they be knit from one hole to
another.

Which being brought unto one, let them be filled with Puluis sine payred, and
upon it apply lintes, and then upon that your Diaflosmos. And thus shall you
dress the cure once a day.

I saw a man of North-hampton, that had three holes in the left buttocke, and
three in the purse of the codde, and all pierced from one to another by th
emiddes of the longacion, whom I cured with cutting of all the holes at one
time of the longation as well as the other. But in the cutting of the longacio^
there flowed much blood, for the Fistulae was right deep, wherefore the pacient
^unded. Then I put to ^ spoonge wette in cold water and received the blood,
afterward I applied into the L^igation restrictiues, and a good spoongs wet in
cold water, and I made the pacient ^ in a chair, and after the blood was
stanched, and that he had received meat and drink, went into his bed and
slept very well all night without effusion of blood, and in the morning. I
found him reasonable well. The second day after, I filled all the wound with
Puluis fine Pa^i, and as is mentioned in all things before, with the yolke of
an egg and oil, and Salus Populi, and Diaflosmes, I cured him soundly in 14.
weeks This man by report had been under the hands of 20. Surgions.

But I had never any yt sounded under my hands but this man, he was corpule^t,
but weak of heart, but nevertheless about the forty day afer his cutting he
rode. Also I cured a man that had.8. holes on the left buttocke, and three on
the right, but the longation perced in the right side only, nevertheless all
the holes on either side of the fundament met together in the ground, which I
prouid thus.

I took a siring and made iniection strongly, and the substance issued forth
through all the holes, nevertheless but one hole perced the longation only,
and for a farther trial, I proved with the instrument called Sequere me. And
with Acus Rostratum. With full great hardness and difficulty. The cure whereof
was this. First every day in the left but tock through one of the holes, I put
Sanguis Veneris, and I put in two tents or three of Lard or Porke into the
largest holes, fastening a third unto the ten^s, lest they should fall into the
botome of the Fistulae, and above that I put Emplastrum Nerb^. And with
convenient Ligature, I bound it up.

And on the next day there came with the plaster well digested matter in great
quantity.

This order I continued a space, when the matter began (...) also for the
fleing through putrified matter, the anointing with Salus Populi avails best
in every cause as well within the fundament, as without.

Of Bubo within the fundament, and the cause why it is incurable. Chapter 5.
BVbo is an Apostome breding within the fundame^t in the longation with great
hardness, but with little pain. This before his vlceracio^ is nothing but a
hid Cancer, which cannot in the beginning be known by sight of the eye, for it
is hid within the fundament, and therefore it is called Bubo. For as an Owl
hides her self in the dark places, so this grief lurketh within in the
beginning.

But after process of time it is vlcerat and frettith and goes out, and
oftentimes it frettith and vlceratith all the circumference of the fundament,
so that the excrements goes out continualie without retencion, and may never
be stayed unto the death, nor cured by the healpe of man. And it is thus
known.

Put your finger within the fundament of the pacient, and if ye find within a
thing very hard, sometime on the one side, and sometime on both, which
hinders egestion, than it is Bubo.

And the manifest signs are these. The pacient cannot abstain from stool,
for aching and pricking, and that twice or thrice within an hour, and the
excrementes seem as it were mingled with watrie blood, and it stinketh very
strongly, so that all the unskillful Surgions and the patient also th^keth they
have Dissenterium, when truly it is nothing so, for Dissenterium is with flux
of the belly, but in Bubo there goes forth hard egestions, and sometime they
may not go out for straightness of the Bubo, but are retained within the
fundament straightly, so that ye may feel them with your finger and draw them
out, and in this case glisters avails much. Of the decoction of wheat
branne, with oil or butter, or such like.

Nevertheless unskillful Chirurgions have ministered unto such restrictiues,
and defensiues of Bole Ar. Sang. Drac. Masticke, Coriander, Sumacke, Mirtells,
hard yolks of eggs, and such like as avails to the flux of the belly, and
how much the more they apply these astringent things, so much the more they do
bind the belly, which brings to the patient great inconvenience, of the
which I have had great experience, wherefore I left those things and found
great commodity by ministering of glisters of the decoction of branne and
Mallows without oil or butter, for all fatty and oily things do nourish
the Cancer. Besides those that have Bubo, they eat and drink and go
reasonable well, and sleep, and they be meanly hungry and thirsty, but in
meat they must abstain from the stool, and often times they dye about Autum.

And when they be nigh their end, they begin to have lyngering Fevers, and
begin to loose their appetite, they forsake all, and covet wine, they eat
little and covet every day less and less, they sleep but little and
unquietly, they are heavy as well in mind as in body, and as they wax weaker
and weaker, they covet their bed, and above all things to drink water,
nevertheless they can speak and move themselves to the last breath.

From these (I say) wash your hands if you have care of your credit, unless
it be in glisterse as aforesaid, to ease him, but this note, that in putting
your finger into the fundament of him that has the Dissenterie, thou shall
feel nothing in the longacion but as in other men's. But in him that has Bubo
you shall feel an induration as big as a Hens egg or a Goose egg, but the
filth that goes out of both, are much like, that is matter of the couloure of
citrine yellow, blewe or wan mixed with watrie blood and stincke, and it goes
out to the quantity of a spoonefull or two, without mixing with egestion, and
sometime with egestion, but in Dissenterie, he shall feel pricking about his
Navel and in his flanks. But in Bubo not so, but aching, pricking, and
tenasmon.

I saw one of North-hampton shire, whose fundament was so eaten on every side
that he could not hold this excrementes, he was constrained always to stop
it with a Towell, yet nevertheless the thinnest of his ordure went out
always, so that his clothes about his buttockes were always wette, and the
Towell being drawn forth, his fundament was so eaten, that a good egg might
easily pass in, whereby ye might very well see far into it, but he dyed in
short space afterward, because the Muscles of retention were eaten away,
whereby he became incurable. I have seen some to have great heat and burning
without the fundament, and great smarting, with rankelyng skin about it, closed
to the manner of a purse, in such sort that they could not well sit, lie,
nor stand, nor find rest in any place, but evermore moving and stirring as it
were in a frenzy, and there issued from the place superfluous water which
filled many linen clothes, to the which grief cold things avails much, as
vinegar by it self, or auxt with the joyce of Planten, or Virga Pastorjs, and
such like.

If these cannot be had, take the yolke of an eggs, and mingle it with Bole
Armonicke, or Ceruse, or both, and anoint the place. So it avails much to
foment the place with vinegar and water mixed together, and after the fomenting,
let the place be well dried, and then dressed as aforesaid, when the foresaid
water begins to cease, the patient shall feel itchyng, then apply this
ointment.

Take of black Soap, Bole Arm. Brimstone, Olibanum, and make it an ointment.
This will dry and make skales to fall off. Also to anoint the place within and
without with Vnguentum Album mingled with Bole and Argentum Viuum. This also
cease heat, and makes a cicatrize, if it be anointed with Salus Populi, it
profits much. Burnt Allome with Tapsimell and Vitrioll kylleth itchyng, or
clarified honey, with the foresaid powder is meet, or honey and the joyce of
Celandine, with the foresaid powder, is very good.

Also the juice mixed with Vinegar and warmed at the fire, eases all
inflammations and itchinges. Also Oleum Sidoniorum does the like. The joyce of
Celidonium inbibed into a sponge or linen clothes doubled and applied unto the
head luke warm, to the forehead or to the templs, it cease the aching and
pain thereof, which I have ofter proved.

There came a man from Burdeux in Gasconie unto Newarke that had great gobbets
or pieces of flesh hanging down to the length of an inch, and they covered
both his buttockes the breadth of three fingers, and there issued out much
waterie substance, and sometime blood, with great heat and stinking, so that
his buttockes were as it were cauterized, and they grew like to the belly of
a fish that is called a Lopster, when he spauneth.

And these superfluities grew partly in the whole skin, which when they were
mortified even to the roots, there appeared holes from whence they went out.

I mortified these superfluities, with Puluis Grecus, and for the issuyng
forth of the water, I took of the most still Alphita. i. Barlie flower, and
above I put Puluis Gracus, which mortified the superfluities in three or four
times so that they began to dye and fall away: this Puluis Grec. is very
^ecatiue and well cleaning, and it restrains all watrie humors and blood, and
it mortifieth the Cancer curable, and the bloody fig in all places. There
was a man had upon his buttocke a bloody fig, casting forth sometime blood
and sometime matter, and it was like a Mulberie, to the which I put Pulueris
Grec. a whole night, and in the morning I took off the grief half mortified,
which being come, black blood followed, and after a little effusion of blood,
I put to Puluis Gre. And the blood was presently restrained, and upon the
powder lint, and then above that Emplastrum Narbo. to keep the powder it
should not fall off, and thus the cure was finished in a short time.

Of the Fistulae in the fingers, and hardness of the cure of it. Cap. 6.
I Have seen oftentimes the Fistulae in the fingers and in the Thombes of
diverse men and women as well young as old, the cure of which is to many
unknown, for why it breeds in some in the foremost ends of the fingers,
mortifiyng all the overmost joints both the flesh and bones, sometimes it
breeds in the midst of the joints, and that is more peril, and sometime
in the lower joints next the hand, and that is most of all, nevertheless the
fistulae breeding in the ends of the fingers, deceaueth the patient sooner
then in other places, for unskillful men term it a white flaw which thou shall
know thus.

If there happen to any man in the ends of his fingers aching with inflammation,
and when it breaks, there appear a little hole out of the which there
comes a little piece of putrified (...) to the bigness of a wheat c^rue,
and there fo^th, little matter o^ none then judge it to be a Fistulae, and
(...) if this he not cured within a month, there is (...) the over joint with
the bone, and parad^ture of the whole finger. I have healed some that said
they feelt ^ pain in a fortenight, and when I saw the foresaid token of the
Fistulaie, then I separated as much as I might the skin being very foulle, with
a Rasour or sheeres, the skin being off, I found all within putrified,
nevertheless the finger was but little swollen and, I put poud^ Creoferoberon
to mundifie the place a night, and above ^ Emplastru^ Sangiboetas, in the
morning when the filth was desolued and (...) out, I perceived the bone of the
finger to be corrupt and loosed from his fellow, and in some men I have seen
the bone corrupt in part but not in all, and sometimes two joints to be
corrupted, whose cure is as folowith. If such manner of cure come to your hands
new, and have had no cure before, and y^ you see a token of the said
Fistulae, then deal as is aforesaid in taking away the skin. If there be any
filth let it be pressed out and the wound filled with powder Creoferoberon, and
put thereon Emplaistrum Sangiboetas, and so leave it.24. hours, when you remove
the plaster the wound being mundified, if you find the bone black and
putrified in the upper part, it behooves that it be drawn out and the place
mu^dified, so you may cure it with Vnguentu^ viride, if there grow any
superfluous flesh in the hole or any part thereof, as it falls often times,
and be not removed in three or four days, it grows to inconvenience, which
in the beginning you may correct with the powder Creoferoberon, or if it
exceed in quantity, then to put to some stronger causticke or actual ^terie,
then to use means with larde or butter, to cause your escarer to fall, which
being fallen let the finger be anointed with Soap and, Brimstone, and use in
the wound Vnguentum Viride, and so follow the cure until it be finished.

Take Licium, that is the juice of (...), and honey, and powder of gla^, (...)
them all together, and (...) thereof an Unguent, this ing^reth (...), staieth y^
(...), and mundifieth the the (...) of the bone, for gla^ ^keth flesh grow
upon the bone, honey purg^ (...) ^ueth stincke, Licrum has (...) to
heal,(...) the Ca^cer and the Fistulae, now Licium is (...).

Rec. Foliorum Capriso.
Bruise them in a Mortar and take the ioyse thereof and put it in a brassen
be^ell or glass and dry it in the (...), and reserve it to your use, and when
your ^ure is ^nate, use this disci^atiue.

Rec. Sulphuris. Auripigmen^. Tar^ari. Alluminis. Vitrioll. Sapone. Olei. Miss^
in fora^ vnguend.
And this use until your pacient be cured.

Of the Fistulae in the lower joints of the fingers and in the legs, knees,
feet and anckles, with corruption of the bones and hardness of the cures.
Cap. vij.
SOmetime the Fi^ulae falls into the fingers of young men or women, in the
lower joints of the hand and makes holes sometime in ones side, sometime in
both.

And when you per^ the holes to be in both sides, the pacient to incurable
except the finger be cut off by the wint where it is fstened to the hand.

If the bone of the next finger be corrupted, it must also be drawn out, but I
have seldom seen any such to escape without death, when the grief was cured.
For the flux flowing thither being stopped once, they dye soon after. Those
things are known thus. If in the finger, hands, feet, legs or any other
member, where there is such a fistulae, it stinketh greatly or has a straight
orifice with hardness, witness and redness, and when the wounds are running,
the pacients are merry, and when it stops, the pacient is pale in face,
lean and feeble. It falls oftentimes in the lege, or knee, or feet^, or in
the ancle. in the leg, and in the feet, I have cured, them, and in the
anckle, but in the anckle and in the knee, it breaks out again shortly after.

Of the manner of the cure of one that had the Fistulae in the inner part of his
legs above the anckle. Cap. viij.
ONce I healed a man that had a Fistulae in the leg, above the anckle and the
foot, and with the plaster Sangiboetas, and with powder made thus.

Rec. Auripigmenti. Sulphuns. Calces viue. and black Soap.
And brought them to powder and applied it twice a day, and applied about the
wound common oil, or Vnguentum Album, until he came to perfect health, and
besides I gave him to drink of the drink of Antioche. But after he was cured
I never saw him more, and therefore I cannot say how long he lived after.

A treatise of Apostumes in the bowing of the knee disposed to Fistulae. Cap.
ix.
THere happened unto a man an Apostume in the bowing of his knee that was very
hard to be broken, although many things were appited thereunto for the purpose.
Therefore I put thereto the skin of larde, but it prouted not, nevertheless
after three days, I could not perceive any sign or likelihood of breaking,
but yet I assaied to have opened it with a lance three times, but the party
withstoode it, then I applied an herb called Pedelion, that it might break
skin, for it was thick, but in the night the pacient took it away, then I
made a plaster of wheat meal and Honey mingled together and put thereto, and
after the second applying, it brake and ran great store of matter, which
being pressed forth, I put into the orifice tents of larde to the length of a
finger, that the hole should not be stopped until the Impostume were purged. In
the mean season the pacient fell into a fever and great pain, and as soon as
the flux of matter ceased to run partly, through necligence and partly
through heat it dried, and the hole stopped and began to swell and to gather
to a new apostume, which I seeing, opened the place with an instrument, and
thrust forth the matter gathered together, a^er I put into the place each
day tents of larde, for the space of a fortnight and more, nevertheless I
perceived not the impostume dried any thing at all, but more and more to
indurate and wax red, and cast forth thin and watrie substance, sometime
much and (...) I perceived the place disposed to a Fistulae, for the ^rifice
was (...) the wound ^epe, and c^st forth matter of diverse colors, and liquid
with hardness of the place and evil habitude. Wherefore I put in ten^es,
anointed with an unguent which I used against the Fistulae made in this wise.

Rec. Actripigmenti. Ana. q.s. Sulphuris. Ana. q.s. Calsic Viui. Ana. q.s. And
black Soap. Ana. q.s.
The which I put in four or five times, but it prevailed nothing, I made a
Ven^osu to be set on, and it would not doie. Thus I perceived that the matter
flowing would not cease, for that it was in a moist place. For in the place
beside the bowing of the knee in the nether part, is a place that has no flesh
but fatness only, an I have not only read, but also known by experience.
The skin and the flesh with the fatness being eaten away, I put into the
hole unto the bottom a tent of wood somewhat broad, and above I cut the skin
by the midst with a casour, and in the wound I put a cloth dipped in the white
of an egg, in the morning I remoouing the plaster, put in this powder.

Rec. Vnidis Eris. Vitrioli. Auripigmenti. Alluminis, Miss^.
And upon that this emplaister.

Rec. Apij. Ebuli. Artemesiae.
As is before taught, and with this powder and emplaister he was soon after
cured. But this note that in making your incision, you beware least you cut ye
vain Saphena that comes (...) the (...) the (...) a great (...) that the
(...).

Of the manner of a full hard cure in swelling of a man's arm. Cap. 10.
IN the arm of a certain man began suddenly pricking, and aching, and both the
arms afterward began greatly to swell, from the shoulders unto the ver^e
^gers ends, the patient ^singe the (...) is of women and their medicines the
space of a month, but (...), at the last he (...) my (...) when I ^ was him
arms greatly (...) with (...) and (...), and (...) heaking, I madely (...)
T^an, ale grounds, Mal^, honey, (...) and theepes fallow boiled together to a
thickeness^ applied pla^ther wise, whereby he found great ^ate, the (...) day
I (...) the plaster, and the swelling was well (...) But in the bought of the
arm all the collection ^ode (...) she wing as it (...) gather to a (...),
which when I (...), ^ put to a plaster maturatiue of Mallows (...) with
grease three or four days, (...) I saw, (...) to suppuration never the
sooner, but the swelling abode still, and in the bought of the arm, the skin
appeared round with diverse colors, to the likeness of a Tode, showing no
token of breaking, and in the bottom of that gathering, was a hard thing as it
were a Nut, right under the bought under Vena Hepatica. Which I perceiving, put
to doves Dung, Leekes, ^garlicke, and bruised them with the joyce of smallage
and salt. And in the morning when I removed, it was full of Pustules, and it
gave ^orth a (...). Then I laid to the place (...) ointment made of black
soap, Brimstone, and Arsnicke, and the second day I removed the plaster, and
the ointment, and the skin was utterly broken, and there issued forth of the
hol^ (...) black matter, then I put above the place shauing of lard, and above
that this plaster.

Rec. Succi. Artemesiae. Apij. Aosmthij. Vitica. Ebuli. Mell. Albumini^ Ouorum
ana. Miss^.
And tompe^ it with (...), if you cannot get all these, the joyce of Apium
with (...), and the white of an egg and meal prusiteth much. (...) the
applying of these, the dead flesh began to disseuer, and there ran forth
blood, with water, and in the greatest bole appeared tetes of flesh with (...)
in the skin. And there to I made this powder. Rec. Veridis eris, Vitrioli,
Au^pigmenti Albo. ana. Miss^.

And I put every second day thereto Pulueris Carpe, and upon that a cloth dipped
in Vngurento Fusco, or Albi Oruiride, the redness, and the watrie places, I
anointed with black soap, and the powder of Sulfer, and above that, a dry
linen cloth which I let ^ee until, it fell off then the place began to (...)
day and ^ally, which I (...) with the foresaid unguent, until the redness and
watrynesse, was utterly gone, and by this means I cured the pacient. And this
nota, that this unguent is profitable to al spots and filths of the skin, which
yields forth water with redness, for it dries much and puts away
redness in all parts of the body except y^ eyes. But after ye putting too of
this vnguet of soap, sulphere, and Arsnicke black, a little cruit appeared to
the thicknes of a seame of a shoe that was hard to depart with the foresaid
Co^rosiues, to the which I applied an actual cauteris, but the pacient skant
feelt it, after that I applied lard to cause ye escar to fall off, and then
finished the cure.

Of man that had his leg swollen, the which I cured on this wise. Cap. 11.
THere was a man which has his leg swollen from the knee so the ancle with
rednes and great inflammation so that he might not stand, I anointed his leg
on each side, and fomented it with the joyce of Solisequium. i. Marigoldes and a
little vinegar, and made it lake war^e, dipping a ^n cloth in the same, and
wrapped it about his leg, and brought hi^ to ^bed, and or ^on^ght the pain was
eased, and within thr^ days he was perfectly (...) without any other medicine,
to the great (...) of many. Also the (...) of Mar^goldes by it seen, or with
^eger ^royer^ greatly Apostumed in women's broathes the C^iter, F^l^, (...),
akings, rep^, and (...).

Of the curing of a man that was smitten on the shin^ bone. Cap. 12.
THere was a man (...) on the shine, but the (...) was not broken, but (...)
the third bay it (...) and d^gan to gr^e him, then he went unto ^ vns^fall,
(...) there he had in his leggo a gre^ lounde hole and deep, and full of
black filth like unto burnt ^eth. So when he come to me, I cured him thus.

(...) I washed y^ place ^ white wine. wanded, as which was (...) y^ troppes of
y^ herb ^olwoor^s, (...) of ^lanten, afterward I put to an (...) made of
Psant^, Ruberbe, Apij, Honey, Rye Mea^e, and whites of eggs mingled together,
or the emplaister Sangiboetas, the place being mandisted; I put to powder
Creo^erobero, with the medicine of Arsnicke before taught, with the other
things in the cure of the arm, if any Pustles arise on the leg, you may use
Vnguentu^ Album, If any man be smitte^ on any part of ye leg violently
without wou^ding, as it often happens either by a horse, or a stone, or
clubbe, or such like. It is good in the beginning to anointe the place, and
bring out the bru^d blood thereof, and after to apply emplaisters repressinge
the pain and swelling.

Of the manners of Marmolles, and the cure of them, Cap. 13.
THere was a Chanon fell sick, and when he began to recover, the humor
descending into his leg, and after a while there arose pustles of broune and
clayishe color. He put thereto the oil of Tartar to dry it. But it auailed
him noihing.

At length there grew on the one side of his leg a large orifice, and about
his anckel three or four small holes to the breadth of a half pany, and the
leg evil colored as yeloish red, from the calfe of his leg, to his
anckle, the skin casting off certain wales, and when he had used diverse
medicines, and none prauailed, then he used a black plaster made of white and
red leads and common oil of Tartar etc. But nothing prevailed, so that it came
to a Marmolle.

Which when I saw I began the cure in this order.

First I sowed the pacients legs strongly in a cloth of linnon, after I
washed the beg so sowed with hot water, and let it lie so 24 hours, keeping
it from air and from cold.

Then I removed the cloth, and mundified the wounds putting into the wound, a
piece of linen cloth wette in cold water, I applied, the Vngue^t of Diuel^ne
in the circuit of the wound about the whole skin, so that it touch not the
wound within, and cover it with a linen cloth wet. And thus every day swise
removing the ointment, and mundifying the wound, and filling them with linen
cloth wet, the Unguent is this. Rec. Copen^ Salt pe^, ye ashes of brom, the
ashes of black Snayles, of (...) a ^ttle, Verchgreece dubble he quarititie of
one of these, of quicksiluer, of Bores grease clean, as much as suffiseth,
the^ mingle ye ashes with the grease, and when they be well incorporated, reserve
it unto your use, it will be a black Unguent. With this Unguent I cured the
great wounds of the legs in the manner as is said before, and the less
wounds I cured with Vng. Viride of Laufranks discriptio^, for there was dead
flesh of a blew ^tour to the breadth of a penny, and that flesh I cut away a
little of the upper part of it, then I put to Larde, and so with Larde and
cutting I took away the flesh, and with Unguent Diuelin and the cloth wet^e in
water, I healed the wound to the breadth of a penny. Then estsoones there brake
out small holes about the sides, and they began to be large until the bigness
almost they were before, which seen, I put the powder of Litarge four times
and anoint it with Vngueto Albo, and put in the wound a cloth wette in the
ioyse of herb Robart. Which cure seemed to me more profitable, and sounded
better the extremities, and joined them more perfectly. If the Mermolex be even
upon the shin bone they are sooner cured.

And the best way is to cut the dead flesh away if the pacient will abyd it,
if it be rutte after the^ cutting, lay to a cloth dippt in the white of an
Egg a whole night, afterward put into the wound the ouder of white glass,
Succarine, Alum, white Lead, and if you see the bone be mortified, the cure
is very heard, or incurable. And in this case it shall be good to use blood
letting in places convenient.

Of the properies of Vitrioll, j. Attramentum. Cap. 14.
OF Attrament j. Vitrioll there be many kinds, and that is best that is most
greenest, and that is found in Greece or Cipres, and is commonly called
Dragante, but not Dragagante, also there is a kind of Vitrioll called
Vitriolum Romanum, and it is yeloish in color, and there is one kind of
white Vitrioll but not shining, and that is profitable for eyes. Vitrioll is
CA. and sic: in 4. Gradu after Platearius, and there be 4. kinds thereof.
Indicum is found in Indi, and that is white. Arabicum is found in Arabyque, and
that is yelow. And Ciprinum is found in Cipres and that is green. And Romanum
that is more competent in medicine. It has power to desolue, consume, and to
corrode. And it may be keept sen years in effect. Vitroll combust by it self
or with salt put upon a venimed wou^d it draws the ven^m to the upper part
of the wound. Also burnt Vitrioll in powder ressraineth blood by it self, or
with the ioyse of some henbe for the purpose. Also it avails against Polipus
in the nose, if it be put into the nose with a tent of cotton and Mellis Ros.
cum Vitello oui, it fretteth away the lump of superfluous flesh.

And put it into a Fistulae and it mortifieth it. Also mingle it with Diaculum,
or Apostolicon, and put upon frudulent ulcers in dry bodies, it cures them
merueilouflye in drawing and mortifiyng them. And being burnt it is less
biting and his virtue nothing deminished. All kinds of Vitrioll be sharp
either less or more. And being burned they be siccatiue, and so in daying they
in geder flesh, and especially in d^y members, for Vitrioll put to diverse
members works diueres effects in diverse bodies, an in colerick and
melancholiek. And also put in day members, for when it finds strong members
resisting his strength, then does, he dry superfluous moisture found in the
wounds, or vlcer^, which being dried, nature engenders flesh in moist bodies,
as in flegmaticke complections, in Children, women, and in moist places of the
body, the members be feeble, and may not withstand the strength of vitriall,
and so they suffer Liquefaction of it, and so putrefaction is augmented in the
wound, and as it works thus in diverse bodies, so it works in diverse
complections, and diuets members.

It has not this contrariety in it self of nature, but from contrariety of
complections, to which it is put. Example.

As fire does diversely in diverse things. For all mettalls put in the fire are
molten, contrariwise, all tilestones, brickes, earthen pots, and such like, put
into the fire, are hardened. And this is not contrari^tie in the fire, but in
the bodies put into the fire. And so of vitriall. The order to burn vitriall
is as follows.

Take of Vitriall as much as thou will, and put it in an earhen pot, the mouth
well slopped with claye and horse dung, let it dry, then set the pot in a
fire of coals making at the first a soft fire by the space of an hour, then
increase your fire, and in the end very strong for the space of two hours,
then let it tool and the Vitriall will be of a red color, then keep it to thy
use in a lether bag. By this combustion his natural heat is altered and
cooled, and his biting dulled, wherefore it may restrain blood in the nose, in
wounds, and other places. It avails againgst the cancer, and against venemus
matter of Apostumes, and to teeth and gumes fretted, mingled with honey or Mell
Rosarum or Licium, when it is made with claryfied honey, also Vitrioll mixed
with honey and Licium put therein, helps the ulcers of the ears. Also
Vitrioll combust mingleld with the powder of Hermodactiles, and put under the
tongue helps Ranulae. An Vngent avails to can^du^ ulcers and wounds,
Appostumes, blouddy and evil car buncles, pestilenciall and roten Apostumes.
Take Swines grease, ounce. iij. Vitrioll, ounce iiij. Let the grease be molten
over the fire a good while, in the mean time labor your Vitrioll with oil,
in a brazen Mortar well together, after mix it with the grease, and make an
unguent. If thou will make thereof an emplaister, put thereto Pitch and wax,
for Pitch agrees well with the properties of the Vitrioll.

Of the properties of Allumen. Cap. 15.
A Alluni zuccarine is commonly called Allome glass, it is hot and dry, in
the fourth degree, it is a vein of the earth well known, but the clarer the
better It co^sumeth grealy and dries, it avails with hot viniger against
inflammation of the Gummes, and in medicine against skabbes. The powder burnt
either by it self, or with honey, mundifieth light cures, and in that it is
Stipticke, it is comfortable to members, for all Stipticke things repress
humors.

There is another kind of Allome called Allumen Scissium commonly Allome
plome, and it has threads, and it may be divided or cloven a sunder, and has
the like virtue to the other, and it is burnt thus.

Take a little stone and set it on the coals, so that the coals touch it not,
and thereon put the Allom, and let it boil until it be dry, and wax very
white, then keep it in a lether bag. The water of Alom is thus made. Take of
Allome one part, of vinegar eight parts, sees them together to the one half.
This avails against itching, skabbes, salt flume, etc.

Of the properties of Verdigrece. Cap. 16.
VErdigrece est Ca. et sic. Hot and dry, it is penetratiue and dissolutiue, and
it pricketh, burns, melts, and represseth putrifactio^, therefore an
unguent of wax, oil, and Verdigrece is penetratiue, dissolutiue, vnctiue, and
liquifactiue, and all these repressed and doubled of the wax and oil added to
it. For wax and oil moysteth much, and engenders putrefaction. So they
hinder the sharpness of the Verdigrece, and the Verdigrece does repress
their putrefaction and humectation, wherefore of those a temperate unguent is
made.

Of the properties of Arsnicke and Auripigmentum. Cap. 17.
ARsnicke and Auripigmentum be both one, but Arsnicke is not so fair as
Auripigmentum is, nevertheless both be yellowe, but Auripigmentum is great,
more shyning and vneasier to grind, but Arsnicke is as it were powder in
respect of the other, and is more lighter broken, and when it is broken, it is
like Vermillion within of read color, which some men take to be Realger, and
that is false, for Realger is an artificial confection as Arsnicke sublimed,
and for certayyne, they are not deceived, for they are one in operation, but
Reagler is read of color, and Arsnicke sublimed is white, but there is no
difference, so that we understand them. Auripigmentum est ca. fic. in iiij.
Gradu, of the which there be two kinds, yellow and read.

Yellowe is dissoluatiue, attractiue, and mundificatiue, and has in it a
virtue putrifactiue, by which he putrifieth strong humors coming to a wound or
an ulcer yt engender proud or dead flesh. It avails in medicines against
skabbes, tetters, white Morphew, mingled with black soap, and because we make
mention of Arsnicke sublimed, I advise that no Surgeon, unless he be
expert, presume to work with Reagler or Arsnicke sublimed, for of them are
bredde many inconveniences by means of their violence, for they cauterize more
worse then fire. If any presume to use it, let it be in very small
quantity. Auripigmentum is dissiccatiue consumptiue, euaporatiue,
erradicatiue, putrifactiue, ruptiue, and cauteratiue. And this lesson learn of
me. In the beginning of my practice, when I knew not the violence of them, I
put in the powder of them both, in the legs of two men which being done, they
were almost mad, for the pain they sustained two days together, and their
legs swollen out of measure.

The third day the place where the powder was put, was very black, and the
patientes were so feeble, they were almost dead. Then I anointed their legs
with oil of Roses, and Popilion.

And I fomented the legs with hot water to euaporate the hu^ors contained
in the members, and upon the sore, I put raw Larde cut thin, with oil of
Roses. Upon hat I put the yolks of eggs spread upon a cloth to hold on the
other things, and about the fourth day after the place combust began to
dissolve in the circumference, and to cast forth matter, and the place was
undressed from three days to three days.

Thus I continued the cure in the said manner until all the mortified shesh
fell out. Which being removed, the bone of the shinne was bare, and the woude
most horrible, which when I saw, I filled the wound full of Stuphes cut
small, and I put upon the bare bone the yolke of an egg mingled with Sanguis
Veneris: and I filled all the wound therewith.

And so every day repayring it until the matter began to cease, and the
sides of the wound began to incarnate.

And when the sides of the wound came to the place of the bone mortified, they
would go no further, which I seeing, I shaued the bone daily with an
instrument, thinking to have engendered flesh upon the bone, and put
regeneratiues to it, as Licium, with Mell Rosaru^, Aloes Masticke, Myrrh
Sarcacolle, Sang. Drac.

And they profited nothing, but nevertheless in my ignorance still shauing
the bone under the instrument, I perceived the bone moved by and down: whereat
I meruayled. But I perceaud the shauing did no good. The I ceased putting
nothing in the wound but Licium, with Mell Rosarum, and the yolke of a raw
egg, mingled iwth Carpit. And so continued from day to day, until the bone
was raised above the wound, and was more loose. When I saw it, I put under the
point of a knife, and raised it a little, and all the bone start out, and
redflesh grown under if, the bone was in length four inches, and in breadth
two, and very thick.

After the separation f the bone, I cured the wounds with Licium and Mell
Rosarum, and the yolke of an egg and Puluis sine parie. And the patient
recovered his going very well, he was a young man, and as it fell to the one,
so was it with the other. And this note, I put not of Arsnicke so much as the
quantity of a fich pease, and the wound that Arsnick made, was the bough and
breadth of a man's hand. Therefore beware of the using of Realger and Arsnicke
sublimed, and especially in the face and legs, and sinowie places, and bonye,
and in a man's yard, and in the fundament. For unless they have great
resistance, they work in great extremity.

Of the properties of Licinm. Cap. 18.
LIcium is the joyce of Caprifolium, Mell, Pulueris vitae Alb. Ana Misceantur.
Et. fiat Vnguetu^. This ^ureth cancer in ye matrix, and in other inwardme^bers.
For it has virtue to mundifie, consolidat, comfort, and regenerate flesh on
bare bones, and generally it avails in all fretting griefs. As Cancer,
Lupus, Fistulae, and Nolimetangere. And against the Cancer in the mouth it is a
present remedy. The ioyse of Caprifolium dried in the Sun, and poudred,
avails in dark eyes, if it be put in them, it is called Oculus Lucidus.
Bright eyes. j. But it may be made profitable auailing in chirurgira in this
wise. Take the ioyse of Caprifolium pressed out by it self, and boiled with as
much clarified honey, unto the consuming of the joyce, and keep it to your use.
This avails against the Cancer in the mouth, and in the fundament, in the
matrix, and to all cancrouse and fradulent ulcers of the legs. If the ioyse
for his thickness will not easily come forth, as oft^ it happens, infuse
the leaves in white wine, and it may be lightly gotten forth. For ye ought not
to wash Caprifolium, before the straining, and inspecially when ye make Licium
for the eyes, but if need be, washed in wine. Also the leaves of Caprifolium
of themselves bruised and applied upon ulcers of the leggesde sperate,
stinking, and casting forth ofule matter and blood, and growing nigh to the
manner of a caucer and disobedient to any medicine, cures them maruelously,
and that I proved in the leg of a rich man having an ulcer in the same, in
curing of the which all medicines failed, and with this he was cured, for why
the first time that it was put to, it dried the ulcer, took away, stinch, and
put away all accidents, and within a month he was fully cured by gods
providence and goodness.

Of the making of Pulueris sine Pari^. Chapter. 19.
REc. Auripigmenti, Varidis et is, Ana..ij. Vitrioli Combusti..iiij. Alluminis
Zaccatini Combasti..viij. Let each of these by them semes e most su^telly
ground upon a stone. Then mingle them well together, and keep them in a
lether bag, for this may be keept.7. years in good effect and longer. This
mortifieth and brings forth dead, rooten, or superfluous flesh, in all
wounds and ulcers. This powder deceives neither the pacient, nor the
Surgeon, for though it be handled vnt ki^fully, it does no harm, and the
ulcer have no dead flesh, yet at the last it shall heal it. But not without
biting, for if it did, it passed all other medicines.

The ioyse of this powder is this. When it is put in a wound or ulcer, put
thereon lint or thin linen cloth, upon that the plaster of Narbon, or some
other, and so bind it up without removing, for.48. hours, and when you remove
the planter, if the powder come forth voluntarily with the dead flesh, then
thy purpose is sped, then put into the wound or ulcer, a drop or two of
Sanguis Veniris, and so use a until the flesh be replete. But if in the
removing thy plaster, the powder come not away willingly with the dead flesh,
then put upon the powder a drop or two of Sanguis Veniris, and bind it up
again for a natural day, or at your discretion until the escarre be fallen,
which being removed, use Sanguis Veniris, as before taught. But this lelarne,
that a corrosiue must not be remove before it fall off by it self. Also there
is a great error among unskillful Chirurgions in the often removing or dresing
their ulcers and wounds, which lets convenient curing, and that by this
reason.

For Natural heat which is principal author of curing, expiring or brething
out by often opening of a wound or ulcer, hinders digestion of humors flowing
to the part, wherefore there cannot be made generation of matter. And the
super^uous humors flowing to the place, and gathered together, are thereby
holden back. Which is the only cause of swelling, pain, inflammation, etc.
Whereby the wound or ulcer is made hard anf oule, and casts forth matter
thin, watrie, and undigested. And oftentimes of little hurt, is made incurable
diseases. Also another cause is by often opening, it takes air, and air
changes the body, and consequently the wound. And that may be praued by
experience. For the breath of a menstrius woman hurts wounds, or the Surgion
himself if he has live with any such woman, or if he have eaten Garlike or
Onyons.

But let this be holden for a general rule of all Chirurgious (that will use
the medicines contained in this book) to renew or dress their patients once
every day. For when you see a wound, or an ulcer, to cast foorh flore of matter
well digested, the swelling, pa^e and inflammation to cease, and the member to
come unto a good habitude and color, and that the pacient be in good ease,
and take well his rest, then judge health to be at hand. For if he can sleep
quietly, it is good. For in sleep nature wo^keth the better, about digestion,
of every matter both in body and members. But oftentimes sleep and rest in
hindered because of pain, therefore before all things labor to cease pain.
For that not only pressth bowne virtues of ye body, but also of ye medicines.
Which may be done in hot causes, with oil of Roses, and in cold with oil of
C^mmuill. Also a plaster of honey, and bran, and a little veniger fried
together mitigateth all manner of pains.

In my cures I was not wont to remove my medicines but from three days, to
three days, and namely in the shine and hurts of the legs. And I sped well
and cured many hard things, that were forsaken of diverse men, with this Puluis
sine Parie, and other emplaisters. And I saw never in all my time this powder
to ^aile me, except in the legs of a great man, in which it could have no
strength of working as it had in others.

Wherefore I was long astonished, but nevertheless in the end I cured him with
green Licium put thereto as it is said above. The Lord being my mean.

Of the making of Sanguis Veneris, and the working of it. Cap. 20.
REc. The powder of Alkanet..j. And put it in a quarte of common oil, and the
oil will be colored as red as blood, whether it be boiled or no, for it may
be made both ways, and let it be keept in a pweter pot. And this is your Sa^g.
Venetis. For Alkenit is cold and dry in ye first or second degree, it consumes
humiditie in wounds and ulcers. For it is subtle, and resolves without
biting. It is incarnatiue, apertiue, and exsiccatiue, with stipticknes,
wherefore it is good in hot Apostumes, with little matter in the beginning, and
it helps wounds in the sinnowes and joints, and ulcers of the mouth, in
drying them, and mingled with viniger, and anointed, halpeth the aching of the
head, it helps, purges, and defends from peril, and deep wounds mads
with Arrowe or Knife. And all hollow ulcers, if it be put into them, and
Emplaistrum Narbon laid above, with many other things profitable.

But this know, that it may be made another way.

Take the blood of a maid of 19. or 20. years old, which must be drawn the
Moon being at the full, the sign in Virgo, and he Sun in Pistes. And or it
be cold add unto it of the pouders of Aloe Cicatrine, myrrhae^, Sang. Dra.
an..j. or more, according to the quantity of the blood, and of ye powder of
Allcane, as much as of all the rest, mingle the pouders with the blond, to the
form of a past, and then dry it in the sun and keep it to your use. And
when you will use thereof, take a part thereof and bring it to powder, and boil
it in green oil olive, for euerse ounce of the confection, you must take two
pound of oil. And boil them together until the oil appear red. Then take
it of the fire, stirring it until it be cold, or else the substance will
fall to the bottom, then keep it unto your use.

Of the making of Salus Populi, and the working thereof. Cap. 21.
REc. Celidonium, M.ij. Hederae terrestris. M.j. Bruise them together, then take
Dear suet or wethers suet, or both, as much as suffiseth to the quantity of
the herbs, of oil olife, as much as half the tallow, and boil all together
until the herbs go to the bottom, and become black, afterward let it
cool and keep it to thy use.

This preuayleth about wounds or ulcers where the skin is chafed with heat, or
where there is pustles or small whe^ks: first foment the place with a spoonge and
hott water, and after the well drying thereof, anoint it with this unguent
warm. This dries and siccatrizeth. It is good in chappes of the lips,
hands, feet, or any other place coming either by wind, or fire. It is very
good against the Hem^roydes.

Emplaistrum Nerbon. Cap. 22.
REt. Lithargi. A^, Cerutae. Plu^b. Al. et Ru. ana. lib. ss. Oleu^. Ros. libi
iiij. Cerae. lib.j. Aced Fortiss. lib.j. Let the^ be finely powdered, then take
it of the fire, putting in your Vinegar by little and little, then stir it
until it be cold. And if you will have it very black, sees it much. If
thou will have it less black, sees it less. And when you have done, make it
in rolls. This is a right good plaster, although it be black, for any sore
leg, and especially if it be enflamed with heat, which I have well proved.

Of the properties of Wallworte, and the making thereof. Cap. 23.
EBulus. i. Wallworte is an herb commonly known with us, whose roots,
rindes, branches, flowers and leaves, be profitable in medicines. It has
virtue to dissolve and consume. Viscous fleume. It avails against the gout
of joints, and contraction of sinnowes of hands or feet, and it avails
against swellings, and for bruses, the place being fomented with the decoction
thereof.

It strengthens the sinowes and joints, it avails against swelling of the
belly in cold Dropsies. If the ioyse be drunk with honye and Cumyne, thou
may prepare it as Licium, to have in readiness, for restrayning of blood, or
otherwise.

The making of Valence of Scabiose, or Matfellon. Cap. 24.
VAlence of Iacea. Albai. Stabiofe, is thus made. Take the joyce of Seabiose,
and strain it throughs cloth, then take swines grease cleansed from the
skins, and beat it in a mortar reasonably, then put in your juice, and
albour them together until the grease become green, then cover it and let it
stand ix. days, then take and labor it as you did before, putting forth the
thin water, and so let stand for five days, then take new juice and labor it
again as aforesaid, which done, let it stand for a fortnight, then take and
labor it again, pouring forth the thin water, and this shall you do
until it has purchased a very green color: then keep it to your use.
This profiteh against Anthrax, it swageth and breaks it.

This may you keep many years, but it is better to renew it yearly. This
note, that Iasea Alba, is Scabiose, but Iacea Nigra, is Matfellon.

The making of Valence of wormwood. Cap. 25.
TAke the juice of wormwood, Smallage, and Plantaine, and with Swynes grease,
work them as is said before, which keep to your use. This avails to all
bruses of the legs and shinne bones, and to wounds made in the Muscles of the
arms and legs with Arrow or knife, and to other wounds, for it keeps them
open, and mittigateth all pain, and when you will use thereof in wounds, put
into the wound first two or three drops of oil of Roses or Violetts, and
anoint all about the wound with the same oils, then lay upon the same,
Valence upon Stuphs or Lyntes, and bind it competentlie, letting it lie so,
for a natural day. This repelleth swelling and aching, and holds the wound
open, and engenders matter, and draws forth venum of the wounds, delayeth
inflamatious, with many other good virtues.

This medicine I loved much, and did wish it many good cures, which for
breuity, I leave to rehearse, which the practicioner in proof shall find.

Pills or powder of Antioche.
REc. Consolida, Ma. et Mi. Buglosse, red Colewortes, Strawberie leaves,
Sanicle, Tanfie, herb, Robert, Auens, Rubi. Tinctorum, of the greater
sumitery, of Summer hemp. ana. M.j. of Orpin, red Breere croppes, red Nettles.
ana. p.j. of Sengreene. Let these be bruised and made in bales, and dried in
the shadow, and when thou will use it, make it in powder and give it in Ale, or
with wine. It casts forth all filth. When you will make the drink of
Antioch, take all the foresaid herbs, and sees them in a gallon of Gascoine
wine white, until half be consumed, then let them be strained with a strong
expression, adding thereto as much honey as is of the decoction, then let them
sees gently, until the skomme be all cleansed, then take it from the fire and
keep it to your use. When you will use it, give three spoonefuls of it in the
morning, and so at night, with five spoonefulls of luke warm water, or water
of Fumitorie.

Bales of Antioch is thus made. Take Mouse ear, Auence, Egrimonie, Daysles,
Veruaine, Fumitorie, Hemp, red Coleworts, Breere croppes, of each like
quantity, stamp them very small, then make them as great as an egg, and
dry them in the Sun, and give the sick to drink thereof..j. in the
morning, and so much in the evening, with wine or clear Ale, and put upon the
wound or sore, a red colewort leaf, or a breere leaf, and this do until the
pa^ be thoroughly whole.

To draw out Iron or scales of bones, thorns and such like.
REc. Magentis, Galbani, Serapini, Hammoaci, Ana..j. Misce, Item. Rec.
Magnetis, Propoleos, Terebin. Ana. Misce. Item Succi apij. li.j. Melis li. ss.
Sees them together to the thickness of an (...), put^ing thereto of wheat or
lie flower, and powder of saw dust, li.ss. this mundifieth old wounds and
new, and draws forth broken bones or scales, and it is good for womes
breasts, being conuaied unto ye bottom of the wou^d, except they be very
horrible, and stinking. Then take white wine a quart, powder of saw dust..iii.
cropes of Madder, i. of roche Alum..ss. Sees them and wash the wound
therewith, then dry it with a soft cloth, laying thereon the mundificatiue, and
upon that this plaster. Rec. wax..ss. Tailowe, per Rosin, ana..i. oil of
Cammomill as much as suffiseth, make an emplaister, this is one of my secrets.
Item, sower dough and temper it with honey, and put thereto misselto of the One,
6 parts Hammoniaci. 8. parts desolued in water of Femcriicke and a little
seces of oil, this emplaister draws forth Scales, and small pieces out of a
wound, as thorns or such like. Item the roots of Fern, cleansed from their
rindes and stalk, and ^oden in white wine, and Elder leaves, and the herb
Persicana soden in water, and beaten with the fern roots and the grease of an
Hare, lay to the wound, and the same night the pain shall cease, and in the
morning you shall find the iron or wood wrawen up into the wound, or else come
clean forth.

If a bone within the wound be corrupt, that sealt shall^ taken away with the
cantery or hot iron, but in no wise raspe the bone when it is canterised, but
put upon it oil of Roses hot, after this lay upon it Speciale or Agrippa and
such like, but if you go about to scrape the bone, it will nevertheless of
his own accord cast of a scale afterward. Wherefore you do but increase your
labor, and bring the pacient to an inconvenience. The healh of a wound is
hindered in two causes, the first is want of blood in the body, or by corruption
of the same blood, for then there may no good flesh be engendered, and the cause
may be in the grosnesse, or subtelnesse, hotnesse, or coldness. Also if there
be hard or dead flesh growing between the lips of the wound. Or ^ the bone
be (...), or if there be over much putrefaction in the ^und, with many other
causes.

Of Molifiyng medicines.
REc. The f^ces of oil of Lillies, the feces of oil of Linseed, Bdellij.
Ana..ij. Storax, Galbanum, Oppoponaxe, Hhammoniaci, Ana..j. the grease of Hens,
or Malardes, 4.. disolue your gu^mes in wine not over much, the me^le
altogether in a Mortar, until they be in corporated into one, this molifieth
hardness well after the fomentacion, with the decoction of March Mallows,
Fenicricke, Linseede, and common Mallows. Another very good, for the
contraction of ^nnowes, and to moliste hardness. Take old ole olyfe, ioyse of
Rosemary ana. parts equales, boil them together unto the consuming of the
ioyse, then reserve it to your use.

Another of the same virtue. Rec. Wax..ii. oil of Been. li.j. masticke,
Storax, ana..j.

Of this make an Unguent. Another for hardness of members. Rec. Rosin li.ss.
wax.ij. oil of Cammomill, li.ii. the flower of linsed and Fenicrick, ana..ij.
Mastix, Olibani, ana..j. Swines greece, Hens, and Duckes greece, ana..ij. melt
the wax and Rosen, and when they be molten ad there unto all other things,
and sees them until they be incorporated, then reserve it to your use.
Another. Rec. Swines greece, Hens, Goose, and Duckes greece, ana. ounce three,
wax ounce i. common oil, ounce iiii. powder of Finitrick and lint feeds,
ana..j. Bdellij, Oppoponax, Mastick, Encense, ana, ounce ss. put the gummes in
wine and after melt them y^ they may be well incorporated, then cool it and
keep it to thy use. This is a more molli^yng and softening, and more
comforting of sinnews then any going before. Another. Rec. Axungie Porcine.
li.ss. wax, ounce ii. Goose, Duckes, and Hens greece, and ounce ii. melt them
at the fire, and incorporate them together. And this molifieth all hardness,
and the shrinking of sinnews.

Vnguentum de Palma, with other Unguent and pouders Consolidatiue and
Sigillatiue.
REc. Calves suet cleave mundified from the skins. li.j. melt it in a pan
over the fire, and put thereto old oil olife, and lygarge in fine powder,
ana. li.j. et ss. Roman Vitrioll in powder, ounce ii. Sees all these
togethere stirring it together, with a stick of green Palm. or cut pieces
of green Pame, and cast into the kettle among your (...) ^ar d^y, take them
away and put in flesh, and so sees it to the form of an unguent. Another
which cools and conglutinateth.

Rec. Oil of Roses (...) iiij. Ceruse ounce. i. wax ounce ss. Disolue the w^e
with the oil at the ^yer, which being desolued, while it is host, put in your
Seruse, continually stirring it, then add thereto the whiste of ^wo eggs
beaten well together, and stir it until it, be cold. And this i^ Vnguentum
Coruse. A powder consolidating old wounds and sores.

Rec. Alloes vsti. ^owers of Pome (...) dried. My (...), Galls, ana ounce ss.
And make (...) a powder. This dry^ and ficcatrizeth old wounds. Another
consolidating (...) wounds and sores.

Rec. Sanguis Draconi^. Masticke. Gum Arabic. Dragagantum. ana..ss. fiat
puluis.
Alia. Take Langdebefe and dry it, ounce iiij.

Dragagantum. Masticke. Sa^guis Draconis, ana..ij.
Powder and searce them, this powder consolidateth old sores, and brings
together new wounds lightly.

Another consolidating powder. Rec. The rindes of Pomgranets, Balaustie, the
powder of a post. ana..ss. Miss^. This powder consolideth all manner of old
sores in wa^rie places.

Emplaisters for Marmolles and Ulcers.
REc. Lytarge, Ceru^e, ana. lib.ss. Boliarmoni aci, Lapis Calaminaris,
Masticis, Olibani, Mumie, Aspatri, ana..j. Olei Co^munis. lib.ij. et ss. First
boil your oil with your Lytarge and Ceruce, almost to a full decoction, then
put to your Lapis Ca. soon after your Bole Ar. after y^ your Aspatu^, when
this is al in, and almost sod, take it of the fire and put in your Masticke,
Oliba, Mumie, always sturring it. Another of mine own, and it corrodeth
mightily, and ciccatrizeth, and mundifieth old ulcers and Marmolls.

Rec. Ceruce..iiij. Sal. gemme..iij. Lapid. Magnetis..j. et ss. Lapid.
Calaminaris.. ss. Oua Mund. iij. Cere..x.
Make powder of them that will be poudred, then melt the wax and put in your
pouders, and when it is nigh cold, put in your eggs, and make it up in
rolls. My master Mi^el did add thereto of Turpentine.i. of wax more.ij. For
it was so short it would not abide together, and he said, if the eggs had
been put in first to the wax, when it was sodde, and then put in the pouders,
it would incorporate the better. Another emplaster.

Rec. Salis Gemme. Salis vitri ana..j. Lapid. Magnetis. Lapid. Lazuli. ana..
ss. Vitrioli. Rom..j. et ss. Litargi Auti..j. et ss. Argenti viui..ss. Cere,
lib.j. et ss. fiat empl.
First melt thy ware over a little ^er of two or thr^e coals, that your wax
be warm, then put in all your pouders, except your Litarge, Auri, and
Argen^i, then mortify the Argetum, and incorporate it very well with the
Litarge, and when your other stuff is almost cold, put into your Litarge with
the Argent, and work it ^est together, but beware it ^ouch neither oil nor
water, and therefore the best making of this is in a hot mortar.

Vnguentum Arabicum.
Rec. Vnguenti Albi. ana. q.S. Boli Armoniaci. ana. q.S. Sanguinis Draconis.
ana. q.S. Olei Rosarum. ana. q.S.
Aqua Rosarum, in quo dissolve Gummi Arabici. Miss^antur et fiet Vnguentum.

Flos Vnguentorum.
TAke Deeres suet, ounce liij. rosen, Perrosine ana. lib.ss. White wax,
Frankensens, ana ounce iiij. Masticke, ounce i. First melt the Dear suet and
the wax together, then powder the Gummes, and put thereto, and when they be
relented, strain them through a piece of Canuas into another vessel, and put
thereto a pottell of white wine, and set it over the fire again, and boil
them to the consuming of the wine, always stirring it, then take it from the
fire, and when it is almost cold, put thereto of Turpentine well washed with
white wine ounce iiij. And of CAmphyre well poudered.ij. Then make it up in
Roles, and lap them in Parchment. This plaster is good for wounds both new
and old, for bruised sores, and for aches, and it does mundifie ulcers or old
sores without pain, it will comfort the member that it lies on, and is good
both for Fistulaes and Cancers that be vlcerated.

THE true methood of the Fistulae practiced and used of one Hall of Northfolke,
to whom the people does flock as unto an Oracle, which thing came to my hands
by chance, (by a Gentleman a patient of mine) and for that I would not have
such a secret hidden, (although of some it was bought full dear and does
closely keep the same,) but minding the benefit of my Country, (bearing not
the mind of those who say it is pity that any such thing should be made
common, or be set forth in Englsh, although them selves have neither Latin
to serve their turn, nor good words to others that mean well.) Will not
keep it in huther muther, as some blind asses would have it. Who thinks all
too little for them selves, making pity of doing good, but would all things
encroch, and nothing impart. And therefore I thought good to deliver the same
as I received it, neither adding, nor diminishing any thing too, nor from the
same. The composition whereof I will distribute unto all men, catch it who best
can.

The powder is white Vitrioll Crude, Mixed with Bolearmoniacke. The strong
powder is Mercuri Sublimate, mixed with Bolearmoniacke. And sometimes they use
to make a tente of the powder of Vitrioll Crude and Bolearmoniacke, mixed with
Vnguentum Populion, and made in the form of a past.

The unguent is made of Auxungie Porcini, and Popler buddes bruised, and boiled
together. The Cataplasme or Pultas is made of Milk, Groundsell, sheep suet,
and great Otemeale bruised. Another, (...), o^ e^h a like (...) the (...) l^ned
bread, boiling it together to the form of a Catoplasme, Sometimes they do
make as it were a past of the said powder tempering it with the soresaide
unguent together to the thickenesse or body of (...), applying it (...) in the
form of a tente, or (...), where they may lay it upon a corrupt borne, or
evil (...).

Certain Balls which are used to cure vicers in Ano.
MUskle sh^lls lays (...) the embers, the out sides next the (...), lotte them
lie so long till the black^ go from the white, (...) your fingers, then take
the white which is the inside of the shells and beat it do powder, and of ra^e
Ba^on, and between two hot iron^ melt it and make Balls of the powder and
great.

The second (...) Balls are (...) of Vitrioll and the Populion, etc.

FINIS.
The description of an Emplaister called Dia Chalciteos, translated out of
Galen his first book of the composition of medicines, The 4. Chapter.
ACcording to the same reason and industry that I have compounded this
emplaister called Chalciteos, which of the Palm tree I call Phemeenon, a very
commodius medicine for the conglutinating, and cicatrizing of ulcers, and for
the curing of inflammations, being brought to the form of a Cerote.

Wishing you also to exercise your minds, leaving the fond practices of
Thessalus and his Scollers, with their ignorance, who neither know (nor will
follow) the best medicines by learned Physicians invented, nor yet consider
that they do consist of contrary faculties. Exercise therefore I say your wits,
that using with me the same methodes, ye may also compound medicines.
Persuading you that our elders composed all in deed by reason. For that order
of y^ empericks called in greek Periptosis, is a very trifling Toye. I must
therefore show the reason of compounding the above said meditine. For that the
old oil, and the Adeps, have digesting or dividing properties. But
Chalciteos, and Succus Palm do repel and bind. Of these did I compound this
medicine, which very many have already used, for that by use and experyence they
have proved it to be better then any other of that kind. For reason inuenteth
the composicion, but experience discerns the virtue of the same. Even as the
artificial workmanship also among the vnskifull, win credit. I have
moreover tempered with the former medicines Spuma Argenti, which gives no
great efficacy, whether it be to the simples that repercusse the inflowing
humors, or them that digest that which is already fixed in the inflamed parts.
For it dries, but not strongly.

Wherefore I did put it as an apt medicine, into the composicion of the
plaster. For it is boiled with the rest above said, until it come to such a
body, as will not cleave to thy fingers. The Adeps must be fresh, and as old
as may be possible, and the oil must likewise be old, whose virtue as you
have learned, is most nigh and like to hogs grease, saving that grease does
somewhat more heat and mollify. And you have heard that by age, they be come
more subill, and do more aptly digest. And therefore unto inflammations that
bring great pain to the part affected, the newer they are the milder and
gentler they be.

But to all other inflammations, the oldest are better, and look how much older
and more stubborn the inflammation is, so much the more profitable are the
oldest, yea, they are of themselves of force enough to cure it. so that they
inflow no more into the inflamed part.

But if any thing do yet inflow, then must the medicine also have a mixed
virtue, even such as has this medicine by me composed.

And therefore did I mix with digestiues Chalciteos et Palma. Knowing full
well how few old inflammations there be to whom nothing infloweth. For by reason
of the humors to them flowing, they are wont to be protracted, and so become
old. Moreover in the beginning and augementacion of inflamacions the virtues
of astringent and cooling medicines should chiefly excel. And therefore is this
emplaister being liquified unto the form of a Cerot very profitable unto many,
adding thereunto now and then wine, or vinegar, or water.

And sometime liquifie it with unripe oil (of the greks) called Omotribis. Or
with some other astringent oil, which is called Hispanicum, et Histricum or
else with some sweet oil, not astringent, or with old oil, and fathermore I
have liquified this emplaister with Oleum Mi^, et Millini, when the case
required so strong adstriction.

Whose composicion is a follows.

Let therebe prepared of Adeps, which the Apothecaries call Axungia, li.ij.
Olei Veteris, li.iij. Spuma Argenti, Tantundem. Chalcitidis..iiii. and thus
must ye compou^d it.

Let the skins of the grease be all taken away, and the rest bruised that it
may be the better molten, which being melted at the fire, let it run through
a strainer, that it may be cleave without skins, and there must be of it two
pound as is aforesaid. After that, mix with the Axungia of Chalcidis made in
fine powder, the third part of a pound, (that is after the old writers.iiii.)
and a quart of oil, putting thereto Argenti Spuma. lib.iij. (as before is
said) and when they are all brought to one body by strong laboring in a mortar,
put them altogether into a Cauldron and stir them with a Spatulae of Palm
tree, whereunto one bigg bough will suffice, that you may use the massy part
of the wood in the manner of a Spatulae, for so men call the instrument
wherewith they stir confections, and we likewise for the more plainness will
use the same term.

Now that which is next to the massy and woody parts of the bough must be cut
off, and the small and tender branches on each part proeeeding forth, must be
pluct off, and the rindes or bark being first pilled away, that the scrappes
or small chippes put in, way with their joyce strain and color the medicine.

You must therefore use your Spatulae even forth with at the beginning.

But the tender fragmentes of the Palm, must be cast in, when the medicine is
come to the form of a Cerote, for if you put them in at the first, the ioyse
of them (which we would have to remain) will in the boiling be consumed.

Moreover that part of your spatulae where with you stir the medicine which
is strained, after it waxes so dry, that it has no more moisture, must be cut
off and cast away, and the rest which has yet ioyse therein must serve your
turn. So long as it retains any ioyse therein, and this may suffice for your
understanding, to consider that your spatulae must be green, and full of
sap. For if it be dry, it avails nothing.

Let it be therefore in winter cut from the tree, the day before, but in
Summer, the same day you boil your medicine.

Now when your medicine is boiled, and come to that perfection, that it will
not stick to your hands, then use this emplaister to ulcers that are hard to
Cicatrize called in Latin Vlcera Cruenta, and also to bloody wounds, being
liquified with oil, it helps very well inflammations, gouts of the feet, and
pains of the joints, inflammations of the shares, and Thima, burnings, kibes,
fractures of bonnes, contusions, and finially all affects that are called
Rumatick. And many that now adays do cut Harniaes straight after their handy
work do use the said emplaister. (Being first prepared with fomentacions,
and cataplasmes) and yet if you will put therein of Chalciteos..vj. (which
after the old order is half a pound) the medicine will thereby be made the
more apt for the conglutination of great wounds. And of more effect to such as
are hard to be Cicatrized.

There are also in this book other medicines of the same virtue.

And yet unto this medicine being liquified with oil is more credit to be
given in Rumatick affects, then to them all. It is very good as I said at all
times, for them that have the gout, and griefs of the joints, when their
pains are not great, then do they require fomentacion, and liquefiyng
Cataplasmes, in the beginning therefore of these griefs, and while they are
yet in their augmentacion, when you have liquified this medicine, let it cool,
then scraping it with a Scise, power it into a mortar, and power wine thereon,
and that it may the better drink in the same, work it well with your hands
against the mortar.

The wine must be somewhat tarte, and of mean age, and of substance not thick,
but as clear as may be. For such wine by reason that it is of a subtle
quality, perceth ye deeper into the body. And so long must you power in your
wine to the melted medicine, and work it with your hands until it be taken
in and tempered with the same, and that none of the liquor be left unmixed with
the mollified medicine. Also if you will mix your liquors with the medicine
while it is yet warm and molten, it will be the better.

Wherefore in the beginning of inslamations, the repercussiue virtue must be
the stronger. But in the augmentacion, the same must be deminished, and the
virtue digestive must be increased. And moreover when the inflamed tumor
comes to his proper state and vigor, the faculties both repercussiue, and
digestive, must be of equal proporcion, unless some vehement pain, shall
require a linetiue medicine.

But when the inflammation once declineth, you shall augment the virtue
digestive, but then shall you mix no wine with your medicine.

Furthermore while it melts, if you will have it more astrictiue, you must
add thereunto Spanish Oil, or Oleum Omphacinum, which we call Crude or
unripe oil.

But when you desire to have both the faculties equal, you may liquifie it
with sweet oil, which must neither be too new nor to old.

But if you desire to have it digest, you may very well take old oil. And
when you melt this emplaister, this rule is to be observed, that ye take more
plenty of the oil then of the medicine. So that if you take of the oil li.i.
(that is.xii.) it will suffice to put thereunto of the medicines.x.

So that ye may plainly perceive, that how much the more of the medicine this
plaster has, so much the more effectuous it is made thereby. And look how
much more liqued it is made, by melting it with oil of Roses, so much the more
mylder and lenetiue it is.

But it is brought to the form of a Cerote, when unto li.i. of the medicine,
ye add of oil li.ss. and after this sort it is profitable unto inflammations
declining. And also healpeth better the inflamed tumors of the fundament and
straight gut that spring of themselves, then any other remedy.

But then must it be liquified with store of oil. That it may be conuayed in,
in the form of a clister. Furthermore we often in such cases liquified the
same in oil of Roses, putting first under the vessel wherein it melts, a
kettell with hot watter therein, which must stand over burning cooles, or a
clear flame without smoke. And being so melted after the same manner of
temperature before mentioned, so that it have form of a soft Cerote, it
thoroughly heals not only the ulcers of the preuy parts, and the fundament,
but also all others, even to the vlcerated kibes and burninges.

For it delivers them forthwith from inflammations, and makes them pure, and
filleht them with firm flesh, and espcially when there is in the medicine good
store of Chalciteos. But note that wine must be also mixed with the medicine
that shall work the effect. And if you mix therewith vinegar, it is good for
burning, both at the first, and also at any time afterward laid thereunto.
Whether it be then bli^tered or not. And it is of the like effect to those
that are skalded with hot water. Moreover if you lay on this medicine before
the inflammation begin, it lets much, and restrayneth not a little the
generation thereof. And therefore as I have said, many that cut Hernies, use
the same by and by, not once molesting the wound before, and besides all this,
to use it upon contusions, to fractures, and to all sorts of wounds, if it be
laid to them liquid, it is a present remedy, so it be applied artificially
with convenient rolling, or ligature, such as commonly are used in ruptures,
moreover it helps all oedematus tumors and inflammations, when the body
abounds with evil joyce, or else it is of much sense, laying the same as
soon as may be to the beaten and contused parts, and you shall put thereto of
fresh Henbane, which if by reasan either of the time of the year, or of the
place it be not to be had, then shall ye use that which has been gathered
and preserved in the Summer.

And also the joyce of Mandnragora mixed with the medicine, makes it the more
milder and pleasant. And of this liquor or joyce, it shall suffice to temper or
mix.i. thereof, with a pound of the emplaster being liquified with oil,
putting in sometime more, and sometime less as need requires.

It is also requisite that in such bodies, the medicine should be melted with
oil of Roses. But unto such parts as are hurt by a fall, or bruised with a
staff, clubbe, or stone, although there happen a congelation, yet may this
medicine, even the beginning commodiously be applied thereunto, being mixed
with wine, as we have before taught. Which wine must be left out the third
day, or at the farthest, the fourth day, if the part be void of inflammation,
and then must you liquifie the emplaister with old Oil. For if the humor be
much con^ealed, and the parts constrained, they may hardly afterward be
digested into vapors.

Moreover I do use this medicine against Herisipelas, and chiefly unto those
yt be conjoined with inflammations, Laying it on at the first, melted with oil
of roses, which is made ex Olio Omphasini, which is green or unripe oil, and
without salt, for such oil unto Herisipelas is most commodious, and when it is
therewith liquified, the joyce of nightshade or Solatrum, is most diligently to
be mixed therewith, thoroughly, and well wrought in a Mortar.

If that be not to be had, ye shall use the joyce of Psylliu^ or if it be in
summer, the joyce of Grapes, with the joyce of Purcelane, or of fingreene or
house leeke, for the liquor of sower grapes by it self, binds, or
restrains more then is requisite. For Herisipelas requires not so great
astri^ion, but hurts, for by hardening the skin, it incloseth the heat,
and hindreh euaporation. Moreover the ioyse of purcelane of it self cannot so
conveniently be used, because of the toughness, and thickness of the same,
and therefore the best way is that you take the ioyse of the sower grapes, and
commixe it with your ioyse of Purcelane, and so bring them into one body or
form, and then to strain it out. And in like sort shall ye strain out the
ioyse of Singreeene, for alone no man can strain forth any store of joyce,
nor of Peneworte.

But the new fresh ioyse of green Mandrage Appls put thereto, makes this
medicine the more convenient. For the which if the time of the year serve not,
thou shall not doubt to use that which is brought from Candy, or some other
place. Also we have used to temper therewith the ioyse of Henbane, and sometime
Meconium, which is the ioyse of Poppie, and it will do well together with the
same, to put some Glaucium much weaker then these.

And yet is the oil of Le^tuce easier to be had, I mean as well the wild, as
the garden Lett^ce. But less effertuous in iooling then these, are too ioyces
of Poligonum Aurcul^ Muris, and such like.

And yet they do also cool. But more euidenly does the kind of Lenticula
cool, that grows in fenny places. But for want of al these, you shall mix
therewith vinegar and water.

And this medicine must artificially be brought to a cooking quality. That is,
by setting them on vessels of exceeding cold water, or on ^e. And let your
Phenichinum be in like manner cooled, and then lay to Herisipelas, until the
vehement heat or burning do ease. But it is evident that those medicines that
by an outward cold quality do help the affects of Herisipelas, must be
changed, and that chiefly when it is an exact Herisipelas, without
inflammation. And after that the same sharp inflammation is cessed, or else if
that it were not from the beginnining a perfect Herisipelas.

But either an Herisipelas joined with Flegmon, or a Flegmon joined with
Herisipelas, then must be apply thereunto no extreme cold thing.

But abstain therefrom, (...) with the liquid medicine such things as de^
(...) cool. And in this case we use the musselage of linseedes, and the ioyse
of Camomill. And then afterward we use only the melted medicine, putting
thereto no other thing.

Now if the Herisipelas, shall at time by the force of co^ing modicine wax
blew, then is the same no longer to be (...).

And you must abstain from the mixture, not only of the wine, but also of
oil of Roses and all astringent oils. For Ph^nichinum only liquified with old
oil, is of sufficient force to discuss the matter into vapors which is waxed
blow.

But then the affected parts, must be fomented with warm water, and scarified.

But if it shall seem (...) this to do then it is convenient to (...) forth
with the moist medicine of Phinichini melted, whereunto you must add wine, and
the next day you must leave away the wine.

And if an Herisipelas shall happen unto us to be cured which has been made
cold by unskillful, Surgions immoderately cooling the same, in so ^ch that it
wareth black, then must we use both (...) and scarification. Which if we do
not, we p^ into the melted medici^ Cal^ Viua.

But if the pacient be of a tender and delicate constitution, we use to wash
the same. Also the ioyse of Co^iander mo^teth much being ^axed with the Ce^ote
made of Oil of Roses.

And therefore to these and such like affects, there shall a number of other
(...) be showed in this treatise following.

Some of like virtue, and diverse of more effect then Phinichinium. More over
against the gri^fe^ where there is conflixion, or flowing of hum^s, this may
well ^e (...) of all (...).

And that which has (...) then, was h^ed for.

For it happened on a time, a (...) thigh was nigh the share impostumed, by
reason of a raw inf^ation all (...) the ori^ce that the (...) to the sh^e, and
so forth, of the pl^ and the flux that was setteled in the thigh, was
e^ac^ted in continuance of time.

But there followed a (...) disp^siti^ of a Fi^u^ under the skin of the whole
thigh. In so much that we de^ifed to open the (...) nigh to (...).

Whereby the matter might the better be expelled, (...) and the (...) medicine
that we put in; ^ght have the easier way to penetrate.

But when we loosed the thigh the day foolowing, and had determined to cut it,
we found all fallen dry, and void of moisture.

Therefore all men may know, that it stood with good reason to use the medicine
both the next day, and likewise, the days following.

For so much as the part waxed every day better colored, and every where
founder then before. After that I had in this case cured this young man, I
cured with this medicine, many romaticke affects, even such as had but one
orifice, and the same inwarly, and in the manner of a Fistulae, and that could
not be conglutinated. And I do will al men not to leave off this use of ye
medicine, although for many days it seem to yield no evident healp. For that,
that it may afterward sometime, even in some one day, at once show some
universal and most notable commodity.

Wherefore ye may boldly use always this medicine in rhumatick affects, and in
tenter bodies, as in Children, or in women, mixed after the manner aforesaid,
namely putting in of the Chalciteos iiij.

But in a strong and hard body, put in more according to the measure of their
excess, either ounce i. or two, that their may be of the Chalciteos, v. or vi.
ounce. And of each of the other two li.iii. to wit of old oil, and Argenti
Spuma. And of old grease li.ii. which the Appoticaries call Auxungia.

But in the diseases that come of rheumes, let it be melted with sweet oil,
neither too new, nor too old.

And use of the wine that is tarte, and of a mean age. This medicine
reprooueth the vain trifling of Thessalus, yelding most effectuous help, and
it is compounded of things that are endued with contrary qualities.

From the which if ye take away one sort, none of the effects aforesaid shall
follow.

For by relaxatiue simples only without astrictiues, it brings to rheumatick
affects, little co^modie. Nor yet to beginning, or increasing inflammations,
neither can it have the virtue, to assuage pain, or to discuss. Relaxatiues
without astrictio^ whose office is to mollify things hard, and it will
moreover perfectly souple, and moderately mollify, if the oil and grease that
is put therein be not too old.

The medicine therefore that Mnasseus made has both oil, Spuma Argenti, and
Adeps, together of equal quantity. But it is most contrary to beginning and
increasing inflamacions, howbeit this our medicine has all that Mnasseu
medicine has to wit, Spuma Argenti, Adpes, and Oleum. But if it have therein
no astrictiues, it weakneth the parts, and dissolueth their strength, by
reason whereof they are made to the flowing of humors.

For you may know that the parts, of the body do not alwaie by reason of
immoderate heat suffer fluxes, but yt the same chances rarely.

But that their weakness does breed such griefs, which for the most part
proceeds of a cold intemperature.

Therefore if any man will moysten and heat those parts with relaxatiue
medicines, they shall be utterly dissolved thereby and made weak.

And again if any man will vehemently constrain tumors in rheumatick griefs,
he shall not at the first seem to profit, but the remains he shall make
rebellious and Scirrhous, for such affects admit not in deed the applcation
of things that be too astringent.

For that they are by them molested with pain and extention. But all pains
does vex and molest the inflamed parts. And gives occasion of fluxes,
allthough the pacient be not affected with any rheumatick intemperature. But
it is no maruaill at all though Thessalus (who is inexpert in the works of the
art of medicine, and knows not by reason how to find out diseases) be
ignorant in the cures of inflammations. But you, who have often seen in many
griefs, most manifest healpes, as well of Phenichini, as also of other
medicines that consist of contrary virtues, must endeavor (where you have no
co^pound medicines in remedies,) to confect medicines by the same method of
such simples as the Country yields. Namely to use when you suspect the
coming of an inflammation. Or when it is already begun, to use medicines more
astringent. But in the state and declination, such as do mollify and digest.
And yet must you always mix together both the faculties repercussiue, and
discussiue.

Unless it be when the flux is thoroughly stayed, and that the dody is empty.
For then may you safely have recourse to the digestiues virtue. Even as in the
beginning, you may aptplie repercussiues. etc.

FINIS.
John Read Surgeon, to the friendly Reader.
AMongst other, there be two several causes (good Reader) which moved me to
enterprise, and publish the translation hereof. Partly, because of mine own
exercise and commodity. But chiefly and especially, for the commodity,
utility, and profit of thy ^atiue Country, the aduanncement and benefit
whereof, every man is bound both by nature and conscience to study for, by all
means possible to the uttermost of his power: and for that purpose, to
distribute according to the greatness or smalnesse of the talent ministered and
lent unto him: to the end that the same (be it never so little) if it may in
any wise profit, do not remain in him as dead and frustrate: but rather that
it be bestowed forth to increase and fructify: Considering in deed that as
Plato says.

Non solum nobis nati sumus, or^usque nostri patrem patria vendicat, partem
parents, partem ^mici.

And therefore Gentle Reader, I have over and besides the Books of A^ques, and
the book of John Ardern of the Fistulae, set foo^th unto thy use, the perfect
cure of the Gar^ncle, with Hall of Northfolke, his cure of the Fistulae, which
both were given me of a gentleman being my pacient of a certain grief, who
being cured, in recompense of my good will, gave it me, and having read, and
considered the same to be both learned, and method all, not knowing whether it
were a translation out of any aucth^r, or a collection of some learned and
skillful man.

But knowing that none as yet has written of the ^me in the English tongue, and
considering how nece^arie a thing it is, I thought it convenient to impart the
same unto my Country. And besides I have thereunto added the composition of
the Emplaister Chalciteos. For although I have red his composition and diverse
aucthors, yet of none, so at large as of Galen him self.

For it appears he was not only studious for the inuenting and compounding
the same, but also very careful and painful to alter the same into diverse
forms and bodies, to serve very necessary unto diverse griefs and
Infirmities.

But calling to mind that most excellent Physician, that feared, that in
writing a compendious doctrine for the curing of sickness, he should but
loose his labor, for as much as no man almost did endeavor himself to the
finding of truth, but that all men did so esteem riches, possessions,
authority, and pleasures, that they supposed them which were studious in any
part of wisdom, to be mad or distract of their wits. For as much as they
deemed the chief sapience, (which is knowledge of things belonging as well to
God, as to man) to have no being.

Since this noble writer found that lack in his time, when there flourished in
sundry Countries, a great multitude of men, excellent in all kinds of
learning, as it does appear by some of their works, why should I think my
self injured, if I should taste of he same cup, as my predecessors, and
other good men of my Country have come. Of whom I will repeat a few, who, in
my time have abidden the hot and fiery assaults of Mo^s sect.

As namely M. Thomas Gale. M. John Hall, M. John Bannister, Master William
Clowes, with others which in our time both written. For being on a time in
company, by chance it was told me unto my face, that there were too many
books set soorth in the English tongue, and that our books did more harm then
good, and that the Art thereby is made common. For that quoth he, every
Gentleman is as well able to reason therein, as our selves. A thing truly to be
lamented, for if heretofore, Emperors, kings, princes, dukes Earls, Lords,
Barrons, Knights, besides diverse Gentlemen, has not only red and practiced
the same, but also greatly augemented the knowledge thereof. And I could well
wish in these days it were better looked into, both of Nobles, Gentles,
Justices, and also of good Captains, for then the common weal should not
only be furnished of good and learned Surgions, but also her Majesty the
better served in the wars, as well by Sea as by Land.

And besides, those that are Surgions, would better follow their books and
practice, if it were but for shame, that these Gentlemen should not discover
their blind practice, and foolish ignorance. And so bring this ancient and
famous, art into great credit, which now (by means of gredie gripes, and
devouring Caterpillars, who only contemn learning) is brought to great
infamy, and scandal.

But there be that can say what need we care for books, as long as we can
when need is, call unto us vj. viij. or ten of our friends to assist us, who
are and shall be our best books.

But I demand of these, what if God send a plague, and take away these books
who are mortal. Or if these books should be pressed into her majesty's ships
and so be disseuered? or what if one of these should happen into the country,
where no such helps are, where were then their knowledge. Might not a man well
think their patients to be (as Hippocrates terms them) the Children of
fortune? and that they are cured by chance? but not by art. And therefore it
was not without cause that Master John Hall in his verses set after the third
treatise of anatomy, uses these words, Wherefore of truth I can not cease,
to meruell much at Momus sect:
Since nothing can their wits releace,
with ignorance, so much infect.
For what a mome was he that said,
these booke-men can but talk and prate:
And we are they that with our aid,
do all the cures in each estate.
An other says I can not talk,
but I will work even with the best,
Thus stubburnelie these buserds walk,
upon their blind customs that rest.
For if their talk any truth had,
a blind man might colors decerne,
And every fool and peuish lad,
might doctors be and never learn.
Then it is no time to sleep,
where grows such noisome weeds:
As does bewray themselves,
by foul and filthy deeds,
Such hideous haggs with tongus that stings
declares a poisoned mind:
And who so does them rightly mark,
these sayings true shall find.
For like as serpents subtellie,
lies lurking in their enne,
Devising mischeues privily,
so does these kind of men.
Pursue virtue full egerlie,
even with a Judas kiss,
Saying forsooth their foolies does,
deserve the golden fleece.
But there is no beast in wilderness,
in mallis can excel:
Such secret foes, which mischeife sowes,
the fire brands of hell.
Whose flattering spech, and sewgered words,
with smiling in the face:
Be tokeneth such are Tigers whellps,
and of some dogged race.


THose kind of serpents which do nothing else but pick quarrels with
authors, I would advise either to speak themselves, or if their ignorance
will not let them, to lay their finger on their mouths till other men tell
their tale, and not to make their harvest of other men's offenses unwillingly
committed, while they themselves rest unable to do any whit of good. And thus
good reader I will end, expecting thy favorable acceptacion of these my
labors, which expectation of mine (if it be not frustrate) I shall be further
encouraged to impart the rest of my studies to thy commodity. Beseching the
almighty God to bless both thee and me, with increase of knowledge, and give
us all grace to serve him.

John Read.

The oath of Hippocratus which he gave unto his desiples and scollers, which
professing Physic and Chirurgerie, is very worthy to be observed and kept
faithfully, of every true and honest Artests, althought he himself were but
a heathen man, and without the true knowledge of the living God, yet for his
noble and excellent skill in Physic and Chirurgerie, he ought not to be
forgotten of us his posterity, but to be had in an honorable remembrance for
ever.
I Swear by Appollo the Physician, by Aesculapuis, by Higea, and Panacea: yea
and I take to witness all the Gods and Goddesses: that to my power I will
vprightlie observe this my oath: I will account my Master which taught me
this art, my father: in his case he shall command my life, and whatsoever
he needs I will give it him. As for his Children I will hold his sons as
my brethren, and if they desire the knowledge of this art, I will teach it
them without stipent or covenant. I will instruct my sons, and my masters
sonns, yea and such as by hand wrighting are my scholars and sworn and adicted
to Physic, the precepts, rules, and whatsoever else belongs to the
knowledge of the said profession, or touching the cure of diseases. I will
appoint them a diet, to my power: and in my judgment commodius. And I will
defend them from hurt and injury, neither shall the requests and petitions of
any man, be they never so earnest, so much prevail with me to give poison to
ane person to drink, neither will I give my counsel or consent thereto: in
like manner I will refuse the mi^stration of any suppositorie, to the hurting
or corrupting of the child, in the time of my life. And in my profession, I
will show my self pure, chaste, and holy. I will never cut any person that has
the stone, but will give place to stone-cutters, in the cure thereof, what
house soever I come into, it shall be to the patient his profit. I will offer
no injury voluntarelie to any man. I will eschew all wickedness to my power,
especially the vice of Venerie, whether it be my chance to deal with men or
women, freeman or bondseruaut, whatsoever in any cure I shall either see,
hear, or know, or in any other matter, yea though I be not called to the cure
my self. I will keep it secret and unrevealed, so that silence therein be
expedient. God grant that as I truly observe and keep this my oath, I may
have prosperous success in my Art and living. And according to the
performance hereof, each man may sound my perpetual praise. But if I
transgress and break the same, I wish to God that in all my cures and other
affairs I may have evil success, and that every one may discommend me to
the worlds end.

The Table
OF the wounds in the head which happen as well by incision, as by contrision,
which nevertheless have not perced beyond Pericranium, or Almocrati. fol. 1.
Of contusion, with fracture of the bone, without any apparent wound. fol. 5.
Of the fracture of the skul. fol. 6. Of the use of the Trepan, or Percer. fol.
9. Of wounds made in the head by incision. fol. 13. Of contusions in the
heads of infants and children. fo. 17. Of curing wounds in the face. fol. 21.
Of wounds in the breast. fol. 23. Of curing Fistulaes which were wont to be
always left in the wounds of the breast ill healed, whereof it comes to
pass, that the patients do fall into a wasting of the lu^gs, and the fever
Hectica, or consumption. fol. 29. A decoction or apozime for the wounds of the
breast and lunges, and for those that are in a consumption. fol. 31. Of curing
of the Cancer happening in women's breasts. fol. 32 Of wounds in the belly, and
the parts thereof, with penetration and without. fol. 38 Of wounds simple and
co^pounde. fol. 42. Of ulcers, and of the cure of the same. fol. 47. Of hollow
ulcers, and their cure. fol. 52. of the use of the hollow tent. fol. 53 of
ulcers in the head which grow either of a schirrous hard sweeling, like
kernells, or by reason of the french Pox, with the corruption of the bone.
fol. 55. Of curing the french pox. fol. 58. The order of curing the french
pox, by fumigation or perfume. fol. 61. Of the curing the french pox, with
the decoction of Guaicum. fol. 62. Of curing the french pox with the decoction
of Rubia Pacilla. fol. 64. Of curing of a distort foot of a child form his
nativity. fol. 66 An example of wounds in the head, to the curing. fol. 68. An
example of Barriga. fol. 69. An example of a certain familiar friend of
Lodowick zapata. fol. 70. A general rule for physicians and Surgeons. fol. 71.
A treatise of the Caruncle or Carnositie, growing in the yard or neck of the
bladder. fol. 72. The signs and tokens of the Caruncle. ibidem. To know the
Caruncle from the stone. fol. 73. The way of curing the Caruncle. ibidem. A
treatise of the Fistulae. fol. 81. Of apostumes in ano, causing fistulae, and
of the cure of them. fol. 82. Of the definition of a fistuale, and the place
that it is bred in, and whether it be curable or not. fol. 85. Of the cure of
the Fistulae in ano. ibidem. An other manner of working in the same Fistulae,
and the cure, with diverse examples. fol. 87. Of Bubo within the fundament, and
the cause why it is incurable. fol. 90 Of the fistulae in the fingers, and the
hardness of the same cure. fol. 92. Of the fistulae in the lower joints of
the fingers, and in the legs, knees, feet, and anckles, with corruption of
the bones, and hardness of the cures. fol. 93. Of the manner of the cure of
one that had the fistulae in the inner part of his legs above the anckle.
fol. 94. A treatise of apostumes in the bowing of the knee, disposed to
fistulae. fol. 94 Of the manner of a full hard cure, in sweeling of a man's
arm. fol. 95. Of a man that had his leg swollen, the which I cured in this
wise. fol. 96. Of the curing of a man that was smitten on the shin. ibidem. Of
the (...) of (...), and the cure of them. fol. 99. Of the properties of Vitri^
Attramentum. fol. 98. Of the properties of Alumen. fol. 99. Of the properties
of Verdigrece. fol. ibid. Of the properties of Arsnicke and Auripigmentu^. fo.
99 Of the properties of Lici^. 100. Of the making of Pul^ fine pari. fol. 101.
Of the making of Sanguis Veneris, and the working of it. fol. 103. Of the
making of (...) Populi, and the ^king of it. fol. 103. Emplast^ Nerbon. fo. ibi
Of the prope^ of Walwort, and the making thereof, fol. 103. The making of
Valence of (...). fo. ^ The making of Valence of wormwood. fol. 104. Pills or
powder of Antioch ibidem. To draw out Iron or scales of bones, thorn, and such
like. fol. 105. Of Mollifiyng medicines. ibidem. Vnguentu^ de Palma, with other
unguents and pouders consolidatiue, and sigillatiue. fol. 106. Emplaisters for
Marmolls and ulcers. ibidem Vnguentum Arabicum. fol. 107. (...) Vnguentorum.
ibi. The true methood of the (...) practiced and ^ed of one Hall of Norfolk.
fo. 108 Certain bales which are used to cure ulcers in Ano. ibidem. The
description of the Emplaister called Dia Chalcite^, (...) and virtues. fo. 109
FINIS.
John Read, of London Surgeon.


