TO THE DESERVING MEMORY OF MY WORTHY PATRON Sir Walter Aston, Knight of the
honorable Order of the Bath, I consecrate my short Poem.

TO THE READER.
TO thee that shall peruse this Poem, and not conversant in the histories of
those times, (I am persuaded) these brief Annotations shall not be altogether
impertinent. By reason the letter (without my knowledge) was chosen too large
for the paper, I am constrained to do as men sometime preparing great bankets,
and deceived of table room, to send in one dish what should have served to set
out many; as to put in this one preface what should have been in marginall
notes stuck in sundry places against the stanzaes to which they are
apropriate: as this.

The 9. page, the 2. stanza, For having Boston business etc. The town of
Boston sued to the Pope for the reauthorizing their Haven, which had been
suspended from that Sea, selecting one Chambers for that business, who being
on his way at Antwerpe, finding Cromwell, a man industrious and experienced,
made choice of him as his assistant, whom he wan to go along with him to Rome.

The 11. page, the 1. stanza, Russell and Pace etc. both great States men of
that time, and employed by Henry the 8. in foreign Intelligence, after both
Secretaries, and Russell by him created Earl of Bedford.

The 15. page, the 3. stanza, Where learned More and Gardener etc. For the
former so famous, as who knows not I hold him unworthy to know; the latter,
Stephen Gardener, after Bishop of Winchester, a learned and politic Prelate,
and one that was in the end a chief instrument of Cromwels overthrow.

The 20. page, the 2. stanza, Bedford whose life etc. This was that Russell, as
I have said before, by Henry the 8. created Earl of Bedford; as in the same
stanza, And reverend Hayles, etc. Sir Christopher Hayles Master of the Rolls,
a man in great grace with the King, and an especial favorer of Cromwell.

The 23. page, the 1. stanza, line 2. Of hospitable Friscobald and me etc.
This Friscobald a Florentine Merchant, relieuing Cromwell, being in great
necessity, who after being Chancellor of England he honorably requited. This
story contains some 14. stanzaes.

The 28. page, the 3. stanza, And the King late obedient to her laws, against
the Clerk of Germany etc. King Henry the 8. wrote a book against Luther,
which book afterward Luther (forgetting all kingly titles) roughly answered.

The 34. page, the 1. stanza, Pierce the wise Plowman etc. The moral of
Contrition and the Friar, the matter of which is Pierce Plowmans in his vision,
the workmanship thereof wholly mine own, containing about 10. stanzaes.

FINIS.
TO MASTER MICHAEL DRAYTON his Friend.
I Would my verses could thy Book advance
B'oue these two fiends; Envy, and Ignorance.
Thy subject of such worth, thy pen so smooth,
Cannot escape the euer-sharpned tooth
Of that first monster; who himself deceiues,
Whilst like a Cankar, hid among the leaves,
He seeks to o'respread, consume, at least deface,
The beauty of thy Muse, and Cromwels grace.
Such as have been thy Apes (and shall not be
Other then so) shall idely carpe at thee:
So much has lewdnes won upon this Age,
Such the contempt, the impudence, the rage
Of every ragged Rymer, who would be
Within himself Monarch of Poesy.
But let them perish, whilst thy works thee raise
Unto a greater fortune, then men's praise.
I. Cook.

To his worthily dear friend Master Michael Drayton.
HOw those great titles that employ our breath
To deck the marble, where our ashes lie,
Are trophies of the harms, that in our death
Best do express our golden misery:
This Oracle thy Muse divinely reads
In Cromwels stars, that could ambition see,
She would not wish their seeming-happie dreads,
That nearest Jove and his proud thunder be.
So short a period Fate has limited
To giddie power, that breathes but grace and air,
Soon cloyed, or those that all have lauished,
Or they, who full, of getting more despair.
But thy dear times, whose happy Genius
Breathes a new life to Cromwels dying name,
And his rent honors, Envy scattred thus,
Whiles in the book of that great Herald Fame,
Naught can them hurt, nor times consuming rust,
Nor the angry frown, that idely we adore;
This Pyramid shall stand, when in the dust
Their names are laid, the Diadem that wore.
Henry Lucas.

TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND Michael Drayton upon his Poem.
TO thee true image of Eternity
Time; that reuolues the graven leaves of Fate,
(Yet give men Lethe sted of Memory,
Because injurious to all humane state)
Cromwell appears apparelled in verse,
The fit'st and noblest ornament of fame,
The doom of Envy gravely to reuerse,
That else to darkness had condemned his name:
For Time thou know it only is the Muse
That Man to immortality can raise.
O Greatness how thy self do thou abuse,
With the slight soothing of poor verbal praise?
Here shall you find Factions (which are the rent,
And disuniting of a league combined)
Make hauock in a civil government;
The grace of Kings unconstant as the wind.
For as corruptiue bodies do depend
On humorous matter, motions, and their pauses;
So States begin, have progress, and do end,
Because they simpathize with natural causes.
Here shall you find (like music shifting mood)
How times do change: vicissitude and sway
Of men, and manners; and by self decay
How each thing lives: force not the envious brood
Renowned friend, but triumph in desert,
Judgment has led thy Pen, and Truth thy Art.
Christopher Brook.

THE LEGEND OF GREAT CROMWELL.
A Waked, and trembling betwixt rage and dread
With the loud slander (by the impious time)
That of my actions every where is spread,
Through which to honor falsely I should clime,
From the sad dwelling of th'vntimely dead,
To quit me of that execrable crime,
Cromwell appears his wretched plight to show,
Much that can tell, one much that once did know.
Roughly not made up in the common mould,
That with the vulgar vilely I should die,
What thing so strange of Cromwell is not told?
What man more praised? who more co^demn'd then I?
That with the world when I am waxed old,
Most it were unfit that fame of me should lie
With fables vain my history to fill,
Forcing my good, excusing of my ill.
You that but hearing of my hated name,
Your ancient malice instantly bewray,
And for my sake your ill deserved blame
Upon my legend publicly shall lay,
Would you forbear to blast me with defame,
Might I so mean a privilege but pray,
He that three ages has endured your wrong,
Hear him a little that has heard you long.
Since Romes sad ruin here by me began,
Who her Religion plucked up by the root,
Of the false world such hate for which I wan,
Which still at me her poisned'st darts does shoot;
That to excuse it, do the best I can,
Little I fear my labor me will boot:
Yet will I speak my troubled heart to ease,
Much to the mind, her self it is to please.
O powerful number, from whose stricter law
Heart-mouing music did receive the ground
Which men to fair civility did draw
With the brute beast when lawless he was found:
O if according to the wiser saw
There be a high divinity in sound,
Be now abundant prosp'rously to aid
The pen prepared my doubtful case to plead.
Putney the place made blessed in my birth,
Whose meanest cottage simply me did shroud,
To me as dearest of the English earth;
So of my bringing that poor village proved,
Though in a time when never less the dearth
Of happy wits, yet mine so well allowed
That with the best she boldly durst confer
Him that his breath acknowledged from her.
Twice flowed proud Thames as at my coming wood,
Striking the wondering borderers with fear,
And the pale Genius of that aged flood
Unto my mother laboring did appear,
And with a countenance much distracted stood,
Threatening the fruit her pained womb should bear:
My speedy birth being added thereunto,
Seemed to foretell that much I came to do,
That was reserved for those worser days,
As the great ebb unto so long a flow,
When what those ages formerly did raise,
This when I lived did lastly overthrow,
And that great'st labor of the world did seize,
Only for which immedicable blow
Due to that time me dooming heaven ordai'nd,
Wherein confusion absolutely reigned.
Vainly yet noted this prodigious sign,
Often predictions of most fearful things,
As plagues, or war, or great men to decline,
Rising of Commons, or the death of Kings;
But some strange news though ever it divine,
Yet forth them not immediately it brings,
Until the'ffects men afterward did learn,
To know that me it chiefly did concern.
Whilst yet my father by his painful trade,
Whose labored Anuile only was his fee,
Whom my great towardnes strongly did persuade
In knowledge to have educated me:
But death did him unluckily invade,
Ere he the fruits of his desire could see,
Leaving me young, then little that did know
How me the heavens had purposed to bestow.
Hopeless as helpless most might me suppose,
Whose meannesse seemed their abject breath to draw:
Yet did my breast that glorious fire enclose,
Which their dull purblind ignorance not saw,
Which still is settled upon outward shows,
The vulgars judgment ever is so raw,
Which the unworthiest sottishly do love
In their own region properly that move.
Yet me my fortune so could not disguise,
But through this cloud were some that did me know,
Which then the rest more happy or more wise,
Me did relieve when I was driven low,
Which as the staier by which I first did rise,
When to my height I afterward did grow,
Them to requite my bounties were so hie,
As made my fame through every ear to fly.
That height and Godlike purity of mind
Rests not still, where titles most adorn
With any, nor peculiarly confinde
To names, and to be limited does scorn:
Man does the most degenerate from kind,
Richest and poorest both alike are borne;
And to be always pertinently good,
Follows not still the greatness of our blood.
Pity it is that to one virtuous man
That mark him lent to gentry to advance,
Which first by noble industry he wan,
His baser issue after should inhance,
And the rude slave not any good that can,
Such should thrust down by what is his by chance:
As had not he been first that him did raise,
Nere had his great heir wrought his grandsires praise.
How weak art thou that make it thy end
To heap such worldly dignities on thee,
When upon fortune only they depend,
And by her changes governed must be?
Besides the dangers still that such attend,
Liuel'est of all men purtraied out in me,
When that for which I hated was of all,
Soon'st from me fled, scarce tarrying for my fall.
You that but boast your ancestors proud style,
And the large stem whence your vain greatness grew,
When you your selves are ignorant and vile,
Nor glorious thing dare actually pursue,
That all good spirits would utterly exile,
Doubting their worth should else discover you,
Giving your selves unto ignoble things;
Base I proclaim you though derived from Kings.
Virtue but poor, God in this earth does place
Against the rude world to stand up in his right,
To suffer sad affliction and disgrace,
Not ceasing to pursue her with despite:
Yet when of all she is accounted base,
And seeming in most miserable plight,
Out of her power new life to her does take,
Least then dismayed when all do her forsake.
That is the man of an undaunted spirit,
For her dear sake that offers him to dye,
For whom, when him the world does disinherit,
Looks upon it with a pleased eye,
What Is done for virtue thinking it does merit,
Daring the proudest menaces defy,
More worth then life, how ere the base world rate him,
Beloved of heaven, although the earth does hate him.
Injurious time, unto the good unjust,
O how may weak posterity suppose
Ever to have their merit from the dust,
Against them thy partiality that knows
To thy report O who shall ever trust,
Triumphant arches building unto those
Alowd the longest memory to have,
That were the most unworthy of a grave?
But my clear mettle had that powerful heat,
As it not turned with all that fortune could:
Nor when the world me terriblest did threat,
Could that place win which my hie thoughts did hold,
That waxed still more prosperously great,
The more the world me strove to have controlled,
On my own Columes constantly to stand,
Without the false help of another hand.
My youthful course thus wisely did I steer,
T'auoid those rocks my wrack that else did thret:
Yet some fair hopes from far did still appear,
If that too much my wants me did not let:
Wherefore my self above my self to bear,
Still as I grew I knowledge strove to get,
To perfect that which in the Embryon was,
Whose birth I found time well might bring to pass.
But when my means to fail me I did find,
My self to travel presently betook,
As much distasteful to my noble mind,
That the vile world into my wants should look,
And of my self industriously inclinde,
To measure others actions with my book,
I might my judgment rectify thereby,
In matters that were difficult and hie.
When lo it hapt that fortune as my guide,
Of me did with such providence dispose,
That The English Merchants then who did reside
At Antwerpe, me their Secretary chose,
(As though in me to manifest her pride)
Whence to those principalities I rose,
To pluck me down, whence afterward she feared
Beyond her power that almost she had reared.
When first the wealthy Netherlands me trained
In wise commerce most proper to the place,
And from my country carefully me wain'd,
That with the world did chiefly win me grace,
Where great experience happily I gained;
Yet here I seemed but tutored for a space,
For hie employment otherwise ordained,
Till which the time I idely entertained.
For having Boston business in hand,
The charge thereof on Chambers being laid,
Coming to Flanders hapt to understand
Of me, whom he requested him to aid;
Of which when I the benefit had scand,
Weighing what time at Antwerpe I had staid,
Quickly me won fair Italy to try,
Under a cheerful and more luckie sky:
For what the meanest clearly makes to shine,
Youth, wit, and courage, all in me concur
In every project, that so powerful tryne
By whose kind working bravely I did stir,
Which to each hie and glorious design
(The time could offer) freely did me spur,
As forcing fate some new thing to prepare
(Showing success) t'attempt that could me dare:
Where now my spirit got roomth it self to show,
To the fairest pitch does make a gallant flight,
From things that too much earthly were and low,
Strongly attracted by a Genuyne light,
Where higher still it every day did grow;
And being in so excellent a plight,
Craved but occasion happily to prove
How much it sat each vulgar spirit above.
The good success the affairs of England found,
Much praised the choice of me that had been made:
For where most men the depth durst hardly found,
I held it nothing boldly through to wade
My self, and through the strait'st ways I woond.
So could I act, so well I could persuade
As merely Iouiall, me to mirth apply,
Composed of freedom and alacrity.
Not long it was ere Rome of one did ring
(Hardly shall Rome so full days see again)
Of freemens catches to the Pope I sing,
Which wan much license to my countrymen,
Thither the which I was the first did bring,
That were unknown to Italy till then:
Light humors them when judgment does direct,
Even of the wise win plausible respect.
And those from home that pensions were allowed,
And here did for Intelligence remain,
Under my power themselves were glad to shroud,
Russell and Pace yea oftentimes were feign,
When as their names they durst not have auow'd,
Me into their society t'retaine,
Rising before me mighty as they were,
Great though at home, yet did they need me there.
In foreign parts nere friends I yet forsake
That had before been deeply bound to me,
And would again I use of them should make,
But still my stars command I should be free,
And all those offers lightly from me shake,
Which to requite I fettred else might be,
And though that often great perils me oppunge,
And means were weak, my mind was ever strong.
And those great wants fate to my youth did tie
Me from delights of those rich countries drive,
Thereby enforced with painful industry
Against affliction manfully to strive
Under her burden faintly not to lie,
But since my good I hardly must deryue,
Unto the same to make my self a way
Through all the power against me she could lay.
As a Comedian where my life I led,
For so a while my need did me constrain,
With other my poor countrymen (that played)
Thither that came in hope of bettter gain,
Whereas when fortune seemed me low to tred
Under her feet, she set me up again,
Until the use me bad her not to fear
Her good and ill that patiently could bear.
Till Charles the fifth th'emperiall power did bend
Against Rome, which Burbon skilfully did guide,
Which sore declining Italy did rend;
For th'right that him her holiness denide,
Wholly her self enforced to defend
Against him that justly punished her pride,
To which my self I lastly did betake,
Seeing thereof what fortune meant to make.
And at the siege with that great General served,
When he did girt her stubborn waste with steel,
Within her walls who well near being starved,
And that with faintnes she began to reele,
Showing her self a little as she swaru'd:
First her then noting I began to feel,
She whose great power so far abroad did roame,
What in her self she truly was at home.
That the great school of the false world was then,
Where here is their subtle practices did vie,
Amongst that mighty confluence of men,
French plots propt up by English policy,
The German powers, false shuffling, and again
All countermin'd by skillful Italy,
Each one in possibility to win,
Great rests were up and mighty hands were in.
^ere first to work my busy brain was set,
My inclination finding it to please
This stirring world which strongly still did whet)
To temper in so dangerous assaies,
Which did strange forms of policies beget;
Besides in times so turbulent as these,
Wherein my studies hopefully did bend
Unto that point the wisest made their end:
And my experience happily me taught
unto the secrets of those times to see,
From whence to England afterward I brought
Those slights of state deliu'red unto me,
^n t'which were then but very few that sought,
Nor did with th'umour of that age agree,
After did great and fearful things effect,
Whose secret working few did then suspect.
When though it were long it happened yet at last
Some hopes me homeward secretly allured,
When many perils strangely I had past,
As many sad calamities endured
Beyond the Moon, when I began to cast
By my rare parts what place might be procured,
If they at home were to the mighty known,
How they would seem compared with their own
Or if that there the great should me neglect,
As I the worste that vainly did not fear,
To my experience how to gain respect
In other countries that do hold it dear,
And now occasion seemed to reject,
Whilst still before me other rising were,
And some themselves had mounted to the sky,
Little before unlike to thrive as I.
When now in England Bigamie with blood
Lately begot by luxury and pride,
In their great'st fulness peremptory stood;
Some there unto that diligently pride,
Stilly were fishing in that troubled flood
For future changes wisely to provide,
Finding the world so rankly then to swell,
That till it brake it never could be well.
^^t floting long upon my first arryue,
^hil'st many doubts me seemed to appall,
^^ke to a bark that with the tide does drive,
^^uing not left to fasten it with all,
^^us with the time by suffering I do strive
^^to what harbor doubtful yet to fall;
Until enforced to put it to the chance,
Casting the fairest my fortune to advance.
^aking my self to mighty Wolsey known,
^^a^ Atlas which the government up stayed,
which from mean place in little time was grown
^p unto him, that weight upon him laid,
and being got the nearest to his throne,
^e the more easly the gre^^ kingdom swai'd,
Leaving there on his wearded self to breath,
Whilst even the greatest fair sat him beneath.
^here learned Mo^e and Gardener I met,
^^en in those times immatchable for wit,
^ble that were the (...) spirit to whet,
and did my humor excellently fit,
^ to their rank that worthily did get
^here as their proud (...) it or to sit,
O (...) excellence to (...) is the mother,
Wit does as ^reathles one beget another.
This Founder of the palaces of Kings,
Whose veins with more then usual spirit were fild^
A man ordained to the mighti'st things,
In Oxford then determining to build
To Christ a College, and together brings
All that thereof the great foundation wills,
There me imploies, whose industry he found
Worthy to work upon the noblest ground.
Yet in the entrance wisely that did fear
Coin might fall short, yet with this work on fire,
Wherefore such houses as Religious were
Whose being no necessity require,
But that the greater very well might bear,
From Rome the Card'nall cunningly did hier,
Winning withal his Sovereign to consent,
Both coloring with so holy an intent.
This like a symptom to a long disease
Was the forerunner to this mighty fall,
And but too unadvisedly did ceaze
Upon the part that ruinated all,
Which had the work been of so many days
And more again, recover hardly shall:
But lo it sunk which time did long uphold,
Where now it lies even leueld with the mould.
Thus thou great Rome here first wast overthrown,
Thy future harms that blindly could not see,
And in this work they only were thine own,
Whose knowledge lent that deadly wound to thee,
Which to the world before had they not shown,
Nere had those secrets been descri'd by me,
Nor by thy wealth so many from the plow
Worn those hie types wherein they flourish now.
After when as the Cardinal again
Into hie favor with the King me brought,
With whom my self so well I did demean,
As that I seemed to exercise his thought,
And his great liking strongly did retain
With what before my Master me had taught,
From whose example by those Cells were small,
Sprang the subversion lastly of them all.
Yet many a let was cast into the way,
Wherein I ran so steddily and right,
And many a snare my adversaries lay,
Much wrought they with their power, much with their slight,
Wisely perceiving that my smallest stay
Fully required the utmost of their might,
To my ascendant hasting me to clime,
There as the first predomining the time,
Knowing what wealth me earnestly did woo,
Which I through Wolsey happened had to find,
And could the path most perfectly unto,
The King thereafter earnestly inclined,
Seeing besides what after I might do
If so great power me fully were assigned,
By all their means against me strongly wrought,
Laboring as fast to bring their Church to naught.
Whilst to the King continually I sue,
And in this business faithfully did stir
Strongly t'approue my judgment to be true
Against those who most supposed me to err,
Nor the least means which any way I knew
Might grace me, or my purposes prefer
Did I omit, till won I had his ear,
Most that me marked when least he seemed to hear
This wound to them thus violently given,
Envy at me her sharpest darts does roue,
Affecting the supremacy of heaven,
As the first Giants warring against Jove,
Heaped hills on hills, the Gods till they had driven
The meanest shapes of earthly things to prove:
So must I shift from them against me rose,
Mortal their hate, as mighty were my foes.
But their great force against me wholly bent
Prevailed upon my purposes so far,
That I my ruin scarsely could prevent,
So momentarie worldly favors are,
That till the utmost of their spite was spent,
Had not my spirit maintained a manly war,
Risen they had when laid I had been low,
Upon whose ruin after I did grow.
When the great King their strange reports that took
That as pernicious as they potent were,
Which at the fair growth of my fortune struck,
Whose deadly malice blame me not to fear,
Me at the first so violently shook,
That they this frame were likely down to bear,
If resolution with a settled brow
Had not vpheld my peremptory vow.
Yet these encounters thrust me not awry,
Nor could my courses force me to forsake,
After this ship wrack I again must try
Some happier voyage hopeful still to make,
The plots that barren long we see did lie,
Some fitting season plentifully take,
One fruitful harvest frankly does restore
What many winters hindered had before.
That to account I strickly call my wit
How it this while had managed my state,
My soul in counsel summoning to sit,
If possible to turn the course of fate,
For ways there be the greatest things to hit,
If men could find the peremptory gate,
And since I once was got so near the brinke
More then before, it would grieve me now to sink.
Bedford whose life (some said) that I had saved
In Italy, one me that favored most,
And reverend Hayles who but occasion craved
To show his love, no less that I had cost,
Who to the King perceiving me disgraced,
Whose favor I unluckily had lost,
Both with him great, a foot set in withal
If not to stay, to quallifie my fall.
Hie their regard, yet hier was their hap,
Well near quite sunk recover me that could,
And once more get me into fortunes lap,
Which well my self might teach me there to hold,
Escaped out of so dangerous a trap,
Whose praise by me to ages shall be told,
As the two props by which I only rose,
When most suppressed, most trod on by my foes.
This me to urge the praemunire won,
Ordained in matters dangerous and hie,
In t'which the heedlesse Prelacie were run,
That back unto the Papacy did fly,
Sworn to that sea, and what before was done
Due to the King, dispensed were thereby,
In t'which first entering offered me the mean
That to throw down already that did lean.
This was to me that ouerflowing sourse,
From whence his bounties plentifully spring,
Whose speedy current with unusual force
Bare me into the bosom of the King,
By putting him into that ready course
Which soon to pass his purposes might bring,
Where those which late imperiously controld me,
Pale struck with fear stood tre^bling to behold me.
When state to me those ceremonies showed
That to so great a favorite were due,
And fortune still with honors did me load,
As though no mean she in my rising knew,
Or heaven to me more then to man had owed,
(What to the world unheard of was and new)
And was to other sparing of her store
Till she could give, or ask I could no more.
Those hie preferments he upon me laid,
Might make the world me publicly to know
Such as in judgment rightly being wai'd,
Seemed too great for me to undergo,
Nor could his hand from pouring on be stayed
Until I so abundantly did flow,
That looking down whence lately I was cloame,
Danger bid fear if further I should roame.
For first from Knighthood rising in degree,
The office of the Jewel house my lot,
After the Rowles he frankly gave to me,
From whence a privy Counselor I got,
Chose of the Garter: and the Earl to be
Of Essex: yet sufficient these not
But to the great Vicegerencie I grew,
Being a title as supreme as new.
So well did me these dignities befit,
And honor so me every way became,
As more then man I had been made for it,
Or as from me it had derived the name:
Where was that man whose love I not requit
Beyond his own imaginary aim,
Which had me succourd nerely being driven
As things to me that idely were not given?
What tongue so slow the tale shall not report
Of hospitable Friscobald and me,
And show in how reciprocal a sort
My thanks did with his courtesy agree,
When as my means in Italy were short
That me relieved, less great that would not be,
When I of England Chancellor was made,
His former bounties librally repaid?
The manner briefly gentler Muse relate,
Since often before it wisely has been told,
The sudden change of vnauoided fate,
That famous Merchant reverend Friscobald
Grew poor, and the small remnant of his state
Was certain goods to England he had sold,
Which in the hands of Creditors but bad,
Small hope to get, yet lesser means he had.
Hither his wants him forcibly constrained,
Though with long travel both by land and seas,
Led by this hope that only now remained,
Whereon his fortune finally he lays,
And if he found that friendship here were feigned,
Yet at the worst it better should him please,
Far out of sight to perish here unknown,
Then vnrelieu'd be pitied of his own.
It chanced as I toward Westminster did ride,
Among the great concourse passing to and fro,
An aged man I happily espide,
Whose outward looks much inward grief did show,
Which made me nere him, and the more I eyed
Him, me thought more precisely I should know,
Reuoluing long it came into my mind,
This was the man to me had been so kind:
Was therewithal so ioyed with his sight,
(With the dear sight of his so reverend face)
That I could scarsely keep me from t'alight,
And in mine arms him openly embrace;
Weighing yet (well) what some imagine might,
He being a stranger and the public place
Checked my affection; till some fitter hour
On him my love effectually might shower.
Never quoth I was fortune so unjust
As to do wrong unto thy noble heart,
What man so wicked could betray the trust
Of one so upright of so good desert?
And though obey necessity thou must,
As when the great'st the same to me thou art,
Let me alone the last be left of all,
That from the rest declined not with thy fall.
And calling to a Gentleman of mine,
Wise and discreet that well I knew to be,
Showed him that stranger, whose dejected eyne
Fixed on the earth nere once looked up at me,
Bid yonder man come home to me and dine
(Quoth I) bespeake him reverently (you see)
Scorn not his habit, little can thou tell
How rich a mind in those mean rags does dwell.
He with my name that kindly did him greet,
Slowly cast up his deadly-mouing eye,
That long time had been fixed on his feet,
To look no higher then his misery,
Thinking him more calamity did greet,
Or that I had supposed him some Spy,
With a deep sigh that from his heart he drew,
Quoth he his will accomplished be by you.
My man departed and the message done,
He whose sad heart with strange impressions struck,
To think upon this accident begun,
And on himself suspitiously to look,
Into all doubts he fearfully does run,
Often himself cheering often himself forsook:
Strangely perplexed unto my house does come,
Not knowing why judged nor dreading yet his doom.
My servants set his coming to attend,
That were therein not common for their skill,
Whose usage yet the former did amend:
He hoped not good, nor guilty was of ill,
But as a man whose thoughts were at an end,
Fortune (quoth he) then work on me thy will,
Wiser then man I think he were that knew
Whence this may come, or what thereof ensue.
His honored presence so did me inflame,
That though being then in presence of my Peers,
Daine not the less to meet him as he came,
(That very hardly could contain my tears)
Kindly salute him, call him by his name,
And often together ask him how he cheeres,
With still along maintaining the extreme;
Yet thought the man he had been in a dream.
At length t'wake him gently I began
With this demand, if once he did not know
One Thomas Cromwell a poor Englishman,
By him relieved when he was driven low:
When I perceived he my remembrance wan,
Yet with his tears it silently did show:
I wept for woe to see mine host distressed,
But he for joy to see his happy guest.
Him to the Lords I published by my praise,
And at my table carefully him set,
Recounting them the many sundry ways
I was unto this gentleman indebt,
How great he was in Florence in those days,
With all that grace or reverence him might get:
Which all the while yet silently he hears,
Moisting (among) his viands with his tears.
And to lend fulness lastly to his fate
Great sums I gave him, and what was his due
Made known, my self became his advocate,
And at my charge his creditors I sue,
Recovering him unto his former state:
Thus he the world began by me anew,
That shall to all posterity express
His honored bounty and my thankfulness.
But Muse recount, before thou further pass,
How this great change so quickly came about,
And what the cause of this sad downfall was,
In every part the spacious Realm throughout,
Being effected in so little space,
Leave not thereof posterity to doubt,
That with the world obscured else may be,
If in this place revealed not by thee.
If the whole land did on the Church rely,
Having full power Kings to account to call,
That to the world read only policy,
Besides Heavens keys to stop or let in all,
Let me but know from her supremacy
How she should come so suddenly to fall:
It Was more then chance sure put a hand thereto,
That had the power so great a thing to do.
Or ought there were had biding under Sun,
Who would have thought those edifices great,
Which first Religion holily begun,
The Church approved, and wisdom richly seat,
Devotion nourished, faith allowance won,
And all that them might any way complete,
Should in their ruins lastly buried lie,
But that begun and ended from the sky?
And the King late obedient to her laws,
Against the Clerk of Germany had writ,
As he that first stird in the Churches cause,
Against him greatliest that oppugned it,
And wan from her so grateful an applause,
Then in her favor chiefly that did sit,
That as the prop, whereon she only stai'th,
Him she instyl'd Defender of the faith.
But not their power, whose wisdoms them did place
In the first rank, the oracles of state,
Who that opinion strongly did embrace,
Which through the land received was of late,
Then ought at all prevailed in this case,
O powerful doom of vnauoided fate,
Whose depth not weak mortality can know,
Who can uphold what heaven will overthrow?
When time now universally did show
The power to her peculiarly annexed,
With most abundance then when she did flow,
Yet every hour still prosp'rously she wex'd,
But the world poor did by loose riots grow,
Which served as an excellent pretext,
And color gave to pluck her from her pride,
Whose only greatness suffered none beside.
Likewise to that posterity did doubt
Those at the first not rightly did adore,
Their fathers that too credulous devout
Unto the Church contributed their store,
And to recover only went about
What their great zeal had lauished before,
On her a strong hand violently laid,
Praying on that, they gave for to be prayed.
And now the King set in a course so right,
Which I for him laboriously had tract,
(Who till I learned him, did not know his might)
I still to prompt his power with me to act,
Into those secrets got so deep a sight,
That nothing lastly to his furtherance lackt,
And by example plainly to him shown,
How all might now be easly overthrown.
In taking down yet of this goodly frame
He suddenly not brake off every band,
But took the power first from the Papal name,
After a while let the Religion stand,
When lim by lim he daily did it lame,
First took a leg, and after took a hand,
Till the poor semblance of a body left,
But all should stay it, utterly bereft.
For if some Abbey happened void to fall
By death of him that the superior was,
Gain that did first Church liberty enthrall,
Only supreme, promoted to the place,
Among many bad the worst most times of all,
Under the color of some others grace,
That by the slander, from his life should spring,
Into contempt it more and more might bring.
This time from heaven when by the secret course,
Dissension universally began,
(Prevailing as a planetarie sourse)
In The Church believing, as Mahumitan,
When Luther first did those opinions nurse,
Much from great Rome in little space that wan,
It to this change so aptly did dispose,
From whose sad ruin ours so great arose.
That here that fabrique utterly did fail,
Which powerful fate had limited to time,
By whose strong law it naturally must quail,
From that proud height to which it long did clime,
Letting against it the contrary prevail,
Therein to punish some notorious crime,
For which at length just dooming heaven decreed,
That on her buildings ruin here should feed.
The Authority upon her she did take,
And use thereof in every little thing,
Finding her self how often she did forsake,
In her own bounds her never limiting,
That awful fear and due obedience brake
Which her reputed holiness did bring,
From slight regard soon brought her into hate
With those that much disliked her estate.
And that those parts she cunningly had played,
Belief unto her miracles to win,
Unto the world were every day bewrai'd,
From which the doubt did of her power begin,
Damnation yet to question what she said
Made most suspect the faith they had been in,
When their salvation easly might be bought,
Found not this yet the way that they had sought.
When those ill humors ripned to a head,
Bred by the ranknes of the plentious land,
And they not only strangely from her fled,
Bound for her ancient liberty to stand,
But what their fathers gave her being dead,
The sons raped from her with a violent hand,
And those her buildings most of all abused,
That with the weight their fathers coffins brus'd.
The wisest and most provident but build,
For time again to wastfully destroy,
The costly piles and monuments we guild,
Succeeding time shall reckon but a toy,
Vicissitude impartially wild,
The goodliest things be subject to annoy,
And what one age did studiously maintain,
The next again accounts vile and vain.
Yet time does tell, in some things they did err,
That put their help her bravery to deface,
When as the wealth, that taken was from her,
Others soon raised, that did them displace,
Their titles and their offices confer
On such before, as were obscure and base,
Who would with her they likewise down should go,
And o'rthrew them that her did overthrow.
And th'Romish rites that with a cleerer sight
The wisest thought they justly did reject,
They after saw that the received light
Not altogether free was from defect,
Mysterious things being not conceived right,
There of bred in the ignorant neglect,
For in opinion something short does fall,
Wants there has been and shall be still in all.
But negligent security and ease
Unbridled sensuality begat,
That only sought his appetite to please,
As in the midst it of abundance sat,
The Church not willing others should her praise
That she was lean, when as her lands were fat,
Her self to too much liberty did give,
Which some perceived that in those times did live.
Pierce the wise Plowman in his vision saw
Conscience sore hurt, yet sorer was afraid
The seven great sins to hell him like to draw,
And to wise Clergy mainly cried for aid;
Fallen ere he wist (whom peril much did awe)
On unclean Priests whilst faintly he him staid,
Willing good Clergy t'ease his wretched case,
Whom these strong Giants hotly had in chase.
Clergy called Friars which near at hand did dwell,
And them requests to take in hand the cure,
But for their Leechcraft that they could not well,
He listed not their dressing to endure,
When in his ear Need softly him did tell
(And of his knowledge more did him assure)
They came for gain their end which they did make,
For which on them the charge of souls they take.
And voluntary poverty professed,
By food of Angels seeming as to live;
But yet with them th'accounted were the best
That most to their fraternity do give,
And beyond number that they were increased:
If so (quoth Conscience) thee may I believe,
Then it is in vain more on them to bestow,
If beyond number like they be to grow.
The Friar soon feeling Conscience had him found,
And hearing how Hypocrisy did thrive,
That many Teachers every where did wound,
For which Contrition miserably did grieve:
Now in deceit to show himself profound,
His former hopes yet lastly to revive
Gets the Popes letters, whereof he does shape
Him a disguise from Conscience to escape.
And so toward goodly Unity he goes,
A strong-built Castle standing very hie,
Where Conscience lived to keep him from his foes,
Whom lest some watchful Centinell should spy,
And him unto the garrison disclose,
His cowle about him carefully does tie,
Creepes to the gate and closely thereat beat,
As one that entrance gladly would entreat.
Peace the good porter ready still at hand
It does vnpin, and prays him God to save,
And after saluing kindly does demand
What was his will, or who he there would have?
The Friar low lowting crossing with his hand,
Speak with Contrition (quoth he) I would crave.
Father (quoth Peace) your coming is in vain,
For him of late Hypocrisy has slain.
God shield (quoth he) and turning up the eyes,
To former health I hope him to restore,
For in my skill his sound recovery lies,
Doubt not thereof if setting God before.
Are you a Surgeon, Peace again replies?
Yea (quoth the Friar) and sent to heal his sore:
Come near (quoth Peace) and God your coming speed,
Never of help Contrition had more need.
And for more haste he haleth in the Friar,
And his Lord Conscience quickly of him told,
Who entertained him with right friendly cheer:
O Sir (quoth he) entreat you that I could
To lend your hand unto my Coosin dear
Contrition, whom a sore disease does hold,
That wounded by Hypocrisy of late,
Now lies in most desperate estate.
Sir (quoth the Friar) I hope him soon to cure,
Which to your comfort quickly you shall see,
Will he a while my dressing but endure;
And to Contrition therewith comes he,
And by fair speech himself of him assure,
But first of all going thorough for his fee:
Which done (quoth he) if outwardly you show
Sound, t'not auailes if inwardly or no.
But secretly assoiling of his sin,
No other medicine will unto him lay,
Saying that heaven his silver him should win,
And to give Friars was better then to pray,
So he were shrieu'd what need he care a pin.
Thus with his patient he so long did play,
Until Contrition had forgot to weep,
This the wise Plowman showed me from his sleep.
He saw their faults that loosly lived then,
Others again our weaknesses shall see:
For this is sure he bideth not with men
That shall know all to be what they should be:
Yet let the faithful and industrious pen
Have the due merit; but return to me,
Whose fall this while blind fortune did devise,
To be as strange as strangely I did rise.
Those secret foes yet subt'ly to deceive,
That me maligning lifted at my state,
The King to marry forward still I heave,
(His former wife being repudiate)
To Anne the sister of the Duke of Cleave,
The German Princes to confederate,
To back me still against those against me lay,
Which as their own retained me here in pay.
Which my destruction principally wrought,
When afterward abandoning her bed,
Which to his will to pass could not be brought,
So long as yet I bear about my head
The only man her saftie that had sought,
Of her again and only favored,
Which was the cause he hasted to my end,
Upon whose fall hers likewise did depend.
For in his hie distemprature of blood
Who was so great whose life he did regard?
Or what was it that his desires withstood
He not invested were it nere so hard?
Nor held he me so absolutely good,
That though I crossed him yet I should be spared,
But with those things I lastly was to go,
Which he to ground did violently throw.
When Winchester with all those enemies
Whom my much power from audience had debarred,
The longer time there mischiefs to devise,
Feeling with me how lastly now it fared,
When I had done the King that did suffice,
Lastly thrust in against me to be heard,
When all was ill contrarily turned good,
Making a maine to th'shedding of my blood.
And that the King his action does deny,
And on my guilt does altogether lay,
Having his riot satisfied thereby,
Seems not to know how I therein did sway,
What late was truth converted heresy:
When he in me had purchased his pray,
Himself to clear and satisfy the sin,
Leaves me but late his instrument therein.
Those laws I made my self alone to please,
To give me power more freely to my will,
Even to my equals hurtful sundry ways,
(Forced to things that most do say were ill)
Upon me now as violently ceaze,
By which I lastly perished by my skill,
On mine own neck returning (as my due)
That heavy yoke wherein by me they drew.
My greatness threatened by ill-boding eyes,
My actions strangely censured of all,
Yet in my way my giddines not sees
The pit wherein I likely was to fall:
O were the sweets of man's felicities
Often amongst not temp'red with some gall,
He would forget by his oreweening skill,
Just heaven above does censure good and ill.
Things over rank do never kindly bear,
As in the corn the fluxure when we see
Fill but the straw when it should feed the ear,
Rotting that time in ripening it should be,
And being once down it self can never rear:
With us well does this similie agree,
(By the wise man) due to the great in all,
By their own weight b'ing broken in their fall.
Selfe-louing man what sooner does abuse,
And more then his prosperity does wound?
Into the deep but fall how can he choose
That over strides whereon his foot to ground?
Who sparingly prosperity does use,
And to himself does after-ill propound,
Unto his height who happily does clime,
Sits above fortune, and controlleth time.
Not choosing that us most delight does bring,
And most that by the general breath is freed,
Wooing that suffrage, but the virtuous thing
Which in it self is excellent indeed,
Of which the depth and perfect managing
Amongst the most, but few there be that heed,
Affecting that agreeing with their blood,
Seldom enduring never yet was good.
But whilst we strive too suddenly to rise
By flattring Princes with a seruill tongue,
And being soothers to their tyrannies,
Work our more woes by what does many wrong,
And unto others tending injuries,
Unto our selves it happens often among
In our own snares unluckily are caught,
Whilst our attempts fall instantly to naught.
The Counsel Chamber place of my arrest,
Where chief I was, when greatest was the store,
And had my speeches noted of the best,
That did them as hie Oracles adore:
A Parliament was lastly my enquest,
That was my self a Parliament before,
The Tower hill scaffold last I did ascend:
Thus the great'st man of England made his end.
FINIS.

