POEMS: By Michaell Draiton Esquire.

N L



LONDON, Printed for N. Ling. 1605.

The Arguments.
THe Barrons wars. Englands Heroical Epistles. Idea. The Legend of Robert
Duke of Normandy. The Legend of Matilda. The Legend of Pierce Gaueston.
To Sir Walter Aston, Knight of the honorable order of the Bath, and my most
worthy Patron.
I Will not strive m'invention to enforce,
With needless words your eyes to entertain,
T'obserue the formal ordinary course
That every one so vulgarly does feign:
Our interchanged and deliberate choice,
Is with more firm and true election sorted,
Then stands in censure of the common voice,
That with light humor fondly is transported:
Nor take I pattern of an others praise,
Then what my pen may constantly avow,
Nor walk more public nor obscurer ways
Then virtue bids, and judgment will allow;
So shall my love, and best endeavors serve you,
And still shall study, still so to deserve you.
Michaell Drayton.

To the Reader.
THat at first I made choice of this argument, I have not as yet repented me
for if the Muse have not much abvsed me, it was most worthy to have found a
more worthy Pen then mine own; for the Barrons wars, (omitting the quality
of those Arms, whereof I have not here to speak) were surely as well for
their length in continuance, as for their manifold bloodshed, and multitude of
horrid accidents, meet matter for trumpet or tragedy. Therefore, as at first
the dignity of the thing was the motive of the doing, so the cause of this my
second greater labor was the insufficient handkung of the first, which though
it were more then boldness to venture on so noble an argument without leisure,
and study co^petent, either of which travel hardly affoords; yet the
importunity of friends made me, contrary to mine own judgment, take,
vndertakem and publish it, so as the world has seen; but herein I intend not
to be too exact, as if either it needed too much excuse (knowing, that even as
it was it ought to have passed for better then some would suffer, who can
hardly think any thing has savor but their own, though never so unsavory)
or as if I should seem now to have excelled my self, and failing in my hopes,
be kept without excuse. Grammaticasters have quarreled at the title of
Mortimeriados, as if it had been a sin against Syntaxis to have subscribed
it in the second case, but not their idle reproof has made me now abstain
from fronting it by the name of Mortimer at all, but the same better advise
which has caused me to alter the whole; and where before the stanza was of
seven lines, wherein there are two couplets, as in this figure appears. the
often harmony thereof softened the verse more then the majesty of the subject
would permit, unless they had all bin Geminels, or couplets. Therefore, (but
not without fashioning the whole frame) I chose Ariostos stanza, of all other
the most complete and best proportioned, consisting of eight, six interwouen,
and a couplet in base.



The Quadrin does never double, or to v^e a word of He raldrie, never brings
forth Gemells. The Quiazain too soon. The Sostin has Twins in the base, but
they detain not the Music nor the Cloze (as Musicians term it) long enough
for an Epicke Poem; The stanza of seven is touched before; This of eight both
holds the tune clean through to the base of the column, (which is the
couplet, the foot or bottom) and closes not but with a full satisfaction to
the care, for so long detention.

Briefly, this sort of stanza has in it, majesty, perfection and soliditie,
resembling the pillar which in Architecture is called the Tuscan, whose shaft
is of six diameters, and bases of two. The other reasons this place will not
bear, but generally all stanzas are in my opinion but tyrants and torturers,
when they make invention they their number, which sometime would otherwise
scantle it self. A fault that great Masters in this Art strive to avoid.
Concerning the division which I use in this Poem, I am not ignorant that
antiquity has used to distinguish works into Books, and every one to bear
the number of their order, Homers ^liads, and Vlysiads indeed are
distinguished by several letters of the Greek Alphabet, as all the world
kn^wes, and not by the numerall letters only, which to lot^ are digit, and
afterward compound; the Alpha being our unite, for the Greeks had no figures
nor ciphers in their Arithmeticke. Virgils Aeneis, Statius Theba^s, Silius
work of the Carthaginian war, Illyricus Argonauticks, Vidas Christeis, are
all divided into books. The Italians use Cantos, and so our first late great
Reformer Master Spenser; that I assume another name for the sections in this
volume, cannot be disgratious nor vnauowable.

Lastly, if I have not already exceeded the length of an Epistle, I am to
entreats, that he who will (as any man may that will) make himself a party to
this of ours, would be pleased to remember that Spartan Prince, who being found
by certain Ambassadors playing among his children, requested them to forbear
to censure, till also they had some of their own. To such I give as ample
power and privilege as ever Ius lib^rorum coulain Rome, craving back again
at their hands by a regrant, the like of that which I impart; for great reason
there is, that they should undergo the license which themselves challenge, and
suffer that in their fames which they would wrongly put upon others, according
to the most indifferent law of the Talio. Fare you well.

To M. Michaell Drayton.
WHat ornament might I devise to fit
The Aspiring height of thy admired spirit?
Or what fair Garland worthy is to sit
On thy blessed brows, that compass in all merit?
Thou shall not crowned be with common Bays,
Because for thee it is a crown too low,
Apolloes tree can yield thee simple praise,
It is too dull a vesture for thy brow;
But with a wreathe of stars shall thou be crowned,
Which when thy working temples do sustain,
Will like the Spheres be ever moving round,
After the royal music of thy brain:
Thy skill does equal Phoebus, not thy birth,
He to heaven gives music, thou to earth.
Thomas Green.

To M. Michaell Drayton.
THose painful wits, which natures depth admire,
And view the causes of unconstant strife,
Do tremble least the Universe expire,
Through lasting iarres, the enemies of life,
On earthly signs let not such Sages look,
Nor on the clear aspects of hopeful stars;
But learn the worlds continuance from thy book,
which frames past natures force eternal wars;
wherein the Mases showing perfect glory,
Adorn it so with graceful harmony,
That all the acts of this lamented story,
Seem not performed for peoples liberty:
Nor through the awe of an imperious King,
But that thy verses their deep wounds might sing.
John Beaumont.

THE FIRST BOOK of the Barrons wars.
The Argument.
The grievous plagues and the prodigious signs
That this great war and slaughter do foreshow,
Th'especiall cause the Baronage combines,
The Queens strong grief, whence many troubles grow,
The time by course unto our fallinclines,
And how each country does to battle go;
What cause to yield, the Mortimers pretend,
And their commitment perfecting the end.
1
THe bloodiefactions, and rebellious pride
Of a strong nation, whose vnmanag'd might
Them from their natural Sovereign did divide,
Their due subjection, and his lawful right,
Whom their light error loosely does misguide,
Urged by lewd Minions tyrannous despite;
Me from soft lays, and tender loves does bring,
Of dreadful fights, and horred wars to sing.
2
What hellish fury poysned your hie blood,
Or should bewitch you with accursed charms,
That by pretending of the general good,
Rashly extrudes you to tumultuous arms,
And from the safety wherein late you stood,
Re^t of all taste, and feeling of your harms,
That France and Belgia with affrighted eyes,
Were sad beholders of your miseries.
3
T(...)ueterate ranckor in their bosoms bred,
Who for their charter waged a former war,
Or through your veins, this raging venom spread,
Whose next-succeeding Nephews now you are,
Or that hot gore your bows in conquest shed,
Having enlarged your Countries bounds so far,
Ensign to ensign furiously oppose,
With blades of Bilbo dealing English blows.
4
O thou the great director of my Muse,
On whose free bounty all my powers depend,
Into my breast a sacred fire infuse,
Ravish my spirit this great work to attend;
Let the still night my labored lines peruse,
That when my Poems gain their wished end,
They whose sad eyes shall read this tragique story,
In my weak hand shall see thy might and glory.
5
What Care would plot, Dissentions quickly cross,
Which like an earthquake rends the tottering state,
By which abroad we bear a public loss,
Betrayed at home by means of private hate;
Whilst us those strange calamities do toss,
(The daily nurse of mutinous debate)
Confusion still our countries peace confounds,
No help at hand, and mortal all our wounds.
6
Thou Church then swelling in thy mightiness,
Tending the care and safety of the soul;
O nurse not factions flowing in excess,
That with thy members should their grief condole,
In thee rests power this outrage to repress,
Which might thy zeal and sanctity enrole,
Come thou in pureness meekely with the word,
Lay not thy hand to the unhallowed sword.
7
Blood-thirsting war arising first from hell,
And in progression seizing on this I Will,
Where it before near forty years did dwell,
And with pollution horribly defile,
By which so many a worthy English fell,
By our first Edward banished awhile,
Transferd by Fortune to the Scottish meare,
To ransacke that, as it had rauinde here.
8
Where hovering still with inauspicious wings
About the verge of these distempered climes,
Returning now, new error hither brings,
To stir us up to these disastrous crimes,
Weakeneth our power by often diminishings;
And taking hold on these unsettled times,
Forcing our frailty sensually at length,
Cracked the stiff nerves that knit our ancient strength.
9
Whose frightfull vision, at the first approach,
With violent madness struck that desperate age,
So many sundry miseries abroach,
Giving full speed to their unbridled rage
That did our ancient liberty encroach,
And in these strong conspiracies engage,
The worthiest blood the subjects loss to bring,
By innaturall wrongs unto their natural king.
10
When in the North whilst horror yet was young,
These dangerous seasons swiftly coming on,
Whilst over our heads portentious meteors hung,
And in the skies stern Comets brightly shone,
Prodigious births often intermixed among,
Such as before to times had been unknown,
In bloody issues forth the earth does break,
Weeping for us, whose woes it could not speak.
11
When by the rankenes of contagious air,
A mortal plague inuadeth man and beast,
Which soon dispersed, and raging every where,
In doubt the same too quickly should have ceast,
More to confirm the certainty of fear
By cruel famine haplesly enereast;
As though the heavens in their remisfull doom,
Took those best loved from wor^er days to come.
12
The level course that we propose to go
Now to the intent you may more plainly see,
And that we every circumstance may show
The state of things, and truly what they be,
And with what skill, or project we bestow,
As our accurrents happen in degree.
From these portents we now divert our view,
To bring to birth the horrors that ensue.
13
The calling back of banished Gaueston,
Against which the Barrons were to Longshanks sworn,
That insolent lascivious Minion,
A Sovereigns blemish, and a countries scorn,
The signiories, and great promotion,
Him in his lawless courses to suborne,
Stirs up that hateful and outrageous strife,
That cost ere long so many an English life,
14
O worthy La^y, had thou sparde that breath
Which shortly after Nature thee denide,
To Lancaster delivered at thy death,
To whom thy only daughter was affide,
That this stern war too quickly publishes,
To aid the Barrons against that Minions pride,
Thy Earledomes, lands, and titles of renown,
Had not so soon returned unto the Crown.
15
The Lordships Bruise unto the Spensers past,
Crossing the Barrons vehement desire,
As from Jove's hand that fearful lightning cast,
When fifty towns lay spent in envious fire,
Alas too vain and prodigal a waste;
The strong effect of their conceived ire,
Urging the weak King with a violent hand,
T'abiure those false Lords from the troubled land.
16
When the fair Queen that progressing in Kent,
Lastly denide her entrance into Leedes,
Whom Badlesmere unkindly does prevent;
Who against his Sovereign in this course proceeds,
As adding further to this discontent,
One of the springs which this great mischief feeds,
Heaping on rage and horror more and more,
To thrust on that which went too fast before.
17
Which more and more, a kingly rage increast,
Moved with the wrongs of Gaueston disgraded,
Which had so long been settled in his breast,
That all his powers it wholly had invaded,
Giving the Spensers an assured rest,
By whom his reasons chiefly are persuaded,
By whose lewd counsels he is only led,
To leave his true Queen, and his lawful bed,
18
That now herself who while she stood in grace,
Applied her powers these discords to appease
When yet confusion had not fully place,
Nor former times so dangerous as these,
A party now in their afflicted case,
A willing hand to his destruction lays,
That time whose soft palm heals the wound of war,
May cure the soar, but never close the scar.
19
In all this heat his greatness first began,
The serious subject of our sadder vain,
Brave Mortimer, that euer-matchlesse man,
Of the old Heroes great and God-like strain,
For whom invention doing best it can,
His weight of honor hardly can sustain,
Bearing his name immortalized and hie,
When he in earth unnumbered times shall lie.
20
That uncle now (whose name this Nephew bare,
The only comfort of the woeful Queen)
Who from his cradle held him as his care,
In whom the hope of that great name was seen,
For this young Lord now wisely does prepare,
Whilst yet this deep hart-goaring wound is green,
And on this fair advantage firmly wrought,
To place him highly in her princely thought.
21
At whose deliberate and unusual birth,
The heavens were said to counsel to retire,
And in aspects of happiness and mirth,
Breathed him a spirit insatiatly t'aspire,
That took no mixture of the ponderous earth,
But all comprest of clear ascending fire,
So well made up, that such an one as he,
Jove in a man like Mortimer would be.
22
The temper of that nobler moving part,
With such rare pureness rectified his blood,
Raising the powers of his resolved heart,
Too proud to be locked up within a flood,
That no misfortune possibly could thwart;
Which from the native greatness where it stood,
Even by the virtue of a piercing eye,
Showed that his pitch was boundless as the sky.
23
Worthy the grandchild of so great a Lord,
Who whilst first Edward fortunately reigned,
Reedified great Arthurs ancient board,
The seat at goodly Kennelworth ordained,
The order of old Knighthood there restored,
To which a hundredth duly appertained
With all the grace, and beauties of a Court,
As best became that brave and martial sport.
24
The hart-swolne Lords with fury set on fire,
Whom Edwards wrongs to vengeance still provoke,
With Lancaster and Hartfoord now conspire
No more to bear the Spensers servile yoke.
And thus whilst all a mutual change desire,
The ancient bonds of their allegiance broke,
Resolved with blood their liberty to buy,
And in this quarrel vowed to live and dye.
25
What privilege has our free birth? (say they)
Or in our blood what virtue does remain,
To each lascivious Minion made a pray,
That us, and our nobility disdain,
Whilst they tryumphing boast of our decay?
Either those spirits we do not now retain
That were our fathers, or by fate we fall
Both from their greatness, liberty and all.
26
Honor dejected from that sovereign state,
From whence at first it challenged a being,
Now prostitute to infamy and hate,
As with it self in all things disagreeing,
So out of order, disproportionate,
From her fair course preposterously flying,
Whilst others as themselves, and only we
Are not held those we would but seem to be.
27
Then to what end has our great conquest served,
Those acts achiued by the Norman sword,
Our Charters, patents, or our deeds reserved,
Our offices, and tytles to record,
The crests that on our monuments are carved,
If they to us no greater good afford?
Thus do they murmr every one apart,
With many a vexed soul, many a grieved heart.
28
Whilst this sad Queen to depth of sorrow thrown,
Wherein she wastes her flower of youth away,
Beyond belief to all but heaven unknown,
This quickening spark, where yet it buried lay,
By the sharp breath of desperate faction blown,
Conuerts her long night to the wished day,
The woeful winter of misfortune cheering,
As the dark world at the bright suns appearing.
29
Yet ill perplexed amid these hard extremes,
All mean^s deprest her safety to prefer,
Deprived of those late comfortable beams,
Whose want might make her the more easly err,
Her hopes relinquisht like deceiptfull dreams,
Which in her breast such sundry passions stir,
Where struggling which each other should control
Work strange confusion in her troubled soul.
30
That now disabled of all sovereign state,
That to her graces rightly did belong,
To be rejected, and repudiate,
So true a Lady, goodly, fair and young,
Which with more feruor still does intimate
Her too-deepe-setled and inveterate wrong,
What wisdom would, a woman's will denies,
With arguments of her indignities.
31
When to effect the angry Fates pursue
In heavens high Court that long time did depend,
When these full mischiefs to a ripeness grew,
And now the harvest hastening in the end,
And all these lines into one center drew,
Which way soever they seemingly extend;
All these together in proportion laid,
Each breath of hope, a gale of certain aid.
32
Now is the time when Mortimer does enter,
Of great employment in this tragic act,
His youth and courage boldly bid him venture,
And tell him still how strongly he was backed;
And at this instant in due season sent her,
When the straight course to her desire is tract,
(And but upon more certainty does stay)
By a direct, what though a dangerous way?
33
This dreadful Commet drew her wondering eye,
Which now began his golden head to rear,
Whose glorious fixure in so fair a sky,
Strikes the beholder with a chilly fear,
And in a Region eleuate and hie,
And by the form wherein it did appear,
As the most skillful seriously divine,
Foreshew'd a kingdom shortly to decline.
34
Yet still recoyling at the Spencers power,
As often checked with their intemperate pride,
Th'vnconstant Barrons wavering every hour,
The fierce encounter of this boisterous tide,
That easily might their liuelihoode devour,
Had she not those that skilfully could guide,
She from suspicion craftily retires,
Careless in show, of what she most desires.
35
Dissembling grief, as one that knew not ill;
So can she rule the greatness of her mind,
As a most perfect Rectoresse of her will,
Above the usual weakness of her kind;
For all this storm immooueable and still,
Her secret drift the wisest miss to find;
Nor will she know what (yet) these factions meant,
With a pleased eye to sooth sad Discontent.
36
The least suspicion cunningly to heal,
Still in her looks humility she bears,
The safest way with mightiness to deal,
So Policy Religions habit wears;
It Is now no time her greeuance to reveal,
He Is mad which takes a Lion by the ears,
This knew the Queen, exampled by the wise,
This must they learn that rightly temporize.
37
The learned Bishop Torleton in the land,
Upon a text of Politickes to preach,
Which he long studying, well did understand,
And by a method could as aptly teach,
That was a Prelate of a potent hand,
Wise were the man could go beyond his reach:
This subtle Tutor Isabell had taught,
In nicer points than ever Edward sought.
38
Rage which no limits longer can contain,
Lastly breaks forth into a public flame,
Then slipped occasion better to regaine,
When to their purpose things sofitly frame,
And now discerned visibly and plain,
When treason boldly dare it self proclaim,
Casting aside all secular disguise,
Leading proud legions furiously to rise.
39
As Severne lately in her ebbes that sanke,
Vast and forsaken leaves th'vncouered sands,
Fetching full tides, luxurious, hie, and rank,
Seems in her pride t'inuade the neighboring lands,
Breaking her limits, covering all the banks,
Threatening the proud hills with her watery hands,
As though she meant her Empery to have,
Where even but lately she beheld her grave.
40
Through all the land, from places far and near,
Led to the field as Fortune lots their side,
(With th'auntient weapons used in war to bear)
As those directed whom they chose their guide,
Or else perhaps as they affected were,
Or as by friendship, or by duty tide,
Swayde by the strength and motion of their blood,
No cause examined, be it bad or good.
41
From Norfolk, and the countries of the East,
That with the long pyke best could manage fight,
The men of Kent unconquered of the rest,
That to this day maintain their ancient right,
And for their strength that we account the best,
The Cornishmen, most active, bold, and light,
Those near the plain that gleaue and polax weeld,
And claim for due vaward of the field.
42
The noble Britton sprung of Illyon race,
From Lancashiere most famous for their bows,
With those of Cheshiere, chiefest for their place,
Men of such bone, as only made for blows,
That for their faith are had in special grace,
And as the guard unto the Sovereign goes;
Those of the North in feuds so deadly fell,
That for their spear and horsemanship excel.
43
For every use experience could espy
Such as in Fens and Marsh-lands use to trade,
The doubtful foards and passages to try,
With stilts and loapstaues that do aptliest wade,
And fit'st for scowts and Currers to discry,
Those from the Mines with pickaxe, and with spade,
For Pyoners best, that for intrenching are,
Men chiefly needful in the use of war.
44
O noble Nation furnished with Arms,
So full of spirit, so eminent alone,
Had heaven but blessed thee to foresee these harms,
And as thy valiant Nephews to have gone,
Paris, ^oan, Orleance shaking with alarmes,
As the bright Sun thy glory then had shone;
To other Realms thou had transferd this chance,
Nor had your sons been first that conquered France.
45
And thus on all hands making for their rest,
And now set forward for this mighty day,
Where every one prepares to do his best,
When in success their lives and fortunes lay;
No cross event their purposes to wrest,
Where now they stand in so direct a way;
And whilst they play this strange and doubtful game,
The Queen stands by, and only gives the aim.
46
When this brave Lord his foot had scarcely set
Into the road where Fortune had to deal,
But she disposd his forward course to let,
Her lewd condition quickly does reveal,
Glory to her vain deity to get,
By him, whose birth did bear her omenous seal,
Winning occasion from this very hour,
In him to prove and manifest her power.
47
As when we see the early rising Sun,
With his fair beams to emulate our sight,
And when his course but newly is begun,
The humorous fogges deprive his wished light,
Till through the moist clouds his clear forehead run,
Climing the noonsted in his gorgeous height:
His bright beginning fortune hinders thus,
To make the rest more rich, more glorious.
48
The King discreetely that considered,
The space of earth whereon the Barrons stand,
What were their powers to them contributed,
Now being himself but partner of his land,
And of the strength and army that heeded,
Against them that do so great a power command,
In which it was well he did so wisely look,
The task was great that now he undertook.
49
And warned by danger to mis-doubt the worst,
In equal scales whilst eithers fortune hung,
Must now perform the utmost that he durst,
Or undergo the burden of his wrong;
As good to stir, as after be inforst
To stop the head whence many evils sprung:
Now with the marchers thinks it best begin,
Which first must loose, ere he could hope to win.
50
The Mortimers being men of greatest might,
Whose name was dreadful, and commanded far,
Sturdie to manage, of a haughty spright,
Strongly aly'd much followed, popular,
On whom if thus he happily could light,
He hopes more easly to conclude this war;
Which he intends speedily to try,
To quit that first, which most stood in his eye.
51
For which he expeditiously provided
That part of land into his power to get,
Which if made good, might keep them still divided,
Their combination cunningly to let,
Who being couioyn'd, would be too strongly sided,
Two, so great strengths together safely met,
The face of war would look so stern and great,
As well might threat to heave him from his seat.
52
Wherefore from London strongly setting forth,
With a fair Army furnished of the best,
Accompanied with friends of greatest worth,
With whom there is many a gallant spirit is pressed;
Great Lancaster, the Lord of all the North,
The Mortimers are Masters of the West,
He toward mid England makes, the way twixt either,
Which they must cross, ere they could com together.
53
And thus inueagled with delightful hope,
Stowtly to front and shoulder with debate,
Knowing to meet with a resolved troop
That came prepared with courage, and with hate,
Whose stubborn Crests if he enforced to stoop,
He now must tempt some great and powrefull fate;
And through stern guards of swords and i^efull flame,
Make way to peace, and propagate his name.
54
When now the Marchers well upon their way,
(Expecting such should promised succor bring
Which all this while abused them by delay)
Are suddenly encountered by a King,
And now perceive their dilatory stay
To be the causer of their ruining,
How near their bosoms black destruction stood,
With open jaws prepared for their blood.
55
And by the shifting of inconstant wind,
Seeing what weather they were like to meet,
Which (even) at first so aukwardly they find
Ere they could yet give sea-roomth to their fleet,
Clean from their course, and cast so far behind,
And yet in perrill every hour to split,
Some unknown harbor suddenly must sound,
Or run their fortunes desprately on ground.
56
The elder peer, grave, politic, and wise,
Which had all dangers absolutely scand,
Finding high time his Nephew to advise,
Since now their state stood on this desperate hand,
And from this mischief many more to rise,
With long experience learned to understand:
Nephew (says he) it is longer vain to strive,
Counsel best serves our safety to contriue.
57
The downright peril present in our eye
Not to be shund, what certain end t'assures;
The next, the weight that on our fall does lie,
And what our life to our design procures,
Each hope, and doubt that does arise thereby,
Proving with judgment how the same endures:
For who observes strict policies true laws,
Shifts his proceeding to the varying cause.
58
To hazard fight with the Imperial powers,
May our small troops undoubtedly appall,
A desperate end us willingly deuours;
Yielding our selves, by this we loose not all,
We leave our friends this litttle force of ours,
Reserved for them, though haplesly we fall;
That show of weakness has a glorious hand,
That falls it self, to make the cause to stand.
59
Twixt inexpected and so dangerous ills,
That Is best wherein we smallest perrill see,
A course that reason necessary wills,
And that does most with policy agree,
The idle vulgar breath it nothing skils,
It Is sound discretion must our Pylot be,
He that does still the fairest mean prefer,
Answers opinion how so ere he err.
60
And to the worl^ ^s eye seeming yet so strong,
By our discending willingly from thence,
May urge the show of our opposed wrong
Rather b'inforcement then forethought pretense,
Leaving the advantage does to us belong,
May qualify the nature of the offense,
Men are not always incident to loss,
When Fortune seems their forward cause to cross.
61
Nor give we envy absolute access,
To lay our fall upon thy forward mind,
There Is nearer means this mischief to redress,
And make succesfull what is yet behind,
Nor of our hope us wholly dispossess,
Fortune is ever variously inclind,
And a small vantage to the course of Kings,
Guides a slight means to compass mighty things.
62
Which speech so caught his Nephews pliant youth,
Fastening upon a dutiful respect,
Which he with such celeritie pursu'th,
(Well could he counsel, well could he direct)
Proceeding from integrity and truth,
And working with such prosperous effect,
Shows wisemens counsels, by a powerful fate,
(Seeming from reason) yet prove fortunate.
63
To which they awful Majesty inuit
By the most due and ceremonious way,
With circumstance, and each conditi'nall rite
Might win respect unto this new essay,
Or might opinion any way excite,
To which the King does willingly obey;
Who as themselves in finding danger near,
Rather accepts doubt, then a certain fear.
64
Which he receaues in presage of his good,
To his success auspiciously applied,
which cooles the heat of his distemperd blood,
Before their force in doubtful Arms was tried,
In his protection when they only stood,
At his disposing wholly to abide,
vvhereon in safety he dismissed their power,
Sends them away as prisoners to the Tower.
65
O all-preparing providence Divine,
In thy large Book what secrets are enrold?
What sundry helps does thy great power assign,
To stay the course thou steadfastly do hold?
What mortal sense is able to define
Thy mysteries, thy counsels manifold;
By these digressions strangely that extends
Thy obscure proceedings to aparent ends?
66
This was the mean, by which the Fates dispose
More threatened plagues upon that age to bring,
Utter confusion on the heads of those
That were before the Barrons ruining,
With the subversion of so many foes,
The murder of the miserable King;
And that which came as Epilogue to all,
Lastly, his fearful, and so violent fall.
67
Which to their hope gives time for further breath,
As the first pawse in this their great affair,
That yet awhile deferred this threatening death,
Trusting this breach by leisure to repair,
And here a while this fury limetteth:
Whilst in this manner things so strangely fare,
Horror beyond the wonted bounds does swell,
As the next Canto dreadfully shall tell.
The end of the first Canto.
The second Book of the Barrons wars.
The Argument.
At Burton-bridge the puissant armies me^,
The form and order of the doubtful fight,
Whereas the King the victory does get,
And the proud Barrons lastly forcde to flight;
How they again toward Borough forward set,
Where then the Lords are vanquished outright,
Lastly, the laws do execute their power,
On those the sword before did not devour.
1
THis chance of war, that dreadfully had swept
So large a share from their full-reckned might,
Which their proud hopes so carefully had kept
Whilst yet their state stood equally upright,
That could at first so closely intercept,
That should have served them for a glorious fight,
Musters supplies of footmen, and of horse,
To give a new strength to their ruinde force.
2
Th'inueterate grief so deep and firmly rooted,
Yet slightly curde by this short strengthelesse peace;
To assay t'remoue, since it but vainly booted,
That did with each distemprature increase,
And being by every offered cause promooted,
The Effect too firmly settled to surcease:
When each evasion sunday passions brought,
Strange forms of fear in every troubled thought.
3
And put in action for this public cause,
Whilst every one a party firmly stood,
Taxt by the letter of the censuring laws,
In the sharp tainder of his honored blood;
And he that's free'st, entangled by some clause,
Which to this mischief gives continual food;
For where confusion gets so strongly hold,
Till all consumde, can hardly be controlde.
4
Where now by night, even when pale leaden sleep,
Upon their eie-lids heavily did dwell,
And, step by step, on every sense did creep,
Mischief (that black inhabitant of hell)
Which never fails continual watch to keep,
Fearful to think, a horred thing to tell,
Entered the place where now these warlike Lords
Lay maild in armor, girt with irefull swords.
5
Mischief with sharp sight, and a meager look,
And always prying where she may do ill,
In which the fiend continual pleasure took,
Her starued body Plenty could not fill,
Searching in every corner, every nooke,
With winged feet, too swift to work her will;
Hung full of deadly instruments she went,
Of every sort to hurt where ere she meant,
6
And with a vial filled with banefull wrath,
Brought from Cocytus by this cursed spright,
Which in her black hand readily she has,
And drops the poison upon every wight;
For to each one she knew the ready path:
Now in the midst and dead-time of the night,
Whose envious force inuadeth every Peer,
Striking with fury, and impulsive fear.
7
The weeping morning breaking in the East,
When with a troubled and affrighted mind,
Each whom this venom lately did infest,
The strong effect soon inwardly do find;
And lately troubled by unquiet rest,
To sad destruction every one inclind;
Rumors of spoil through every ear does fly,
And fury sits in every threatening eye.
8
This done, in haste unto King Edward hies,
Which now grown proud upon his fair success,
The time in feasts and wantonness implies
With crowned cups his sorrows to redress,
That on his fortune wholly now relies,
And in the bosom of his Courtly press
Vaunting the glory of this late won day,
Whilst the sick Land with sorrow pines away.
9
Thither she comes, and in a Minions shape
She creeps near the person of the King,
Warmed with the verdure of the swelling grape,
In which, she poison secretly does wring,
Not the least drop vntaynted does escape,
To which intent she all her store did bring,
Whose rich commixtu^e making it more strong,
Fills his hot veins with arrogance and wrong.
10
And having both such courage, and such might
As to so great a business did belong,
Never considering their pretended right
Should be inducement to a trebled wrong,
When misty error so deludes their sight,
Which still betwixt them, and clear reason hong;
By which opinion falsely was abusde,
As left all out of order, all confusde.
11
Now our Minerua tells of dreadful Arms,
Enforced to sing of worse then civil wars,
Of Ambuscades, stratagems, alarmes,
Unkind discentions, fearful massacars,
Of gloomy magiques, and benumming charms,
Fresh-bleeding wounds, and neuer-healed skarrs,
And for the sock wherein she used to tread,
Marching in greaues, a helmet on her head.
12
Whilst hate, and grief, their weakened sense delude,
The Barrons draw their forces to a head,
(Whom Edward spurred with vengeance still pursude)
By Lancaster, and noble Herford led,
This long proceeding lastly to conclude;
Whilst now to meet, both Armies freshly sped
To Burton, both incamping for the day,
With expectation for a glorious pray.
13
Upon the East, from Needwoods bushy side,
There rises up an easy clyming hill,
At whose fair foot the silver Trent does glide,
With a deep murmr permanent and still,
With liberal stor^ of many Brooks supplide,
Th'^n^atiate Meades continually do fill,
Upon whose stream, a bridge of wondrous strength
Does stretch it self in forty arches length.
14
Upon this Mount the Kings pauillion fixed,
And in the town, the foe entrenched in sight,
When now the flood is risen so betwixt,
That yet a while prolonged th'unturall fight,
With tributarie waters intermixed,
To stay the fury doing all it might,
Things which presage both good and ill there be,
Which heaven fore-shewes, but mortals cannot see.
15
The heaven even mourning over our heads does sit,
As grieved to see the time so out of course,
Looking on them who never look at it,
And in mere pity melting with remorce,
Longer from tears that cannot stay a whit,
Whose confluence on every lower sourse,
From the swollen fluxure of the clouds does shake
A rank Impostume upon every lake.
16
O warlike Nation! hold thy conquering hand,
Even senseless things admonish thee to pawse,
That Mother soil on whom thou yet do stand,
That would restrain thee by all natural laws.
Can thou (unkind) inuiolate that band,
When even the earth is angry with the cause?
Yet stay thy foot in mischiefs ugly gate,
Ill comes too soon, repentance still too late.
17
And can the clouds weep over thy decay,
And not one drop fall from thy droughtie eyes?
See thou the snare, and wilt not shun the way,
Nor yet be warned by passed miseries?
It Is yet but early in this fatal day;
Let late experience learn thee to be wise,
Mischief foreseen, may easly be prevented,
But hap'd, vnhelp'd, though nere enough lamented.
18
Cannot the Scot of your late slaughter boast?
And are you yet scarce healed of the sore?
Is It not enough you have already lost,
But your own madness needsly make it more?
Will you seek safety in a foreign Coast?
Your wives and children pitied you before;
But when your own blood your own swords imbrue,
Who pitties them which once did pity you?
19
The neighboring groves dispoiled of their trees,
For boats, and timber to assay this flood,
Where men are laboring as the Summer be,
Some hollowing truncks, some binding heaps of wood,
Some on their breasts, some working on their knees,
To win the bancke whereon the Barrons stood,
Which over this current they by strength must tew,
To shed that blood that many ages rue.
20
Some sharpen swords, some on their Murrians set
The Greaues, and pouldrons others riuet fast,
The archers now their bearded arrows whet,
Whilst every where the clamerous Drums are bra'st,
Some taking view where surest ground to get,
And every one advantage does forecast;
In ranks and fyles each plain and meadow swarms,
As though the land were clad in angry Arms.
21
The crests and honors of the English name,
Against their own opposed rudely stand,
As angry with th'atchieuements whence they came,
That to their virtues gave the generous brand;
O you unworthy of your ancient fame,
Against your selves to lift your conquering hand!
Since foreign swords your height could not abate,
By your own power your selves to ruinate.
22
Upon his surcoate valiant Neuell bore
A silver saltoyre graced on martial red;
A Ladies sleeue hie-spirited Hastings wore,
Ferrer his Taberd with rich verry spread,
Well known in many a warlike match before;
A Raven sat on Corbets warlike head,
Cou'ring his Helmet; Culpepper inrayld,
On maiden Arms, a bloody bend engrayld,
23
The noble Percy in this furious day,
With a bright Cressant in his guide-home came,
In his fair Cornet Verdoon does display
A Geuly fret, prized in this mortal game
That had been taskt in many a doubtful fray,
His lances pennons stained with the same;
The angry horse chafde with the stubborn bit,
The ruinous earth with rage and horror smit.
24
I could the sum of Staffords arming show,
What colors Courtney, Rosse and Warren hold,
Each sundry blazon I could let you know,
And all the glorious circumstance have told,
What all the Ensigns standing in arow,
But wailing in a Muse, (ah me) thou art controlde,
When in remembrance of this horred deed,
My pen for ink even drops of blood does sheede.
25
The Imperial standard in this place is pitched,
With all the hatchments of the English crown,
Great Lancaster with all his power enricht,
Sets the same Leopards in his Colors down;
O if with fury you be not bewitched,
Have but remembrance, on your self you frown,
A little note, or difference is in all,
How can the same stand, when the same does fall?
26
Behold the Eagles, Lions, Talbots, Bears,
The badges of your famous ancestries,
And shall they now by their inglorious heirs,
Stand thus opposed against their families?
More honored marks no Christian nation wears,
Relics unworthy of their progenies;
Those beasts you bear, do in their kinds agree.
O that than beasts more savage men should be!
27
But whilst the king no course concluded yet,
In his directions variably does houer,
See how misfortunes still her time can fit,
Such as were sent the Country to discover;
As up and down, from place to place they flit,
Had found a foord to land their forces over:
Ill news has wings, and with the wind does go,
Comfort's a Cripple, and comes ever slow.
28
When Edward fearing Lancasters supplies,
Proud Richmond, Surry and great Penbrooke sent,
On whose success his chiefest hope relies;
Under whose conduct half his Army went,
The nearest way, conducted by thespies;
And he himself, and Edmond Earl of Kent,
Upon the hill, in sight of Burton lay,
Watching to take advantage of the day.
29
Stay, Surry stay, thou mai'st too soon be gone,
Pawse till this rage be somewhat over past,
Why runn'st thou thus to thy destruction?
Richmond and Penbrooke, whither do you haste?
You labor still to bring more horror on;
Never seek sorrow, for it comes too fast:
Why do you strive to pass this fatal flood,
To fetch new wounds, and shed your native blood?
30
Great Lancaster, sheath up thy angry sword,
On Edwards arms whose edge thou should not whet,
Thy natural kinsman, and thy sovereign Lord;
Are you not one, both true Plantaginet?
Call but to mind thy once-engaged word,
Can thou thy oath to Longshankes thus forget?
Consider well, before all other things
Our vows be kept we make to Gods and Kings.
31
The winds are hushed no little breath does blow,
Which seems so still as though it listening stood,
With trampling crowds the very earth does bow,
And through the smoke the sun appears like blood;
What with the shout, and with the dreadful show,
The heirds and flocks run bellowing to the wood.
When drums and trumpets give the fearful sound,
As they would shake the clouds unto the ground.
32
The Earls then charging with their power of horse,
Taking a signal when they should begin,
Being in view of the imperial force,
Which at the time assayed the bridge to win;
That now the Barrons change th'intended course,
T'auoide the danger they were lately in;
Which on the sudden had they not forecast,
Of their black day this hour had been the last.
33
When from the hill the Kings maine power comes down,
Which had Aquarius to their valiant guide,
Brave Lancaster and Herford from the town
Now issue forth upon the other side,
Peer against peer, the crown against the crown,
The one assailes, the other munifide,
Englands red cross upon both sides does fly,
Saint George the king, S. George the Barrons cry.
34
Like as an exhalation hot and dry,
Amongst the ayre-bred moistie vapors thrown,
Spetteth his lightning forth outragiously,
Rending the gross clouds with the thunder-stone,
Whose fiery splinters through the thin air fly,
That with the terror heaven and earth does groan;
With the like clamor and confused woe,
To the dread shocke these desperate Armies go.
35
Now might you see the famous English Bows
So fortunate in times we did subdue,
Shoot their sharp arrows in the face of those
which many a time victoriously them drew,
Shunning their aim, as troubled in the loose;
The winged weapons mourning as they slew.
Cleave to the string, (now in potent and slack)
As to the Archers they would feign turn back.
36
Behold theremnant of Troyes ancient stock,
Laying on blows, as Smiths on Anuils strike,
Grapling together in this fearful shocke,
whereas the like incountreth with the like,
As firm and ruthlesse as th'obdurate Rock,
Deadly opposed at the push of pike;
Still as the wings, or battles brought together,
when Fortune yet gives vantage unto neither.
37
From battred caskes with every envious blow,
The scattred plumes fly loosly here and there,
which in the air does seem as drifts of snow,
which every light breath on his wings does bear,
As they had sense and feeling of our woe;
And thus affrighted with the present fear,
Now back, now forward such strange windings make,
As though uncertain which way they should take.
38
Slaughter runs wildely through the afflicted host
Whilst yet the battle strongly does abide,
That in this strange distemprature is lost,
Where hellish fury sensibly does guide,
Never suffisde, where tyrannizing most,
That now their wounds (with mouths even opend wide,)
Lastly inforcde to call for present death,
That wants but tongues, your swords do give them breath.
39
Here lies a heap half slain, and halfly drowned,
Gasping for breath among the watery segs,
And there a sort fallen in a deadly swownd,
Troade with the press into the muddy dregs,
Other lie bleeding on the firmer ground,
Hurt in the bodies, maimde of arms and legs,
One kills a foe, his brain another cuts;
Ones feet entangled in another guts.
40
One his assayling enemy beguiles,
As from the bridge he happily does fall,
Crushed with his weight upon the forced piles,
Some in their gore upon the pauement spraule,
That every place so loathsomely defiles,
The careasses lie heaped like a wall,
Such hideous shreekes yet still the soldiers breathe,
As though the spirits had howled from beneathe.
41
The faction still defying Edwards might,
Edmond of Woodstocke with the men of Kent,
Charging afresh, reuiues the doubtful fight,
Upon the Barrons languishing and spent,
New preparation for a tragic fight;
when they again supplies immediate sent
A second battle prowdly to begin;
The noblest spirits but newly entered in.
42
As at Troyes sack, fair Thetis godlike sun,
Courageous Talbot with his shield him bare,
Clifford and Mowbray bravely following on,
Awdley and Gifford thronging for a share;
These seconding, the former being gone,
Elmsbridge and Baldsmere in the thickest are,
Pell mell together fly this furious power,
when they perceive that death will all devour.
43
Mountfort and Teis, your worth I feign would speak,
But that your valu^e does so ill deserve,
And Denuile here from thee perforce must break,
And from thy praises Willington must swerue,
Your deeds permit not I your wrongs should wreake,
Proud Damory, here must thy glory starve:
Concealing many most deserving blame,
Because your actions quench my sacred flame.
44
O had you fashioned your great deeds by them,
Who sommond Acon with an English drum,
Or marched before that fair Jerusalem,
With the united powers of Christendom,
Eternal then had been your Diadem,
And with Christ's warriors slept about his toombe:
Then ages had immortalizde your name,
Where now my song can be but of your shame.
45
O age inglorious, arms untimely borne,
When now this proved and victorious shield
Must in this civil massacre be torn,
Which bare the marks of many a bloody field;
And lastly, in their overthrown forlorn,
When now to flight the Barrons basely yield,
That since that time the stones for very dreed,
Against foul storms small drops of moisture sheed.
46
When now those wretched and unsteadfast friends,
Which all this while stood doubtfully to pawse,
When they perceive what desteny intends,
And his success does justify his cause,
Their faintness now more comfort apprehends,
For victory both fear and friendship draws,
T'an open smile, convert a covered frown,
All lend their hands to hew the conquered down.
47
That part of power the imperial seemde to lack,
whilst yet the adverse bare an upright face,
when now constraind to give a recreant back,
Quickly returns to prosecute the chase,
where now the Barrons wholly go to wrack,
In the just trial of so near a case;
Inforede to prove the fortune of the coast,
When they perceine the glorious goal is lost.
48
And to the fortunes of the conquering King,
Which well confirmde his long and tendered hope,
His fair success still more encouraging,
which now had got so large and ample scope,
The Earl of Carlell happily does bring
His light-armde bands the valiant Northern troop,
Armed too lately, and with too much speed,
To do most harm, even when we least had need.
49
When now the Barrons making out their way,
Through parts for safety, and advantage known,
Keeping their force still bodied as they may,
Into the depth of this misfortune thrown;
And in pursuit, devising day by day
TO offend the assailant, and defend their own,
In their last hope the utmost to endure,
To defer the effect, although the end were sure.
50
And whilst their fortune suting sadly thus,
To Burrough-bridge conducted by their fate,
Bridges to Barrons ever ominous,
And to this place their fall preordinate,
That ministering such cause of grief to us,
By the remembrance of their passed state;
The very soil by deep impression yet,
Even to this day does still remember it.
51
New courage now, new fights, new battles rangde,
New breath (but what might make destruction new)
They change the ground, but yet their fate vnchangde,
Which too directly does their course pursue,
Nor from their former misery estrangde,
Their strength decays, their dangers daily grew,
To shorten that which whilst it did depend,
Gave a long breathing to a fearful end.
52
Like to a heird of weary heartlesse dear,
whom hote-sporrde huntsmen seriously do chase,
In brakes and bushes falling here and there,
Proouing each covert, every secret place,
Yet by the hounds recovered every where,
with eager yearning in the sented trace;
Hemmed on each side with horns rechating blast,
Headlong themselves into the toils do cast.
53
Ensign beards ensign, sword genst sword does shake,
Wing against wing, and rank does rank oppose,
In, on each other furiously they brake,
And death in earnest to his business goes,
A general havoc as disposde to make,
And with destruction does them all enclose,
Dealing it self impartially to all,
Friend by his friend, and foe by foe does fall.
54
This part of life which yet they did respire,
In spite of Fortune, as they stood preparde,
With courage chargde, with comeliness retire,
Make good their ground, and then relieve their guarde,
Withstand the entrer, then pursue the flier,
New form their battle, shifting every ward,
As your hie courage; but were your quarrel good,
O noble spirits, how dear had bin your blood?
55
The Northern bands the ambitious Herckley led
On the weak Barrons mangled so before,
That now toward Borough make a puissant head,
Encouraging the imperial power the more;
O day so fatal, and so full of dread,
When ere shall time thy ruinous waste restore,
Which to amend although thou shall persevere,
Thou still may promise, but perform it never.
56
Pale death beyond all wonted bounds does swell,
Caruing proud flesh in cantells now at large,
As leaves in Autumn, so the bodies fell
Under rough steel at every boystrous charge,
O what sad pen can the destruction tell,
Where scalps lay beaten as the battred targe;
And every one he claims as his right,
That not prouides to escape away by flight.
57
Those ensigns erst, that in the glittring field
With their curld foreheads threat the ambitious foe,
Like wetherd foul the drowping pinions yield,
Stouping their proud heads to the dust below,
There sits a helmet, and there lies a shield,
O ill did fate these noble Arms bestow,
Which as a quarry on the soilde earth lay,
Seizde on by conquest as a glorious pray.
58
Here noble Bohune that brave, issued peer,
Herford so hie in every gracious heart,
Unto his country so receiude, and dear,
Wounded by treason in the lower part.
(As over the bridge his men returning were)
Through those ill-ioynd planckes by an envious dart:
But Lancaster, whose lot not yet to die,
Taken, reserved to greater infamy.
59
O subject for some sadder Muse to sing,
Of five great Earledomes happily possessed,
Of the direct line of the English king,
with favors friends, and earthly honors blessed,
If so that all these happiness could bring,
Or could endow assurednes of rest;
But what estate stands free from fortunes power?
The Fates have guidance of our time and hour.
60
Some few themselves in sanctuaries hide,
In mercy of that privileged place,
Yet are their bodies so vnsanctifide,
As scarce their souls can ever hope for grace;
Whereas they still in want and fear abide,
A poor dead life this draws out a space,
Hate stands without, and horror sits within,
Prolonging shame, but pard'ning not their sin.
61
Here is not death contented with the dead,
As though of some thing carelessly denide,
Till which might firmly be accomplished
His utmost fully were not specifide,
That all exactly might be perfected
A further torment vengeanec does provide,
That dead men should in misery remain,
To make the living die with greater pain.
62
You sovereign Cities of the afflicted I Will,
In Cipresse wreathes, and widowed attire,
Prepare ye now to build the funeral pile;
Lay your pale hands unto this latest fire,
All mirth and comfort from your streets exile,
Till you be purgde of this infectious ite,
The noblest blood yet living to be shed,
That ever dropped from your rebellious dead.
63
When this brave Lord great Lancaster, who late
This pu^ssant force had now thus long retainde,
As the first Agent in this strange debate
At fatal Pomfret for those facts arraignde;
(...) whom of all things they articulate,
To whom these factions chiefly appertainde:
Whose proofs apparent so directly sped,
As from his body reft a reverent head.
64
Yet Lancaster, it is not thy dear breath
Can ransom back the safety of the Crown,
Nor make a league of so great power with death,
To warrant what is rightfully our own,
But they must pay the forfait of their faith,
Which sondly broke with their ambition,
when now revenge unto the utmost rackt,
The Agents justly suffer with the act.
65
Even in that place where he had lately led,
As this dark path unto the rest to show,
It was not long ere many followed,
In the same steps that he before did go;
London, thy freedom is prohibited,
The first in place (O would the first in woe)
Others in blood did not excel thee far,
That now devour the remnant of this war.
66
O parents ruthful, and hart-renting sight,
To see that son thy tender bosom fed,
A mothers joy, a fathers sole delight,
That with much cost, yet with more care was bred;
A spectacle even able to affright
The most senseless thing, and terrify the dead;
His blood so dear upon the cold earth powered,
His quartered coarse of birds and beasts devoured.
67
But it is not you that here complain alone,
Or to your selves this fearful portion share,
Here Is choice, and strange variety of moan,
Poor childrens tears with widows mixed are;
Many a friends sigh, many a maidens groan,
So innocent, so simply, pure, and rare;
As though even Nature that long silent kept,
Burst out in plaints, and bitterly had wept.
68
O wretched age, had not these things been done,
I had not now in these more calmer times
Into the search of former troubles run;
Nor had my virgin impolluted rimes,
Altered the course wherein they first begun,
To sing these bloody and unnatural crimes,
My lays had still been to Ideas bower,
Of my dear Ankor, or her loved Stoure.
69
Or for our subject your fair worth to choose,
Your birth, your virtue, and your hie respects,
That gently daine to patronize our Muse,
Who our free soul ingeniously elects
To publish your deserts, and all your dues
Maugre the Momists, and Satyricke sects,
Whilst my great verse eternally is sung,
You still may live with me in spite of wrong.
70
But greater things reserved are in store,
Unto this task my armed Muse to keep,
Still offering me occasion as before,
Matter whereof my tragic verse may weep;
And as a vessel being near the shore,
By adverse winds enforced to the deep,
Am driven back from whence I came of late,
Unto the bus'nes of a troubled state.
The end of the second Canto.
The third Book of the Barrons wars.
The Argument.
By asleepie potion that the Queen ordaines,
Lord Mortimen escapes out of the Tower,
And by false slights, and many subtle trains,
She gets to France to raise aforraigne power;
The French King leaves his sister; need constraines
The Queen to Henault in a happy hour:
Edward her son to Philip is affide,
And for invasion presently provide.
1
SCarce had these passed miseries their ends,
When other troubles instantly begun,
As (still) new matter mischief apprehends,
By things that inconsid'rately were done;
And further yet this insolence extends,
Whilst all not yielded that the sword had won;
For some there were that secretly did lie,
That to this bus'nes had a watchful eye.
2
Whenas the King (whilst things thus fairly went)
Who by this happy victory grew strong,
Sommons at York a present Parliament,
To plant his right, and help the Spensers wrong,
By which he thinks t'establish his intent,
Whence (more and more) his Minions greatness sprung,
Whose counsels still in all proceedings crossde
The Enraged Queen, whom all misfortunes tossde.
3
When now the eldst, a man extremely hated,
Whom yet the King not aptly could prefer,
The edge of their sharp insolence abated,
This Parliament makes Earl of Winchester,
Where Herckley Earl of Carlell is created,
And Baldocke likewise is made Chancellor,
On whom the king had for his purpose wrought,
A man as subtle, so corrupt, and naught.
4
When now mishaps that seldom come alone,
Thick in the necks of one an other fell,
The Scot pretends a new invasion,
And France does thence our useful power expel,
Treasons suspected to attend his throne,
The grieved Commons every day rebel,
Mischief on mischief, curse does follow curse,
One ill scarce past, when after comes a worse.
5
For Mortimer this wind yet fitly blew,
Troubling their eyes which else perhaps might see,
Whilst the wise Queen, who all advantage knew,
Is closly plotting his delivery,
(Which now she does with all her powers pursue)
Aptly continued by her deep policy,
Against opinion, and the course of might,
To work her will, even through the jaws of spite.
6
A sleepy drink she secretly has made,
Whose operation had such wondrous power,
As with cold numnesse could the sense invade,
And mortify the patient by an hour,
The lifelesse coarse in such a slumber laid,
As though pale death did wholly it devour:
Nor for two days take benefit of eyes,
By all means Art or Physic could devise.
7
For which she Plantane and cold Lettice had,
The water Lilly from the marrish ground,
with the wanne Poppy, and the Nightshade sad,
And the short moss that on the trees is found,
The poysning Henbane, and the Mandrake drad,
With Cypress flowers that with the rest are pownd;
The brain of Cranes like purposely she takes,
Mixed with the blood of Dormise, and of Snakes.
8
Thus sits the great Enchauntresse in her Cell,
Strongly engi^t with ceremonious charms,
Her cleansed body sensde with halowing smell,
With vestall fire her potent liquor warmes,
Having full heat, unto her busnes fell,
When her with Magic instruments she arms:
And from the herbs the powrefull verdure wrong,
To make the medcine forcible and strong.
9
The sundry doubts that incident arise,
Might be supposde her trembling hand to stay,
If she considred of the enterprise,
To think what peril in th'attempting lay,
The secret lurking of deceitful spies,
That on her steps continually do pray:
But when they leave off virtue to esteem,
Those greatly err which take them as they seem.
10
Their plighted faith for liberty they leave,
Their love is cold, their lust hot, hot their hate,
With smiles and tears they serpent-like deceive,
In their desires they be insatiate,
There Is no restraint their purpose can bereave,
Their will no bound, nor their revenge no date,
All fear exempt where they at ruin aim,
Covering their sin with their discovered shame.
11
The elder of the Mortimers this space,
(That many sundry miseries had past,)
So long restrainde within that healthlesse place,
Redeemde by death, yet happily at last
That much auailes the other in this case,
And from this Lord that imposition cast:
Which the dear safety of his uncles breath
within the tower so strictly limiteth.
12
Put there was more did on his death depend,
Than heaven was pleased the foolish world should know,
And why the Fates thus hasted on his end,
Thereby intending greater things to show;
Brave Lord, in vain thy breath thou did not spend,
From thy corruption further matters grow,
And some beginning fruitfully to spring,
New forms of fear upon the time to bring.
13
All things preparde in readiness, and fit,
The Queen attends her potions power to prove,
Their steadfast friends, their best assisting it,
Their seruan^s seal their secrets up in love;
And he express his valor and his wit,
Whom of the rest it chiefly does behoue,
Places resolved where guide and horses lay,
And where the ship him safely to convey.
14
As his large bounties liberally were heap't
To all deserving, or to those that heed,
His solemn birth-dayes festival was kept
At his free charge, all in the Tower to feed,
which may suspicion clearly intercept,
A strong assistant in so great a need,
When amidst their cates, their furious thirst to quench,
Mixing their wine with this approved drench.
15
Which soon each sense, and every power does seize,
when he that knew the strength of every ward,
And to the purpose sorting all his keys,
His corded ladders readily preparde;
And lurking forth by the most secret ways
Not now to learn his Compass by the Card,
To win the walls courageously does go,
which look as scorning to be maistied so.
16
They soundly sleep whilst his quick spirits awake,
Opposde to peril, and the stern'st extremes,
Alcydes labors new to undertake,
Of walls, of gates, of watches, and of streams,
Through which his passage he is now to make,
And let them tell king Edward of their dreams:
For ere they rose out of the brainsicke france,
He hopes to tell this noble jest in France.
17
The sullen night has her black curtains spread,
Lowering the day had tarried up so long,
Whose fair eyes closing softly steals to bed,
When all the heavens with duskie clouds are hung,
And Cynthia now pluckes in her horned head,
And to the West incontinently flung;
As she had longed to certify the sun,
What in his absence in her Court was done.
18
The glimmering lights, like Sentinels in war,
Behind the clouds stand craftily to pry,
And through false loope-holes looking from afar,
To see him skirmish with his desteny;
Not any fixed, nor any wandering star,
As they had held a counsel in the sky;
And had before concluded with the night,
It should not look for any cheerful sight.
19
In deadly silence all the shores are hushed,
Only the Skreech-howle sounds to the assault,
And Isis with a troubled murmr rushed,
As if consenting, and would hide the fault;
And as his foot the sand or gravel crushed,
A little whispering moved within the vault,
Made by the treading softly as he went,
Which seemed to say, it furthred his intent.
20
This wondrous Queen whom care yet restless kept,
Now for his speed to heaven holds up her hands,
A thousand strange thoughts in her bosom heap't,
As in her closet listening still she stands,
That many a sigh spent, many a warm tear wept,
And though divided, as in sundry strands,
Most absent, present in desires they be,
Our minds discern where eyes do cease to see.
21
The small clouds issuing from his lips she says,
Laboring so fast, as he the ladder clame,
Should purge the air of pestilence and death;
And as sometime that filch'd Promethian flame,
Even so the power and virtue of his breath,
New creatures in the elements should frame;
And to what part of heaven it happ'd to stray,
There should path out another milkie way.
22
Attainde the top, half spent a while to blow,
Now round about he casts his longing eyes,
The gentle earth salutes him from below,
And covered with the comfortable skies,
Viewing the way that he is now to go,
Cheered with the beams of Isabels fair eyes,
Down from the turret desperately does slide,
Night be successful, fortune be his guide.
23
With his descent, her eye so still descends,
As fear had fixed it to fore-warne his fall,
On whom her hope and fortune now depends,
When sudden fear her senses does appall;
For present aid her god-like hand extends,
Forgets herself, and speedy aid does call;
Silent again, if ought but good should hap,
She begs of heaven his grave may be her lap.
24
Now she intreates the dark distempred air,
Then by strong Magicks she coniures the wind,
Then she inuokes the gloomie night by prayre,
Then with her spells the mortal sense to bind;
And fearing much lest these yet frustrate are,
Now by the burning tapers she diuin'd,
Entreating Thames to give a friendly pass,
The dearest fraught ere on her bosom was.
25
The rushing murmr stills her like a song,
But yet in fear the stream should fall in love,
Suspects the drops that on his tresses hung,
And that the billows for his beauty strove,
To this fair body that so closely clong,
Which when in swimming with his breast he drove;
Palled with grief she turns away her face,
Jealous that he the waters should embrace.
26
This angry Lion having slipped his chain,
As in a fever makes King Edward quake,
Which knew (too well) ere he was caught again,
Dear was the blood must serve his thirst to stake,
Many the labors had been spent in vain,
And he enforced a longer course to take,
Saw further vengeance hanging in the wind,
That knew the pride and greatness of his mind.
27
The faction working in this lingering jarr^,
How for the Scot free passage might be made,
To lay the ground of a succesfull war,
That hope might breed fresh courage to invade;
And whilst our safety stands out so far,
More dangerous proiects every where are laid;
That some in hand home troubles to enure,
Others in France do foreign broiles procure.
28
By these discentions that were lately sown,
Inciting Charles to open Arms again,
Who seazing Guyne, pretended as his own,
That Edward should unlawfully detain,
Proceeds to make a further title known.
To Our Lands in Pontieu, and in Aquitaine,
When wanted homage has desolu'd the truce,
Waking his wrongs by Isabels abuse.
29
This plot concluded that was long in hand,
(Which to this issue prosperously had thriu'd)
The Base whereon a mighty frame must stand,
With mickle Art, yet with more fcare cont^iu'd;
So strongly builded by this factious band,
As from the same their safety is derived,
Till their full-rooted and inueterate hate,
Getting more strength might deeply penetrate.
30
When choice of such to sway this French affair,
Which as a sharpelesse and unwieldy mass,
Might well employ the strength of all their care;
So hard and perlous to be brought to pass,
Which it behooues them quickly to prepare,
That being now so settled as it was,
Craves a grave spirit, whose eminence and power,
Might like a stiff gale check this threatening shower.
31
This must a Session seriously debate,
That depth of judgment craved to be discust,
That so concerns the safety of the state,
And in a case so plausible and just,
As might have quenched all sparckes of former hate,
(...) (...)ight be thought even policy might trust,
Could envy master her distracted will,
Or apprehend sacietie in ill.
32
Tarleton, whose tongue men's ears in chains could tie,
And as a fearful thunderbolt could pierce,
In which there more authority did lie,
Then in the Sybils sage propheticke verse,
Whose sentence was so absolute and hie,
As had the power a judgment to reuerse;
On the Queens part with all his might does stand,
To lay this charge on her well-guiding hand.
33
What helps her presence to the cause might bring,
Being a wife, a sister, and a mother,
And in so great and pertinent a thing,
To right her lonne, her husband, and her brother,
Her gracious help to all distributing,
To take of her what they should hold of other;
Which color serves to effect in these extremes,
That which (God knows) King Edward never dreams.
34
Torleten, is this thy spiritual pretense?
Would God thy thoughts were more spiritual,
Or less perswasiue were thy eloquence.
But O! thy actions are too temporal;
Opinion lends too great pre-eminence,
Thy reasons subtle, and sophistical;
Would all were true thy supposition says,
Thy arguments less force, or thou more faith.
35
These sudden broiles that were begun of late,
Still kept in motion by their secret slight,
By false suggestions so interminate;
That as a ballast of some solid weight,
Betwixt these adverse currents of debate,
Kept their proceeding in a course so straight,
As lends the Queen an ampler color still,
By general means to work a general ill.
36
She which thus fitly found both wind and tide,
And sees her leisure serve, the hour so near,
All her endeavors mutually applied,
Whilst for her purpose things so fitly were,
And thus advantage quickly had espied,
As one whose fortunes taught the worst to fear,
Seeing the times so variously inclinde,
And every toy soon altring Edwards mind.
37
Her followers such as friendlesse else had stood,
Suncke, and dejected by the Spensers pride,
Who bare the brands of treason in their blood,
Which but with blood there was no way to hide;
Whose mean was weak, whose will was but too good,
Which to effect did but the hour abide,
And knew all means that mischief could invent,
That any way might further her intent.
38
Whilst Mortimer which now so long has lain
From our just course, by fortune lately crosst,
In France now struggling how he might regaine
That which before he had in England lost,
All present means does gladly entertain,
No jote dismaide in all these tempests tosst:
Nor his great mind can thus be overthrown,
All men his friends, all countries are his own.
39
And Muse, transported by thy former zeal,
Led in our progress where his fortune lies,
To thy fair aid I seriously appeal,
To sing this great man his magnanimous guise,
The ancient Heroes unto me reveal,
whose worths may raise our nobler faculties,
That in my verse, transparent, nete, and clear,
His character more lively may appear.
40
Such one he was, of him we boldly say,
In whose rich soul all sovereign powers did suit,
In whom in peace the elements all lay
So mixed, as none could sovereignty impute;
As all did govern, yet all did obey,
His lively temper was so absolute,
That t'seemde when heaven his model first began,
In him it showed perfection in a man.
41
So thoroughly seasond, and so rightly set,
As in the level of clear judgments eye,
Time never tuch't him with deforming fret,
Nor had the power to wrap him once awry,
Whose steadfast course no cross could ever let,
His elevation was so heavenly hie,
Those giddy tempests that the base world prove,
State under where he Planet like did move.
42
Which this fair Queen that had a knowing spirit,
And saw the beauties resting in his mind,
One that had thoroughly looked into his merit,
Above the value of the vulgar kind,
That rightly did his Grandsires deeds inherit,
When now the ages in their course declinde,
when the old world, being weak began to bow,
To th'effeminate baseness that it rests at now.
43
What weighs he wealth, or what his Wigmore left?
Let needless heaps, things momentary stand,
He counts not his that can be rapde by theft,
Man is the sole Lord both of sea and land,
And still is rich of these that is not reft,
Who of all creatures has an upright hand;
And by the stars is only taught to know,
That as they progress heaven, he earth should do.
44
Wherefore wise Nature forcde this face of ground,
And through the deeps showed him the secret way,
That in the floods her judgments might be found,
Where she for safety did her treasure lay;
Whose store, that he might absolutely sound,
She gave him courage for her only kay,
That he alone of all her creatures free,
Her glory, and her wondrous works should see.
45
Let wretched worldlings sweat for mud and earth,
whose groueling bosoms lick the recreant stones,
And pesants carke for plenty, and for dearth,
Fame never looks upon these prostrate drones,
Man is allotted at his princely birth,
To manage Empires, and to sit on thrones,
Frighting coy Fortune when she sternst appears,
Which else scorns sighs, and jeeteth at our tears.
46
When now Report with her fleet murmuring wing,
Tucht the still entrance of his listening ear,
A fleet preparde this royal Queen to bring,
And her arrival still awaited near,
When every sound a note of love does sing,
The joyful thoughts that in his bosom were:
The soul in doubt to make her function less,
Denies the utterance fully to express.
47
Quoth he, Slide billows gently for her sake,
Whose sight can make your aged Nereus young,
For her fair passage even allies make,
On the sleeke waters wast her sails along;
And whilst she glides upon the pleasant lake,
Let the sweet Sirens rock her with a Song:
Though not Loves mother that does pass this way,
Fairer than she that's borne upon the sea.
48
You Sea-bred creatures, gaze upon her eye,
And never after with your kind make war;
O steal the accents from her lip that fly,
Which like the musickes of the Angels are,
And them unto your amorous thoughts apply,
Comparde with which, Aryons did but jarre:
Wrap them in air, and when black tempests rage;
Use them as charms the rough seas to assuage.
49
France, send to fetch her with full sholes of oars,
With which her fleet may every way be plide,
And being landed on thy happy shoares,
As the vast navy does at anckor ride;
For her departure when the wild sea roares,
Ship mount to heaven, there brightly stellifide:
Next Iasons Argo on the burnisht throne,
Assume thee there a constellation.
50
Her person hence conuaide with that delight,
Which best the languish of her iournies easde,
That to her pleasure does it self inuit,
Whereon her mind, and subtle fancy seasde,
And that (most dear) her liking might excite,
Which then this Lord, naught more her presence pleased,
where, when with state she first her time could take,
Thus the fair Queen her Mortimer bespake.
51
O Mortimer, great Mortimer, quoth she,
What angry power did first this mean devise,
To separate Queen Isabell and thee,
whom loves eternal union strongly ties;
But if supposde this fault began by me,
For a just penance to my longing eyes:
(Though guiltless they) this punishment assignde,
To gaze upon thee, till they leave me blind.
52
It Is strange, sweet friend, how thou art altered thus,
Since first in Court thou did our favors wear,
whose shape seemde then not mortal unto us,
when in our eye thy brow was beauties sphere,
In all perfection so harmonious,
A thousand several graces mooving there;
But what then could thou be, not now thou art,
An alien first, last home-borne in my heart.
53
That powerful fate thy safety did enforce,
And from the worst of danger did thee free,
Still regular, and constant in one course,
Wrought me a firm and even path to thee,
Of our affections as it took remorce,
Our birth-fix't stars so happily agree;
Whose revolution seriously directs
Our like proceedings, to the like effects.
54
New form of counsel in the course of things,
To our dissignement finds a nearer way,
That by a clear and perfect managing,
Is that firm prop whereon we only stay;
Which in it self the authority does bring,
That weak opinion has no power to sway;
Confuting such, whose sightlesse judgment sit,
In the thick rank with every vulgar wit.
55
Then since pleased Time our wished content assures,
Embrace the blessings of our mutual rest;
And whilst the day of our good hap endures,
And we as favorites lean on Fortunes breast,
Which does for us this vacancie procure,
In choice make free election of the best;
Never fear the s^orme before thou feel the shower,
My son a King, an Empire is my dower.
56
Of wanton Edward when I first was wooed,
Why came thou not into the Court of France?
Thy self alone then in my grace had stood;
Dear Mortimer, how good had been thy chance?
My love attempted in that youthful mood,
I might have been thine own inheritance;
Where entering now by force, thou hold'st thy might,
And art deseisor of another right.
57
Honor thou Idol women so adore,
How many plagues do thou retain to grieve us,
When still we find there is remaining more,
Then that great word of Majesty can give us;
Which takes more from us then it can restore,
And of that comfort often does deprive us,
That with our own selves sets us at debate,
And make us beggars under our estate.
58
Those pleasing raptures from her graces rise,
Strongly inuading his impressiue breast,
That soon entranced all his faculties,
Of the proud fullness of their joys possessed;
And having thoroughly wrought him in this wise,
Like tempting Sirens sing him to his rest,
When every power is passive of some good,
Felt by the spirits of his high-rauisht blood.
59
Like as a Lute that is touched with curious skill,
In musickes language sweetly speaking plain,
When every string his note with sound does fill,
Taking the tones, and giving them again,
And the ear bath's in harmony at will,
A diapason closing every strain;
So their affections set in keys so like,
Still fall in consort as their humors strike.
60
When now the path to their desire appears,
Of which before they had been long debarred,
By desolution of some threatening fears,
That for destruction seemed to stand prepared,
Which the smooth face of better safety bears,
And now protected by a stronger guard,
Gives the large scope of leisure to forecast
Events to come, by things already past,
61
These great dissignements setting easly out,
By due proportion measuring every pace,
T'auoide the cumbrance of each hindering doubt,
That might distort the comeliness and grace,
Coming with every circumstance about,
Strictly observing person, time and place;
All ornaments in fair discretions laws,
Could give attire to beautify the cause.
62
The Embassy in terms of equal height,
As well their state and dignity might fit,
Apparelling a matter of that weight,
In ceremony well beseeming it,
To carry things so steady, and so right,
Where Wisdom with clear majesty might sit;
All things still seeming strictly to effect,
That Love commands, and Greatness should respect.
63
Whose expedition by this fair success,
That does again this ancient league combine,
when Edward should by covenant release,
And to the Prince the Provinces resign,
With whom king Charles renues the happy peace,
Receiving homage due to him for Guyne:
And lastly now to consumate their speed,
Edwards own person to confirm the deed.
64
Who whilst he stands yet doubtful what to do,
The Spensers chiefly that his counsels guide,
Nor with their Sovereign into France durst go,
Nor in his absence durst at home abide;
Now whilst the weak king stands perplexed so,
His listening ears with such persuasion plide,
As he at last to stay in England's won,
And in his place, to send the Prince his son.
65
Thus is the King encompasst by their skill,
A mean to work what Herford does devise,
To thrust him on, to draw them up the hill,
That by his strength they might get power to rise:
Thus they in all things are before him still,
This perfect steersman of their policies
Has cast to walk whilst Edward bears the light,
And take that aim that must direct his sight.
66
And by th'allowance of his liberal will,
Supposde his safety, furthering their intent,
Stands as a test to justify their ill,
Made sound and current by this late event,
And what yet wanting lastly to fulfill,
Things in their course to fall in true consent,
Gives full assurance of that happy end,
On which they now laboriously attend.
67
Nor finding reason longer to protract,
Or in suspense their home-left friends to hold,
By being now so absolutely backed,
And thereby waxing confident and bold,
By their proceedings publishing their act,
whenas their power was ripened as they would,
Now with an armed and erected hand,
To abet their faction absolutely stand.
68
When now the fearful fainting Exceter,
A man experiencde in their counsels long,
Whether himself thought his way to prefer,
Or moved in conscience with king Eawards wrong,
Or it was his frailty forede him thus to err,
Or other fatal accident among,
The only first that back to England flew,
And knowing all, discovered all he knew.
69
The plot of treason lastly thus disclosde,
And Torletons drift by circumstaunces found,
With what conueyance things had been disposde;
The cunning used in casting of the ground,
The means and apt advantages he chosde,
When better counsel coldely comes to sound,
Awakes the King to see his own estate,
When the prevention comes too vain and late.
70
And whilst the time she daily does adjourne,
Charles as a brother, by persuasions deals,
Edward, with threats, to hasten her return,
And John of Rome with Papal curse assaies,
It Is but in vain against her will to spurn,
Persuasions, threats, nor curses aught preuailes:
Charles, Edward, John, do the utmost of your worst,
The Queen fares best when she the most is cursed.
71
The subtle Spensers which French humors felt,
(And with their Sovereign had deuisde the draught)
with Prince and Peers now underhand had dealt,
with golden baits that craftily were caught,
whose flexed temper soon begins to melt,
On which they now by sleights so throwly wrought,
As with great sums now lastly ouer-waide,
The wretched Queen is desperate of aid.
72
Nor can all this amaze this mighty Queen,
with all th'affliction never yet contrould,
Never such courage in her sex was seen,
Nor was she cast in other women's mould,
(Nor can rebate the edge of her hie spleen)
But can endure war, travel, want, and cold:
Struggling with Fortune, never with grief oppressed,
Most cheerful still, when she was most distressed.
73
And thus resolved to leave ungrateful France,
And in the world her fortune yet to try,
Changing the air, hopes time may alter chance,
As one whose thoughts were eleuate more hie,
Her weakened state still seeking to advance,
Her mighty mind so scorneth misery;
Yet ere she went, her grieved heart to east,
Thus to the King this grieved Lady says.
74
Is this a King and brothers part, quoth she?
And to this end did I my grief unfold?
Came I to heal my wounded heart to thee,
Where slain outright I now the same behold?
Prove these thy vows, thy promises to me,
In all this heat, thy faith become so cold,
To leave me thus forsaken at the worst?
My state more wretched than it was at first.
75
My frailty urging what my want requires,
To thy dear mercy should my tears have tide,
Our bloods maintained by the selfsame fires,
And by our fortunes as our birth alide;
My suit supported by my just desires,
All arguments I should not be denide.
The grievous wrongs that in my bosom be,
Should be as near thy care, as I to thee.
76
Nature that easly wrought upon my sex,
To thy vile pleasure thus mine honor leaves,
And under color of thy due respects,
My settled trust disloyally deceaues,
That me and mine thus carelessly neglects,
And of all comfort wholly me bereaues;
Twixt recreant baseness, and disord^nate will,
To expose my fortunes to the worst of ill.
77
But for my farewell this I prophecy,
That from my womb that glorious fruit does spring,
Which shall deiect thy near posterity,
And lead a captive thy succeeding King,
That shall revenge this wretched injury.
To fatal France I as a Sybel sing,
Her cities sacked, the slaughter of her men,
When of the English, one shall conquer ten.
78
Bewmount in France that had this shuffling seen,
whose soul by kindness Isabel had won,
For Henault now persuades the grieved Queen,
By full assurance what might there be done;
Now in the anguish of this tumerous spleen,
Offering his fair Niece to the Prince her son:
The lurest way to gain his brothers might,
To back young Edward, and uphold her right.
79
This gallant Lord, whose name even filld report,
To whom the soldiers of that time did throng,
A man that fashiond others of his sort,
As that knew all to honor did belong,
And in his youth traind up with her in Court,
And fully now confirmed in her wrong,
Crosst by the faction of th'emperiall part,
In things that sat too nearly to his heart.
80
Sufficient motives to inuit distress,
To apprehend the least and poorest mean,
Against those mischiefs that so strongly press,
Whereon their low dejected state to leave,
And at this season, though it were the less,
That might a while their sickely power sustain;
Till prosperous times by mild and temprate days,
Their drooping hopes to former height might raise
81
Where finding cause to breathe their restless state,
where welcome looked with a more milder face,
From those dishonours she received of late,
Where now she wants no due officious grace,
Under the guidance of a gentler fate,
Where bounteous offers mutually embrace:
And to conclude all ceremonies past,
The Prince affies fair Philip at the last.
82
All covenants signde with wedlockes sacred seal,
A lasting league eternally to bind,
And all proceeding of religious zeal,
And suting right with Henaults mighty mind,
That to his thoughts much honor does reveal,
What ease the Queen is like thereby to find,
The sweet contentment of the lovely Bride,
Young Edward pleased, and joy on every side.
The end of the third Canto.
The fourth Book of the Barrons wars.
The Argument.
The Queen in Henault mighty power does win,
In Harwich haven safely is arrived,
Great troubles now in England new begin,
The King of friends and safety is deprived,
Flies to Wales, at Neath received in,
Many strange acts and outrages contrived:
Edward betrayde, deliu'red up at Neath,
The Spensers, and his friends are put to death.
1
NOw seven times Phoebus had his welked waine,
Upon the top of all the Tropike set,
And seven times descending down again,
His fiery wheels had with the fishes wet;
In the occurrents of this hapless reign,
Since treason first these troubles did beget:
which through more strange varieties had run,
Than it that time celestial signs has done.
2
Whilst our ill thriuing in those Scottish broiles,
Their strength and courage greatly does advance,
That being made fat and wealthy by our spoils.
When we still weakened by the jarres in France,
And thus dis-hartned by continual foiles,
Yeeldes other cause, whereat our Muse may glance;
And Herckleys treasons lastly brings to view,
Whose power of late the Barrons ouer-threw.
3
Now when the Scot with an inuasiue hand,
By daily inroads on the borders made,
Had spoilde the Country of Northumberland,
whose buildings level with the ground were laid;
And finding none that dare his power withstand,
Without controlement every where had praide,
Bearing with pride what was by pillage got,
As our last fall appointed to their lot.
4
For which false Herckley by his Sovereign sent,
T'intreate this needful, though dishonored peace,
Cloking his treasons by this feigned intent,
Kinling the war which otherwise might cease;
And with a Scot, new mischiefs does invent,
T'intrap King Edward, and their fear release;
For which, their faith they constantly have plight,
In peace and war, to stand for eithers right.
5
For which the King his sister does bestow,
Upon this false Lord, which to him affy'd,
Makes too plain and evident a show,
Of what before his trust did closely hide;
But being found from whence this match should grow
By such as now into their actions pried,
Displaies the treasons, which not quickly crossed,
Would shed more blood then all the wars had cost.
6
Whether the Kings weak Counsels, causes are
That every thing so badly sorteth out,
Or that the Earl did of our state despair,
when nothing prosperd that was gone about;
And therefore, careless how these matters fare
(I Will not define, but leave it as a doubt)
Or some vain title his ambition lackt,
Hatched in his breast this treasonable act.
7
Which now revealed unto the jealous King,
For apprehension of this traitorous Peer,
To the Lord Lucy leaves the managing,
One, whose known faith he ever held so dear;
By whose dispatch, and travel in this thing,
(He does well worthy of his trust appear)
In his own Castle carelessly desended,
The treacherous Herckley closely apprehended.
8
For which ere long unto his trial led,
In all the roabes befitting his degree,
Where Scroope chief Justice in King Edwards sted,
was now prepared his lawful Judge to be,
Urging the proofs by his enditement read,
Where they his treasons evidently see;
Which now themselves so plainly do express,
As might at first declare his bad success.
9
His honored title back again restord,
Noted with terms of infamy and scorn,
And then disarmed of his knightly sword,
On which his faith and loyalty was sworn,
And by a varlet of his spurs dispur'd,
His coat of Arms in pieces haled and torn;
To taste deserved punishment is sent,
T'a traitrous death that traitrously had meant.
10
When such the favorers of this fatal war,
Whom this occasion does more sharply whet,
Those for this cause that yet impris'ned are,
Boldly attempt at liberty to set,
Whose purpose frustrate by the others care,
Does greater wounds continually beget;
Warning the King more strictly look about,
These secret fires still daily breaking out.
11
And Hereford in Parliament accusde
Of treasons, which apparently were wrought,
That with the Queen, and Mortimers were used,
Whereby subversion of the Realm was sought,
And both his calling and his trust abusde;
Which now to answer when he should be brought,
Seizde by the Clergy in the Kings despite,
Under the color of the Churches right.
12
Whilst now the Queen from England day by day,
That of these troubles still had certain word,
Whose friends much blamde her tedious long delay,
When now the time occasion does afford,
With better haste does for her self puruay,
Bearing provision presently abord;
Ships of all uses daily rigging are,
Fit'st for invasion to transport a war.
13
The Earl of Kent by's sovereign brother placed,
As the great General of his force in Gwine,
Who in his absence here at home disgraced,
And frustrated both of his men and coin,
By such lewd persons to mainetaine their waste,
From the Kings treasures ceased not to proloine;
Th'lasciuious Prince, though moved, regardlesse still,
Both of his own loss, and his brothers ill.
14
Whose coffeehouse being quickly found,
By such as all advantages await,
That still applied strong corsiues to the wound,
And by their sharp and intricate deceit,
Hindered all means might possibly redound,
This fast-arising mischief to defeat;
Until his wrongs were to that fullness grown,
That they have made him absolute their own.
15
Whose selfe-like followers in these faithless wars,
Men most experienced, and of worthiest parts,
Which for their pay received only scarres,
Whilst the inglorious reaped their due deserts,
And Mineons hate of other hope debarres,
With too much violence urged their grieved hearts,
On John of Henault wholly do rely,
Who led a great and valiant company.
16
That in this conquest do themselves combine,
The Lords Pocelles, Sares, and Boyseers,
Dambretticourt, the young and valiant Heyn.
Estoteuill, Comines, and Villeers,
Others his Knights, Sir Michaell de la Line,
Sir Robert Balioll, Boswit, and Semeers,
Men of great power, whom spoil and glory warmes,
Such as were wholly dedicate to Arms.
17
Three thousand soldiers mustred men in pay,
Of French, Scotch, Almaine, Swiser, and the Dutch,
Of native English, fled beyond the sea,
Whose number near amounted to as much;
which long had looked for this unhappy day,
whom her revenge did but too nearly tutch,
Her friends now ready to receive her in,
And new commotions every day begin.
18
When she for England fitly setting forth,
Spreading her proud sails on the watery plain,
Shaping her course directly to the North,
with her young Edward Duke of Aquitaine,
with the other three of special name and worth,
(The destainde scourges of his lawless reign)
Her soldier Beumount, with the Earl of Kent,
And Mortimer, that mighty malconsent.
19
A fore-winde now for Harwich fitly blows,
Blow not too fast to kindle such a fire,
whilst with full sail, and fairer tide shegoes,
Turn gentle wind, and force her to retire;
The fleet thou driu'st is fraughted with our woes,
But winds and seas, do Edwards wrack conspire;
For when just heaven to chastise us is bent,
All things convert to our due punishment.
20
Thy coasts be kept with a continual ward,
Thy Beacons watched her coming to discry;
O had the love of subjects been thy guard,
T'had been to effect that thou did fortify;
But whilst thou standst against foreign foes prepared,
Thou art betraide by thy home enemy;
Small help by this thou art but like to win,
Shutting death out, thou keep'st destruction in.
21
When Henry brother to that hapless Prince,
The first great engine of this civil strife,
(Dear Lancaster) who law did late convince,
And that at Pomfret left his wretched life;
This Henry, in whose great heart ever since
Revenge lay couerd, smotherd up in grief,
Like fire in some fat mineral of the earth,
Finding the least vent, gives it self a birth.
22
That being Earl Marshall, great upon the coast,
With bells and bon-fires welcomes her ashore,
And by his office gathering up an host,
Shows the old malice in his breast he bore,
Nor of his help abashed at all to boast,
The Clergies power in readiness before,
Upon their friends a great taxation laid,
To raise munition for the present aid.
23
And to confusion all their power expose,
On the rent bosom of this I Will, where long
War did it self so steadfastly enclose;
(war from our own lewd desolutenesse sprung)
Whom no invasion ever yet could lose;
So old the malice, and so great the wrong,
Urged with the force that foreign fire does bring,
A greater spoil, and horror menacing.
24
This inuouation by an altered state,
Lent this new action such a violent hand,
That it thus boldly dare insinuate,
On the cold faintness of the feebled Land;
And being armed with all the power of fate,
Finding a way so openly to stand
To their intendments, which endeavored well,
Might get that height from whence at first they fell.
25
When all their strength in order strictly set,
All helps and doubts by wars best counsels waid,
What well might further, what their course might let,
And their reliefes conveniently had laid,
A mean reserved security to get,
Whereon at worst their fortune might be stayed,
And furnished fully as themselves desired,
Of all this action needefully required.
26
And at Saint Edmonds do a while repose,
To rest themselves, and their new welcomed force,
Better to learn the manner of their foes,
To the end, not vainly to direct their course;
And seeing daily how the Army grows,
To take a full view both of foot and horse;
With such discretion managing the war,
Truly to show them what indeed they are.
27
When now the King of these proceedings heard,
And of the troops that to them daily run,
And little strength at London yet preparde,
Where he expected favor to have won,
He now commits the City to the guard
Of his approved most-trusted Stapleton,
To John of Eltham (his fair son) the Tower,
Himself to Wales to raise a speedy power.
28
Yet whilst his name does any hope admit,
Proclaims in forfait both of goods and life,
All that enioyde a subjects benefit,
Should lend their power against his son and wife,
And does all slaughters generally acquit
Were done upon the moouers of this strife:
And who could bring in Mortimers proud head,
Should freely take th'reuenewes of the dead.
29
Which strait encountered by the Queens Edict,
who making known the iustnes of her cause,
That she proceeded in a course so strict,
T'vphold their ancient liberties and laws;
Nor that she did this punishment inflict
For private hate, or popular applause,
Only the Spensers to account to bring,
Whose wicked counsels had abusde the King.
30
Which ballasing the multitude that stood
As a light bark that's tosst twixt wind and tide,
Turned in the mixture of th'opposed flood,
when yet opinion not their course could guide,
And wau'ring thus in their inconstant mood,
Till by the weakness of th'emperiall side,
Suffers the seizure of it self at last,
which to the Queen all free advantage cast.
31
When friendlesse Edward followed by his foes,
whom danger does to recreant flight debase,
As poor in hope, as he is rich in woes,
Deprived all princely ornament and grace,
whose force th'more weakened further that he goes,
His safety now suspecting every place;
No help at home, no succor seen abroad,
His mind small rest, his body less abode.
32
One scarce to him his sad discourse has done
Of Henaults power, and what the Queen intends,
But whilst he speaks, another has begun,
A third does take it where the second ends,
when now abroad there is other rumors run,
Some of new foes, some of reuolting friends;
These scarcely past when more reports are spread,
Of many that rebel, of many fled.
33
What plagues does Edward for himself prepare,
Forsaken king, O whither do thou she?
Men change their clime, but sildome change their care,
Thou fli'st thy foes, but follow'st misery,
The evil fates in number many are,
That to thy footsteps do themselves apply;
And still thy conscience pricked with inward grief,
Thy self pursues thy self, both robbed, and thief.
34
Accepting succor offered next at hand,
At last for Wales commits him to the seas;
And seeing Lundy that so fair does stand,
Puts in for succor, (need would feign have ease)
This little model of his banished land,
Which for a while his fancy seems to please,
Feign would he be king of a little I Will,
Although his Empire bounded in a mile.
35
And ready now to strike his prosperous sail,
As under lee, past danger of the flood,
A sudden storm of mixed ^leet and hail,
Not suffers him to rule this piece of wood.
What does thy labor, what thy toil avail,
When thou art still with greater powers with-stood?
Edward, thy hopes all vainly do delude,
By Gods and men, incessantly pursude.
36
In this black tempest long turmoild and tossed,
Quite from their course, and well they know not where,
Among rocks and sands, in danger to be lost,
without in perrill, and within in fear,
At length perceiving they are near the coast,
And that the place more plainly does appear,
Knows by the mountains insolently tall,
That part of Wales that we Glamorgan call.
37
To Neath, a Castle fortified and strong,
Commanding entrance with his banished crew,
The Earl of Gloucester, worker of much wrong,
The Chancellor Baldocke that much evil knew,
Reding his Marshall is the rest among,
Here hid from eyes, but not from enuies view;
where for a while committing them to dwell,
We must prepare more dreadful things to tell,
38
You lighter Muses, leave me, and be gone,
Your weak complaints are matters much too slight,
More horred plagues are here approaching on,
Ye ghastly spirits that haunt the gloomie night,
Lend me your shreeks to express the depth of moan,
with ghastly howling all approach my sight;
And round about with funeral tapers stand,
To give a sad light to my sadder hand.
39
Each line shall lead to some dire point of woe,
And every cadence as a torturde cry,
Now must my tears in such abundance flow,
That they surround the circle of mine eye;
And whilst these great calamities I show,
All loose affections stand you idely by,
Once more our clear Muse dips her wing in gore,
The dreerest tale that pen did ere deplore.
40
New sorts of vengeance threatened to the earth,
The raging Ocean past the bounds to rise,
Strange apparitions, and prodigious birth,
Unheard of sickness, and mortalities,
More inaccustom'd, and unlooked for dearth,
New sorts of Meteors gazing from the skies;
As what before had small or nothing bin,
And only now our miseries begin.
41
And whilst these discordes and dissentions breed,
The land laid naked to all offered ill,
The lawless exile now returns with speed,
Not to defend his country, but to kill,
And all the prisons dissolutely freed,
Both field and town with wretchedness to fill,
London first author of our latest shame,
Soonst that repentst, most plagued for the same.
42
Whose giddy commons merciless and rude,
Let loose to mischief in this cursed day,
Their hands in blood of Edwards friends imbrude,
Never content till they were made away;
Th'implacable and wicked multitude
On the Lieutenant Stapleton do pray,
who dragged and torn by this tumultuous heap,
Cut off his head before the Cross in Cheap.
43
Read woeful City on thy ruinde wall,
Thy sad destruction which is drawing nie,
Where on thy gates is charactered thy fall,
In mangled bodies thine Anatomy,
Now thy lewd errors to a reckning call,
Which may exstract tears from thy ruthlesse eye:
And if the thick air dim thy hateful sight,
Thy buildings are on fire to give thee light.
44
Thy channels serve for incke, for paper, stones,
And on the ground write murder, incest, rape,
And for thy pens, a heap of dead men's bones,
Let every letter besome monstrous shape,
Thy points and accents be departing groans,
And let no vile, nor desperate act escape,
And when with pride thou art again ore'gon,
Then take this book, and sadly look thereon.
45
Poor wretch dispoilde of thy late Virgins name,
Now for thy sin what impious villain shent,
Black is my incke, but blacker thy defame,
Who shall revenge whilst I thy state lament,
What might be done to remedy thy shame,
When now too late these mischieses to prevent,
Against these horrors thou do idely strive,
Thou see thy self devoured, yet alive.
46
Thou wantst redress, and tyranny remorce,
To whom should thou thy helples woes complain?
But yield thy self to the adulterers force,
Thy words untimely, and return in vain,
The more thou grieu'st, thy fault is still the worse;
This remedy there only does remain,
Dispoylde of fame, be prodigal of breath,
And make thy life clear by a resolute death.
47
For worlds that were, the present times complain,
when men might have been buride when they di'de,
And children safely in their cradles lain,
And when the husband might enjoy his bride,
when in some bounds ill could it self contain,
The son have kneeld by's fathers deathbed side,
The living wrongde, the dead no right can have,
The father sees his son to want a grave.
48
But it is too late thy headstrong course t'recall,
Depriude all feeling of external fear;
These deadly sounds by their continual fall,
Settle confusion in thy deafned ear,
This is the last, O would the worst of all!
Shreekes be the music thou delightst to hear,
Arms thy attire, and wounds be all thy good,
Thy end consists in rapine and in blood.
49
In glorious age of whom it should be said,
That all these mischieues should abound in thee,
That all these sins should to thy charge be laid,
From no calumnious nor vile action free,
O let not time us with thy ills upbraid,
Lest fear what has been, argue what may be;
And fashioning so a habit in the mind,
Make us alone the haters of our kind.
50
O powrefull heaven, in whose all-soueraigne rain,
Those thy pure bodies move in harmony,
And by a strong and everlasting chain,
Together linckt in sacred unity;
In which you do continually remain,
Stayed in one certain course eternally,
Why his due motion keeps every star,
Yet what they govern so irregular?
51
Muse, in the course of this unnatural war,
Tell me from whence this height of mischief grew,
That in so short time spread it self so far,
Whereon such strange calamities ensue;
The true occasions faithfully declare:
O men religious, was the fault in you?
Which even grown resty by your power, withdraw
Your stifned necks, as free from civil awe.
52
What wonder then the people grow profane,
When Church men's lives give laymen leave to fall;
Their former Doue-like humbleness disdain,
For coats of hair, now clad in costly pall,
The holy Ephod made a cloak for gain,
And what most cunning, most cannonicall,
And blind promotion shuns that dangerous road,
Which the old Prophets diligently troad.
53
Hence is it that God so slightly is adored,
The rock remoou'd whereon our faith is gounded,
Conscience esteemde but as an idle word,
Which weak before, by vain opinion wounded,
Professors lives so little fruit afford,
And in her sects religion lies confounded;
The sacred things a merchandise become,
None talks of texts, and prophesying dumb.
54
And of the former being thus possessed,
Like to the venom of infectious air,
That having got into the secret breast,
Is not prescribde, nor long times stays it there;
But from this ground to seize upon the rest,
The rank contagion spreading every where;
That ere this evil has the utmost done,
The solid body lastly overrun.
55
Cauells break forth to cancel wholesome laws,
And caching hold upon the public weal,
Where doubts should cease, they rise in every clawse,
The sword that wounds ordaind a salve to heal,
One mischief still another forward draws,
Each striuiug others vileness to conceal,
By lewd corruptions in a needful use,
Right cloakes all wrong, and couers all abuse.
56
When now the King late taken to this hold,
And in this poor imprisned liberty,
Living a death in hunger, want, and cold,
Even in depth of woe and misery;
By hateful treason secretly is sold,
Before he could the treacherous drift espy;
For when oppression's up unto the chin,
Who lends not hand to thrust him boldly in?
57
In th'lucklesse fortunes of this wretched King,
whose person's seized by th'inuading part,
Unto his friends sad matters menacing,
With bloodlesse terror striking every heart,
All expectation now discouraging,
When no evasion from the foe to start;
And that the clowd which threatened greatest fear,
Rose whence their hopes most brightest did appear.
58
Which breaking in now with a general force,
On the two Spensers, from whose only hate
This war first sprung, distracted in their course,
Their latest power confined by their fate,
Of whom there is none takes pity or remorce;
Which to avoid, as cankers of the state,
The eldest first to death at Bristow led,
Where hangde to death, his body quartered.
59
Whenas the heir to Winchester late dead,
The bloody lot to The Earl of Gloucester fell,
Reding the Marshall, marshald with the dead,
When soon succeedes the Earl of Arundell,
To pay the forfait of a reverent head,
Then Muchelden, and woeful Daniell,
Who followed him in his lascivious ways,
Must go before him to his fatal days.
60
Even like some pillar, on whose goodly height,
A pondrous building only does depend,
Which when not able to sustain the weight,
And that his strong back has begun to bend,
As quite deprived of his former might,
The massy load unto the ground does send,
Crushing the lesser props, and murdring all
That stand within the compass of the fall.
61
That state whereon the strength of Princes leanes,
Whose hie ascent we trembling do behold,
From whence by coyness of their chaste disdaines,
Subjection is imperiously controld;
Their earthly weakness evermore explaines,
Exalting whom they please, not whom they should,
When their own fall (shows how they ^ondlyer'd)
Procured by those unworthily preferred.
62
Merit goes unregarded and vngrac'd,
When by his fauters ignorance held in,
And Parasites in wise men's rooms are placed,
Only to sooth the great ones in their sin,
From such whose gifts, and knowledge is debac'd,
There Is many strange enormities begin,
Forging great wits into most factious tools,
When mightiest men often prove the mightiest fools.
63
But why so vainly do I time bestow,
The foul abuse of th'wretched world to child,
Whose blinded judgment every hour does show,
What folly weak mortality does guide?
Wise was the man that laughed at all thy woe,
My subject still more sorrow does provide,
And this late peace more matter still does breed,
To hasten that which quickly must succeed.
The end of the fourth Canto.
The fifth Book of the Barrons wars.
The Argument.
Th'imprisoned King his government for sakes,
And to the Peers his weakness so excused,
Who him ere long from Leisters keeping takes,
That with much woe his sovereign Lord refused,
His torturers of him a mockery makes,
And basely, and reproachfully abused,
By secret ways to Berckley being led,
And cruelly in prison murdered.
1
THe wretched King unnaturally betrayed,
By lewd coruption of his native Land,
From thence with speed to Kennelworth conuayd,
By The Earl of Leister with a mighty band,
Some few his favorers quickly ouer-wayd,
And now a present Parliament in hand,
To ratify the general intent,
His resignation of the government.
2
Fallen through the frailty of intemperate will,
That with his fortunes it so weakly farde,
To undergo that unexpected ill,
For his deserved punishment preparde,
The measure of that wretchedness to fill,
To him allotted as a just reward,
Arms all with malice, either less or more,
To strike at him that struck at all before.
3
And being a thing the commons daily crave,
To which the great are resolutely bent,
Such forward helps on every side to have,
To Effect their strong and forcible intent,
Which now that speed unto their action gave,
That ratified by general consent,
Still hastened on to execute the thing,
Which for one ill, two worse should shortly bring.
4
Bishops, Earls, Abbots, and the Barrons all,
Each in due order as becomes the state,
Set by the Heraults in that goodly hall,
The Burgesses for places corporate,
Whom this great busnes at this time does call,
For the Cinque Ports the Barrons conuocate,
And other Knights, for the whole body sent,
Both on the South, and on the North of Trent.
5
From his impris'ning chamber clad in black,
Before the assembly sadly he is brought,
A doleful hearse upon a dead man's back,
whose heavy looks might tell his heavier thought,
In which there does no part of sorrow lack,
Nor fained action needs to grieve be taught:
His funeral solemnized in his cheer,
His eyes the mourners, and his legs the Beer.
6
Torleton, as one select to this intent,
The best experienced in this great affair,
A man grave, subtle, stowt, and eloquent,
First with fair speech the assembly does prepare,
Then with a voice austere and eminent,
Does his abuse effectually declare,
As winnes each sad eye with a reverent fear,
With due attention drawing every ear.
7
The great exactions raised by the King,
With whose full plenty he is Mineons fed,
Himself and subjects so impou'rishing,
And that dear blood he lauishly had shed,
Which desolation to the land should bring,
And the chief cause by his lewd riots bred;
The loss in war sustained through his blame,
The during scandal to the English name.
8
Proceeding forward to the future good,
That their dissignements happily intend,
And with what upright policy it stood,
No after hopes their for tunes to amend,
The resignation to his proper blood,
That might the action lawfully defend,
The present need that willd it strictly so,
Whose imposition they might not sorslowe.
9
Pardon me Art, that striving to be short,
To this intent a speech delivering,
And that at full I do not here report
Matters that tuch deposing of the King,
My faithful Muse, O do not thou exhort
The after times to so abhorred a thing,
To show the reasons forcibly were laid,
Out of thy feelings what he might have said.
10
The strong deliu'ry of whose vehement speech,
Borne with a dauntlesse, and contracted brow,
That with such steme severity did teach,
His reasons more authentic to allow,
Which the more easly made the dangerous breach,
By the remembrance of a general vow:
To which they here must openly contest,
When Edward comes to consumate the rest.
11
His fair cheek couerd in pale sheets of shame,
And as a dumb show in a swowne began,
Where passion does such sundry habites frame,
As every sense a right Tragedian,
Truly to show from whence his sorrow came,
Beyond the compass of a common man,
where Nature seems a practiser in Art,
Teaching Despair to act a lively part.
12
Ah Pity, do thou live, or were thou not,
Mortals by such sights have to flint bin turned,
Or what men have been, has their seed forgot,
Or was it never known that any mourned,
In what so strangely are we ouershot?
Against our own self has our frailty spurned,
Or tears hence forth abandon humane eyes,
And neuer-more to pit^y miseries.
13
He takes the Crown yet scornefully unto him,
With slight regard, as scarcely thinking on it,
As though not senseless that it should forgo him,
And sildome casts a scornful eye upon it,
would seem to leave it, and would have it woe him,
Then snatching it, as loath to have forgone it,
Yet puts it from him, yet he will not so,
would feign retain what feign he would forgo.
14
In this confused conflict of the mind,
Tears drowning sighs, and sighs confounding tears,
Yet whenas neither liberty could find,
Oppressed with the multitude of ^eares,
Stands as a man affrighted from his kind,
Grief becomes senseless when too much it bears,
whilst speech and silence strives which place should take
From his full bosom thus his sorrowee brake.
15
If that my title rightfully be planted,
Upon a true indubitate succession,
Confirmd by nations as by nature granted,
That freely has deliuerd me possession,
Impute to heaven sufficiency to have wanted,
which must deny it power, or you oppression,
which into question by due course may bring,
The grieved wrongs of an anointed King.
16
That hallowed unction by a sacred hand,
which once was powrde on this emperious head,
which wrought th'iudument of a strict command,
And round about me the rich verdure spread,
Either my right in greater stead must stand,
Or why in vain was it so idely shed,
whose profanation and vnreueret tuch,
Just heaven has often punished always much.
17
When from the bright beams of our sovereign due,
Descends the strength of your enated right,
And prosperously deriues it self to you,
As from our fulness taking borrowed light,
which to your safeties always firm and true,
Why thus repugne you by prepostrous might?
But what heaven lent me virtuously to have used,
Leaves to your power what weakness has abused.
18
But here I do resign it to your King,
Pawsing heereat as though his tongue offended,
with griping throws seems forth that word to bring,
Sighing a full point as he there had ended,
O how that sound his grieved heart does wring,
Which he recalling gladly would have mended:
Things of small moment we can scarcely hold,
But griefs that touch the heart are hardly cold.
19
But being past, he prosecutes in tears,
Calming that tempest with a shower of rain,
As he had strove to keep it from his ears,
Quoth he, the liegeman to your Sovereign?
O in his lips how vile that word appears,
Whereat ashamde does sadly pawse again,
Yes, yes, even say so unto him you bear it,
Ift be young Edward that you mean shall wear it.
20
Let him account his bondage from that day
That he is with the Diadem invested,
A glittering Crown has made this hair so gray,
Within whose circle he is but arrested,
To true content this not the certain way,
With sweeter cates a mean estate is feasted,
And when his proud feet scorn to tuch the mold,
His head a prisner in a gayle of gold.
21
His subjects numbered, numbering of his care,
And when with showts the people do begin,
Let him suppose the applause but prayers are
T'escape the danger that they see him in,
Wherein t'aduenture he so boldly dare;
The multitude hoth multitudes of sin,
And he that's first to cry, God save the King,
Is the first man does news of sorrow bring.
22
Appeasing tumults hate cannot appease,
Soothde with deceits, and fed with flatteries,
Thy self displeasing, other sought to please,
Obeyed as much as he shall tyrannize,
The least in safety being most at ease,
Fear forcing friends, enforcing enemies:
And when he fitteth in his greatst estate,
His footstool danger, and his chair is hate.
23
Reign he alone, whilst he no King, was one
Disarmde of power, and here dejected is,
By whose deposing he enioyes a throne,
Nor should I suffer that, nor he do this,
I must confess the inheritance his own,
But whilst I live it should be none of his,
The son climes up to thrust the father down,
And thus the crowned left without a Crown.
24
Having performd this hard constrained part,
His speech, his reign, the day all jointly ended,
Strangely transformd, not being what thou art,
Card for of none, unlooked on, vnattended,
Sadly departing with a heavy heart,
To his strong lodging straightly recommended,
Left to bemoane his miserable plight,
To the rude walls, and solitary night.
25
Whilst things are thus disastrously decreed,
Seditious libels every day are spread,
By such as like not of their violent deed,
That he by force should be delivered,
Whether his wrong remorce in some did breed,
That him at last untimely pitied,
Or else deuisde in policy by some,
To cloak that mischief afterward to come.
26
And hate that each where harkening still does lurk,
And yet suspicions Edward is not sure,
Thinking what blood with Leicester might wurke,
Or else, what friends his name might him procure,
Which yet their thoughts continually does yrke
The time he should at Kenelworth endure:
Fore think some place t'which secretly conuaide,
Unknown his being, be securde from aid.
27
And though the great to hide their close intent,
(Seem never so clear from knowing those know ill)
Not unprovided of the instrument,
Which they keep ready to perform their will,
Such have th'in store to their damnation bent,
In villainy notorious for their skill,
Dishonest, desperate, merciless, and rude,
To all vile actions ready to intrude.
28
Matreuers and base Gurney are the men
In this lewd act that must confedered be,
Whose hateful names pollute our maiden pen,
But I entreat you, be not grieved with me
To whom the same do worthily pertain,
Some bought grow crooked from the streightest tree:
Nor shall you be partakers of their shame,
The fault lies in their deed, not in your name.
29
These secretly to Killingworth dispatched,
Fitted of all things that their hearts desire,
At such a time as few their purpose watched,
After whose busnes none is to enquire,
Which by their warrant subtly was matched,
Only to them known whither to retire:
Taking the King, his guardian to acquit,
And to bestow him where they thought most fit.
30
With a crew of ribalds, villainous, and naught,
As their coagents in this hateful thing,
To the earl of Leister their commission brought,
Commanding the deliu'ry of the King
which (with much grief) they lastly from him wrought,
About the Castle closely houering,
watching a time till silence, and the night,
Might with conuenience privilege their flight.
31
With shameful scoffs, and barbarous disgrace,
Him on a lean ill fauord jade they set,
In a vile garment, beggarly, and base,
Which, it should seem, they purposely did get,
And in a wretched miserable case,
B^numd and beaten with the cold, and wet,
Deprived of all repose and natural rest,
with thirst and hunger grievously oppressed.
32
Yet still suspicious that he should be known,
They shave away his ornament of hair,
The last thing his that he could call his own,
Never left Fortune any wight so bare;
Such tyranny on king was never shown,
Thus void of comfort, were he void of care:
No, no, our joys are shadows, and deceive us,
But till our death our sorrows never leave us.
33
To which intent, when farthest from resort,
Forcing him light from his poor weary beast,
Upon a molehill (O most sad report)
With puddle-water him they lewdly dressed,
Whilst at his woes and miseries they sport,
An iron skull the Basin, like the rest,
Whose lothing eyes in this more lothed glass,
Well may discern how much deformd he was.
34
Th'abundant drops that from his eyes do fall,
A poole of tears still rising by this rain,
Which wrestling with the water, and withal,
A troubled circle makes it to retain,
His endless griefs unto his mind might call,
Billowde with sighs like to a little maine,
water with tears contending whether should
Make water warm, or make the warm tears cold.
35
Vile traitors, hold off your unhallowed hands,
His brow the state of majesty still bears,
Dare you thus keep your sovereign Lord in bands,
How can your eyes behold th'annointeds tears?
Or if your sight thus all remorce with-stands,
Are not your hearts even pierced through your ears?
The mind is free, what ere afflict the man,
He Is yet a King, do Fortune what she can.
36
Who Is he should take what God himself has given,
Or spill that life his holy spirit infused,
All powers be subject to the power of heaven,
Wrongs pass not unrevenged how ere excused,
If of all sense grief has thee not bereauen,
Rise majesty when thou art thus abused,
O whither shall authority betake,
When in this sort it does it self forsake.
37
And in despite and mockery of a Crown,
A wreathe of grass they for his temples make,
Which when he felt, as coming from a swoune,
And that his powers a little began awake,
Fortune (quoth he) thou do not always frown,
I see thou give as well as thou do take,
That wanting natural covert for, my brain,
For that defect, thou lend'st me this again.
38
To whom, O heaven, should I my griefs complain
Since thou art just and provident in all?
How should this body natural strength retain,
To suffer things so much innaturall?
My cogitations labor but in vain,
Except thou be partaker in my fall;
And when at once so many mischiefs meet,
By change of sorrow make my torment sweet.
39
Wherefore my fate I should but fondly grutch,
It Is vain contention when with heaven we strive,
Which preordaines my miseries for such,
That by one woe another should survive,
To show how it mortality can tutch,
My wretchedness so strangely to contriue,
That all my comfort in mishaps should rest,
And else in nothing but misfortune blessed.
40
To Berckley thus they led this wretched King,
The place of horror that was long forethought,
What power should suffer so defilde a thing,
Or can behold this murder to be wrought,
That might the Nation into question bring,
But that your ways with judgment still are fraught;
Thus art thou hap'd into thy earthly hell,
Now take thy leave, and bid the world farewell.
41
Berekley, whose fair seat has been famous long,
Let thy fair buildings shreeke a deadly sound,
And to the air complain thy grievous wrong,
Keeping the figure of King Edwards wound,
That as thou waxest old, their shame still young,
Their wretched foote-steps printed on the ground,
That when report shall lend their vile act breath,
All tongues may add damnation to their death.
42
The omenous Raven with a dismal cheer,
Through his hoarse beak, of following horror tells,
Begetting strange imaginary fear,
With heavy echoes like to passing-bells;
The howling dog a doleful part does bear,
As though they chimde his latest burying knells,
Under his cave the buzzing shreech-owle sings,
Beating his windows with her fatal wings.
43
And still affrighted in his fearful dreams,
With raging fiends and goblins that he meets,
Of falling down from steep Rocks into streams,
Of toombes, of burialls, and of winding-sheetes,
Of wandering helpelesse in far foreign Realms,
Of strong temptations by seducing sprites,
Wherewith awakde, and calling out for aid,
His hollow voice does make himself afraid.
44
Next comes the vision of his bloody rain,
Masking along with Lancasters stern ghost,
Of Barrons twenty eight or hanged, or slain,
Attended with the ruefull mangled host,
That vnreuengde yet all this while remain,
At Borough battle, and at Burton lost,
Threatening with frowns, and trembling every lim,
As though in pieces they would torture him.
45
And if it chance that from the troubled skies,
The least small star through any chincke give light,
Straitwaies on heaps the thronging clouds arise,
As though the heaven were angry with the night,
That it should lend that comfort to his eyes,
Deformed shadows, glimpsing in his sight
As darkness, for it would more darkened be,
Through those poor crannies for^de it self to see.
46
When all th'affliction that they could impose,
Even to the full, and utmost of their hate,
Above his torment yet his strength arose,
As Nature made a covenant with Fate,
When now his watchful and two wary foes,
That cease not still his woes to aggrauate,
All further helps suspected to prevent,
To take his life to Berckley closely sent.
47
And subtly a letter fashioning,
Which in the words a double sense does bear,
Which seems to bid them, not to touch the King,
Showing withal how, vile a thing it were,
But by false poynting, is another thing,
And to dispatch him, bids them not to fear,
which taught to find, these murderers need no more,
For which they stood too ready long before.
48
Whereas he haps a Chronicle to find
Of former kings, their reigns, their deaths, and deeds,
which some their lodgde forgotten had behind,
On which to pass the hours he falls to reed,
Thinking thereby to recreate his mind,
But in his breast this greater woe does breed,
For when deep sorrow on the fancy seaseth,
What ere we see, our misery increases.
49
First of great William, Conqueror of this I Will,
(From whom he is tenth that in succession lies)
Whose power inforcde the Saxon to exile,
Planting new laws, and foreign subtilties,
Force and subjection, so to reconcile
The punishment of Harolds tyrannies,
which he applies with arguments so strong,
To the due course of his just punished wrong.
50
Rufus his son, duke Robert far abroad,
Receives the rule in weak infeebled state,
His fathers steps that evidently troade,
Depressing those who had been conquered late,
Wishing release of this their gricuous load,
Under the guidance of their former fate,
The place for men that did to beasts intend,
A bestiall life had last a beastly end.
51
Henry the yongst, his brother William dead,
Takes the Crown from his vsurpfull hand,
Due to the eldest good duke Roberts head,
Bearing our Red Cross in the Holy Land,
whose force far off so much diminished,
That his return disabled to withstand,
when those for whom th'unnaturall war was done,
The sea deuours, he left without a son.
52
To Mawd the Empress he the Scepter leaves,
His only daughter, which by false pretext
Stephen Earl of Bolloine forcibly bereaues,
Henry's false nephew in succession next,
By which the Land a stranger war receaues,
wherewith it grew so miserably vexed:
Till Stephen failing, and his issue reft,
T'the heirs of Mawd the regal Scepter left.
53
The second Henry, Mawd the Empress son,
Of The English line Plantagenet the first,
By Stephens death a glorious reign begun,
whose youth prolongd to make his age accursed,
By his son Henry's coronation,
Which to his days much woe and sorrow nursed,
when those for whom he conquered, to make great,
Abroad his towns, at home vsurpde his seat.
54
Richard his son that after him succeedes,
Who not content with what was safely ours,
A man lift up to great and glorious deeds,
Into the East transportes our valiant powers,
Where with his sword whilst many a Pagan bleedes,
Relentlesse Fate hastes on untimely hours,
And makes a period to this hopeful story,
Even in the spring and blossom of his glory.
55
When him succeedes his faithless brother John,
Murthring young Arthur by oppressefull might,
Climing by sorce to his usurped throne,
Justly with poison was repayde his spite,
His life to all men is so hateful grown,
Who grieves his wrongs that never did any right?
That on the Clergy ryrannously fed,
Was by the Clergy justly punished.
56
Henry his son now crowned very young,
Who for the hate they to his father bare,
His state of reigning stood in question long,
Or to be left unto a strangers care;
With whom the Barrons, insolent and strong,
For the old Charter in commotion are,
Which his long rain so carefully attends
Granting, his days in peace securely ends.
57
From him proceeds a Prince, just, wise, and sage,
(In all things happy but in him his son)
For whom even nature did herself engage,
More then in man, in this Prince to have done,
Whose happy reign, recur'd the former rage,
By the large bounds he to his Empire won,
As the first Edward had the second been,
O what a flow of glory had we seen!
58
Turning the leaf as finding unawares,
What day young Edward Prince of Wales was borne,
Which letters seem like Magique Characters,
Or to despite him they were made in scorn,
Marking the paper like dis-figuring stars,
O let that name (quoth he) from books be torn,
Lest in that place the sad displeased earth,
Do loath it self as slaundered with my birth.
59
From thence hereafter humane birth exiled,
By the earth devoured, or swallowed by the sea,
And fame enquiring for that lucklesse child,
Say it was abortiue, or else stolen away;
And lest, O Time, thou be therewith defiled,
In thy unnumbered course devour that day;
Let all be done that power can bring to pass,
Only forget that such there ever was.
60
The troubled tears now standing in his eyes,
Through which as glasses he is forced to look,
Make letters seem as rondlets that arise,
By a stone cast into a standing brook,
Appearing to him in such various wise,
And at one time such sundry fashions took,
Which like deluding monsters do affright,
And with their foul shapes terrify his sight.
61
When on his saint bed falling down at last,
His troubled spirit foretelling danger nie,
When (forth) the doors a fearful howling cast,
To let those in by whom a King should die;
Whereat he starts, amaz^d and aghast,
These ruthlesse villains all upon him fly,
Sweet Prince, alas in vain thou call'st for aid,
By these accursed homicides betraide.
62
O be not authors of so vile an act,
My blood on your posterity to bring,
Which after times with horror shall distract,
When Fame even hoarce with age your shame shall ring,
And by recounting of so vile a fact,
Mortality so much astonishing,
That they shall count their wickedness scarce sin,
To that which long before their time has bin.
63
And if your hate be deadly, let me live,
For that advantage angry heaven has left,
That except life, takes all that it could give,
But for just vengeance should not quite bereft;
Me yet with greater misery to grieve,
Reserve a while this remnant of their theft,
That that which spent from the rest should interdict me,
Alone remaining, does withal afflict me.
64
Thus spoke this woeful and distressed Lord,
As yet his breath found passage to and fro,
With many a short pant, many a broken word,
Many a sore groan, many a grievous throw,
whilst yet his spirit could any strength afford,
Though with much pain disburdning of his woe,
Till lastly gasping by their maist^ring strength,
His kingly heart subjects it self at length.
65
When twixt two beds they close his wearied corse,
Basely vncou'ring of his secret part,
Without all humane pity and remorce,
With burning iron thrust him to the heart,
O that my Muse had but sufficient force,
T'explaine the torment in the which thou art,
Which whilst with words we coldy do express,
Thy pain made greater that we make it less.
66
When those in dead and depth of all the night,
Good simple people that are dwelling near,
From quiet sleep whom care did now affright,
That his last shreeke and woeful cry do hear,
Even pitying that miserable wight,
As twixt compassion, and obedient fear,
Lift their sad eyes with heavy sleep oppressed,
Praying to heaven to give the soul good rest.
67
Still let the buildings sigh his bitter groans,
And evermore his sad complaints repeat,
And let the dull walls and the senseless stones,
By the impression of his torment, sweat,
As wanting sounds wherewith to show his mones,
With all sharp pain and agony repleate,
That all may thither come that shall be told it,
As in a mirror clearly to behold it.
68
When now the Genius of this woeful place,
Being the guide to his affrightfull ghost,
With hair dis^eued, and a ghastly face,
Shall haunt the prison where his life was lost;
And as the den of horror and disgrace,
Let it be fearful unto all the coast,
That those hereafter that do travel near,
Never behold it but with heavy cheer.
The end of the fifth Canto.
The sixth Book of the Barrons wars.
The Argument.
Lord Mortimer made Earl of March; when he
And the fair Queen rule all things by their might,
The pomp wherein at Nottingham they be,
The cost wherewith their amorous Court is dight,
Enuide by those their hateful pride that see,
The King attempts the dreadful cave by night,
Entering the Castle, takes him from thence,
And March at London dies for the offense.
1
Enforced of other accidents to sing,
(Bearing fair shows of promised delight,
Somewhat to slack this melancholy string,)
That new occasions to our Muse excite,
To our conceit strange objects fashioning,
Does our free numbers liberally inuit,
Matter of moment much to be respected,
Must by our pen be seriously directed.
2
And now the time more cuuningly redeeming,
These fraudfull courses fitly to contriue,
How ill so e're, to bear the fairest seeming,
For which they now must diligently strive,
Casting all ways to gain the same esteeming,
That to the world it prosprously might thrive,
This far gone on, now with the hand of might,
Upon this wrong to build a lasting right.
3
The pompous Synod of these earthly Gods;
At Salsbury selected by their King,
To set all even that had been atods,
And into fashion their dissignes to bring,
And strongly now to settle their abodes,
That peace might after from their actions spring;
Firmly t'establish what was well begun,
Under which color mighty things were done.
4
When Mortimer pursuing his desire,
Whilst every engine had his temperate heat,
To b'Earle of March does suddenly aspire,
To Increase the honor of his ancient seat,
That his command might be the more entire;
Who now but only Mortimer is great?
Who knew a kingdom as her lot was thrown,
Which having all, would never starve her own.
5
Now stand they firm as those celestial Poles,
Twixt which the stars in all their course do move,
Whose strength this frame of government vpholds,
An argument their wisdoms to approve.
Which way soever the time in motion roles,
So perfect is the union of their love;
For right is still most absolute alone,
Where power and fortune kindly meet in one.
6
Whilst Edwards nonage gives a further speed,
To th'antient foe-man to renew the war,
Which to prevent they must have special heed,
Matters so strangely managed as they are,
Which otherwise, if their neglect should breed,
Nothing yet made, it might not easily mar,
Which with the most, reserving their estate,
Enforced to purchase at the dearest rate.
7
So much t'release the homage as sufficed,
Among which that deed namde Ragman, of renown,
By which the kings of Scotland had deuisde,
Their fealty unto the English crown,
With other Relics that were highly prizde,
As that which forced the greatest part to frown;
Th'blacke Cross of Scotland (men did omenous deem)
Being a Relic of so hie esteem.
8
To color which, and to confirm the peace,
They make a marrige twixt the Scot and us,
To give more strength unto this strange release,
Which unto all men seemd so dangerous
Whilst Roberts reign, and after his decease,
The league might ever be continued thus,
David the Prince the Lady Jane should take,
which twixt the Realms a lasting bond should make.
9
When The Earl of Kent that being one of those,
Which in their actions had a powerful hand,
Perceiving them of matters to dispose,
To the subjection of so great a land,
Finding the inconvenience that grows
Under the guidance of their wilful hand,
To shake their power whilst he strangely does cast,
His fatal end too violently does haste.
10
Which giving out his brother yet to live,
(Long now supposed the deceased King)
Unto his nephew might that scandal give,
As into question might his title bring:
Ill this report began, and worse it thrive,
Being so foul and dangerous a thing,
Which being the motive of intestine strife,
The time not long ere it bereft his life.
11
Whilst Edward takes what late their power did give,
Whose nonage craves their bountiful protection,
Which know to rule whilst he must learn to live,
From their experience taking his direction,
Which more and more their doubtful hopes revive,
When borne to reign, yet crowned by their election,
Th'allegiance duly does to him belong,
Now makes their faction absolutely strong.
12
Providing for protection of the king,
Men of most power, and noblest of the Pecres,
That no distaste unto the realm might bring,
For ripened judgment, or well seasoned years,
With comelines all matters managing,
Yet whilst they row, it is Mortimer that steeres,
well might we think the man were worse than blind,
That wanted sea-roome, and could rule the wind.
13
To smoothe the path wherein this course was gone,
Which as a test might to their actions stand,
And give more full possession of their own,
In being received from a soucraine band,
Into their bosoms absolutely thrown,
Both for the good, and safety of the land:
When their proceedings colored with this care,
To the worlds eye so fair an outside bare.
14
All complement that appertainde to state,
By giving greatness every honored rite,
To feed those eyes that did their hours avvaite;
And by all means to nourish their delight,
That entertaining love, they welcome hate,
And with free bounty equally inuit,
A Princes wealth in spending still does spread,
Like to a brook with many fountains fed.
15
To Nottingham the Norths emperious eye,
Which as a Pharus guardes the goodly soil,
And armd by Nature danger to defy,
There to repose him safely after toil,
Where treason least advantage might epsy,
Closely conuaies this great in-valued spoil:
That by residing from the public sight,
He might more freely relish his delight.
16
Nine score in check attending in their court,
Whom honored Knighthood knitts in mutual bands,
Men most select, of special worth and sort,
Much might they do that have so many hands,
Who pays not tribute to this lordly port?
This hie-rearde Castle every way commands;
Thus like those Giants against great heaven they rise,
Which darted Rocks at the imperial skies.
17
It seems in him Fame means her power to show,
And twixt her wings to bear him through the skies,
He might more easly see the things below,
Having above them mounted him so hie,
Unto whose will they meckely seem to bow,
Under whose greatness meaner powers do ^e:
All things concur with fair succeslefull chance,
To raise that man whom Fortune will advance.
18
Here all along the flower enameld vales,
The silver. Trent on pearly sand^ does slide,
And to the meadows telling wanton tales,
Her Cristall limbs lasciuiously in pride,
(As ravished with the enamored gales,)
with often turnings casts from side to side,
As loath she were the sweet soil to for sake,
And cast her self into the German lake.
19
Near whom; fair Sherwood wildely bent to roue,
Twines her loose arms about the flattering Towers,
By the mild shadows of her scattered grove,
Lends winter shelter, and giues' summer bowers,
As with the flood in courtesy it strove,
And by repulsing the sharp Northern showers:
Courts the proud Castle, who by turning to her,
Smiles to behold th'lasciuious wod-nymph woe her.
20
Who being retirde so strictly to this place,
To this fair sted the Princes person draws,
When Fortune seems their greatness to embrace,
That as a working and especial cause,
Effects each formal ceremonious grace,
As by her just and necessary laws,
That in the town retains his kingly seat,
With Marches Court the Castle is repleate.
21
Occasiond where, in counsels to debate,
And by the king conveniently is met,
So sovereign and magnificent in state,
As might all eyes upon his greatness set,
Prizing his honor at that costly rate,
As to the same due reverence might beget,
which as the object sundry passions wrought,
Stirring strange forms in many a wandering thought.
22
Could blind ambition find the meanest stay
His disproportiond and vain course to guide,
Tassure some safety in that slippery way,
Where the most worldly provident do slide,
Feeling the steep fall threatening sure decay,
Besotted in the wantonness of pride,
The mind assuming absoluter powers,
Might check the frail mortality of ours.
23
But still in pleasure sitting with excess,
His sauory junkett tasted with delight,
Never can that glutton appetite suppress,
Where every dish inuites a licorish sight,
Nor having much, is his desire the lesle,
Till tempted past the compass of his might,
The pampered stomach more than well suffizde,
Casts up the surfeit lately gurmundizde.
24
And when some brook from th'ouer moistened ground
By swelling waters prowdly over slowd,
Stops his ^^rrent, shouldrrth down his mownd,
And from his course does quite himself unload,
The bordring meddowes every where surrownd,
Dispersing his own riches all abroad,
Spending the store he was maintained by,
Leaves his first channel desolate and dry.
25
When now those few that many tears had spent,
And long had wept on murdered Edwards grave,
Muttring in corners, grieud, and discontent,
And finding some a willing care that gave,
Sti^ as they durst, bewraying what they meant,
Tending his pride and greatness to deprave,
Urging withal, what some might justly do,
If things thus borne, were rightly looked into,
26
Some give it out, that March by blood to rise,
Had cut off Kent, the man might next succeed,
And his late treasons falsely did surmise,
As a mere color to this lawless deed,
That his ambition only did devise,
In time the royal family to weed,
When in account there was but only one,
That kept him off from stepping to the throne.
27
And those much busied in the former times,
Then credulous that honor was his end,
And by the hate they bare to others crimes,
Did not his faults so carefully attend,
Perceiving how he desolutely climes,
(Having thus brought his purpose to an end)
With a severe eye now more strictly look
Into the course that his ambition took.
28
All fence the tree that serves for a shade,
Whose large grown body does repulse the wind,
Until his wastefull branches do invade,
The straighter plants, and them in prison bind,
And as a tyrant to the weaker made;
When like a foul deuourer of his kind,
Unto his root all put their hands to hew,
Whose romth but hinders others that would grow.
29
Thus at his ease whilst he securely sat,
And to his will these things assured were,
With a well gouernd and contented fate,
Never so much freed from suspicious fear,
Well fortifide, and in so good estate,
As not admits of danger to be near,
But still we see before a sudden shower,
The sun shines hotst, and has the greatest power.
30
Within the Castle has the Queen deuisde
A chamber with choice rarities so frought,
As in the same she had imparadizde
Almost what man by industry has sought,
where, with the curious pensill was comprizde,
what could with colors by the Art be wrought,
In the most sure place of the Castle there,
which she had namde the Tower of Mortimer.
31
An orball form with pillars small composde,
Which to the top like paralels do bear,
Arching the compass where they were inclosde,
Fashioning the fair roof like the hemisphere,
In whose partitions by the lines disposde,
All the clear Northern Asterismes were
In their corporeal shapes with stars inchased,
As by the old Poets they in heaven were placed.
32
About which lodgings, toward the upper face,
Ran a fine bordure circularly led,
As equal twixt the hi'st point and the base,
That as a Zone the waste ingirdled,
That lends the sight a breathing or a space,
Twixt things near view, and those far over head;
Under the which the Painters curious skill,
In lively forms the goodly room did fill.
33
Here Phoebus clipping Haycinthus stood,
whose lives last drops his snowie breast imbrew,
The ones tears mixed with the others blood,
That shoul't be blood or tears, no sight could view,
So mixed together in a little flood,
Yet here and there they seu'rally withdrew,
The pretty wood-nimphs chafing him with balm,
To bring the sweet boy from his deadly qualme.
34
With the Gods Lire, his quiver and his bow,
His golden mantle cast upon the ground,
To Express whose geiefe, Art even her best did show,
The sledge so shadowed still seemed to rebound,
To counterfeit the vigor of the blow,
As still to give new anguish to the wound,
The purple flower sprung from the blood that run,
That opneth since, and closes with the Sun.
35
By which the heyfer Io, Jove's fair rape,
Gazing her new taken figure in a brook,
The water shadowed to observe the shape,
In the same form that she on it does look:
So cunningly to cloud the wanton escape,
That gazing eyes, the portrature mistook,
By prospectiue deuisde beholding now,
This way a maiden, that way ^t seemde a Cow.
36
Swist Mercury like to a Sheepheards boy,
Sporting with Hebe by a fountain brim,
with many a sweet glance, many an amorous toy,
He sprinckling drops at her, and she at him;
wherein the Painter so explainde their joy,
As though his skill the perfect life could lim;
Upon whose brows the water hung so clear,
As through the drops the fair skin might appear.
37
And Ciffy Cynthus with a thousand birds,
whose freckled plumes adorn his bushy crown,
Under whose shadow graze the straggling herds,
Out of whose top the fresh springs trembling down,
Dropping like fine pearl through his shaggy beards,
With moss and climing Ivy ouer-growne,
The Rock so lively done in every part,
As Nature could be paterned by Art.
38
The naked Nimphs some up and down descending,
Small scattering flowers at one another flung,
With nimble turns their limber bodies bending,
Cropping the blooming branches lately sprung,
(Upon the briers their colored mantles rending)
Which on the Rocks grew here and there among;
Some comb their hair, some making garlands by,
As with delight might satisfy the eye.
39
There comes proud Phaeton tumbling through the clouds,
Cast by his Palfraies that their raines had broke,
And setting fire upon the welked shrowdes,
Now through the heaven run madding from the yoke,
The elements together thrust in crowdes,
Both Land and Sea hid in a reeking smoke,
Drawn with such life, as some did much desire,
To warm themselves, some frighted with the fire.
40
The river Po, that him receiving burnde,
His seven sisters standing in degrees,
Trees unto women seeming to be turnde,
As the gods turnde the women into trees,
Both which at once so mutually that mournde,
Drops from their boughs, or tears fell from their eyes,
The fire seemde to be water, water flame,
Such excellence in showing of the same.
41
And to this lodging did the light invent,
That it should first a natural course reflect,
Through a short room into the window sent,
Whence it should come expressiuely direct,
Holding just distance to the lineament,
And should the beams proport onably project;
And being thereby condensated and grave,
To every figure a sure color gave.
42
In part of which, under a golden Vine,
Whose broad leau'd brauches cou'ting over all,
Stood a rich bed, spread with this wanton twine,
Doubling themselves in their lascivious fall,
Whose rip'ned clus^ers seeming to decline,
Whereas among the naked Cupids sprawle,
Some at the sundry colored birds do shute,
Some swaruing up to pluck the purple fruit.
43
On which a Tissue counterpoint was cast,
Arachnes web the same did not surpass,
Wherein the story of his fortunes past,
In lively pictures neatly handled was;
How he escaped the Tower, in France how graced,
with stones embroyd'red of a wondrous mass;
About the border in a curious fret,
Emblems, Empresas, H^^oglifiques set.
44
This flattering calm, congeales that thickened shower,
Which the full clouds of poisnous envy fed,
whose desolution waits th unhappy hour,
To let the fury on his hateful head,
which now was of that violence and power,
As his delights yet not imagined,
when men suppose in safety most to stand,
Then greatest dangers are the neer'st at hand.
45
Yet finding the necessity is such,
To execute what he does undertake,
And that his crown it did so nearly tuch,
If they too soon his sleeping power awake;
The Attempt was great, the danger was as much,
Must secretly provide some course to take,
By which he might th'enterprise effect,
And most offend, where he might least suspect.
46
A deep black cave low in the earth is found,
whose duskie entrance like pale Morpheus Cell,
with strange Meanders windeth under ground,
where sooty darkness evermore does dwell;
That with such dread and horror does abound,
As might be deemde an entrance into hell;
which Architects to serve the Castle made,
Whenas the Dane this Island did invade.
47
Now on along this cranckling path does keep,
Then by a rock turns up another way,
Now rising up, now falling toward the deep,
As the ground level, or vnlevell lay;
And now direct, now angular does creep,
Nor in the course keeps any certain stay,
Till in the Castle in a secret place,
He casts the foul mask from his clowdy face.
48
By which the King with a selected crew,
Of such as he with his intent acquainted,
And well affected to this action knew,
That in revenge of Edward never fainted,
And to their utmost zealously pursue,
Such, whose clear blood no time had ever tainted;
Adventures now this labirinth t'assay,
To rowze the beast which kept them all at bay.
49
What time the Sun with this day-laboring teames,
Is driving down unto the West apace,
T'refresh his cauples in the Ocean streams,
And cool the feruor glowing in his face,
Which now appears by his hic-coloured beams,
To rest him from our Hemisphere a space,
Leaving foul darkness to possess the skies,
The fittest times for bloody tragedies.
50
With torches now attempting the sad cave,
Which at their entrance seems in a fright,
At the reflection that the brightness gave,
As till that time it never saw the light;
Where light and darkness with the power they have,
Strongly for the pre-eminence do fight,
And each confounding other, both appear,
As to their own selves they contrary were.
51
The craggy cleeues which cross them as they go,
Make as their passage they would have denide,
And threatening them their journey to forslow,
As angry with the path that was their guide,
As they their grief and discontent would show,
Cursing the hand that did them first divide;
The combrous falls and risings seem to say,
This wicked action could not brook the day.
52
The gloomy lamps this troop still forward led,
Forcing shadows follow on their back,
Are like the mourners waiting on the dead,
And as the deed, so are they ugly black;
Hate goes before, confusion followed,
The sad portents of bloodshed, and of wrack;
These faint dim-burning lights as all amazed,
At those deformed shades whereon they gazed.
53
The clattering arms their masters seem to chide,
As they would reason wherefore they should wound,
And striking with the points from side to side,
As though even angry with the hallow ground,
That it this vile and ruthlesse act should hide,
whose stony roof locked in their doleful sound,
And hanging in the creekes, draw back again,
As willing them from murder to refrain.
54
Now waxing late, and after all these things,
Unto her chamber is the Queen withdrawn,
To whom a choice Musician plays and sings,
Reposing her upon a state of Lawne,
In night attire divinely glittering,
As the approaching of the cheerful dawne,
Leaning upon the breast of Mortimer,
Whose voice more then the music pleased her ear.
55
Where her fair breasts at liberty are let,
where violent veins in curious branches flow,
where Venus Swans and milkie Doves are set,
Upon the swelling mounts of driven snow,
where Love whilst he to sport himself does get,
Has lost his course nor finds which way to go,
Enclosed in this Labyrinth about,
Where let him wander still, yet never get out.
56
Her loose gold hair, O gold, thou art too base,
were it not sin to name those silk threeds hair,
Declining down to kiss her fairer face,
But no word fair enough for thing so fair,
O what hie wondrous epethite can grace,
Or give the due praise to a thing so rare!
But where the pen fails, pensill cannot show it,
Nor can be known unless the mind do know it.
57
She lays those fingers on his manly cheek,
The gods pure Scepters, and the darts of love,
which with a touch might make a tygre meek,
Or the maine Atlas from his place remove,
So so^t, so feeling, delicate, and sleeke,
As Nature ware the lillies for a glove,
As might beget life where was never none,
And put a spirit into the flinty stone.
58
The fire of precious wood the lights perfume,
whose perfect cleerenesse on the painting shone,
As every thing to sweetness did consume,
Or every thing had sweetness of it own,
And to it self this portrayed did resume,
The smell wherewith his natural is grown,
That light gave color on each thing it fell,
And to the color the perfume gave smell.
59
Upon the sundry pictures they devise,
And from one thing they to another run,
Now they commend that body, then those eyes,
How well that bird, how well that flower was done,
Now this part shadowed, and how that does rise,
This top is clouded, and that traile is spunne,
The landscape mixtures, and delineatings,
And in that Art a thousand curious things.
60
Looking upon proud Phaeton wrapped in fire,
The gentle Queen does much bewail his fall,
But Mortimer more praising his desire,
To loose a poor life, or to govern all;
And though he did ambitiously aspire,
And by his mind is made proud Fortunes thrall,
Yet in despite when she her worst has done,
He perished in the chariot of the Sun.
61
The Queen says Phoebus is much forcde by Art,
Nor can she find how his embraces be,
But Mortimer now takes the Painters part,
Why thus great Empress, thus, and thus, quoth he,
Thus holds the boy, thus clips his fainting heart,
Thus twine their arms, and thus their lips you sec:
You shall be Phoebus, Hyacinthus I,
It were a life thus every hour to die.
62
By this time near, into the upper hall,
Is rudely entered this disordered rowt,
When they within suspecting least of all,
Dischargde the guard that should have watched without
O see how mischief suddenly does fall,
And steals upon us, being freest from doubt.
How ere the life, the end is ever sure,
And often in death fond man is most secure.
63
Whilst his loved Neuill, and dear Turrington,
Amongst the Ladies that attended there,
Relating things that anciently were done,
With such discourse as women love to hear,
Staying delight, whilst time so fast does run,
Thus in the Lobby as they freely were,
Chargde on the sudden by this armed train,
Both in the entrance miserably slain.
64
As from the snow-crownd Skidos lofty cleeues,
Some fleet wingd haggard toward the evening hour,
Stooping amongst the More-bred Mallard drives,
And the air of all her featherd flocks does skowre,
when back unto her former pitch she strives,
The feely foul all prostrate to her power:
Such a sharp shreek does ring through all the vault,
Made by the Ladies at the first assault.
65
March now vnarmde (she only in his arms,
Too fair a shield, not made for fouler blows)
That least of all exspected these alarmes,
And to be thus intrapped by his foes,
When he is most improuident of harms,
O, had he had but weapons like his woes,
Either his valor had his breath redeemde,
Or in her sight did happily esteemde.
66
Amongst the others looking for the king,
In this black show that (he assures him) is,
Though much disguisde, yet him imagining
By the most perfect lineaments of his,
Quoth he, the man thee to the Crown did bring,
Might at thy hands the least have looked for this,
And in this place, unseeming of the rest,
Where only sacred solitude is blessed.
67
Her presence frees the offender of his ill,
And as the essence makes the place divine,
What strong Decree can countermaund the will,
That gave to thee the power that now is thine,
And in her arms preserved in safety still,
As the most pure inviolable shrine,
Though thou thus irreligiously despise,
And dare profane these hallowed liberties.
68
But as when Illion fatally surprisde
The Grecians issuing from the wooden horse,
Their rage and fury prowdly exercisde,
Opening the wide gates, letting in their force,
Putting in act what was before deuisde,
Without all sense of pity or remorce,
With cries, shreekes, rumors in confused sound,
words are broken off, complaints abruptly drowned.
69
Dissolved to drops she follows him, O tears,
Elixar like turn all to pearl you touch,
To weep with her the building scarce forbeares,
The sorrows that she utters are such,
Able to wound th'impenitrabl'st ears,
Her plaints so piercing, and her woes so much,
when with the abundance words would hardly come,
Her eyes in silence spoke when lips were dumb.
70
Sweet son (quoth she) let not that blood be spilt,
Once prizd so dear as did redeem thy Crown,
Whose purity if ^ainted now with guilt,
The cause thereof efficiently thine own,
That from the ruins of thy country built,
(Razde with dissentions) thy substantial throne,
And broke those bounds thy kingdoms once confinde,
Into large France, to exercise thy mind.
71
For the dear portion of that natural blood,
Which lends thee heat, and nutriment of life,
Be not a nigg^rd of so small a good,
Where bounty should be plentifully rife,
Begged on those knees at which thou often have stood,
In those arms circles might co(...)re this strife,
O God! that breath from such a bosom sent,
Should thus in vain be prodigally spent.
72
When in this vproare with the sudden fright,
Whilst every one for ^afety seeks about,
And none regarding ^o preserve the light,
Which being wasted sadly goes out,
Now in the midst and terror of the night,
At the departure of this armed rowt,
The Queen alone (at least if any near)
Her wretched women, yet half dead with fear.
73
When horror, darkness, and her present woe,
Begin to work on her afflicted mind,
And every one his tyranny does show,
Even in the fulness of his proper kind,
In such ^x(...)sse her accusations flow,
This liberty unto their power assignde,
Racking her conscience by this torture due,
It self t'accuse with whatsoere it knew.
74
O God, to think (that not an hour yet past)
Her greatness, freedom, and her hopes so hie,
The sweet content wherein her thoughts were placde,
Her great respect in every humbled eye,
How now she is abused how disgracde,
Her present shame, her after misery,
When every woe could by despair be brought,
Presents his form to her distracted thought.
75
To London now a wretched prisner led,
London where often he triumphed with the Queen;
And but for spite of no man followed,
Scarcely thought on, who had for many been,
Of all regard and state impou'rished,
Where in excess he often had bin seen:
Which at his fall does make them wonder more,
Who saw the pomp wherein he lived before.
76
O misery! where ^nce thou do infest,
How soon thy vile contagion alters kind,
That like a Circe metamorphisest
The former habit of the humane mind,
That even from us do seem our selves to wrest,
Striking our frail and fading glories blind,
And with thy vicious presence in a breath,
Chain'st us as slaves unto pale fainting Death.
77
At Westminster a Parliment decreed,
To th'establishing the safety of the Crown,
Where to his end they finally proceed,
All laying hand to dig this mountain down,
To which Time wills they have especial heed,
Now whilst the Fates thus angerly do frown,
The blood of Edward, and the Spensers fall,
For their just vengeance hastily do call.
78
The death of Kent that foul and loathsome blot,
Th'assuming of the Wards and Liueries,
With Ione the Princess married to the Scot,
he sums often seized to his treasuries,
And that by this might well have been forgot,
The sign at Stanhope to the enemies,
Or what else ripped from the records of Time,
That any way might aggrauate his crime.
79
O dire Revenge, when thou in time art rakde,
From the r^de ashes which preserved thee long,
In the dry cindars where it seemde as slakde,
Matter to feed it forcde with breath of wrong,
How soon his hideous fury is awakde,
From the small sparks what flames are quickly sprung,
And to that top does naturally aspire,
Whose weight and greatness once represt his fire.
80
And what auailes his answer in this case,
Which now the time does generally distaste?
Where judgment looks with so severe a face,
And all his actions utterly disgraced,
What fainting bosom gives him any place,
From out the fair seat of opinion cast?
With pen and incke his sorrows to deceive,
Thus of the fair Queen takes his latest leave.
81
Most mighty Empress s'daine not to peruse,
The Swan like dirges of a dying man,
Unlike those raptures of the fluent Muse,
In that sweet season when our joys began,
That did my youth with glorious fire infuse,
When for thy glove at Tilt I prowdly ran;
Whereas my start^ing Courser strongly set,
Made fire to fly from Hartfords Burgone^.
82
The King your son, which hastneth on my death,
(Madam) you know I tendered as mine own,
And when I might have grasped out his breath,
I set him gently on his fathers throne,
Which now his power too quickly witnesses,
Which to this height and majesty is grown;
But our desert forgot, and he forgiven,
As after death we wish to live in heaven.
83
And for the sole rule whereon thus he stands,
Came bastard William but himself on shore,
Or borrowed not our fathers conquering hands,
Which in the field our ancient ensigns bore,
(Guarded about with our well ordered bands)
Which his proud Leopards for their safety wore,
Raging at Hastings like that ominous Lake,
From whose dread waves our glorious name we take
84
Had I been chargde upon mine armed horse,
As when I came unto the walls of Gaunt,
Before the Belgike and Burgonian force,
There challenging, my Countries Combattant,
Borne from my seat in some robustious course,
That of my spoils the enemy might vaunt,
Or had I fallen under my battered shield,
And lent mine honor to some conquered field.
85
I have not followed Fortun like a slave,
To make her bounty any whit the less,
By my desert her judgment to deprave,
Nor lent me aught I freely not confess,
And have returned with intrest what she gave,
A mind that suited with her mightiness,
He twice offends which sin in flattry bears,
Yet every hour he dies that ever fears.
86
I cannot fear what forces others quake,
The times and I have tuggd together so,
Wonting my way through sword and fire to make,
So often constraind against the stream to row,
To doubt with Death a covenant to make,
When I am grown familiar with my woe:
And nothing can the afflicted conscience grieve,
But he can pardon, that does all forgive.
87
And thus thou most adored in my heart,
Whose thoghts in death my humbled sprite does raise
Lady most fair, most dear, of most desert,
Worthy of more than any mortal praise,
Condemned March, thus lastly does depart
From her, the greatest Empress of her days:
Nor in the dust mine honor I interre,
Thus Caesar did, and thus dies Mortimer.
88
To Nottingham this Letter brought unto her,
Which is subscribde with her Emperious style,
Puts her in mind how once that hand did woo her,
With this short thought to please herself a while,
Thus sorrow can so subtly vndooe her,
That with such flattery does her sense beguile.
To give a sharper feeling to that pain,
Which her grieved heart was shortly to sustain.
89
Putting her fingers to unrip the seal,
Cleaning to keep those sorrows from her eyes,
As it were loath the tidings to reveal,
Whence grief should spring in such varieties;
But strongly urged does to her will appeal,
When the soft wax unto her touch implies,
Sticking unto her fingers bloody red,
To show the bad news quickly followed.
90
Thus by degrees she easly does begin,
As the small fish plays with the baited hook,
Then more and more to swallow sorrow in,
As threatening death at every little look;
Where now she reads th'expences of her sin,
Sadly set down in this black dreadful book,
And those dear sums were like to be desray'd,
Before the same were absolutely paid.
91
An host of woes her suddenly assail,
As every letter wounded like a dart,
As though contending which should most prevail,
Yet every one does pierce her to the heart,
As every word did others case bewail,
And with his neighbor seemde to bear a part,
Reason of grief each sentence is to her,
And every line a true remembrancer.
92
Grief makes her read, yet straitwaies bids her leave,
With which ore-charg'd she neither sees nor hears,
Her senses now their Mistress so deceive,
The words do wound her eyes, the sound her ears,
And every organe of the use bereaues,
When for a fescue she does use her tears;
That when some line she loosely ouer-past,
The drops do tell her where she left the last.
93
O now she sees, was never such a sight,
And seeing, cursed her sorrow-seeing eye,
Yet thinks she is deluded by the light,
Or is abusde by the orthography;
And by some other it is deuisde for spite,
Or pointed false, her schollership to try;
Thus when we fondly sooth our own desires,
Our best conceits often prove the greatest liers.
94
Her trembling hand as in a fever shakes,
Wherewith the paper does a little stir,
Which she imagines at her sorrow shakes,
And pitties it, who she thinks pitties her,
Each small thing somewhat to the greater makes,
And to the humor something does infer;
Which when so soon as she her tongue could free,
O worthy Earl, dear loved Lord quoth she.
95
I will reserve thy ashes in some Vrne,
Which as a relic I will only save,
Mixed with the tears that I for thee shall mourn,
Which in my dear breast shall their burial have,
From whence again they never shall return,
Nor give the honor to another grave,
But in that Temple ever be preserved,
Where thou a Saint religiously art served.
96
When she breaks out to cursing of her son,
But March so much still runs in her mind,
That she abruptly ends what she begun,
Forgets her self, and leaves the rest behind,
From this she to another course does run,
To be reuengde in some notorious kind:
To which she deeply does engage her troth,
Bound by a strong vow and a solemn oath.
97
For pen and incke she calls her maids without,
And the kings dealings will in grief discover,
But soon forgetting what she went about,
She now begins to write unto her lover,
Here she sets down, and there she blotteth out.
Her grief and passion do so strongly move her:
When turning back to read what she had writ,
She tears the paper, and condemns her wit.
98
And thus with contrarieties araised,
As waters chillness wakeneth from a swownd,
Comes to her self, the agony appeased,
When colder blood more sharply feels the wound,
And grief her so incurably has seized,
That for the same no remedy is found,
As the poor refuge to her restless woes,
This of her grief she lastly does dispose.
99
That now unkind King as thou art my son,
Leaving the world, some legacy must give thee,
My hearts true love the dying March has won,
Yet that of all I will not quite bereave thee;
The wrong and mischief to thy mother done,
I thee bequeathe, so bound that they out live thee,
That as my breast it hourly does torment,
Thou may enjoy it by my Testament.
100
Henceforth within this solitary place,
Abandoning for ever general sight,
A private life I willingly embrace,
No more rejoicing in the obuious light,
To consumate the weary lingering space,
Till death enclose me with continual night:
Each small remembrance of delight to fly,
A conuertite and penitently die.
Finis.
To the Reader.
Seeing these Epistles are now to the world made public, it is imagined that I
ought to be accountable of my private meaning, chiefly for mine own
discharge, lest being mistaken, I fall in hazard of a inst and universal
reprehension, for: Hae nugae seria ducent
In mala derisum semel exceptumque sinistre.


Three points are especially therefore to be explained. First, why I entitle
this work Englands Heroical Epistles; then, why I observe not the persons
dignity in the dedication; lastly, why I have annexed notes to every Epistles
end. For the first, the title I hope carries reason in it self, for that the
most and greatest persons here in, were English, or else, that their loves
were obtained in England. And though (heroical) be properly understood of
demigods, as of Hercules and Aeneas, whose parents were said to be, the one
celestall, the other mortal, yet is it also transferred to them, who for the
greatness of mind come near to Gods. For to be borne of a celestial
Incubus, is nothing else but to have a great and mighty spirit, far above
the earthly weakness of men; in which sense, Ovid (whose imitator I partly
profess to be) does also use Heroical. For the second, seeing none to whom I
have dedicated any two Epistles, but have their states ouer-matched by them,
who are made to speak in the Epistles, howeuer the order is in dedication, yet
in respect of their degrees in my devotion, and the cause before recited, I
hope they suffer no disparagement, seeing every one is the first in their
particular interest, having in some sort, sorted the complexion of the Epistles
to the character of their judgments to whom I dedicate them, excepting only
the blamefulnes of the persons passion, in those points wherein the passion is
blamefull. Lastly, such manifest diffrence being betwixt every one of them,
where, or howsoever they be marshalled, how can I be justly appeached of
vnaduisement. For the third, because the work might in truth be judged
brainish, if nothing but amorous humor were handled therein, I have enter-wouen
matters historical, which vnexplaned, might defraude the mind of much
content, as for example, in Queen Margarites Epistle to William de la Poole,
My Daizie flower, which once perfumde the air,


Margarite in French signifies a Daizie, which for the allusion to her name,
this Queen did give for her devise; and this as others more, have seemed to me
not worthy the explaning.

Now, though no doubt I had need to excuse other things beside, yet these
most especially, the rest I ouerpasse to eschew tedious recital, or to speak
as malicious envy may, for that in truth I ouersee them. If they be as
harmelesly taken, as I meant them, it shall suffice to have only touched the
cause of the title of the Dedications, and of the Notes, whereby emboldned to
publish the residue, (these not being accounted in men's opinions relishlesse) I
shall not lastly be afraid to believe and acknowledge thee a gentle Reader.

M. D.

To M. Michaell Drayton.
HOw can he write that broken has his pen;
Has rent his paper, thrown his incke away;
Detests the world, and company of men,
Because they grow more hateful day by day?
Yet with these broken relics, mated mind,
And what a iustly-grieued thought can say:
I give the world to know, I never could find,
A work more like to live a longer day.
Go Verse, an object for the prowdest eye;
Disdain those which disdain to read thee over,
Tell them they know not how they should descry,
The secret passions of a wirty lover.
For they are such, as none but those shall know,
Whom Beauty schools to hold the blind Boys bow.
Once I had vowed, (O who can all vows keep?)
Henceforth to smother my unlucky Muse;
Yet for thy sake she started out of sleep,
Yet now she dies: Then do as kinsfolks use;
Close up the eyes of my new-dying style,
As I have opened thy sweeet babes ere-while.
E. St. Gent.
Duris decus omen:
To M. Michaell Drayton.
LOng have I wished and hopde my weaker Muse,
(In nothing strong but my unhappy love)
Would give me leave my fortune to approve,
And view the world, as named, Poets use;
But still her fruitless bosom does refuse
To bless me with indifferency of praise,
Not daring (like to many) to abuse
That title which true worth should only raise;
Thus bankerout, and despairing of mine own,
I set my wish and hope (kind friend) on thee,
Whose fruit approved, and better fortune known,
Tells me thy Muse my loves sole heir must be,
So barren wombs embrace their neighbors young,
So dumb men speak by them that have a tongue.
Thomas Hassall, Gent.

To M. Michaell Drayton.
NOw I perceive Pithagoras diuinde,
When he that mocked Maxim did maintain,
That spirits once spoilde, reuested were again,
Though changde in shape, remaining one in mind;
These love sick Princes passionate estates;
Who feeling reads, he cannot but allow,
That Ouids soul reuines in Drayton now,
Still learnd in love still rich in rare conceits,
This pregnant spirit affecting further skill,
Often altring form, from vulgar wits retirde,
In diverse Ideoms mightily admirde,
Did prosecute that sacred study still;
While to a full perfection now attainde,
He sings so sweetly that himself is stainde.
William Alexander-Scotus.

To the excellent Lady Lucie Countess of Bedford.
MAdam, after all the admired wits of this excellent age, which have labored
in the sad complaints of fair and unfortunate Rosamond, and by the excellency
of invention, have sounded the depth of her sundry passions; I present to your
Ladyship this Epistle of hers to King Henry, whom I may rather call her lover
than beloved. Here must your Ladyship behold variablenes in resolution; woes
constantly grounded; laments abruptly broken off; much confidence, no
certainty, words begetting tears, tears confounding matter, large complaint^
in little papers; and many deformed cares, in one vniformed Epistle. I strive
not to effect singularity, yet would feign fly imitation, and prostrate mine
own wants to other men's perfections. Your judicial eye must model forth what
my pen has laid together, much would she say to a King, much would I say to a
Countess, but that the method of my Epistle must conclude the modesty of
hers, which I wish may recommend my ever vowed service to your Honor.

Michaell Drayton.

The Epistle of Rosamond to King Henry the second.
The Argument.
Henry the second of that name, King of England, the son of Geffrey
Plantaginet, Earl of Anlow, and Mawd the Empress, having by long suit and
Princely gifts, won (to his unlawful desire) fair Rosamond, the daughter of
the Lord Walter Clyfford and to avoid the danger of Ellinor his jealous
Queen, had caused a Labyrinth to be made within his Palace at Woodstocke, in
the center whereof he had lodged his beauteous paramour. Whilst the king is
absent in his wars in Normandy, this poor distressed Lady, enclosed in this
solitary place, touched with remorce of conscience, writes to the king of her
distress and miserable estate, urging him by all means and persuasions, to
clear himself of this infamy, and her of the grief of mind, by taking away
her wretched life.

IF yet thine eyes (great Henry) may endure
These tainted lines, drawn with a hand impure,
Which fain would blush, but fear keeps blushes back,
And therefore suited in dispairing black,
This in loves name, O that these lips might crave,
But that sweet name (vile I) profaned have,
Punish my fault, or pity mine estate,
Read (...) for love, if not for love, for hate.
If with my shame thine eyes thou feign would feed,
Here let them su^feit, on my shame to reed;
This scribled paper which (...) send to thee,
If noted rightly, does resemble me;
As this pure ground, whereon th^se letters stand,
So pure was I, er^stained by thy hand;
Ere I was blotted with this foul offense,
So clear and spotless was mine innocence,
Now like these marks which taint this hateful scroule,
Such the black sins which spot my l^prous soul.
O Henry, why by loss thus should thou win?
To get by conquest? to enrich with sin?
Why on my name this slander do thou bring,
To make my fault renowned by a King?
Fame never stoopes to things but mean and poor,
The more our greatness, makes our fault the more.
Lights on the ground, themselves do less^n far,
But in the air, each small spark seems a star.
Why on a woman's frailty would thou lay
This subtle plot, mine honor to betray?
Or thy unlawful pleasure should thou buy
With vile expense of kingly maies^ie?
It Was not my mind consented to this ill,
Then had I been transported by my will:
For what my body was inforcde to do,
(Heaven knows) my soul did not consent unto;
For through mine eyes had she her liking seen,
Such as my love, such had my lover been.
True love is simple, like his mother Truth,
Kindly affection, youth to love with youth;
No sharper corsiue to our blooming years,
Then the cold badge of winter-blasted hairs.
Thy kingly power makes to withstand thy foes,
But can not keep back age, with Time it grows,
Though honor our ambitious sex does please,
Yet in that honor, age a foul disease,
Nature has her free course in all, and then,
Age is alike in Kings, and other men,
Which all the world will to my shame impute,
That I my self did basely prostitute;
And say that gold was fuel to the fire,
Gray hairs in youth not kindling green desire.
O no; that wicked woman wrought by thee,
My tempter was to that forbidden tree,
That subtle Serpent, that seducing devil,
Which bade me taste the fruit of good and evil;
That Circe, by whose magic I was charmd,
And to this monstrous shape am thus transformed,
That viperous hag, the foe to her own kind,
That wicked spirit unto the weaker mind;
Our frailtes plague, our natures only curse,
Hels deepst damnation, the worst evils worse.
But Henry, how can thou affect me thus,
T'whom thy remembrance now is odious?
My hapless name, with Henry's name I found,
Cut in the glass with Henry's Diamond,
That glass from thence feign would I take away;
But then I fear the air would me betray;
Then do I strive to wash it out with tears,
But then the same more evident appears.
Then do I cover it with my guilty hand,
Which that names witness does against me stand;
Once did I sin, which memory does cherrish,
Once I offended, but I ever perrish.
What grief can be, but time does make it less?
But infamy time never can suppress.
Sometimes to pass the tedious irksome hours,
I climb the top of Woodstockes mounting towers,
Where in a Turret secretly I lie,
To view from far such as do travel by,
Whether (me thinks) all cast their eyes at me,
As through the stones my shame did make them see,
And with such hate the harmless walls do view,
As unto death their eyes would me pursue.
The married women curse my hateful life,
Which wrong a lawful bed, a Queen, a wife;
The maidens wish I buried quick may die,
The loathsome stain to their virginity.
Well knewst thou what a monster I would be
When thou did build this Labyrinth for me,
Whose strange Meanders turning every way,
Be like the course wherein my youth did stray;
Only a Clue to guide me out and in,
But yet still walk I circular in sin.
As in the Ta^ras here this other day,
My maid and I did pass the time away,
Among many pictures which we passed by,
Theseely gerle at length hapt to epsy
Chaste Lucrece picture, and desires to know,
What she should be herself that murdered so?
Why getle (quoth I) this is that Roman Dame,
Not able then to tell the rest for shame,
My tongue does mine own guiltiness betray;
With that I send the prattling girl away,
Lest when my lisping guilty tongue should hault,
My looks should be the index to my fault.
As that life blood which from the heart is sent,
In beauties field pitching his crimson Tent,
In lonely sanguine suits the Lilly cheek,
Whilst it but for a resting place does seek;
And changing oftentimes with sweet delight,
Conuerts the white to red, the red to white.
The lovely blush the palenesse does distaine;
The palenesse makes the blush more fair again;
Thus in my breast a thousand thoughts I carry,
Which in my passion diversely do vary.
Whenas the Sun hales toward the Western slade,
And the trees shadows three times greater made,
Forth go I to a little current near,
Which like a wanton traile creepes here and there,
Wherewith mine angle casting in my bait,
The little fishes (dreading the deceit)
With fearful nibbling fly th'inticing gin,
By nature taught what danger lies therein.
Things reasonlesse thus warnde by nature be,
Yet I devoured the bait was laid for me;
Thinking thereon, and breaking into groans,
The bubling spring which trips upon the stones,
Chides me away, lest sitting but too nie,
I should pollute that native purity.
Rose of the world, so does import my name,
Shame of the world, my life has made the same.
And to th'vnchaste this name shall given be,
Of Rosamond, derived from sin and me.
The Cliffords take from me that name of theirs,
Famous for virtue many hundred years.
They blot my birth with hateful bastardie,
That I sprang not from their nobility;
They my alliance utterly refuse,
Nor will a strumpet shall their name abuse.
Here in the garden wrought by curious hands,
Naked Diana in the fountain stands,
With all her Nymphs got round about to hide her,
As when Acteon had by chance espide her;
This sacred Image I no sooner viewed,
But as that metamorphosde man pursued
By his own hounds; so by my thoughts am I,
Which chase me still, which way so ere I fly.
Touching the grass, the honny-dropping dew,
Which falls in tears before my limber shue,
Upon my foot consumes in weeping still,
As it would say, why wentst thou unto ill?
Thus to no place in safety can I go.
But every thing does give me cause of woe.
In that fair Casket of such wondrous cost,
Thou sentst the night before mine honor lost
Amimone was wrought, a harmless maid,
By Neptune that adult'rous God betraide;
She prostrate at his feet begging with prayers,
Wringing her hands, her eyes swollen up with tears;
This was not the entrapping bait of men,
But by thy virtue gentle warning then;
To show to me for what intent it came,
Lest I therein should ever keep my shame.
And in this Casket (ill I see it now)
What Jove's love I-o, turnde into a Cow.
Yet was she kept with Argus hundred eyes,
So wakefull stil^ be Iunoes jealousies:
By this I well might have forewarned been,
To Have cleerde my self to thy suspecting Queen,
Who with more hundred eyes at ends me,
Then had poor Argus single eyes to see.
In this thou rightly imitatest Jove,
Into a beast thou have transformde thy love.
Nay, worser far, (degenerate from kind)
A monster, both in body and in mind.
The waxen taper which I burn by night,
With his dull vapory dimnesse mocks my sight,
As though the dampe which hinders his clear flame,
Came from my breath, in that night of my shame,
When it did burn as darkness ugly eye,
When shot the star of my v^ginitie,
And if a star but by the glass appear,
I strait entreat it not to look in here;
I am already hateful to the light,
It is enough betray me not to night.
Then since my shame so much belongs to thee,
Rid me of that by only murdering me;
And let it justly to my charge be laid,
Thy royal person I would have betraide;
Thou shall not need by circumstance t'accuse me,
If I deny it, let the heavens refuse me.
My life's a blemish which does clowd thy name,
Take it away, and clear shall shine thy fame.
Yield to my suit, if ever pity moved thee,
In this show mercy, as I ever loved thee.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Well knewst thou what a monster I would be,
When thou did build this Labyrinth for me.
IN the Cretean Labyrinth a monster was enclosed, called a Minotaur, the
history whereof is well known, but the Labyrinth was framed by Daedalus, with
so many (...)icate ways, that being entered, one could either hardly or never
return, being in manner of a maze, save that it was larger, the ways being
walld in on every side, out of the which Theseus by Ariadnes help (lending him
a clu^ of third) escaped. Some report that it was a house, having one half
bene^th the ground, another above, the chamber doors therein so deceitfully
enwrapped, and made to open so many wais, that it was held a matter almost
impossible to return.

Some have held it to have been an Allegory of man's life, true it is that the
comparison will hold, for what liker to a Labyrinth then the maze of life? But
it is affirmed by antiquity, that there was indeed such a building, though
Daedalus being a (...) applied to the workmans excellency, make it suspected:
for Daedalus is nothing else but engenious, or artificial. Hereupon it is
used among the ancient Poets, for any thing curiously wrought.

Rosamonds Labyrinth, whose ruins together with her well being paued with
square stone in the bottom, and also her Tower from which the Labirinth did
run, (are yet remaining) was altogether under ground, being vaults arched and
walld with brick and stone, almost inextricably wound one within another, by
which if at any time her lodging were laid about by the Queen, she might easly
avoid peril imminent, and if need be, by secret issues take the air abroad,
many furlongs round about Woodstock in Oxfordshire, wherein it was situated.
Thus much for Rosamonds labirinth. Whose strange Meanders turned every way.


Meander is a river in Lycia, a province of Natolia, or Asia minor, famous for
the sinuosity and often turning thereof, rising from certain hills in Maeonia,
heerevpon are intricate turnings by a transumtiue and metonimicall kind of
speech, called Meanders, for this River did so strangely path it self, that
the foot seemed to touch the head. Rose of the world, so does import my name,
Shame of the world, my lise has made the same.


It might be reported, how at Godstow, where this Rose of the world was
sumptuously interted, a certain Bishop in the visitation of his Diocese,
caused the monument which had bin erected to her honor, utterly to be
demolished, but be that severe chastisement of Rosamond then dead, at this time
also ouer-passed, lest she should seem to be the Shame of the world.

Henry to Rosamond.
WHen first the Post arrived at my Tent,
And brought the letters Rosamond had sent,
Think from his lips but what sweet comfort came,
When in mine ear he softly breathed thy name,
Straight I enjoin him of thy health to tell,
Longing to hear my Rosamond did well;
With new enqui^ies then I cut him short,
When of the same he gladly would report,
That with the earnest haste my tongue often trips,
Catching the words half spoke out of his lips:
This told, yet more I urge him to reveal,
To loose no time while I vn^ipt the seal.
The more I read, still do I err the more,
As though mistaking somewhat said before.
Missing the point, the doubtful sense is broken,
Speaking again, what I before had spoken,
Still in a swound, my heart reuiues and faints,
Twixt hopes, dispaires, twixt smiles and deep complaints.
As these sad accents sort in my desires,
Smoothe calmes, rough storms, sharp frosts, and raging (...)es,
Put on with boldness, and put back with fears,
My tongue with curses, when mine eyes with tears.
O how my heart at that black line did tremble!
That blotted paper should thy self resemble;
O were there paper but near half so white!
The Gods thereon their sacred laws would write
With pens of Angels wings, and for their ^^ke,
That heavenly Nactar, their immortal drink.
Maiesticke courage strives to have suppressed
This fearful passion stird up in my breast;
But still in vain the same I go about,
My heart must break within, or woe breaks out,
Am I at home pursued with private hate,
And war comes raging to my palace gate?
Is meager ^nuie stabbing at my throne,
Treason attending when I walk alone?
And am I branded with the curse of Rome,
And stand condemned by dreadful counsels dombe?
And by the pride of my rebellious son,
Rich Normandy with Armies overrun?
Fatal my birth, unfortunate my life,
Unkind my children, most unkind my wife.
Grief, cares, old age, suspicion to torment me,
Nothing on earth to quiet or content me,
So many woes, so many plagues to find,
Sickness of body, discontent of mind;
Hopes left, helps reft, life wronged, joy interdicted,
Banished, distressed, forsaken and afflicted,
Of all relief has fortune quite bereft me?
Only my love unto my comfort left me,
And is one beauty thought so great a thing,
To mittigate the sorrows of a King?
Barred of that choice the vulgar often prove,
Have we (then they) less privilege in love?
Is it a King, the woeful widow hears?
Is it a King dries up the Orphans tears?
Is it a King regards the Clyants cry?
Gives life to him by law condemnd to die?
Is it his care the Commonwealth that keeps,
As does the Nurse her babie whilst it sleeps?
And that poor king, of all those hopes prevented,
Unheard, vnhelp'd, vnpittied, unlamented,
Yet let me be with poverty oppressed,
Of earthly blessings robbed, and dispossessed,
Let me be scornde, rejected and reuilde,
From Kingdom, Country, and from Court exilde;
Let the worlds curse upon me still remain,
And let the last bring on the first again:
All miseries that wretched man may wound,
Leave for my comfort, only Rosamond;
For thee swift Time her speedy course does stay,
At thy command the Destinies obey;
Pity is dead that comes not from thine eyes,
And at thy feet, even mercy prostrate lies:
If I were feeble, rheumatike, or cold,
These were true signs that I were waxed old;
But I can march all day in massy steel,
Nor yet my arms unwieldy weight do feel,
Nor waked by night with bruise or bloody wound,
The tent my bed, no pillow but the ground:
For very age had I lain bedred long,
One smile of thine again could make me young.
Were there in Art a power but so divine,
As is in that sweet Angel-tongue of thine,
That great Enchantresse which once took such pains,
To force young blood in Aesons witherd veins,
And from groves, mountains, and the moorish Fen,
Used all the herbs ordainde to use of men,
And in the powerful potion that she makes,
Puts blood of men of birds, of beasts, of snakes,
Never had needed to have gone so far,
To seek the soiles where all those simples are,
One accent from thy lips, the blood more warmes,
Then all her philters, exorcismes and charms.
Thy presence has repaired in one day,
What many years and sorrows did decay,
And made fresh beauties fairest branches spring,
From wrinkled furrows of times ruining.
Even as the hungry winter-starued earth,
When she by nature labors toward her birth,
Still as the day upon the dark world creepes,
One blossom forth after another peepes,
Till the small flower whose root is now unbound,
Gets from the frostie prison of the ground,
Spreading the leaves unto the powerful noone,
Decked in fresh colors, smiles upon the sun.
Never unquiet care lodged in that breast,
Where but one thought of Rosamond did rest;
Nor thirst, nor travail, which on war attend,
E're brought the long day to desired end;
Nor yet did pale Fear, or lean Famine live,
Where hope of thee did any comfort give,
Ah what injustice then is this of thee
That thus the guiltless do condemn for me?
When only she (by means of my offense)
Redeemes thy pureness, and thy innocence,
When to our wills perforce obey they must,
That just in them, what e're in us unjust,
Of what we do, not them account we make,
The fault craves pardon for th'offenders sake,
And what to work a Princes will may merit,
Has deepst impression in the gentlest spirit;
Ift be my name that does thee so offend,
No more my self shall be mine own names friend,
And ^ft be that which thou do only hate,
That name, in my name, lastly has his date.
Say it is accu^st, and fatal, and dispraise it,
If written, blot it, if engraven, raze it.
Say that of all names it is a name of woe,
Once a Kings name, but now it is not so.
And when all this is done, I know ^vvill grieve thee,
And therefore (svveet) why should I now believe thee?
Nor should thou think those eyes with envy lower,
Which passing by thee, gaze up to thy tower;
But rather praise thine own which be so clear,
Which from the Turret like two stairs appear;
Above the sun does shine, beneath thine eye,
Mocking the heaven to make another sky,
The little stream which by thy tovver does glide,
Where often thou spendst the weary evening tide,
To view thee well his course would gladly stay,
As loath from thee to part so soon away;
And with salutes thy self would gladly greet,
And offer up those small drops at thy feet,
But finding that the envious banks restrain it,
T'excuse it self, does in this sort complain it,
And therefore this sad bubling murmr keeps,
And in this sort within the channel weeps.
And as thou do into the water look,
The fish which see thy shadow in the brook,
Forget to feed, and all amazed lie,
So daunted with the luster of thine eye.
And that sweet name which thou so much do wrong
In time shall be some famous Poets song;
And with the very sweetness of that name,
Lions and tigers men shall learn to tame.
The careful mother from her pensive breast,
With Rosamond shall bring her babe to rest;
The little birds, (by men's continual sound)
Shall learn to speak, and pr(...)le Rosamond.
And when in April they begin to sing,
Wi^h Rosamond shall welcome in the spring;
And she in whom all ra^ities are found,
Shall still be said to be a Rosamond.
The little flowers which dropping honied dew,
Which (as thou writst) do weep upon thy shue,
Not for thy fault (sweet Rosamond) do moan,
But weep for grief that thou so soon art gone,
For if thy foot ^uch Hemlocke as it goes,
That Hemlocke's made more sweeter than the Rose,
Of Jove or Neptune how they did betray,
Nor speak of I^o, or Amimone,
when she for whom Jove once became a Bull,
Comparde with thee, had been a tawny trull;
He a white Bull, and she a whiter Cow,
Yet he, nor she, near half so white as thou.
Long since (thou know) my care provided for
To lodge thee safe from jealous Ellenor,
The labyrinths conueyance guides thee so,
(Which only Vaghan, thou, and I do know)
If she do guard thee with a hundred eyes,
I have an hundred sub^ile Mercuries,
To watch that Argus which my love does keep,
Until eye, after eye, fall all to sleep.
Those stars look in by night, look in to see,
Wondering what star here on the earth should be.
As often the Moon amidst the silent night,
Has come to joy us with her friendly light,
And by the curtain helped mine eye to see
What (...) night and darkness hid from me;
When I have wished that she might ever sta^,
And other worl(...) might still enjoy the day:
What should I say? words, ^eares, and sighs be spent,
And want of (...) does further helps prevent:
My camp r^sounds with fearful shockes of war,
Yet in my breast the worser conflicts are;
Yet is my signal to the battles sound,
The blessed name of beauteous Rosamond.
Accursed be that heart, that tongue, that breath,
Should think, should speak, or whisper of thy death.
For in one smile, or lower from thy sweet eye,
Consists my life, my hope, my victory.
Sweet Woodstocke, where my Rosamond does rest,
Blessed in her, in whom thy King is blessed;
For though in France a while my body be,
(Sweet Paradise) my heart remains in thee.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Am I at home pursued with private hate,
And war comes raging to my Palace gate?
RObert earl of Leicester, who took part with young king Henry, entered into
England with an army of 3000. Flemmings, and spoild the countries of Norsfolk
and Susfolke, being succored by many of the Kings private enemies. And am I
branded with the curse of Rome?


King Henry the second, the first Plantaginet, accused for the death of Tho.
Becket, archbishop of Canterbury, stain in the cathedral church, was accursed
by Pope Alexander, although he vrgde sufficient proof of his innocence in
the same, and offered to take upon him any penance, so he might escape the
curse and interdiction of the Realm. And by the pride of my rebellious son,
Rich Normandy with armies overrun.


Henry the young K. whom king Henry had caused to be crowned in his life (as he
hoped) both for his own good and the good of his Subjects, which indeed turned
to his own sorrow, and the trouble of the Realm, for he rebelled against him,
and raising a power, by the means of Jews king of France, and William K: of
Scots, who took part with him, invaded Normandy. Unkind my children, most
unkind my wise:


Never king more unfortunate then K: Henry, in the disobedience of his
children: first Henry, then G^ssrey, then Richard, then John, all at one time
or other, first or last, unnaturally rebelled against him; then the jealousy
of Elinor his Qu. who suspected his love to Rosamond, which grievous troubles
the devout of those times attributed to happen to him justly, for refusin: to
take on him the government of Jerusalem, offered to him by the patriarch there;
which country was mightily afflicted by the Souldane. Which only Vaghan, thou,
and I do know.


This Vaghan was a Knight whom the King exceedingly loved, who kept the Palace
at Woodstocke, and much of the Kings jewels and treasure, to whom the King
committed many of his secrets, and in whom he reposed such trust, that he
durst commit his love unto his charge.

King John to Matilda.
The Argument.
After that King John had assayed by all means possible, to win the fair and
chaste Matilda, to his unchaste and unlawful bed and by unjust courses and
false accusation had banished the Lord Robert Fitzwater her noble Father, and
many other of his alies, who justly withstood the desire of this wanton King,
seeking the dishonor of his fair and virtuous daughter; this chaste Lady,
still solicited by this lascivious King, flies unto Dunmow in Essex, where in a
Nunnery she becomes a Nun, whether the King (still persisting in his suit)
solicites her by his Epistle; her reply confirms her vowed and invincible
chastity, making known to the King her pure unspotted thoughts.

WHen these my Letters come unto thy view,
Think them not forcde, or faind, or strange, or new,
Thou know no way, no means, no course exempted,
Left now unsought, vnproou'd, or unattempted,
All rules, regardes, all secret helps of Art,
What knowledge, wit, experience can impart;
And in the old worlds Ceremonies doted,
Good days for love, times, hours and minutes noted;
And where Art left, love teaches more to find,
By signs in presence to express the mind.
Often has mine eye told thine eye, beauty grieved it,
And begd but for one look to have relieved it,
And still with thine eyes motion, mine eye moved,
Laboring for mercy, telling how it loved.
If blushed, I blushed, thy cheek pale, pale was mine,
My red, thy red, my whiteness answered thine;
If sighed, I sighed, alike both passion prove,
But thy sigh is for grief, my sigh for love;
If a word past, that insufficient were.
To help that word, mine eyes let forth a tear,
And if that tear did dull or senseless prove,
My heart would fetch a sigh, to make it move.
Often in thy face, one favor from the rest
I singled forth, that likes my fancy best;
This likes me most, another likes me more,
A third exceeding both those likde before;
Then one that does derive all wonder thence,
Then one whose rarenes passes excellence.
Whilst I behold thy Globe like rolling eye,
Thy lovely cheek (me thinks) stands smiling by
And tells me, those but shadows and supposes,
And bids me thither come and gather Roses;
Looking on that, thy brow does call to me
To come to it, if wonders I will see:
Now have I done, and now thy dimpled chinne
Again does tell me I but new begin,
And bids me yet to look upon thy lip,
Lest wondering least, the greatst I ouerslip;
My gazing eye, on this and this does sease,
Which surffets, yet cannot desire appease.
Then like I brown, (O lovely brown thy hair)
Only in brownenesse, beauty dwells there.
Then love I black, thine eye, ball black as jet,
Then clear, that ball is there in cristall set,
Then white, but snow, nor swan, nor yuorie please,
Then are thy teeth more whiter then all these;
In brown, in black, in pureness, and in white,
All love, all sweetes, all rarenes, all delight;
Thus thou vile thief, my stolen heart hence do carry,
And now thou fliest into a Sanctuary;
Fie peevish gerle, ungrateful unto Nature,
Did she to this end frame thee such a creature,
That thou her glory should increase thereby,
And thou aloue do scorn society?
Why, heaven made beauty like herself to view,
Not to be locked up in a smoaky mew,
A rosie-tainted feature is heavens gold,
Which all men joy to touch, all to behold.
It was enacted when the world begun,
That so rare beauty should not live a Nun.
But if this vow thou needs wilt undertake,
O were mine arms a Cloister for thy sake,
Still may his pains for ever be augmented,
This superstition that at first invented,
I^l might he thrive, that brought this custom hither,
That holy people might not live together.
A happy time, a good world was it then,
When holy women lived with holy men;
But kings in this yet priuiledgde may be,
I Will be a Monk, so I may live with thee.
Who would no(...)se to ring the mornings knell,
When thy sweet lips might be the sacring bell?
Or what is he not willingly would fast,
That on those lips might feast his lips at last?
Who unto Mattens early would not rise,
That might read by the light of thy fair eyes?
On worldly pleasures who would ever look,
That had thy curles his beads, thy brows his book?
Were thou the cross, to thee who would not creep?
And wish the cross, still in his arms to keep.
Sweet gerle, I Will take this holy habit on me,
Of mere devotion that is come upon me,
Holy Matilda, thou the Saint of mine,
I Will be thy servant, and my bed thy shrine.
When I do offer, be thy breast the Altar,
And when I pray thy (...) shall be my Psalter.
The beads that we will bid shall be sweet kisses,
Which we will number, if one pleasure misses,
And when an Auie comes to say Amen,
We will begin, and tell them over again,
Now all good fortune give me happy thrift,
As I should joy t'absol^e thee after shrift.
But see how much I do my self beguile,
And do mistake thy meaning all this while,
Thou tookst this vow to equal my desire
Because thou would have me to be a Friar,
And that we two should comfort one another,
A holy sister, and a holy brother,
Thou as a Votresse unto me alone,
She is most chaste that's but enjoyed of one,
Yea, now thy true devotion do I find,
And sure in this I much commend thy mind,
Else here thou do but ill ensample give,
And in a Nunry thus thou should not live.
Is It possible the house that thou art in
Should not be tucht, (though with a venial sin)
When such a she-priest comes her mass to say,
Twenty to one they all forget to pray?
Well may we wish they would their hearts amend,
When we be witness that their eyes offend,
All creatures have desires, or else some lie,
Let them think so that will, so will not I.
Do thou not think our ancestors were wise,
That these religious Cells did first devise?
As Hospitalls were for the sore and sick,
These for the crook'd, the hault, the stigmaticke,
Lest that their seed marked with deformity,
Should be a blemish to posterity.
Would heaven her beauty should be hid from sight,
Nere would she thus her self adorn with light,
With sparkling lamps; nor would she paint her throne,
But she delights to be gazed upon:
And when the golden glorious Sun goes down,
Would she put on her star-bestudded crown,
And in her masking suit the spangled sky,
Come forth to bride it in her reuelrie,
And gave this gift to all things in creation,
That they in this should imitate her fashion.
All things that fair, that pure, that glorious been,
Offer themselves of purpose to be seen;
In sinks and vaults, the ugly toades do dwell,
The devils since most ugly, they in hell:
Our mother Earth, nere glorious in her fruit,
Till by the Sun clad in her Tinsell suit.
Nor does she ever smile him in the face,
Till in his glorious arms he her embrace;
Which proves she has a soul, sense, and delight
Of generations feeling appetite.
Well hypocrite (in faith) would thou confess,
What ere thy tongue say, thy heart says no less.
Note but this one thing, (if naught else persuade)
Nature, of all things male, and female made,
Showing her self in our proportion plain,
For never made she any thing in vain;
For as thou art, should any have been thus,
She would have left ensample unto us.
The Turtle that is so true and chaste in love,
Shows by her mate something the spirit does move;
The Arabian bird that never is but one,
Is only chaste, because she is alone:
But had our mother Nature made them two,
They would have done as Doves and Sparrowes do;
But therefore made a Martire in desire,
And does her penance lastly in the fire;
So may they all be roasted quick that be
Apostataes to Nature, as is she.
Find me but one so young, so fair, so free,
(Wood, sude and sought, by him that now seeks thee)
But of thy mind, and here I undertake,
Strait to erect a Nunry for her sake;
O had thou tasted of these rare delights,
Ordainde each where to please great Princes sights,
To have their beauties and their wits admirde,
(Which is by nature of your sex desirde)
Attended by our trains, our pomp, our port,
Like Gods adorde abroad, kne^^d to in Court,
To be saluted with the cheerful cry,
Of highness, grace, and sovereign majesty;
But unto them that know not pleasures price,
All Is one, a prison, and a Paradise.
If in a dungeon, closde up from the light,
There is no difference twixt the day and night,
Whose palate never tasted dainty cates,
Thinks homely dishes princely delicates.
Alas poor girl, I pity thine estate,
That now thus long have lived disconsolate;
Why now at length let yet thy heart relent,
And call thy father back from banishment;
And with those princely honors here inuest him,
That awkward love, not hate has dispossessed him.
Call from exile, thy dear alies and friends,
To whom the fury of my grief extends;
And if thou take my counsel in this case,
I make no doubt thou shall have better grace,
And leave the Dunmow, that accursed Cell,
There let black night and melancholy dwell;
Come to the Court, where all joys shall receive thee,
And till that hour, yet with my grief I leave thee.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
THis Epistle of King John to Matilda, is much more poetical then historical,
making no mention at al of the occurrents of the time, or state, touching only
his love to her, and the extreamitie of his passions forced by his desires,
rightly fashioning the humor of this king, as has bin truly noted by the most
authnticall Writers; whose nature and disposition is truliest discerned in the
course of his love; first jesting at the ceremonies of the services of those
times, then going about by all strong and probable arguments, to reduce her to
pleasures and delights; next with promises of honor, which he thinks to be
last and greatest mean, and to have greatest power in her sex, with promise
of calling home of her friends, which he thought might be a great inducement to
his desires.

Matilda to King John.
NO sooner I received thy letters here,
Before I knew from whom, or whence they were
But sudden fear my bloodlesse veins does fill,
As though divining of some future ill:
And in a shiuering ecstasy I stood,
A chilly coldness runs through all my blood;
Opening thy letters, I shut up my rest,
And let strange cares into my quiet breast,
As though thy hard vnpittying hand had sent me,
Some new devised torture to torment me;
Well had I hoped, I had been now forgot,
Cast out with those things thou remembrest not:
And that proud beauty which enforst me hither,
Had with my name now perished together:
But O (I see) our hoped good deceiues us,
But what we would forgo, that seldom leaves us;
Thy blamefull lines bespotted so with sin,
Mine eyes would cleanse, ere they to read begin.
But I to wash an Indian go about,
For ill so hard set on, is hard got out.
I once determinde still to have been mute,
Only by silence to refell thy suit,
But this again did alter mine intent,
For some will say, that silence does consent:
Desire, with small encouraging grows bold,
And Hope, of every little thing takes hold.
I set me down at large to write my mind,
But now, nor pen, nor paper can I find;
For dread and passion, are so powerful over me,
That I discern not things that stand before me:
Finding the pen, the paper, and the wax,
This at command, and now invention lacks;
This sentence serves, and that my hand out-strikes,
That pleases well, and this as much mislikes,
I write, indite, I point, I raze, I quote,
I enterline, I blot, correct, I note;
I hope, despair, take courage, faint, disdain,
I make, allege, I imitate, I feign:
Now thus it must be, and now thus, and thus,
Bold, shame-fac'd, fearelesse, doubtful, timorous;
My faint hand writing, when my full eye reeds,
From every word strange passion still proceeds.
O! when the soul is fettered once in woe,
It Is strange what humors it does force us to;
A tear does drown a tear, sigh, sigh does smother,
This hinders that, that interrupts the other:
Th'ouer-watched weakness of a sick conceit,
Is that which makes small beauty seem so great,
Like things which hid in troubled waters lie,
Which crook'd, seem straight, if straight, seem contrary:
And thus our vain imagination shows it,
As it conceiues it, not as judgment knows it,
(As in a Mirrhor, if the same be true)
Such as your likeness, justly such are you:
But as you change your self, it changes there,
And shows you as you are, not as you were;
And with your motion does your shadow move,
If frown or smile; such the conceit of love.
Why tell me, is it possible the mind
A form in all deformity should find?
Within the compass of man's face we see,
How many sorts of several favors be;
And that the chin, the nose, the brow, the eye,
If great, if small flat, sharp, or if awry,
Alters proportion, alters the grace,
And makes a mighty difference in the face;
And in the world, scarce two so likely are,
One with the other which if you compare,
But being set before you both together,
A judging sight does soon distinguish either.
How woman like a weakness is it then?
O what strange madness so possesses men!
Bereft of sense; such senseless wonders seeing,
Without form, fashion, certainty, or being?
For which so many die to live in anguish,
Yet cannot live, if thus they should not languish;
That comfort yeeldes not, and yet hope denies not,
A life that lives not, and a death that dies not;
That hates us most, when most it speaks us fair,
Does promise all things, always paies with air,
Yet sometime does our greatest grief appease,
To double sorrow after little ease.
Like that which thy lascivious will does crave,
Which if once had, thou never more can have;
Which if thou get, in getting thou do waste it,
Taken, is lost, and perrish'd if thou have it;
Which if thou gain'st, thou never the more have won,
I loosing nothing, yet a(...) quite undone;
And yet of that, if that a King deprave me,
No King restores, though he a kingdom gave me.
Do thou of father and of friends deprive me?
And take thou from me all that heaven did give me?
What Nature claims by blood, alies or neerenesse,
Or friendship challenge, by regard or deerenesse.
Make me an Orphan ere my father die,
A woeful widow in virginity?
Is thy unbridled lust the cause of all?
And now thy flattering tongue bewailes my fall.
The dead man's grave with fained tears to fill,
So the devouring Crocodile does kill,
To harbor hate in show of sweetest things,
So in the Rose the poisned serpent stings.
To lurk far off, yet lodge destruction by,
The Basiliske does poison with the eye;
To call for aid, and then to lie in wait,
So the Hiena murders by deceit;
By sweet inticements, sudden death to bring,
So from the rocks th'alluring Mir-maides sing;
In greatest wants, t'inflict the greatest woe,
This is the utmost tyranny can do.
But where (I see) the tempest thus preuailes,
What use of ankors, or what need of sails?
Above us blustering winds and dreadful thunder,
The waters gape for our destruction under;
Here on this side the furious billows fly,
There rocks, there sands, and dangerous whirl-poole lie.
Is this the mean that mightiness approues?
And in this sort do Princes woo their loves?
Mildness would better suit with majesty,
Then rash revenge and rough severity.
O in what safety Temperance does rest,
Obtaining harbor in a sovereign breast.
Which if so praisefull in the meanest men,
In powerful Kings, how glorious is it then?
Alas, and fled I hither from my so,
That innocence should be betrayed so?
Is Court and Country both her enemy,
And no place found to shroud in chastity?
Each house for lust a harbor, and an Inn,
And every City a receite for sin;
And all do pity beauty in distress,
If beauty chaste, then only pitiless,
Thus is she made a tempting stale to lust,
Or vnreleeued, nedsly perrish must.
Lascivious Poets which abuse the truth,
Which often teach age to sin, infecting youth,
For the unchaste make trees and stones to mourn,
Or as they please, to other shapes do turn:
Cinyras daughter, whose incestuous mind,
Made her wrong Nature and dishonor Kind;
Long since by them is turnde into a Mir,
Whose dropping liquor ever weeps for her;
And in a fountain, Biblis does deplore
Her fault so vile and monsterous before:
Silla, which once her father did betray,
Is now a bird, (if all be true they say.)
She that with Phoebus did the foul offense,
Now metamorphosde into frankencense.
Other, to flowers, to odors, and to gum,
At least Jove's leman is a star become;
And more; they feign a thousand fond excuses,
To hide their scapes, and cover their abuses,
The virgin only they obscure and hide
Whilst the unchaste, by them are deifide;
Yet if a Vestals name be once expressed,
She must be set together with the rest.
I am not now, as when thou sawst me last,
That favor soon is vanished and past;
That Rosie-blush, lapt in a Lilly-vale,
Now with the morphew ouer-growne and pale,
And down my cheeks with showers of swelling tears,
Remain the furrows that continuance wears,
And in the circles of my withered eyes,
In aged wrinckles Beauty buried lies;
And in my grace, my presence, gesture, cheer,
Ruin, distress, woe, anguish, does appear.
That breast, that hand, that cheek, that eye, that brow,
Faded, decayed, fallen, darkened, wrinckled now;
Such was my beauty once, now is it such,
Once thought most rare, now altered more than much,
Nor I regard all that thou can protest,
My vovv is taken, I a Nun professed.
This vestall habit does content me more,
Then all the robes that yet I ever wore.
Had Rosamond, (a recluse of our sort)
Taken our Cloister, left the wanton Court,
Shadowing that beauty with a holy vale,
Which she (alas) too loosely set to sale,
She need not like an ugly Minotaur,
Have been looked up from jealious Ellenor,
But bin as famous by thy mothers wrongs,
As by thy father subject to all tongues.
To shadow sin, might can the most pretend,
Kings, but the conscience, all things can defend.
A stronger hand restraines our wilful powers,
A will must rule above this will of ours,
Not following what our vain desires do woo
For virtues sake, but what we (only) do.
And has my father chose to live exilde,
Before his eyes should see my youth defilde?
And to withstand a tyrants lewd desire,
Beheld his towers and castles razde with fire:
Yet never tucht with grief, so only I,
Exempt from shame might with true honor die.
And shall this jewel which so deerly cost,
Now after all, by my dishonor lost?
No, no, his reverend words, his holy tears,
Yet in my soul too deep impression bears
His latest farewell at his last depart,
More deeply is ingraued in my heart,
Nor shall that blot, by me his name shall have,
Bring his gray hairs with sorrow to his grave,
Better his tears to fall upon my tomb,
Then for my birth to curse my mothers womb.
Though Dunmow give no refuge here at all.
Dunmow can give my body burial.
If all remorcelesse, no teare-shedding eye,
My self will moan my self; so live, so die.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
THis Epistle contains no particular points of History, more than the
generality of the argument lays open; for after the banishment of the Lord
Robert Fitzwater, and that Matilda was become a Recluse at Dunmow, (from whence
this reply is imagined to be written.) the King still earnestly persisting in
his suit. Matild. (...)ith this chaste and constant denial, hopes yet at
length to find some comfortable remedy, and to rid her self of doubts, by
taking upon her this monasticke habit, and to show that she still bears in
mind his former cruelty, bred by the impatience of his lust, she remembers
him of her fathers banishment, and the lawless exile of her alies and friends.
Do thou of father and of friends deprive me?


Then complaining of her distress, that flying thither, thinking there to find
relief, she sees herself most assaild where she hoped to have found most
safety. Alas, and fled I hither from my for,
That, etc.


After again, standing upon the precise points of conscience, not to cast off
this habit she had taken. My vow in taken, I a Nun professed.


And at last laying open more particularly the miseries sustaind by her father
in England, the burning of his Castles and houses, which she proves to be for
her sake: as respecting only her honor, more then his native Country and his
own fortunes. And to withstand a tyrants lewd desire,
Beheld his Towers and Castles set on fire.


Knitting up her Epistle with a great and constant resolution. Though Dunmow
give no refuge here at all,
Dunmow can give my body burial.


Finis.
To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne Harrington, wife to the honorable
Gentleman, sir John Harrington Knight.
MY singular good Lady, your many virtues known in general to all, and your
gracious favors to my unworthy self, have confirmed that in me, which before I
knew you, I only saw by the light of other men's judgments. Honor seated in
your breast, finds her self adorned as in a rich Palace, making that
excellent which makes her admirable; which like the Sun (from thence)
begets most precious things of this earthly world, only by the virtue of
his rays, not the nature of the mould. Worth is best discerned by the worthy,
dejected minds want that pure fire which should give vigor to virtue. I refer
to your great thoughts (the impartial Judges of true affection) the unfeigned
zeal I have ever borne to your honorable service; and so rest your Ladyships
humbly to command.

Mich: Drayton.

Queen Isabell to Mortimer.
The Argument.
Queen Isabel, (the wife of Edward the second, called Edward Carnaruan,)
being the daughter of Philip de Beau, King of France, forsaken by the King her
husband, who delighted only in the company of Piers Gaueston, his minion and
favorite, and after his death seduced by the evil counsel of the Spencers. This
Queen thus left by her husband, even in the glory of her youth, drew into her
especial favor Roger Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore, a man of a mighty and
invincible spirit. This Lord Mortimer rising in arms against the King with
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and the Barons, was taken ere he could gather his
power, and by the King committed to the tower of London. During his
imprisonment, he ordained a feast in honor of his birthday, to which he
invited Sir Stephen Segraue, Lieutenant of the Tower, and the rest of the
officers, where, by means of a drink prepared by the Queen, he cast them all
into a heavy sleep, and with Ladders of coards being ready prepared for the
purpose, he escapes and flies into France, whither she sends this Epistie,
complaining her own misfortunes, and greatly rejoicing at his safe escape.

THough such sweet comfort comes not now from her
As Englands Queen has sent to Mortimer.
Yet what that wants, which might my power approve
If lines can bring, this shall supply with love,
Me thinks affliction should not fright me so,
No^ should resume these sundry shapes of woe;
But when I feign would find the cause of this,
Thy absence shows me where the error is.
Often when I think of thy departing hence,
Sad sorrow then possesses every sense:
But finding thy dear blood preserved thereby,
And in thy life, my long-wisht liberty,
With that sweet thought my selff I only please
Amidst my grief, which sometimes gives me case,
Thus do extremest ills a joy possess,
And one woe makes another woe seem less.
That blessed night, that milde-aspected hour,
Wherein thou madst escape out of the Tower,
Shall consecrated evermore remain;
What gentle Planet in that hour did reign;
And shall be happy in the birth of men,
Which was chief lord of the Ascendant then.
O how I feared that sleepy juice I sent,
Might yet want power to further thine intent!
Or that some unseen mystery might lu^ke,
Which wanting order, kindly should not work;
Often did I wish those dreadful poysned lees,
That closde the euer-waking Dragons eyes,
Or I had had those sence-ber^auing stalks,
That grow in shady Proserpines dark walks;
Or those black weeds on Lethe banks below,
Or Lunary that does on Latmus flow;
Often did I fear this moist and soggy clime,
Or that the earth, waxt barren now with time,
Should not have herbs to help me in this case,
Such as do thrive on Indiaes parched face,
That morrow, when the blessed Sun did rise,
And shut the liddes of all heavens lesser eyes,
Forth from my palace by a secret staire,
I steal to Thames, as though to take the air;
And ask the gentle flood as it does glide,
Or thou did pass or perish by the tide?
If thou did perish, I desire the stream
To lay thee softly on her silver teame,
And bring thee to me to the quiet shore,
That with her tears thou might have some tears more.
When suddenly does rise a rougher gale,
With that (me thinks) the troubled waves look pale,
And sighing with that little gust that blows,
With this remembrance seem to knit their brows.
Even as this so daine passion does affright me,
The cheerful Sun breaks from a cloud to light me,
Then does the bottom evident appear,
As it would show me, that thou wast not there,
Whenas the water flowing where I stand,
Does seem to tell me, Thou art safe on land.
Did Bulloyne once a festival prepare,
For England, Almaine, Cicile, and Navarre?
When France envied those buildings (only blessed)
Gracde with the Orgies of my Bridal feast,
That English Edward should refuse my bed,
For that incestuous shameless Ganimed?
And in my place, upon his regal throne,
To set that gerle-boy, wanton Gaueston.
Betwixt the feature of my face and his,
My glass assures me no such difference is,
That a foul witches bastard should thereby
Be thought more worthy of his love than I.
What does avail us to be Princes heirs,
When we can boast our birth is only theirs?
When base dissembling flatterers shall deceive us,
Of all our famous ancestors did leave us;
And of our princely jewels and our dowres,
We but enjoy the least of what is ours;
when minions heads must wear our monarks crowns
To raise up dunghills with our famous towns;
When beggars-brats are wrapped in rich perfumes,
Their buzzard wings impt with our Eagles plumes;
And matched with the brave issue of our blood,
All the kingdom to their crauand brood.
Did Longshankes purchase with his conquering hand,
Albania, Gascoyne, Cambria, Ireland?
That young Carnarnan (his unhappy son)
Should give away all that his father won?
To back a stranger, prowdly bearing down
The brake alies and branches of the crown?
And did great Edward on his deathbed give
This charge to them which afterward should live,
That that proud Gascoyne banished the land,
No more should tread upon the English sand?
And have these great Lords in the quarrel stood,
And sealde his last will with their decrest blood,
That after all this fearful massacre,
The fall of Beauchamp, Lacy, Lancaster,
Another faithless favorite should arise,
To cloud the sun of our Nobilities?
And gloried I in Gauestons great fall,
That now a Spenser should succeed in all?
And that his ashes should another breed,
Which in his place and Empire should succeed;
That wanting one a kingdoms wealth to spend,
Of what that left, this now shall make an end;
To waste all that our father won before,
Nor leave our son a sword to conquer more.
Thus but in vain we fondly do resist,
Where power can do (even) all things as it list,
And with unjust men to debate of laws,
Is to give power to hurt a rightful cause;
Whilst Parlements must still redress their wrongs,
And we must starve for what to us belongs;
Our wealth but fuel to their fond excess,
And we must fast to feast their wantonness.
Think thou our wrongs then insufficient are,
To move our brother to religious war?
And if they were, yet Edward does detain
Homage for Pontiu, Guyne, and Aquytaine;
And if not that, yet has he broke the truce,
Thus all accurre, to put back all excuse.
The sisters wrong, ioynde with the brothers right,
Me thinks might urge him in this cause to fight.
Be all those people senseless of our harms,
Which for our Country ought have managed arms?
Is the brave Normans courage now forgot?
Or the bold Britains lost the use of shot?
The big-bonde Almaines, and stowt Brabanders,
Their warlike Pikes, and sharpe-edg'd Semiters?
Or do the Pickards let their Crosse-bowes lie,
Once like the Centaurs of old Thessalie?
Or if a valiant Leader be their lack,
Where thou art present, who should drive them back?
I do conjure thee by what is most dear,
By that great name of famous Mortimer,
By ancient Wigmors honorable cr^st,
The tombs where all thy famous grand-sires rest;
Or if than these, what more may thee approve,
Even by those vows of thy unfeigned love,
That thy great hopes may move the Christian King,
By foreign arms some comfort yet to bring,
To curb the power of traitors that rebel,
Against the right of princely Isabell.
Vain witlesle woman, why should I desire.
To add more heat to thy immortal fire?
To urge thee by the violence of hate,
To shake the pillars of thine own estate,
When whatsoever we intend to do,
To our misfortune ever sorts unto;
And nothing else remains for us beside,
But tears and coffins (only) to provide,
When still so long as Borough bears that name,
Time shall not blot out our deserved shame;
And whilst clear Trent her wonted course shall keep,
For our sad fall, her crystal drops shall weep.
All see our ruin on our backs is thrown,
And to our selves our sorrows are our own.
And Torlton now whose counsel should direct,
The first of all is slaundred with suspect;
For dangerous things dissembled seldom are,
Which many eyes attend with busy care.
What should I say? My griefs do still renew,
And but begin when I should bid adieu,
Few be my words, but manifold my woe,
And still I stay, the more I shiue to go.
As accents issue forth, griefs enter in,
And where I end, me thinks I but begin;
Till then fair time some greater good affords,
Take my loves payment in these ayrie words.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
O how I feared that sleepte drink I sent,
Might yet want power to further thine intent.
MOrtimer being in the Tower, and ordaining a feast in honor of his birthday,
as he pretended, and inuiting thereunto Sir Stephen Segraue, Constable of the
Tower, with the rest of the officers belonging to the same he gave them a
sleepie drink, provided him by the Queen, by which means he got liberue for
his escape. I steal to Thames, as though to take the air,
And ask the gentle stream as it does glide,


Mortimer being got out of the Tower, swamme the river of Thames into Kent,
whereof she having intelligence, doubts of his strength to escape, by reason
of his long imprisonment, being almost the space of three years. Did Bulloyne
once a festival prepare,
For England, Almaine, Cicile and Niuarr^?


Edward Carnaruan, the first Prince of Wales of the English blood, married
Isabell, daughter of Philip the Fair at Bulloine, in the presence of the Kings
of Almaine, Navarre, and Cicile, with the chief Nobility of France and
England: which marriage was there solemnized with exceeding pomp and
magnificence. And in my place, upon his regal throne,
To set that girle-boy, wanton Gaueston.


Noting the effeminacie and luxurious wantonness of Gaueston, the Kings
Minion, his behavior and attire ever so womanlike, to please the eye of his
lascivious Prince. That a foul Witches bastard should thereby.


It was urged by the Queen and the Nobility, in the disgrace of Piers
Gauestone that his mother was convicted of witchcraft, and burned for the same,
and that Piers had bewitched the King. Albania, Gascoine, Cambria, Ireland.


Albania, Scotland, so called of Albanact, the second son of Brutus, and
Cambria; Wales, so called of Camber the third son, the four Realms and
Countries, brought in subjection by Edward Longshanks. When of our princely
Jewels and our dowers.
We but enjoy the least of what is ours.


A complaint of the prodigality of King Edward, giving unto Gauestone the
jewels and treasure which was left him, by the ancient Kings of England; and
enriching him with the goodly Manor of Wallingford, assigned as parcel of the
dower, to the Queens of this famous ^le. And joined with the brave issue of
our blood,
Alie our kingdom to their crauand brood.


Edward the second, gave to Piers Gaueston in marriage, the daughtet of Gilbert
Clare, Earl of Gloucester, begot of the Kings sister, lone of Acres, married to
the said Earl of Gloucester. Should give away all that his father won,
To back a stranger.


King Edward offered his right in France, to Charles his brother in law, and
his right in Scotland to Robert Bruise, to be aided against the Barrons, in the
quarrel of Piers Gaueston. And did great Edward on his deathbed give.


Edward Longshankes, on his deathbed at Carlisle, commanded young Edward his
son on his blessing, not to call back Gaueston, which (for the mis-guiding
of the Princes youth) was before banished by the whole counsel of the Land.
That after all this fearful massaker,
The fall of Beuchamp, Lasy, Lancaster.


Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, Guy, Earl of Warwick, and Henry Earl of
Lincoln, who had taken their oaths before the deceased King at his death, to
withstand his son Edward if he should call Gaueston from exile, being a thing
which he much feared: now seeing Edward to violate his fathers commandment,
rise in arms against the King, which was the cause of the civil war, and
the ruin of so many Princes. And gloried I in Gauestons great fall,
That now a Spenser should succeed in all.


The two Hugh Spensers, the father and the son, after the death of Gaueston,
became the great favorites of the king, the son being created by him lord
Chamberlain, and the father Earl of Winchester. And if they were, yet Edward
does detain
Homage for Pontiu, Guyne, and Aquitaine.


Edward Longshankes, did homage for those Cities and Territories to the French
King, which Edward the second neglecting, moved the French King, by the
subornation of Mortimer, to sease those Countries into his hands. By ancient
Wigmors honorable Crest.


Wigmore in the marches of Wales, was the ancient house of the Mortimers, that
noble and courageous family. That still so long as Borrough bears that name.


The Queen remembers the great overthrow given to the Barrons, by Andrew
Herckley, Earl of Carlil, at Borrough bridge, after the battle at Burton.
And Torlton now whose counsels should direct.


This was Adam Torlton, Bishop of Herford, that great Polititia^, who so highly
favored the faction of the Queen and Mortimer, whose evil counsel afterward
wroght the destruction of the king.

Mortimer to Queen Isabell.
AS thy salutes my sorrows do adiourne
So back to thee their interest I turn;
Though not in so great bounty (I confess)
As thy heroicke princely lines express:
For how should comfort issue from the breath,
Of one condemned, and long lodged up in death?
From murders rage thou did me once repriue,
Now in exile, my hopes thou do revive;
Twice all was taken, twice thou all did give,
And thus twice dead, thou make me twice to live.
This double life of mine, your only due,
You gave to me; I gave it back to you;
Never my escape had, I aduentur'd thus,
As did the sky-attempting Daedalus;
And yet to give more safety to my flight,
Have made a night of day, a day of night.
Nor had I backed the proud aspiring wall,
Which held without, my hopes, within, my fall,
Leaving the cords to tell where I had gone,
For gazing eyes with fear to look upon;
But that thy beauty (by a power divine)
Breathed a new life into this spirit of mine.
Drawn by the Sun of thy celestial eyes,
With fiery wings made passage through the skies,
The heavens did seem the charge of me to take,
And sea and land be friend me for thy sake;
Thames stopped her tide, to make me way to go,
As thou had charged her that it should be so;
The hollow marmuring winds their due time kept,
As they had rocked the world, while all things slept;
One billow bore me, and another drove me,
This strove to help me, and that strove to save me;
The brisling reeds moved with the air did chide me,
As they would tell me that they meant to hide me;
The pale-faced night beheld thy heavy cheer,
And would not let one little star appear,
But over all her smokie maptle hurled,
And in thick vapors mu(...)d up the world;
And the pure air became so calm and still,
As it had been obedient to my will;
And every thing disposde unto my rest,
As when on Seas the Alcion buildes her nest.
When those rough waves which late with fury rusht,
Slide smoothely on, and suddenly are hushed;
Nor Neptune lets his surges out so long,
As Nature is in bringing forth her young;
Nor let the Spencers glory in my chance,
That I should live an exile here in France:
That I from England banished should be,
But England rather banished from me:
More were her want, France our great blood should bear,
Then Englands loss should be to Mortimer.
My grandsire was the first since Arthurs reign,
That the Round-table rectifide again;
To whose great Court at Kenelworth did come,
The peerless knighthood of all Christendom:
Whose princely order, honored England more,
Then all the Conquests she atchiu'd before.
Never durst Scot set foot in English ground,
Nor on his back did English bear a wound,
Whilst Wigmore flourisht in our princely hopes,
And whilst our Ensign marched with Edwards troops:
Whilst famous Longshankes bones (in Fortunes scorn)
As sacred relics to the field were borne;
Nor ever did the valiant English doubt,
Whilst our brave battles guarded them about.
Nor did our wives and woeful mothers mourn,
The English blood that stained Banocksburne,
Whilst with his Minions sporting in his Tent,
Whole days and nights in banqueting were spent,
Until the Scots (which vndersafegard stood)
Made lavish havoc of the English blood?
And battered helmes lay scattered on the shore,
Where they in conquest had been borne before.
A thousand kingdoms will we seek from far,
As many Nations waste with civil war,
Where the disheuel'd ghastly Sea-nimph sings,
Or well-rigd ships shall stretch their swelling wings,
And drag their ankors through the sandy foam,
About the world in every clime to rome,
And those vnchristned Countries call our own,
Where scarce the name of England has bin known;
And in the dead-sea sink our houses fame,
From whose stern waves we first derived our name,
Before foul blacke-mouth'd infamy shall sing,
That Mortimer e're stooped unto a King.
And we will turn sterne-visag'd fury back,
To seek his spoil, who sought our utter sack:
And come to beard him in our native I Will,
E're he march forth to follow our exile.
And after all these boistrous stormy shockes,
Yet will we grapple with the chaulkie rocks:
Nor will we come like Pirates, or like the eues,
From mountains, forests, or sea-bordering Cleeues,
But fright the air with terror (when we come)
Of the stern trumpet, and the bellowing drum:
And in the field advance our plumy Crest,
And march upon fair Englands flowrie breast;
And Thames which once we for our life did swim,
Shaking our dewy tresses on her brim,
Shall bear my navy; vaunting in her pride,
Falling from Tanet with the powerful tide;
Which fertile Essex, and fair Kent shall see,
Spreading herflags along the pleasant lee,
When on her stemming poope she prowdly bears
The famous Ensigns of the Belgicke Peers,
And for the hateful sacrilegious sin,
Which by the Pope he stands accursed in,
The Canon text shall have a common gloss,
Receipts in parcels, shall be paid in gross.
This doctrine preachde, who from the Church does take,
At least shall trebble restitution make:
For which Rome sends her curses out from far,
Through the stern throat of terror-breathing war,
Till to th'vnpeopled shores she brings supplies
Of those industrious Roman Colonies.
And for his homage, by the which of old
Proud Edward Guyne and Aquitaine does hold.
Charles by inuasiue arms again shall take,
And send the English forces over the lake;
When Edwards fortune stands upon this chance,
To loose in England, or expulsde from France;
And all those towns great Longshankes left his son,
Now lost again, which once his father won.
Within their strong percullizde Ports shall lie,
And from their walls his sieges shall defy.
And by that firm and undissolved knot,
Betwixt their neighboring French, and bordring Scot,
Bruise now shall bring his Red-shanks from the seas,
From th'Iled Oreads, and the Hebrydes.
And to his western havens give free pass,
To land the warlike Irish Galiglasse,
Marching from Tweede to swelling Humber sands,
Wasting along the Northern netherlands.
And wanting those which should his power sustain,
Consumde with slaughter in his bloody reign,
Our warlike sword shall drive him from his throne,
Where he shall lie for us to tread upon;
And those great lords now after their attaints,
Canonized amongst the English Saints;
And by the superstitious people thought,
That by their Relics, miracles are wrought,
And think that flood much virtue does retain,
Which took the blood of famous Bohun slain;
Continuing the remembrance of the thing,
To make the people more abhor their King.
Nor shall a Spenser (be he never so great)
Possess our Wigmore, our renowned seat.
To raze the ancient Trophies of our race,
With our deserts their monuments to grace;
Nor shall he lead our valiant marchers forth,
To make the Spensers famous in the North;
Nor be the Gardants of the British pales,
Defending England, and preserving Wales.
At first our troubles easily reculde;
But now grown headstrong hardly to be ruled;
With grauest counsel all must be directed,
Where plainest shows are openly suspected;
For where mis-hap our error does assault,
There does it eassiest make us see our fault,
Then (sweet) repress all fond and wilful spleen,
Two things to be a woman, and a Queen;
Keep close the cindars, lest the fire should burn,
It is not this which yet must serve our turn.
And if I do not much mistake the thing,
The next supply shall greater comfort bring;
Till when I leave my Princess for a while,
Live thou in rest, though I live in exile.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Of one condemnd, and long lodgde up in death.
ROger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, had stood publicly condemned, for his
insurrection with Thomas earl of Lancaster, and Bohune earl of Herford, by the
space of three months: and as the report went, the day of his execution was
determined to have bin shortly after, which he prevented by his escape. Twice
all was taken, twice thou all did give.


At what time the two Mortimers, this Roger lord of Wigmore and his uncle Roger
Mortimer the elder, were apprehended in the west, the Queen by means of
Torlton Bishop of Hereford, and Beck Bishop of Duresme, and Patriarch of
Jerusalem, being then both mighty in the state, upon the submission of the
Mortimers, somewhat pacified the king, and now secondly she wrought means for
his escape. Leaving the cords to tell where I had gone,


With strong ladders made of cords provided him for the purpose, he escaped out
of the Tower, which when the same were found fastened to the walls, in such a
desperate attempt they bred astonishment to the beholders. Nor let the Spensers
glory in my d^awe.


The two Hugh Spensers, the father, and the son, then being so highly favored
of the King, knew that their greatest safety came by his exile, whose high and
turbulent spirit could never brook any corriuall in greatness. My grandsire was
the first since Arthurs reign,
That the Round-table rectifide again.


Roger Mortimer, called the great Lord Mortimer, Grandfather to this Roger,
which was afterward the first Earl of March, ree^ected again the Round-table
at Kenelwoorth, after the ancient order of king Arthurs table, with the retinue
of a hundred knights, and a hundred ladies in his house, for the entertaining of
such adventures as came thither from all parts of Christendom. Whilst famous
Longshanks bones in Fortunes scorn.


Edward Longshanks willed at his death, that his body should be boiled, the
flesh from the bones, and that the bones should be borne to the wars in
Scotland, which he was persuaded unto by aprophecie, which told that the
English should still be fortunate in conquest, so long as his bones were carried
in the field. The English blood that stained Banocksburne.


In the great voyage Edward the second made against the Scots, at the battle
at Striueling near unto the river of Banocksburne in Scotland, where there was
in the English camp such banket^ing and excess, such riot and misorder, that
the Scots, (who in the mean time labored for advantage) gave to the English
a great overthrow. And in the Dead-sea sincke our horses fame,
From whose, etc.


Mortimer, so called of Mare mortuum, and in French Mort mer, in English the
Dead-sea, which is said to be where Sodom and Go morra once were, before they
were destroyed by fire from Heaven. And for that hateful sacrilegious sin
Which by the Pope he stand^ (...)ursed in.


Gaustelinus and Lucas, two Cardinals, sent into England from Pope Clement, to
appease the ancient hate between the King and Thomas. Earl of Lancaster, to
whose Embassy the king seemed to yield, but after their departure he went
back from his promises, for which he was accursed at Rome. Of those
industrious Roman Colonies.


A Colony is a sort or number of people, that come to inhabit a place before
not inhabited, whereby he seems here to prophecy of the subversion of the
land; the Pope joining with the power of other Princes against Edward for the
breach of his promise. Charles by inuasiue Arms again shall take.


Charles the French King, moved by the wrong done unto his sister, seiseth the
Provinces which belonged to the King of England into his hands, stirred the
rather thereto by Mortimer, who solicited her cause in France, as is expressed
before in the other Epistle, in the gloss upon this point. And those great
Lords now after their attaints,
Canonized among the English Saints.


After the death of Thomas Earl of Lancaster at Pomfret, the people imagined
great miracles to be done by his relics: as they did of the body of Bohune
earl of Hereford, slain at Borough bridge.

Finis.
To my worthy and honored friend, Sir Walter Aston Knight of the Bath.
SIR, though without suspicion of flattery I might in more ample and free
terms, intimate my affection unto you, yet having so sensible a taste of your
generous and noble aisposition, which without this habit of ceremony can
estimate my love: I will rather affect bre(...), though it should seem my
fault, than by my tedious complement, to trouble mine own opinion settled in
your judgment and discretion. I make you the Patron of this Epistle of the
Blacke-Prince, which I pray you accept, till more easy hours may offer up
from me some thing more worthy of your view, and my travel.

Yours truly devoted, Mich: Drayton.

Edward the Blacke-Prince to Alice Countess of Salisbury.
The Argument.
Alice Countess of Salisbury, remaining at Roxborough castle in the North, in
the absence of the earl her husband, who was by the Kings command sent over
into Flaunders, and there deceased ere his return. This Lady being besieged in
her castle by the Scots, Edward the Blacke-Prince being sent by the King his
father to relieve the north parts with an Army, and to remove the siege of
Roxborough, there fell in love with the Countess; when after she returned to
London, he sought by diverse and sundry means to win her to his youthful
pleasures, as by forcing the Earl of Kent her father, and her mother,
unnaturally to become his Agents in his vain desire; where after a long and
assured trial of her invincible constancy, he takes her to his wife, to
which end he only frames this Epistle.

Receive these papers from thy woeful Lord,
With far more woes than they with words are storde,
Which if thine eye with rashness do reprove,
Thei'le say they came from that imperious love.
In every letter thou may understand,
Which love has signde and sealed with his hand;
And where no farther process he refers,
In blots set down, for others Characters,
This cannot blush, although you do refuse it,
Nor will reply how ever you shall use it;
All, one to this, though you should bid despair,
This still intreates you, this still speaks you fair;
Have thou a living soul? a humane sense?
To like, dislike p^oue, order and dispense,
The depth of reason soundly to advise,
To love things good things hurtful to despise;
The tuch of judgment, which should(...) things prove,
And have thou touched, yet not allowst my love?
Sound moves his sound, voice does beget his voice,
One Ec^ho makes another to rejoice,
One well tunde string set truly to his like,
Struck near at hand does make another strike.
How comes it then that our affections jarre?
What opposition does beget this war?
I know that Nature franckly to thee gave,
That measure of her bounty that I have,
And with that sense she likewise to us lent
Each one his organ, each his instrument,
But every one, because it is thine own,
Does p(...)se it self, unto it self alone.
Thy d(...)y hand, when it it self does tuch,
That feeling tells it there was never such;
When in thy gl^sse thine eye it self does see,
That thinks there is none, like to it self can be,
And every one does judge it self divine.
Because that thou do challenge it for thine;
And each it self, Narcissus. like does smother,
And loves it self, not like to any other;
Fie be not burnd thus in thine own desire,
It Is needless beauty should it self admire,
The Sun, by which all creatures lightened be,
And sees all, it self yet cannot see;
And his own brightness his own foil is made,
And is to us the cause of his own shade.
When first thy beauty by mine eye was proved,
It saw not then so much to be beloved;
But when it came a perfect view to take,
Each look of one, does many beauties make:
In little circlets first it does arise,
Then somewhat larger seeming in mine eyes,
And in this gi^ing compass as it goes,
So more and more, the same in greatness grows,
And as it yet at liberty is set,
The motion still does other forms beget;
Until ^t length, look any way I could,
Nothing there was but beauty to behold.
Art thou offended that thou art beloved?
Remove the cause, the effect is soon removed;
Indent with Beauty how far to extend,
Set down desire, a limmit where to end;
Then charm thine eyes, their glances shall not wound,
And teach the sense, the depth of love to sound:
If thou do this, nay then thou shall do more,
And bring to pass what never was before;
Make anguish sportiue, craving all delight,
Mirth solemn, sullen, and inclinde to night;
Ambition lowly, envy speaking well,
Love, his relief of nigardize to sell;
Our warlike father did these forts devise,
As surest holds against our enemies,
The safest places for our sex to rest,
Fear soon is settled in a woman's breast,
Thy breast is of another temper far,
And then thy Castle fitter for the war,
Thou do not safely in thy Castle rest,
Thy Castle should be safer in thy breast,
That keeps out foes, but does thy friends enclose,
But thy breast keeps out both thy friends and foes;
That may be batterd, or be vnderminde,
Or by strait siege, for want of succor pinde;
But thy heart is invincible to all,
And more defensive then thy Castle wall;
Of all the shapes that ever Jove did prove,
Wherewith he used to entertain his love;
That likes me best, when in a golden shower,
He ^ainde himself on Danae in her Tower,
Nor did I ever envy his command,
In that he bears the thunder in his hand;
But in that showrie shape I cannot be,
And as he came to her, I come to thee,
Thy Tower with foes, is not begirt about,
If thou within, they are besieged without,
One hair of thine, more vigor does retain
To bind thy foe, then with an iron chain:
Who might be gyu'd in such a golden string,
Would not be captive, though he were a King;
Had thou all India heaped up in thy fort,
And thou thy self besieged in that sort,
Get thou but out, where they can thee epsy,
They Will follow thee, and let the treasure lie.
I cannot think what force thy Tower should win,
If thou thy self do guard the same within;
Thine eye retains artillary at will,
To kill who ever thou desir^st to kill;
For that alone more deeply wounds their hearts,
Then they can thee, though with a thousand darts;
For there entrenched little Cupid lies,
And from those turrets all the world defies:
And when thou letst down that transparant lid,
Of entrance, there an Army does forbid.
And as for Famine, thou needs never fear,
Who thinks of want when thou art present there,
Thy only sight gives spirit unto the blood,
And comforts life, though never tasting food.
And as thy soldiers keep their watch and ward,
So chastity thy inward breast does guard,
Thy modest pulse serves as a latum bell,
Which watched by a wakefull Sentinel,
Is stirring still with every little fear,
Warning, if any enemy be near.
Thy virtuous thought, when all the others rest,
Like careful Skowts pass up and down thy breast,
And still they round about that place do keep,
Whilst all the blessed garrison do sleep.
But yet I fear, if that the truth were told,
That thou have robbde, and fl^st unto this bold
I thought as much, and did this Fort devise,
That thou in safety here might tyrannize.
Yes, thou have robbde the heaven and earth of all,
And they against thy lawless theft do call;
Thine eyes with mine, that wage continual wars,
Borrow their brightness of the twinkling stars;
Thy breath, for which mine still in sighs consumes,
Has robbed sweet flowers, rich odors and perfumes,
Thy cheek, for which mine all this penance proves,
Steals the pure whitenes both from Swans and doves.
Thy lips from mine, that in thy mask be pent,
Have filch'd the blushing from the orient;
O mighty Love! bring hither all thy power,
And fetch this heavenly thief out of her Tower,
For if she may be suffered in this sort,
Heavens store will soon be hoarded in this fort.
When I arrived before that state of love,
And saw thee on the battlement above,
I thought there was no other heaven but there,
And thou an Angel did from thence appear.
But when my reason did reprove mine eye,
That thou were subject to mortality,
I then excusde the Scot before had done,
No marvel though he would the fort have won;
Perceiving well those envious walls did hide,
More wealth then was in all the world beside;
Against thy foe, I came to lend thee aid,
And thus to thee my self, my self betraide;
He is besieged, the siege that came to raise,
There Is no assault that not my breast assaies,
Love grown extreme, does find unlawful shifts,
The Gods take shapes, and do allure with gifts,
Commanding Jove, that by great Stix does swear,
Forsworn in love, with lovers oaths does bear,
Love causeless still, does aggrauate his cause,
It is his law to violate all laws;
His reason is, in only wanting reason,
And were untrue, not deeply tuch'd with treason;
Th'vnlawfull means, does make his lawful gain,
He speaks most true, when he the most does feign;
Pardon the faults that have escapde by me,
Against fair virtue, chastity and thee;
If Gods can their own excellence excel,
Is it in pardoning mortals that rebel?
When all thy trialls are enrol'd by fame,
And all thy sex made glorious by thy name,
Then I a captive shall be brought hereby,
To adorn the triumph of thy chastity;
I sue not now thy Paramore to be,
But as a husband to be linck'd to thee.
I am Englands heir, I think thou will confess,
Were thou a Prince, I hope I am no less;
But that thy birth does make thy stock divine,
Else durst I boast, my blood as good as thine;
Disdain me not, nor take my love in scorn,
Whose brow a crown hereafter may adorn.
But what I am, I call mine own no more,
Take what thou will, and what thou will, restore;
Only I crave, what ere I did intend,
In faithful love, now happily may end.
Farewell sweet Lady, so well may thou fare,
To equal ^oy with measure of my care;
Thy virtues more then mortal tongue can tell,
A thousand, thousand times, farewell, farewell.
Notes of the Chronicle history.
Receive these papers from thy woeful Lord.
BAndello, by who^ this history was made famous, being an Italia^ as it is the
peoples custom in that clime, rather to fail sometime in the truth of
circumstance, then to forgo the grace of their conceit; n like manner as the
Grecians, of whom the Satyrist. Et quicquid Graetia mendax,
Audet in historia.


Thinking it to be a greater trial, that a Countess should be sude unto by a
King, then by the son of a King, and conseqently, that the honor of her
chastity should be the more, has caused it to be generally taken so; but as
by Polidore, Fabian, and Froisard, appears the contrary is true. Yet may
Bandello be very well excused, as being a stranger, whose errors in the truth
of our history, are not so material, that they should need an inuectiue,
lest his wit should be defrauded of any part of his due, which were not less,
were every part a fiction. Howbeit, lest a common error should prevail against
a truth; these Epistles are conceived in those persons, who were indeed the
actors: to wit, Edward, surnamed the Black (...), not so much of his
complexion, as of the dismal battles which he fought in France, (in like
sense as we may say, a black day) for some tragical event, though the Sun
shine never so bright therein. And Alice, the Countess of Salsburie, who as it
is certain, was beloved of Prince Edward; so it is as certain, that many
points now current in the received story, can never hold together with
likelihoode of such enforcement, had it not been showed under the title of a
King. And when thou let'st down that transparent lid.


Not that the lid is transparent, for no part of the skin is transparent, but
for the gemme which at that closure is said to containt, is transparent, for
otherwise how could the mind understand by the eye? should not the images
slide through the same, and replenish the stage of the fantasy? But this
belongs to Optickes. The Latins call the eye lid cilium, (I will not say of
celando) as the eye brow supercilium, and the hair on the eye lids palpebra,
perhaps quod palpitet, all which have their distinct and necessary uses.

Alice Countess of Salsbury, to the Black Prince.
AS one would grant; yet gladly would deny,
Twixt hope and fear, I doubtfully reply;
A woman's weakness, lest I should discover,
Answering a Prince, and writing to a lover;
And some say, Love with Reason does dispense.
And wrest our plain words to another sense:
Think you not then, poor women had not need
Be well aduisde to write, what men should read,
When being silent moving but awry,
Gives cause of scandal and of obloquy;
Whilst in our hearts, our secret thoughts abide,
Th'inuenom'd tongue of slander yet is tide;
But if once spoke, delivered up to Fame,
Hers the report, but ours returns the shame.
About to write, yet newly entering in,
Me thinks I end, ere I can well begin;
When I would end, then something makes me stay,
And then me thinks I should have more to say;
And some one thing remains in my breast,
For want of words that cannot be expressed;
What I would say; as said to thee I feign,
Then in thy person I reply again,
Then in thy cause, urge all I can object,
Then what again mine honor must respect.
O Lord! what sundry passions do I try?
Striving to hate, you forcing contrary;
Being a Prince, I blame you not to prove,
The greater reason to obtain your love.
That greatness which does challenge no denial,
The only rest that does allow my trial:
Edward so great, the greater were his fall,
And my offense in this were capital.
To men is granted privilege to tempt,
But in that charter women be exempt:
Men win us not, except we give consent;
Against our selves, except our selves are bent.
Who does impute it is a fault to you?
You prove not false, except we be untrue;
It is your virtue, being men, to try,
And it is ours, by virtue to deny.
Your fault it self, serves for the faults excuse,
And makes it ours, though yours be the abuse.
Beauty a beggar, fie it is too bad,
When in it self sufficiency is had,
Not made a Lure t'entice the wandering eye,
But an attire t'adorne sweet modesty,
If modesty and women once do sever,
We may bid farewell to our fame for ever
Let John and Henry, Edwards instance be,
Matilda and fair Rosamond for me:
A like both wooed, alike su'd to be won,
The One by the father, the other by the son;
Henry obtaining, did our weakness wound,
And lays the fault on wanton Rosamond;
Matilda chaste, in life and death all one,
By her denial, l^^es the fault on John;
By these we prove, men accessory still,
But women only principalls of ill.
What praise is ours, but what our virtues get?
If they be lent, so much we be in debt,
Whilst our own honors virtue does defend,
All force too weak, what ever men pretend;
If all the world else, should suborne our fame,
It Is we our selves that overthrow the same;
And howsoever although by force you win,
Yet on our weakness still returns the sin.
A virtuous Prince who does not Edward call?
And shall I then be guilty of your fall?
Now God for bid; yet rather let me die,
Then such a sin upon my soul should lie.
Where is great Edward? whither is he led?
At whose victorious name whole armies fled.
Is that brave spirit that conquered so in France,
Thus overcome and vanquished with a glance?
Is that great heart that did aspire so hie,
So soon transpersed with a woman's eye?
He that a king at Poictiers battle took,
Himself led captive with a wanton look?
Twice as a Bride to church I have bin led,
Twice have two Lords enjoyd my Bridale bed;
How can that beauty yet be vndestroyd,
That years have wasted, and two men enjoyed,
Or should be thought fit for a Princes store,
Of which two subjects were possessed before?
Let Spain, let France, or Scotland so prefer
Their infant Queens; for Englands dowager,
That blood should be much more than half divine,
That should be equal every way with thine:
Yet princely Edward, though I thus reprove you,
As mine own life, so dearly do I love you.
My noble husband, which so loved you,
That gentle Lord, that reverend Mountague,
Nere mothers voice did please her babe so well,
As his did mine, of you to hear him tell;
I have made short the hours that time made long,
And chaind mine ears unto his pleasing tongue,
My lips have waited on your praises worth,
And snatched his words ere he could get them forth:
When he has spoke, and something by the way
Has broke off that he was about to say;
I kept in mind where from his tale he fell,
Calling on him the residue to tell;
Often he would say, how sweet a Prince is he!
When I have praisde him but for praising thee,
And to proceed, I would entreat and woo,
And yet to ease him, help to praise thee too:
Must she be forcde, t'exclaime th'iniurious wrong,
Offered by him, whom she has loved so long?
Nay, I will tell, and I durst almost swear,
Edward will blush, when he his fault shall hear.
Judge now that time does youths desire assuage,
And reason mildely quenched the fire of rage.
By upright justice let my cause be tried,
And be thou judge if I not justly chide.
That not my fathers grave and reverend years,
When on his knee he beggd me with his tears,
By no persuasions possibly could win,
To free himself as guiltless of my sin.
The woe for me my mother did abide,
Whose suit (but you) there is none would have denide.
Your lust full rage your tyranny could stay;
Mine honors ruin further to delay;
Have I ot loved you? let the truth be shown,
That still preserved your honor with mine own.
Had your fond will your foul desires preuailde,
When you by them my chastity assailde:
Though this no way could have excusde my fault,
True virtue never yielded to assault:
Yet what a thing were this it should be said,
My parents sin should to your charge be laid:
And I have gainde my liberty with shame,
To save my life, made ship wrack of my name.
Did Roxborough once veil her towering fane,
To thy brave ensigue, on the Northern plain?
And to thy trumpet sounding from thy tent,
Often replide (as to my succor sent)
And did receive thee as my sou^raigne liege
Coming to aid, thou should again besiege,
To raise a for, but for my treasure came
To plant a foe, to take my honest name;
Under pretense to have removed the Scot,
And would have won more than he could have got;
That did ingirt me ready still to fly,
But thou laidst batt'ry to my chastity:
O modesty, did thou me not restrain,
How I could chide you in this angry vain!
A Princes name (heaven knows) I do not crave,
To have those honors Edward^ spouse should have;
Nor by ambitious lures will I be brought,
In my chaste breast to harbor such a thought,
As to be worthy to be made a Bride,
An Empress place by mighty Edwards side,
Of all the most unworthy of that grace,
To wait on her that should enjoy that place.
But if that love Prince Edward does require,
Equal his virtues, and my chaste desire:
If it be such as we may justly vaunt,
A Prince may sue for, and a Lady grant:
If it be such as may suppress my wrong,
That from your vain unbridled youth has sprung,
That faith I send, that I from you receive,
The rest unto your Princely thoughts I leave.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Twice as a Bride I have to Church been led.
THe two husbands of which she makes mention, obiecting bigamy against
herself, as being therefore not meet to be married with a batcheller-Prince,
were sir Thomas Holland knight, and sir Willlam Montague, afterward made Earl
of Salisbury. That not my fathers grave and reverend years.


A thing incredible, that any Prince should be so unjust to use the fathers
means for the corruption of the daughters chastity, though so the history
imports, her father being so honorable, and a man of so singular desert,
though Polidore would have her thought to be Jane, the daughter to Edmund earl
of Kent, uncle to Edward the third, beheaded in the Protectoriship of Mortimer,
that dangerous aspirer. And I have gainde my liberty with shame.


Roxborough is a castle in the North, mis-termed by Bandello Salisbury castle,
because the king had given it to the Earl of Salisbury, in which her Lord
being absent, the Countess by the Scots was besieged, who by the coming of
the English Army were removed. Here first the Prince saw her, whose liberty
had bin gained by her shame, had she bin drawn by dishonest love to satisfy
his appetite, but by her most praiseworthy constancy she converted that humor
in him to an honorable purpose, and obtained the true reward of her admired
virtues. The rest unto your princely thoughts I leave.


Lest any thing be left out which were worth the relation, it shall not be
impertinent to annex the opinions that are uttered, concerning her, whose name
is said to have bin Aclips, but that being rejected as a name unknown among
us, Froisard is rather believed, who calls her Alice. Polidore contrariwise
as before is declared, names her Jane, who by Prince Edward had issue, Edward
dying young, and Richard the second king of England, though (as he says) she was
divorced afterward, because within the degrees of consanguinitie prohibiting
to many, the truth whereof I omit to discuss, her husband the Lord Montague,
being sent over into Flaunders by king Edward, was taken prisoner by the
French, and not returning, left his Countess a widow, in whose bed succeeded
Prince Edward, to whose last and lawsull request the reioycesull Lady sends
this loving answer.

Finis.
To the right Honorable and my very good Lord, Edward Earl of Bedford.
THrice noble and my gracious Lord, the love I have ever borne to the
illustrious house of Bedford, and to the honorable family of the Harringtons,
to the which by marriage your Lordship is happily united, has long since
devoted my true and zealous affection to your honorable service, and my Poems
to the protection of my noble Lady, your Countess; to whose service I was
furst bequeathed, by that learnd and accomplished gentleman sir Henry Goodere,
(not long since deceased,) whose I was whilst he was, whose patience pleased
to bear with the imperfections of my heedles and unstaid youth. That
excellent and matchless Gentleman, was the first cherisher of my Muse, which
had been by his death left a poor Orphan to the world, had he not before
bequeathed it to that Lady whom he so dearly lived. Vouchsafe then, my dear
Lord, to accept this epistle, which I dedicate as zealously, as (I hope) you
will patronize willingly, until some more acceptable service may be witness
of my love to your honor,

Your Lordships ever Michaell Drayton.

Queen Isabell to Richard the second.
The Argument.
Queen Isabel the daughter of Charles king of France) being the second wife of
Richard the second, the son of Edward the Black Prince, the eldest son of
King Edward the third; After the said Richard her husband was deposed from his
crown and kingly dignity, by Henry duke of Herford, the eldest son of John of
Gaunt duke of Lancaster, the fourth son of Edward the third, this Lady being
then very young, was sent back again into France, without dowre, at what time
the deposed King her husband was sent from the Tower of London (as a prisoner)
unto Pomfret Castle. Whether this poor Lady bewailing her husbands misfortunes
writes this Epistle from France.

AS does the yearly Auger of the spring
In deapth of woe, thus I my sorrow sing;
Words tunde with sighs, tears falling often among,
A doleful burden to a heavy song:
Words issue forth to find my grief some way,
Tears overtake them, and do bid them stay;
Thus whilst one strives to keep the other back,
Both once too forward, now are both too slack.
If fatal Pomfret has in former time.
Nurrisht the grief of that unnatural clime.
Thither I send my sorrows to be sed,
But, where first bo^ne, where fitter to be bred?
They unto France be aliens and unknown,
England from her does challenge these her own.
They say all mischief comes from the North,
It is too true, my fall does set it forth;
But why should I thus limite Grief a place,
When all the world is filld with our disgrace?
And we in bounds thus striving to contain it,
The more resists, the more we do restrain it.
Oh how even yet I hate these wretched eyes,
And in my glass often call them faithless spies
(Preparde for Richard) that unawares did look
Upon that traitor Henry Bulingbrooke,
But that excess of joy my sense bereaved
So much, my sight had never bin deceau'd.
Oh how unlike to my loved Lord was he,
Whom rashly I, sweet Richard took for thee,
I might have seen the Cou^sers self did lack,
That Princely rider should bestride his back,
He that (since Nature her great work began)
She made to be the mirror of a man,
That when she meant to form some matchless lim,
Still for a pattern, took some part of him,
And jealous of her cunning, brake the mould,
In his proportion done the best she could.
Oh let that day be guilty of all sin,
That is to come, or heretofore has bin,
Wherein great Norffolkes forward course was staide,
To prove the treasons he to Hersord laid,
When (with stern fury) both these Dukes enragde,
Their warlike gloves at Couentry engaged,
When first thou did repeal thy former grant,
Sealed to brave Mowbray, as thy Combatant,
From his unnumbered hours let time divide it,
Lest in his minutes he should hap to hide it;
Yet on his brow continually to bear it,
That when it comes, all other days may fear it,
And all ill-boding Planets by consent,
That day may hold their dreadful parliament,
Be it in heavens decrees enroled thus,
Black, dismal, fatal, inauspitious:
Proud Herford then, in height of all his pride,
Under great Mowbraies valiant hand had did;
Nor should not thus from banishment retire,
The fatal brand to set our Troy on fire.
O why did Charles relieve his needy state?
A vagabond and straggling runnagate;
And in this Court, with grace did entertain
This vagrant exile, this abiected Caine,
Who with a thousand mothers curses went,
Marked with the brand often years banishment.
When thou to Ireland took'st thy last farewell,
Millions of knees upon the pauements fell,
And every where th'applauding echoes ring,
The joyful showts that did salute a King;
Thy parting hence, what pomp did not adorn?
At thy return, who laughed thee not to scorn?
Who to my Lord a look vouchsafde to lend,
Then all too few on Herford to attend.
Princes (like suns) be evermore in sight,
All see the clouds betwixt them and their light;
Yet they which lighten all down from the skies,
See not the clouds offending others eyes,
And deem their noone-tide is desired of all,
When all expect clear changes by their fall.
What color seems to shadow Herfords claim,
When law and right his fathers hopes does maime?
Affirmed by churchmen (which should bear no hate)
That John of Gaunt was illegi^timate;
Whom his reputed mothers tongue did spot,
By a base Flemish Boore to be begot,
Whom Edwards Eglets mortally did shun,
Daring with them to gaze against the Sun.
Where lawful right and conquest does allow,
A triple crown on Richards princely brow,
Three kingly Lions bears his bloody field,
No bastards mark does blot his conquering shield,
Never durst he attempt our hapless shore,
Nor set his foot on fatal Rauenspor^;
Nor durst his slugging Hulkes approach the strand,
Nor stoop a top as signal to the land,
Had not the Percyes promisde aid to bring,
Against their oath unto their lawful King,
Against their faith unto our crowns true heir,
Their valiant kinsman, Edmond Mortimer;
When I to England came, a world of eyes
Like stars attended on my fair arise,
At my decline, like angry Planets frown,
And all are set before my going down;
The smooth faced air did on my coming smile,
But with rough storms are driven to exile;
But Bullingbrooke deuis^e we thus should part,
Fearing two sorrows should possess one heart;
To make affliction stronger, does deny,
That one poor comfort left our misery,
He had before diuorc'd thy crown and thee,
Which might suffice, and not to widow me,
But that to prove the utmost of his hate,
To make our fall the greater by our state.
Oh would Aumerle had suncke when he betrayed
The complot, which that holy Abbot laid.
When he infringed the oath which he first took,
For thy revenge on pe^iurde Bullingbrooke.
And been the ransom of our friends dear blood
Untimely lost, and for the earth too good;
And we untimely mourn our hard estate,
They gone too soon, and we remain too late.
And though with tears I from my Lord depart,
This curse on Horford fall, to ease my heart:
If the foul breach of a chaste nuptial bed,
May bring a curse, my curse light on his head;
If murders guilt with blood may deeply stain,
Green, Scroope, and Bushie, die his fault in grain;
If perjury may heavens pure gates debar,
Damned be the oath he made at Dancaster;
If the deposing of a lawful King,
The curse condemn him, if no other thing;
If these disioynde, for vengeance cannot call,
Let them united strongly curse him all.
And for the Percyes, heaven may hear my prayre,
That Bullingbrooke now placde in Richards chair;
Such cause of woe unto their wives may be,
As those rebellious Lords have been to me.
And that proud Dame, which now controlleth all,
And in her pomp triumphs in my fall,
For her great Lord may water her sad eyne,
With as salt tears as I have done for mine,
And mourn for Henry Hotspur, her dear son,
As I for my sweet Mortimer have done;
And as I am, so succourlesse be sent,
Lastly, to taste perpetual banishment.
Then loose thy care, where first thy crown was lost,
Sell it so dearly, for it dearly cost;
And since they did of liberty deprive thee,
Burying thy hope, let not thy care out-liue thee.
But hard (God knows) with sorrow does it go,
When woe becomes a comforter to woe;
Yet much me thinks of comfort I could say,
If from my heart pale fear were rid away:
Something there is which tells me still of woe,
But what it is, that heaven above does know;
Grief to it self, most dreadful does appear,
And never yet was sorrow void of fear;
But yet in death, does sorrow hope the best,
And with this farewell wish thee happy rest.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
If fatal Pomfret has in former time,
POmfret Castle, ever a fatal place to the Princes of England, and most
ominous to the blood of Plantaginet. Oh how even yet I hate these wretched eyes,
And in my glass, etc.


When Bullingbrooke returned to London from the West, bringing Richard a
prisoner with him, the Queen, who little knew of her husbands hard success,
staid to behold his coming in, little thinking to have seen her husband thus
led in triumph by his foe, and now seeming to hate her eyes, that so much had
graced her mortal enemy. Wherein great Norfolks forward course was staid.


She remembers the meeting of two Dukes of Herford and Norfolk at Couentry,
urging the justness of Mowbrayes quarrel against the Duke of Herford, and the
faithful assurance of his victory. O why did Charles relieve his needy state?
A vagabond, etc.


Charles the French King her father, received the Duke of Herford in his Court,
and relieved him in France, being so nearly alied, as Cousin german to king
Richard his son in Law, which he did simply, little thinking that he should
after return into England, and dispossess King Richard of the Crown. When
thou to Ireland took'st thy last farewell.


King Richard made a voyage with his Army into Ireland, against Onell and
Mackemur, which rebelled, at what time Henry entered here at home, and robbed him
of all kingly dignity. Affirmde by Churchmen (which should bear no hate)
That John of Gaunt was illegit^imate.


William Wickham, in the great quarrel betwixt John of Gaunt and the Clergy,
of mere spite and malice (as it should seem) reported, that the Queen
confessed to him on her deathbed, being then her Confessor, that John of Gaunt,
was the son of a Flemming, and that she was brought to bed of a woman child
at Gaunt, which was smothered in the cradle by mischance, and that she obtained
this child of a poor woman, making the king believe it was her own, greatly
fearing his displeasure. Fox e^ Chron. Alban. No bastards mark does blot our
conquering shield.


Showing the true and indubitate birth of Richard, his right unto the Crown of
England, as carrying the Arms without blot or difference. Against their faith
unto the Crowns true heir,
Their noble kinsman, etc.


Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, son of Earl Roger Mortimer, which was
son to Lady Phillip, daughter to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third son to
King Edward the third, which Edmund (King Richard going into Ireland) was
proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown, whose Aunt called Ellinor, this Lord
Piercie had married. O would Aumerle had suncke when he betrayed
The compl^t which that holy Abbot laid.


The Abbot of Westminster had plotted the death of King Henry, to have been
done at a Tilt at Oxford: of which confederacy there was John Holland, Duke of
Excester, Thomas Holland, Duke of Surrey, the Duke of Aumerle, Mountacute,
Earl of Salsbury, Spenser, Earl of Gloucester, the Bishop of Carlisle, Sir Thomas
Blunt, these all had bound themselves one to another by Indenture to perform
it, but were all betrayed by the Duke of Aumerle. Scroope, Green, and Bushie,
die his fault in grain,


Henry going toward the Castle of Flint, where King Richard was, caused
Scroope, Green, and Bushie, to be executed at Bristow; as vile persons, which
had seduced this King to this lascivious and wicked life. Damned be the oath he
made at Doncaster.


After Henry's exile, at his return into England, he took his oath at
Doncaster upon the Sacrament, not to claim the crown or Kingdom of England,
but only the Dukedom of Lancaster, his own proper right, and the right of
his wife. And mourn for Henry Hotspur, her dear son,
As I for my, etc.


This was the brave courageous Henry Hotspur, that obtained so many victories
against the Scots, which after falling out right with the curse of Queen
Isabell, was slain by Henry, at the battle at Shrewsbury.

Richard the second to Queen Isabell.
WHat may my Queen, but hope for from that hand,
Unfit to write; unskillful to command?
A Kingdoms greatness, hardly can he sway,
That wholesome counsel never did obey;
Ill this rude hand did guide a Scepter then,
Worse now (I fear me) governs a pen;
How shall I call my self, or by what name,
To make thee know from whence these letters came?
Not from thy husband, for my hateful life
Has made thee widow, being yet a wife;
Nor from a King, that title I have lost,
Now of that name proud Bullingbroke may boast:
What I have been, does but this comfort bring,
That no woe is, to say, I was a King.
This lawless life, which first procurde my hate,
This tongue, which then denounced my regal state,
This abject mind, that did consent unto it,
This hand, that was the instrument to do it;
All these be witness, that I do deny
All passed hopes, all former sovereignty.
Did thou for my sake leave thy fathers Court,
Thy famous Country and thy virgin port;
And vndertook'st to travail dangerous ways,
Driven by awkward winds and boisterous seas?
And left's great Burbon for thy love to me,
Who su'd in marriage to be linck'd to thee,
Offering for dower the Countries neighboring nie.
Of fruitful Almaine, and rich Burgundy:
Did thou all this, that England should receive thee,
To miserable banishment to leave thee?
And in my downfall, and my fortunes wrack,
Forsaken thus, to France to send thee back.
When quiet sleep (the heavy hearts relief)
Has rested sorrow, somewhat lesned grief,
My passed greatness unto mind I call,
And think this while I dreamed of my fall:
With this conceit my sorrows I beguile,
That my fair Queen is but with-drawne a while,
And my attendants in some chamber by,
As in the height of my prosperity.
Calling alowd, and asking who is there,
The Echo answering, tells me Woe is there;
And when mine arms would gladly thee enfold,
I clip the pillow, and the place is cold,
Which when my waking eyes precisely view,
It Is a true token, that it is too true.
As many minutes as in the hours there be,
So many hours each minute seems to me,
Each hour a day, morn, noone-tide, and a set,
Each day a year, with miseries complet.
A winter, springtime, summer and a fall,
All seasons varying, but unseasoned all:
In endelesse woe my third of life thus wears,
By minutes, hours, days, months and lingering years,
They praise the summer, that enjoy the South,
Pomfret is closed in the Norths cold mouth:
There pleasant summer dwells all the year,
Frost-starued-winter does inhabit here;
A place wherein despair may fitly dwell,
Sorrow best suting with a cloudy Cell:
When Herford had his judgment of exile,
Saw I the peoples murmuring the while;
Th'vncertaine Commons touched with inward care,
As though his sorrows mutually they bare:
Fond women, and scarce speaking children mourn,
Bewail his parting, wishing his return,
Then being forcde t'abridge his banished years,
When they bedewd his footsteps with their tears:
Yet by example could not learn to know
To what his greatness by this love might grow,
Whilst Henry boasts of our atchiuements done,
Bearing the trophies our great fathers won;
And all the story of our famous war
Now grace the Annals of great Lancaster.
Seven goodly siens in their spring did flourish,
Which one self root brought forth, one stock did no^ish:
Edward the top-branch of that golden tree,
Nature in him her utmost power did see,
Who from the bud still blossomed so fair,
As all might judge what fruit it meant to bear:
But I his graft of every weed ore-growne,
And from the kind, as refuse forth am thrown,
From our brave Grandsire, both in one degree,
Yet after Edward John the yongst of three.
Might Princely Wales beget an impe so base,
(That to Gaunts issue should give sovereign place)
That leading Kings from France returned home,
As those great Caesar's brought their spoils to Rome,
Whose name obtained by his fatal hand,
Was ever fearful to that conquered land;
His fame increasing, purchasde in those wars,
Can scarcely now be bounded with the stars,
With him is valor quite to heaven fled,
(Or else in me is it extinguished,)
Who for his virtue and his conquests sake
Posterity a demi god shall make,
And judge this vile abject spirit of mine
Could not proceed from temper so divine.
What earthly humor, or what vulgar eye
Can look so low as on our misery?
When Bullingbrooke is mounted to our throne,
And makes that his, which we but called our own:
Into our counsels he himself intrudes,
And who but Henry with the multitudes?
His power disgrades, his dreadful frown disgraceth,
He throws them down, whom our advancement places:
As my disable, and unworthy hand,
Never had power belonging to command.
He treades our sacred tables in the dust,
And proves our acts of Parliament unjust;
As though he hated that it should be said,
That such a law by Richard once was made,
Whilst I deprest before his greatness, lie
Under the weight of hate and infamy.
My back a footstool Bullingbrooke to raise,
My loosenes mocked, and hateful by his praise:
Out-liu'd mine honor, buried my estate,
And nothing left me but the peoples hate.
(Sweet Queen) i will take all counsel thou can give,
So that thou bidst me neither hope nor live;
Succor that comes, when ill has done his worst,
But sharpens grief, to make us more accursed.
Comfort is now unpleasing to mine ear,
Past cure, past care, my Bed become my Beer.
Since now misfortune humbles us so long,
Till heaven be grown unmindful of our wrong,
Yet they forbid my wrongs shall ever die,
But still remembered to posterity;
And let the crown be fatal that he wears,
And ever wet with woeful mothers tears.
Thy curse on Percie angry heavens prevent,
Who have not one curse left, on him unspent,
To scourge the world, now borrowing of my store,
As rich of woe, as I a King am poor.
Then cease (dear Queen) my sorrows to bewail,
My wounds too great for pity now to heal,
Age steals on, whilst thou complainest thus,
My griefs be mortal and infectious;
Yet better fortunes thy fair youth may try,
That follow thee, which still from me does fly.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Thi^ tongue which first denounced my regal state.
RIchard the second, at the resignation of the crown to the duke of Herford,
in the Tower of London, delivering the same with his own hand, there confessed
his disabilitie to govern, utterly denouncing all kingly authority. And
left'st great Burbon for thy love to me.


Before the Princess Isabell was married to the king, Jews duke of Burbon sued
to have had her in marriage, which was thought he had obtained, if this motion
had not fallen out in the mean time; This Duke of Burbon sued again to have
received her at her coming into France, after the imprisonment of king Richard
but King Charles her Father then crossed him as before, and gave her to Charles
son to the Duke of Orleans. When Herford had his judgment of exile.


When the combat should have been at Couentrie, betwixt Henry Duke of
Herford, and Thomas Duke of Norfolk; where Herford, was adjudged to banishment
for ten years, the commons exceedingly lamented, so greatly was he ever
favored of the people. Then being forced t'abridge his banished years.


When the Duke came to take his leave of the King; being then at Eltham, the
King to please the Commons, rather then for any love he bare to Herford,
repleaded four years of his banishment. Whilst Henry boasts of our
atchieuements done,


Henry the eldest Son to John Duke of Lancaster, at the first Earl of Darby,
then created Duke of Herford, after the death of the Duke John his father, was
Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, Earl of Darby, Leicester, and Lincoln; and
after he had obtained the Crown, was called by the name of Bullingbrooke,
which is a town in Lincolneshire, as usually all the Kings of England bare the
name of the places where they were borne. Seven goodly syens in their spring
did flourish.


Edward the third had seven sons, Edward Prince of Wales, after called the
black Prince, William of Hatfield the second, Lionell Duke of Clarence the
third, John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster the fourth, Edmund of Langley Duke of
York the fifth, Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester the sixth, William of
Winsore the seventh. Edward the top-branch of that golden tree.


Truly boasting himself to be the eldest Son of Edward the black Prince.
Yet after Edward, John the yongst of three.


As disabling Henry Bullingbrooke, being but the son of the fourth brother:
William and Lionell being both before John of Gaunt. That leading Kings from
France, returned home,


Edward the black Prince, taking John king of France prisoner, at the battle
of Poicters, brought him into England, where at the Sauoy he died. Whose name
achieved by his fatal hand,


Called the Black Prince, not so much of his complexion, as of the famous
battle he fought, as is showed before: in the gloss upon the Epistle of
Edward to the Countess of Salisbury. And proves our Acts of Parliament unjust.


In the text parliament, after Richards resignation of the crown, Henry caused
to be annihilated all the laws made in the Parliament, called the wicked
Parliament, held in the twenty year of king Richards reign.

Finis.
To sir John Swinerton Knight, and one of the Aidermen of the City of London.
VOrthy Sir, so much mistrust I my own ability, to do the least right to
your virtues, that I could gladly wish any thing that is truly mine, were
worthy to bear your name, so much (reucrend Sir) I esteem you, and so ample
interest have you in my love; To some honorable friends have I deaicated these
Poemes (with whom I rank you: may I escape prejumption) Like not this Britain
the worse, though after some former Impressions he be lastly to (...)crated; in
this like an honest man that would part(...) his own worth, before he would
presume his (...)ronage, with whom you shall ever command my (...), and have
my best wishes.

That love you truly, Mich: Drayton.

Queen Katharine to Owen Tudor.
The Argument.
After the death of that victorious Henry the fifth, Queen Katharine, the
Dowager of England and France, daughter to Charles the French King, holding her
estate with Henry her son, (then the fixed of that name) falls in love with
Owen Tuder a Welchman, a brave and gallant Gentleman of the Wardrobe to the
young King her son; yet grently fearing if her love should be discovered, the
Nobility would cross her purposed marriage; or fearing, that if her fair
and princely promises should not assure his good success, this high and great
attempt, might (perhaps) daunt the forwardness of his modest and shamefast
youth; wherefore to break the ice to her intent, she writes unto him this
Epistle following.

IVdge not a Princess worth impeacht hereby,
That love thus triumphs over majesty;
Nor think less virtue in this royal hand,
Which now intreates that wonted to command,
For in this sort, though humbly now it woo,
The day has been, thou would have kneeld unto.
Not think that this submission of my state,
Proceeds from frailty, (rather judge it fate.)
Alcides never more fit for wars stern shocke,
Then when for love sat spinning at the rock,
Never less clouds did Phoebus glory dim,
Then in a clownes shape when he covered him;
Jove's great command was never more obeyed,
Than when a Satyrs anticke parts he played.
He was thy king that sued for love to me,
She is thy Queen that sues for love to thee.
When Henry was, what is Tuders now, was his;
Whilst yet thou art, what is Henry's, Tuders is;
My love to Owen, him my Henry gives,
My love to Henry, in my Owen lives;
Henry wood me whilst wars did yet increase,
I woo my Tuder, in sweet calmes of peace,
To force affection he did conquest prove,
I fight with gentle arguments of love.
Incampt at Melans, in wars hot alarmes,
First saw I Henry clad in princely arms.
At pleasant Windsore first these eyes of mine,
My Tuder iudgde for wit and shape divine.
Henry abroad, with p^issance and with force,
Tuder at home, with courtship and discourse,
He then, thou now, I hardly can judge whether
Did like me best, Plantaginet or Tether.
A march, a measure, battle or a dance,
A courtly rapier, or a conquering lance.
His princely bed has strengthened my renown,
And on my temples set a double crown;
Which glorious wreathe, (as Henry's lawful heir)
Henry the sixth upon his brow does bear.
At Troy in Champaine he did first enjoy
My Brydall rites, to England brought from Troy,
In England now that honor thou shall have,
Which once in Champaine famous Henry gave,
I seek not wealth, three kingdoms in my power,
If these suffice not, where shall be my dower?
Sad discontent may ever follow her,
Which does base pelf before true love prefer;
If titles still could our affections tie,
What is so great but Majesty might buy?
As I seek thee, so Kings do me desire,
To what they would, thou easily mai'st aspire.
That sacred fire, once warmde my heart before,
The fuel fit, the flame is now the more,
And means to quench it, I in vain do prove,
We may hide treasure, but not hide our love;
And since it is thy fortune (thus) to gain it,
It were too late, nor will I now restrain it.
Nor these great titles vainly will I bring,
Wife, daughter, mother, sister to a King,
Of grandsire, father, husband, son and brother,
More thou alone to me, then all the other,
Nor fear my Tudor, that this love of mine,
Should wrong the Gaunt-borne great Lancastrian line,
Nor stir the English blood, the Sun and Moon,
T'repine at Lorame, Burbon, A lansoon;
Nor do I think there is such different ods,
They should alone be numbered with the Gods.
Of Cadmus earthly issue reckoning us;
And they from Jove, Mars, Neptune, Eolus,
Of great Latonas offspring only they,
And we the brats of woeful Niobe,
Our famous grandsires (as their own) bestride,
That horse of fame, that God, begotten steed,
Whose bounding hoof plowed that Boetian spring,
Where those sweet maids of memory do sing,
Not only Henry's Queen, but boast as well,
To be the child of Charles and Isabell.
Nor do I know from whence their grief should grow,
They by this match should be disparaged so;
When John and Longshankes issue both affied,
And to the Kings of Wales in wedlock tied,
Showing the greatness of your blood thereby,
Your race, and royal consanguinity.
And Wales as well as haughty England boasts,
Of Camilot, and all her Penticosts;
A nephews room in great Pendragons race,
At Arthurs Table held a princely place,
If by the often conquest of your land,
They boast the spoils of their victorious hand,
If these our ancient Chronicles be true,
They altogether are not free from you.
When bloody Rufus sought your utter sack,
Twice entering Wales, yet twice was beatenbacke.
When famous Cambria washed her in the flood,
Made by th'effusion of the English blood,
And often returnde with glorious victory,
From Worster, Herford, Chester, Shrowesbury,
Whose power in every conquest so preuailes,
As once expulsde the English out of Wales.
Although my beauty made my Countries peace,
And at my Bridal former broils did cease;
Yet more then power, had not his person been,
I had not come to England as a Queen.
Nor took I Henry to supply my wont,
Because in France, that time my choice was scant;
When he had robde all Christendom of men,
And Englands flower remainde amongst us then;
Gloucester, whose counsels (Nestor-like) assist,
Courageous Bedford, that great martiallist,
Clarence, for virtue honored of his foes,
And York, whose fame yet daily greater grows,
Warwick, the pride of Neuels haughty race,
Great Salebury, so fearde in every place.
That valiant Poole, whom no atchieuement dares,
And Vere, so famous in the Irish wars,
Who though my self so great a Prince were borne,
The worst of these my equal need not scorn:
But Henry's rare perfections and his parts,
As conquering Kingdoms, so he conquered hearts.
As chaste was I to him as Queen might be,
But freed from him, my chaste lone vowed to thee;
Beauty does fetch all favor from thy face,
All perfect courtship rests in thy grace.
If thou discourse, thy lips such accents break,
As love a spirit forth of thee seem^d to speak.
The British language, which our vowels wants,
And iarres so much upon harsh consonants,
Comes with such grace from thy mellifluous tongue,
As do the sweet notes of a well set song,
And runs as smoothly from those lips of thine,
As the pure Tuskan from the Florentine;
Leaving such seasoned sweetenes in the ear,
As the voice past, yet still the sound is there:
In Nisus Tower, as when Apollo lay,
And on his golden vial used to play,
Where senseless stones were with such music drowned,
As many years they did retain the sound,
Let not the beams that greatness does reflect,
Amaze thy hopes with timorous respect;
Assure thee Tudor, majesty can be
As kind in love, as can the mean degree;
And the embraces of a Queen as true,
As theirs (might judge them) much advanced by you,
When in our greatness our affections crave
Those secret joys that other women have:
So I (a Queen) be sovereign in my choice,
Let others fawn upon the public voice;
Or what (by this) can ever hap to thee,
Light in respect to be beloved of me.
Let peevish worldlings prate of right and wrong,
Leave plaints and pleas, to whom they do belong;
Let old men speak of chances and events,
And Lawyers talk of titles and discents,
Leave fond reports to such as stories tell,
And covenants to those that buy and s^ll;
Love my sweet Tudor, that becomes thee best,
And to our good suceesse refer the rest.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Great Henry sought to accomplish his desire,
Armed, etc.
HEnry the fifth, making claim to the Crown of France, first sought by Arms
to subdue the French, and after sought by marriage to confirm what he got by
conquest, the heat and fury of which invasion, is alluded to the sixion of
Semele in Ovid: which by the crafty persuasion of Juno, requested Jove to come
unto her, as he was wont to come unto his wife Juno, who at her request he
yielding unto, destroyed her in a tempest. Encamped at Melans in wars hot
alarmes,
First, etc.


Near unto Melans, upon the River of Scyne, was the appointed place of parley,
between the two Kings of England and France, to which place, Isabell the
Qucene of France, and the Duke of Burgoyne, brought the young Princess
Katherine, where King Henry first saw her. And on my temples set a double
Crown.


Henry the fifth and Queen Katherine, were taken as King and Queen of France,
and during the life of Charles the French king, Henry was called King of
England, and heir of France, and after the death of Henry the fifth, Henry the
sixth his son, then being very young, was crowned at Paris, as true and lawful
King of England and France. At Troy in Champaine he did first enjoy.


Troy in Champaine, was the place where that victorious king Henry the fifth
married the Ptincesse Katherine, in the presence of the chief nobility of the
Realms of England and France. Nor these great tules vainly will I bring,
Wife, daughter, mother, etc.


Few Queens of England or France, were ever more princely alied then this
Queen, as it has been noted by Historiographers. Nor think so Tudor that
this love of mine,
Should wrong the Gaunt-borne, etc.


Noting the descent of Henry her husband, from John Duke of Lancaster, the
fourth son of Edward the third, which Duke John was surnamed Gaunt, of the
City of Gaunt in Flanders, where he was borne. Nor stir the English blood,
the Sun and Moon,
Trepine, etc.


Alluding the greatness of the English line, to Phoebus and Phoebe, fained to be
the children of Latona, whose heavenly kind might seorne to be joined with any
earthly progeny: yet withal, boasting the blood of France, as not inferior to
theirs. And with this allusion follows on the history of the strife betwixt
Juno and the race of Cadmus, whose issue was afflicted by the wrath of heaven.
The children of Niobe slain, for which the woeful mother became a rock,
gushing forth continually a sountaine of tears. And John and Longshanks issue,
both affied,


Lheellin or Leolin ap Iorweth, married Ioane, daughter to king John, a most
beautiful Lady. Some Authors affirm that she was base borne, Lhewellin ap
Gryfith, married Ellenor, daughter to Simon Montfort, Earl of Leicester, and
Cousin to Edward Long-shankes, both which Lhewellins were Princes of Wales. Of
Camilot and all her Pentecosts,
A Nephews room, etc.


Camilot, the ancient Palace of King Arthur, to which place all the Knights
of that famous order yearly repaired at Penticost, according to the law of the
Table, and most of the famous home-borne Knights were of that Country, as to
this day is perceived by their ancient monuments. When bloody Rutus sought your
utter sack.


Noting the ill success which that William Rufus bad in two voyages he made
into Wales; in which a number of his chief Nobility were slain. And often
returnde with glorious victory.


Noting the diverse sundry incursions that the Welchmen made into England, in
the time of Rufus, John, Henry the second, and Longshankes.

Owen Tudor to Queen Katherine
WHen first mine eyes heheld your princely name,
And found from whence this friendly letter came,
As in excess of joy my self forgot,
Whether I saw it, or I saw it not;
My panting heart does bid mine eyes proceed,
My dazeled eye, inuites my tongue to reed;
Mine eye should guide my tongue, amazed mist it,
My lips which now should speak, are dombe, and kissed it,
And leaves the paper in my trembling hand,
When all my senses so amazed stand;
Even as a mother coming to her child,
Which from her presence has been long exilde,
With tender arms his gentle neck does strain,
Now kissing him, now clipping him again;
And yet excessive joy deludes her so,
As still she doubts if this be hers or no:
At length awak'ned from this pleasing dream,
When passion somewhat leaves to be extreme,
My longing eyes, with their fair object meet,
Where every letter's pleasing, each word sweet.
It was not Henry's conquests nor his Court,
That had the power to win me by report,
Nor was his dreadful terror-striking name,
The cause that I from Wales to England came,
For Christian Rhodes, and our religious truth,
To great atchieuements first had won my youth;
Before adventure did my valor prove,
Before I yet knew what it was to love:
Nor came I hither by some poor event,
But by the eternal Destinies consent,
Whose vncomprised wisdoms did foresee,
That you in marriage should be linck'd to me.
By our great Merlin, was it not foretold,
(Amongst his holy prophecies enrold),
When first he did of Tudors name divine,
That Kings and Queens should follow in our line,
And that the Helm, (the Tudors ancient Crest)
Should with the golden Flower-delice be dressed;
And that the Leeke, (our Countries chief renown)
Should grow with Roses in the English Crown:
As Charles fair daughter, you the Lilly wear,
As Henry's Queen the blushing Rose you bear;
By France's conquest, and by Englands oath,
You are the true made dowager of both;
Both in your crown, both in your cheek together,
Join Tethers love to yours, and yours to Tether.
Then make no future doubts, nor fear no hate,
When it so long has been foretold by Fate;
And by the all-disposing doom of heaven,
Before our births, unto one bed were given.
No Pallas here, nor Juno is at all,
When I to Venus give the golden ball;
Nor when the Graecians wonder I enjoy,
None in revenge to kindle fire in Troy.
And have not strange events diuinde to us,
That in our love we should be prosperous.
When in your presence I was called to dance,
In lofty tricks whilst I my self advance;
And in my turn, my footing failde by hap,
Was It not my chance to light into your lap?
Who would not judge it Fortunes greatest grace,
Since he must fall, to fall in such a place?
His birth from heaven, your Tudor not deriues,
Nor stands on tip-toes in superlatiues,
Although the envious English do devise,
A thousand ieasts of our hyperbolies;
Nor do I claim that plot by ancient deeds,
Where Phoebus pastures his firie-breathing steedes;
Nor do I boast my god-made Grandsires scarres,
Nor Giants trophies in the Titans wars;
Nor feign my birth (your princely ears to please)
By three nights getting as was Hercules,
Nor do I forge my long descent to run
From aged Neptune, or the glorious Sun,
And yet in Wales with them most famous be,
Our learned Bards do sing my pedigree,
And boast my birth from great Cadwallader,
From old Cair-septon, in mount Palador,
And from Eneons line, the South Wales king
By The^dor the Tuders name do bring.
My royal mothers princely stock began,
From her great grandam fair Gwenellian;
By true descent from Leolin the great,
As well from North Wales as fair Powslands seat;
Though for our princely genealogy,
I do not stand to make apology;
Yet who with judgments true impartial eyes,
Shall look from whence our name at first did rise,
Shall find that Fortune is to us in debt;
And why not Tuder as Plantaginet?
Nor that term Croggen, nicke-name of disgrace,
Used as a byword now in every place,
Shall blot our blood, or wrong a Welchmans name,
Which was at first begot with Englands shame.
Our valiant swords our right did still maintain,
Against that cruel, proud, usurping Dane;
And bucklde in so many dangerous fights,
With Norwayes, Swethens, and with Muscouits,
And kept our native language now thus long,
And to this day yet never changde our tongue,
When they which now our Nation feign would tame,
Subdude, have lost their country, and their name:
Nor never could the Saxons swords provoke
Our Britain necks to bear their servile yoke,
Where Cambr^aes pleasant Countries bounded be,
With swelling Seuerne, and the holy Dee;
And since great Brutus first arrived, have stood,
The only remnant of the Tr^^an blood.
To every man is not allotted chance,
To boast with Henry to have conque^d France;
Yet if my fortunes thus may raised be,
This may presage a farther good to me.
And our S. David, in the Brutaines right,
May join with Grorge, the sainted English knight,
And old Caer-marden, Merlins famous town,
Not scorned by London, though of such renown.
Ah would to God, that hour my hopes attend,
Were with my wish brought to desired end,
Blame me not Madame, though I thus desire,
When eyes with envy do my hap admire;
Till now your beauty in nights bosom slept,
What eye durst st^^re, where awful Henry kept?
Who durst attempt to sail but near the bay,
Where that all-conquering great Alcides lay?
Thy beauty now is set a royal prize,
And Kings repair to cheapen merchandise.
If thou but walk to take the breathing air,
Orithia makes me that I Boreas fear,
If to the fire Jove once in lightning came,
And fair Egina make me fear the flame.
If in the Sun, then sad suspicion dreams
Phoebus should spread Lucothoe in his beams,
If in a fountain thou do cool thy blood,
Neptune I fear, which once came in a flood;
If with thy maids, I dread Apolloes rape,
Who coosned Chion in an old wives shape;
If thou do banquet, Bacchus makes me dread,
Who in a grape Erigone did feed;
And if my self the chamber door should keep,
Yet fear I Hermes coming in a sleep.
Pardon (sweet Queen) if I offend in this,
In these delays love most impatient is;
And youth wants power his hot spleen to suppress,
When Hope already banquets in excess.
Though Henry's fame in me you shall not find,
Yet that which better shall content your mind;
But only in the title of a King
Was his advantage, in no other thing:
If in his love more pleasure you did take,
Never let Queen trust Britain for my sake.
Yet judge me not from modesty exempt,
That I another Phaetons charge attempt,
My mind that thus your favors dare aspire,
Declare a temper of celestial fire;
If love a fault, the more is Beauties blame,
When she her self is author of the same.
All men to some one quality incline,
Only to love is naturally mine.
Thou art by Beauty famous, as by birth;
Ordainde by heaven, to cheer the drowping earth,
Add faithful love unto your greater state,
And then alike in all things fortunate.
A King might promise more, I not deny,
But yet (by heaven) he loved not more than I.
And thus I leave, till time my faith approve,
I cease to write, but never cease to love.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
And that the helm, the Tudors ancient Crest,
THe arms of Tudor was the helmes of men's heads, whereof he speaks as a
thing prophetically foretold of Merlin. When in thy presence I was called to
dance.


Owin Tudor, being a courtly and active Gentleman, commrunded once to dance
before the Queen, in a turn (not being able to recover himself) fell into her
lap, as she sat upon a little stool, with many of her Ladies about her.
And yet with them in Wales most famous be,
Our learned Bards, etc.


This Berdh, as they call it in the British tongue, or as we more properly say
Bard, or Bardus, be their Poets, which keep the records of Petigrees and
discents, and sing in odes and measures to the Harps, after the old manner of
the Lirick Poets. And boast my blood from great Cadwallader.


Cadwallader, the last king of the Britains, descended of the noble and
ancient race of the Troyans, to whom an Angel appeared, commanding him to go
to Rome to Pope Sergius, where he ended his life. Since fair Caer-Septon in
mount Palador.


Caer-Septon, now called Shaftsburie, at whose building it was said an ^^agle
prophesied (or rather one named Aquila) of the fame of that place, and of the
recovery of the I Will of the Brytaines, bringing back with them the bones of
Cadwallader from Rome. And from Eneons line, the South Wales King,
From Theodor, etc.


This Eneon was slain by the Rebels of Gwentsland, he was a noble and worthy
Gentleman, who in his life did many noble acts, and was father to Theodor, or
Tudor Maur, of whom descended the Princes of South Wales. From her great
Grandam fair Guenelliam.


Guenelliam, the daughter of Rees ap Griffeth, ap Theodor, Prince of
South Wales, married Edniuet Vahan auncestor to Owen Tudor. By true descent from
Liolin the great,


This is tho Lewhelin, called Liolinus Magnus, Prince of North Wales. Nor that
word Croggen, nickname of disgrace.


In the voyage that Henry the second made against the Welchmen, as his
Soldiers passed Offas ditch at Croggen Castle, they were overthrown by the
Welchmen: which word Croggen, has since been used to the Welchmens disgrace,
which was at first begun with their honor. And old Caer-Merdin, Merlins famous
town,


Caer-Merdin, or Merlins Town, so called of Merlius being found there. This
was Ambrose Merlin, whose prophecies we have. There was another of that name,
called Merlin Siluestris, borne in Scotland, surnamed Calidonius, of the
Forest Calidon where he prophesied. And kept our native language now thus long.


The Welchmen be those ancient Britains, which when the Picts, Danes, and
Saxons invaded here, were first driven into those parts, where they have kept
their language ever since the first, without commixtion with any other language.

Finis.
To my worthy and deerly esteemed friend, Master James Huish.
SIR your own natural inclination to virtue, and your love to the Muses,
assure me of your kind acceptance of my dedication. It is seated by custom
(from which we are now bold to assume authority) to bear the names of our
friends upon the fronts of our books, as Gentlemen use to set their Arms over
their gates. Some say this use began by the Heroes and brave spirits of the old
world, which were desirous to be thought to patronize learning; and men in
requital honor the names of those brave Princes. But I think some after, put
the names of great men in their books, for that men should say there was some
thing good, only because indeed their names stood there; But for mine own part
(not to dissemble) I find no such virtue in any of their great titles to do so
much for any thing of mine, and so let them pass. Take knowledge by this, I
love you, and in good faith, worthy of all love I think you, which I pray you
may supply the place of further complement.

Yours ever, M. Drayton.

Elinor Cobham to Duke Humfrey.
The Argument.
Elinor Cobham, daughter to the Lord Cobham of Sterborough, and wife to Humfrey
Plantaginet duke of Gloucester, the son of Henry the fourth, King of England,
surnamed Bullingbrooke. This noble Duke for his great wisdom and justice
called the good, was by King Henry the fifth (brother to this Duke) at his death
appointed Protector of the land, during the nonage of Henry the sixth; this
Elinor Duches of Gloucester, a proud and ambicious woman, knowing that if young
Henry died without issue, the Duke her husband was the nearest of the blood,
conspired with one Bullingbrooke, (otherwise called Only a great Magitian) Hun
a priest and Iourdane witch of Eye, by sorcerie to make away the King, and by
coniuration to know who should succeed. Of this being justly convicted, she
was adjudged to do penance three several times openly in London, and then to
perpetual banishment in the I Will of Man, from whence she writes this Epistle.

ME thinks, not knowing who these lines should send,
Thou straight turn'st over to the latter end,
Where thou my name no sooner have espied,
But in disdain my letters cast aside;
Why if thou will, I will my self deny,
Nay, I Will affirm and swear I am not I,
Orifin that thy shame thou do perceive,
I Will leave that name, that name my self shall leave,
And yet me thinks amazd thou should not stand,
Nor seem so much appauled at my hand,
For my misfortunes have invrde thine eye
(Long before this) to sights of misery;
No, no, read on it is I, the very same,
All thou can read, is but to read my shame.
Be not dismaide, nor let my name affright,
The worst it can, is but to offend thy sight;
It cannot wound, nor do thee deadly harm,
It is no dreadful spell, nor magique charm;
If she that sent it love duke Humfrey so,
Is It possible her name should be his foe?
Yes, I am Elnor, I am very she,
Who brought for dower a virgins head to thee,
Though envious Beuford slaunderd me before,
To be duke Humfreis wanton Paramore,
And though indeed I can it not deny,
To Magique once I did my self apply,
I won thee not, as there be many think,
With poisning Philters, and bewitching drink,
Nor on thy person did I ever prove,
Those wicked portions so procuring love,
I cannot boast to be rich Hollands heir,
Nor of the blood and greatness of Bauire,
Yet Elnor brought no foreign armies in,
To fetch her back, as did thy Iacomin;
Nor clamorous husbands followed me that fled.
Exclayming Humfrey to defile his bed,
Nor wast thou forcde the slander to suppress.
To send me back as an adulteress;
Brabant nor Burgoyne, claimed me by force,
Nor su'd to Rome to hasten my deuorce;
Nor Belgias pomp defaced with Belgias fire,
The just reward of her unjust desire;
Nor Bedford spouse, your noble sister Anne,
That princely-issued great Burgunnian,
Should stand with me, to move a woman's strife,
To yield the place to the Protectors wife.
If Cobhams name my birth can dignifie,
Or Sterborough renown my family;
Where Is Greenewich now, thy Elnors Court of late,
Where she with Humfrey held a princely state?
That pleasant Kent, when I abroad should ride,
That to my pleasure laid forth all her pride;
The Thames by water when I took the air,
Danced with my Barge in lanching from the staire;
The ankoring ships that when I passed the road,
Were wont to hang their chequered tops abroad;
How could it be, those that were wont to stand,
To see my pomp, so goddesse-like on land,
Should after see me mayld up in a sheet,
Do shameful penance three times in the street^?
Rung with a bell, a Taper in my hand,
Bare-foote to trudge before a Beedles wand;
That little babes, not having use of tongue,
Stood pointing at me as I came along.
Where Is Humfreys power, where was his great command,
Wast thou not Lord-protector of the Land?
Or for thy justice, who can thee deny,
The title of the good Duke Humfrey?
Have thou not at thy life, and in thy look,
The seal of Gaunt, the hand of Bulling brook;
What blood extract from famous Edwards line,
Can boast it self to be so pure as thine?
Who else next Henry should the Realm prefer,
If it allow of famous Lancaster?
But Rayners daughter must from France be fet,
And with a vengeance on our throne be set;
Mauns, Maine and Aniou, on that beggar cast,
To bring her home to England in such haste,
And what for Henry thou have labored there,
To join the King with Arminacks rich heir,
Must all be dashed, as no such thing had been,
Poole needs must have his darling made a Queen;
How should he with our Princes else be placed,
To have his Farleship with a Dukedom graced?
And raise the offspring of his blood so hie,
As Lords of us and our posterity.
O that by sea when he to France was sent,
The ship had suncke wherein the traitor went;
Or that the sands had swallowed her before
She e're set foot upon the English shore.
But all is well, nay we have store to give,
What need we more, we by her looks can live:
All that great Henry by his conquests heapt,
And famous Beaford to his glory kept,
Be given back ^o Rayner all in post,
And by this means, rich Normandy be lost;
Those which have comen as Mistresses of ours,
Have into England brought their goodly dowers,
Which to our Coffers yearly tribute brings,
The life of subjects and the strength of Kings;
The means where by fair England ever might
Raise power in France, to back our ancient right;
But she brings ruin here to make abode,
And cancells all our lawful claim abroad,
And she must recapitulate my shame,
And give a thousand by words to my name,
And call me Beldam, Gib, Witch, Nightmare, Trot,
With all despite that may a woman spot:
O that I were a witch but for her sake!
I faith her Queeneship little rest should take;
I would scratch that face that may not feel the air,
And knit whole ropes of witch-knots in her hair,
O I would hag her nightly in her bed,
And on her breast sit like a lump of lead,
And like a Fayrie, pinch that dainty skin,
Her wanton blood is now so cockered in,
Or take me some such known familiar shape,
As she my vengeance never should escape;
Were I a garment, none should need the more
To sprinckle me with Nessus poisned gore,
It were enough if she once put me on,
To tear both flesh and sinews from the bone;
Were I a flower that might her smell delight,
Though I were not the poisning Acenite,
I would send such a fume into her brow,
Should make her mad, as mad as I am now.
They say, the Druides once lived in this I Will,
This fatal Man, the place of my exile,
Whose powerful charms, such dreadful wonders wroght,
Which in the gotish Island tongue were taught;
O that their spells to me they had resignde,
Wherewith they raisde and calmde both sea and wind,
And made the Moon pawse in her paled sphere,
Whilst her grim Dragons drew them through the air,
Their hellish power to kill the Plow-mans seed,
Or to fore-speake the flocks as they did seed,
To nurse a damned spirit with human blood,
To carry them through earth, air, fire and flood;
Had I this skill that time has almost lost,
How like a Goblin I would haunt her ghost,
O pardon, pardon my mis-gouernde tongue,
A woman's strength cannot endure my wrong.
Did not the heavens her coming in withstand,
As though affrighted when she came to land?
The earth did quake, her coming to abide,
The goodly Thames did twice keep back her tide;
Paul's shook with tempests, and that mounting spire,
With lightning sent from heaven was set on fire;
Our stately buildings to the ground were blown,
Her pride by these prodigious signs were shown;
More fearful visions on the English earth,
Than ever were at any death or birth.
Ah Humfrey, Humfrey, if I should not speak,
My breast would split, my very heart would break.
I that was wont so many to command,
Worse now then with a clapdish in my hand;
A simple mantle covering me withal,
A very leaper of Cares hospital,
That from my state a presence held in awe,
Glad here to kennell in a pad of straw;
And like an Owl by night to go abroad,
Roosted all day within an Iuy tod,
Among the sea-cliffes, in the dampy caves,
In charnall houses, or among the graves;
Saw thou those eyes, in whose sweet cheereful look,
Duke Humfrey once such joy and pleasure took;
Sorrow has so dispoyl'd me of all grace,
Thou could not say, this was my Eluors face;
Like a foul Gorgon, whose disheuel'd hair,
With every blast flies gla^ing in the air;
Some standing up like horns upon my head,
Even like those women that in Coos are bred:
My lanke breasts hang like bladders left vnblowne,
My skin with loathsome laundize over grown;
So pinde away, that if thou long'st to see
Ruins true picture, only look on me;
Sometime in thinking of what I have had,
Even in a sudden ecstasy am mad;
Then like a Bedlam, forth thy Elnor runs,
Like one of Bacchus raging frantic Nuns,
Or like a Tartar, when in strange disguise,
Preparde unto a dismal sacrifice.
That Prelate Beuford, a foul ill befall him,
Prelate said I^ nay devil I should call him,
Ah God forgive me, if I think amiss,
His very name me thinks my poison is;
Ah that vi^e Judas, our professed foe,
My curse pursue him where so e're he go;
That to my judgment when I did appear,
Laid to my charge those things which never were.
I should partake with Bullingbrookes intents,
The hallowing of his magique instruments;
That I procured Southwell to assist,
Which was by order consecrate a Priest,
That it was I should cover all they did,
That but for him, had to this day been hid.
Ah that vile bastard, that himself dare vaunt
To be the son of thy brave grandsire Gaunt,
Whom he but fatherd of mere charity,
To rid his mother of that infamy,
Who if report of Elder times be true,
Unto this day his father never knew.
He that by murders black and odious crime,
To Henry's throne attempted once to clime;
Having procurde by hope of golden gain,
A fatal hand his sovereign to have slain;
Who to his Chamber closely he conuaide,
And for that purpose fitly there had laid,
Upon whose sword that famous Prince had died,
If by a dog he had not been discried.
But now the Queen, her Minion Poole and he,
As it please them, so now must all things be;
England's no place for any one beside,
All is too little to maintain their pride:
What of a King has Henry but the name,
And now scarce that, so public his defame?
And I pray God I do not live the day,
To see thy ruin, and thy Realms decay;
And yet as sure as Humfrey seems to stand,
He be preserved from that vile traitors hand;
From Glosters seat, I would thou were estranged,
Or would to God that Dukedomes name were changed;
For it portends no goodness unto us,
Ah Humfrey, Humfrey, it is ominous,
Yet rather then thy hap so hard should be,
I would thou were here banished with me:
Humfrey adue, farewell true noble Lord,
My wish is all thy Elnor can afford.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
I sought that dreadful Sorceresse of Eye.
ELinor Cobham was accused by some that sought to withstand, and mistiked her
marriage with Duke Humsrey, that she practiced to give him Philters, and such
poisoning potions, to make him love her, as she was slandered by Cardinal
Beuford, to have lived as the Dukes Lemman, against the which Cardinal she
exclaimeth in this Epistle in the verse before. Though envious Beuford
slandered me before.


Noting the extreme hate he ever bore her. Nor Elnor brought thee foreign
Armies in,
To fetch her back as did thy Iacomin.


This was the chief and only thing that ever tutched the reputation of this
good Duke, that dotingly he married Iacomin, or as some call her Iaquet,
daughter and heir to William Bauier, Duke of Holland, married before, and
lawful wife to John Duke of Brabant, then living; which after as it is showed
in this verse following. Brabant nor Burgoyne claimed me by force,
N^rsu'd to Rome to hasten my deuorce.


Caused great wars, by reason that the Duke of Burgoyne took part with
Brabant, against the Duke of Gloucester; which being arbitrated by the Pope, the
Lady was adjudged to be delivered back to her former husband. Nor Bedfords
spouse, your noble sister Anne,
That Princely issued brave Burgonian.


John Duke of Bedfort, that scourge of France, and the glory of the Englishmen,
married Anne, sister to the Duke of Burgundy, a virtuous and beautiful Lady;
by which marriage, as also by his victories attained in France, he brought
great strength to the English Nation. Where Is Greenewich now, thy Elnors Court
of lat^?


That fair and goodly palace of Greenewich, was first builded by that famous
Duke, whose rich and pleasant situation might remain an assured monument of
his wisdom, if there were no other memory of the same. They say the
Druidesonce lived in this I Will.


It would seem that there were two Islands, both of them called Mona, though
now distinguished the one by the name of Man, the other by the name of
Anglesey, both which were full of many infernal ceremonies, as may appear by
Agricolaes voyage, made into the hithermost Man, described by his son in law
Cornelius Tacitus. And as superstition, the daughter of barbarism and
ignorance; so amongst those Northerly nations, like as in America, Magic was
most esteemed. Druidae were the public ministers of their religion, as
throghly taught in all rites thereof; their doctrine concerned the immortality
of the soul, the contempt of death, and all other points which may conduce to
resolution, fortitude, and magnanimity: their abode was in groves and woods,
whereupon they have their name; their power extended it self to master the
souls of men deceased, and to confer with ghosts and other spirits, about
the success of things. Plutarch, in his profound and learned discourse of the
defect of Oracles, reports that the outmost British Isles, were the prison of
I wot not what Demigods; but it shall not need to speak any farther of the
Drueda, then that which Lucas does. Et (...) barbaricus ritus, moremque
sinestrum,
Sacrorum, Druidae positis repetistis ab armis.


Did not the heavens her coming in withstand?
Noting the prodigious and fearful signs that were seen in England, a
little before her coming in: which Elinor expresses in this Epistle, as
fore-shewing the dangers which should ense upon this unlucky marriage. The
hallowing of the magique instruments.


The instruments which Bullenbrooke used in his coniurations, according to the
devilish ceremonies and customs of these unlawful Arts, were dedicated at a
Mass in the Lodge in Har^sey Park, by Southwell, Priest of Westminster.
Having procurde by hopes of golden gain,


This was one of the Articles that Duke Humfrey vrgde against the Cardinal
Beuford, that conspired the death of Henry the fifth, by conuaying a villain
into his chamber, which in the night should have murdered him: but what ground
of truth he had for the same, I leave to dispute.

Duke Humfrey to Elinor Cobham
ME thinks thou shuldst not doubt I could forget
Her whom so many do remember yet;
No, no, our joys away like shadows slide,
But sorrows firm, in memory abide;
Nay I durst answer, thou do nothing less,
But moved with passion, vrgde by thy distress;
No Elnor no, thy woes, thy grief, thy wrong,
Have in my breast been resident too long;
Oh when report in every place had spread,
My Elnor was to sanctuary fled,
With cursed Ouley, and the witch of Eye,
As guilty of their vile conspiracy;
The dreadful spirits when they did invoke,
For the succession, and the realms estate;
When Henry's Image they in wax had wrought,
By which he should unto his death be brought;
That as his picture did consume away,
His person so by sickness should decay;
Grief that before could never my thoughts control,
That instant took possession of my soul.
Ah would to God I could forget thine ill,
As for mine own, let that instruct me still;
But that before has taken too sure hold,
Forget it said I; would to God I could.
Of any woe, if thou have but one part,
I have the whole remaining in my heart;
I have no need of others cares to borrow,
For all I have is nothing else but sorrow.
No my sweet Nell, thou tookst not all away,
Though thou wentst hence, here still thy woes do stay,
Though from thy husband thou were forcde to go,
Those still remain, they will not leave me so;
No eye bewailes my ill, moanes my distress,
Our grief is more, but yet our debt is less;
we owe no tears, no mourning days are kept;
For those that yet for us have never wept;
we hold no obijts, no sad exequies
Upon the death-daies of vnweeping eyes.
Alas good Nell, what should thy patience move,
T'vpbraid thy kind Lord with a foreign love?
Thou might have bid all former ills adue,
Forgot the old, we have such store of new.
Did I omit thy love to entertain
with mutual grief to answer grief again?
Or think thou I unkindly did forbear,
To bandie woe for woe, and tear for tear?
Did I omit, or carelessly neglect,
Those shows of love that Ladies so respect?
In mournful black was I not seen to go?
By outward shows to tell my inward woe:
Nor dr^rie words were wasted in lament,
Nor cloudy brow bewraid my discontent,
Is this the cause? if this be it, know then,
One grief concealde more grievous is than ten:
If in my breast those sorrows sometimes were,
And never vtterd, still they must be there,
And if thou know, they many were before,
By time increasing they must needs be more;
England to me, can challenge nothing lent,
Let her cast up, what is received, what spent,
If I her own, can she from blame be free,
If she but prove a stepdame unto me?
That if I should with that proud bastard strive,
To plead my birthright and prerogative;
If birth allow, I should not need to fear it,
For then my true nobility should bear it;
If counsel aid, that France will tell (I know)
Whose towns lie waste before the English foe;
When thrice we gave the conquered French the foil.
At Agincourt, at Crauant, and Uernoile,
If faith avail, these arms did Henry hold,
To claim his crown, yet scarcely nine months old.
If countries care have leave to speak for me,
Gray hairs in youth, my witness then may be,
If peoples tongues give splendour to my fame,
They add a title to duke Humfries name;
If toil at home, French treason, English hate,
Shall tell my skill in managing the state,
If foreign travel my success may try,
In Flaunders, Almaine, Boheme, Burgundy,
That robe of Rome proud Benford now does wear,
In every place such sway should never bear.
The Crosier staff in his imperious hand,
To be the Scepter that controules the land;
That home to England, despensations draws,
Which are of power to abrogate our laws,
That for those sums the wealthy church should pay,
Upon the needy Commontie to lay,
His ghostly counsels only do advise,
The means how Langlies progeny may rise,
Pathing young Henry's unadvised ways,
A Duke of York from Cambridge house to raise,
which after may our title undermine,
Grafted since Edward in Gaunts famous line:
Us of succession safely to deprive,
which they from Clarence fainedly derive,
Knowing the will old Cambridge ever bore,
To eateh the wreathe that famous Henry wore.
With Gray and Scroope, when first he laid the plot,
From us, and ours, the ga^land to have got,
As from the Match-borne Mortimer to reign,
Whose title Glendour stoutly did maintain,
When the proud Percies haughty March, and he,
Had sharde the Land by equal parts in three.
His Priesthood now stern Mowbray does restore,
To stir the fire that kindled was before;
Against the Yorkists shall their claim advance,
To steel the point of Norffolkes sturdie lance,
Upon the breast of Herfords issue bent,
In just revenge of ancient banishment.
He does advise to let our pris^er go,
And does enlarge the faithless Scottish foe,
Giving our heirs in marriage, that their dowres
May bring invasion upon us and ours.
Ambitious Suffolk so the helm does guide,
With Benfords damned policies supplide;
He and the Queen in counsel still confer,
How to raise him who has advanced her.
But my dear heart, how vainly do I dream,
And fly from thee, whose sorrows are my theme?
My love to thee and England thus divided,
With the most part how hard to be decided,
Or thee, or that, to whether I am loath,
So near are you, so dear unto me both,
Twixt that and thee, for equal love I find
England in grateful, and my Elnor kind.
But though my country justly I reprove,
For countries sake unkind unto my love,
Yet is thy Humfrey to his Elnor, now,
As when fresh beauty triumphed on thy brow,
As when thy graces I admired most,
Or of thy favors might the frankli'st boast,
Those beauties were so infinite before,
That in abundance I was only poor,
Of which, though time has taken some again,
I ask no more but what does yet remain.
Be patient gentle heart in thy distress,
Thou art a Princess, not a whit less.
Whilst in these breasts we bear about this life,
I am thy husband, and thou art my wife;
Cast not thine eye on such as mounted be,
But look on those cast down as low as we;
For some of them which prowdly perch so hie,
Ere long shall come as low as thou or I.
They weep for joy, and let us laugh in woe,
We shall exchange when heaven will have it so.
We mourn, and they in after time may mourn,
Woe past may once, laugh present woe to scorn,
And worse than has been we can never taste,
Worse cannot come than is already past.
In all extremes, the only depth of ill,
Is that which comforts the afflicted still;
Ah would to God thou would thy griefs deny,
And on my back let all the burden lie!
Or if thou can resign, make thine mine own,
Both in one carrige to be undergone,
Till we again our former hopes recover,
And prosperous times blow these misfortunes over,
For in the thought of those forepassed years,
Some new resemblance of old joy appears.
Mutual our care, so mutual be our love,
That our affliction never can remove,
So rest in peace, where peace has hope to live,
Wishing thee more than I my self can give.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
At Agincour^, at Grauant, and Vernoyle,
THe three famous battles, fought by the Englishmen in France:

Agincourt by Henry the fifth, against the whole power of France, Crauant fought
by Montacute, Earl of Salisburie, and the Duke of Burgoyne, against the
Dolphine of France, and William Stuart, Constable of Scotland: Vernoile, fought
by John Duke of Bedford, against the Duke of Alanson, and with him most of the
Nobility of France, Duke Humfrey an Especial Counselor in all these
expeditions. In Flaunders, Almain, Boheme, Burgundy.


Here remembering the ancient amity which in his ambassaes he concluded
betwixt the King of England, and Sigismund Emperor of Almaine, drawing the
Duke of Burgoyne into the same league, giving himself as an hostage for the
duke of saint Omers, while the Duke came to Calice to confirm the league. With
his many other employments to foreign Kingdoms. That crosier staff in his
imperious hand.


Henry Beuford, Cardinal of Winchester, that proud and haughty Prelate,
received his Cardinals hat at Calice by the Popes Legate, which dignity, Henry
the fifth his nephew, forbade him to take upon him, knowing his haughty and
malicious spirit unfit for that robe and calling. The means how Langleis
progeny may rise.


As willing to show the house of Cambridge to be descended of Edmund Langley
Duke of York, a younger brother to John of Gaunt his Grandfather (as much as
in him lay) to smother the title that the Yorkists made to the crown (from
Lionell of Clarence, Gaunts elder brother) by the daughter of Mortimer. His
priesthood now, stern Mowbray does restore.


Nothing the ancient grudge between the house of Lancaster and Norffolke, ever
since Mowbray duke of Norffolke was banished for the accusation of Henry duke
of Herford, (after the king of England father to duke Humfrey,) which
accusation he came as a Combatant, to have made good in the Lists at Couentry.
And gives our heirs in marriage that their dowers.


James Stuart King of Scots, having bin long prisoner in England, was released,
and took to wife the daughter of John duke of Somerset, sister to John duke of
Somerset, niece to the Cardinal, and the duke of Excester, and coosin germain
removed to the King, this King broke the oath he had taken, and became after a
great enemy to England.

FINIS.
To my Honored Mistress, Mistress Elizabeth Tanfield, the sole daughter and heir
of that famous and learned Lawyer, Lawrence Tanfield Esquire.
Fair and virtuous Mistres, since first it was my good fortune to be a
witness of the many rare perfections wherewith nature and education have
adorned you, I have been forced since that time, to attribute more admiration
to your sex, then ever Petrarch could before persuade me to by the praises of
his Laura. Sweet is the French tongue more sweet the Italian; but most sweet
are they both, if spoken by your admired self. If Poesy were praiselesse,
your virtues alone were a subject sufficient to make it esteemed, though among
the barbarous Getes: by how much the more your tender years give scarcely
warrant for your more then womanlike wisdom, by so much is your judgment and
reading the more to be wondered at. The Graces shall have one more sister by
your self, and England to her self shall add one Muse more to Muses. I rest
the humble devoted servant, to my dear and modest Mistress, to whom I wish
the happiest fortunes I can devise.

Michaell Drayton.

William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk, to Queen Margaret.
The Argument.
William de la Pole, first Marquis, and after created Duke of Suffolk, being
sent into France by King Henry the sixth, concluded a marriage between the King
his Master, and Margaret, daughter to Rayner, Duke of Aniou, who only had the
title of the King of Cicily and Jerusalem. This marriage being made, contrary
to the liking of the Lords and Counsel of the Realm (by reason of the
yielding up of Aniou and Maine into the Dukes hands, which shortly after proved
the loss of all Aquitaine,) they ever after continually hated the Duke, and
after, (by means of the Commons) banished him at the Parliament at Berry; where
after he had the judgment of his exile, being then ready to depart, he
writes back to the Queen this Epistle.

IN my disgrace (dear Queen) rest thy content,
And Margarets health from Suffolkes banishment,
Not one day seems five years exile to me,
But that so soon I must depart from thee;
Where thou not present, it is ever night,
All be exilde that live not in thy sight.
Those Savages which worship the Suns rise,
Would hate their God, if they beheld thine eyes;
The worlds great light, might thou be seen abroad,
Would at our noone-stead never make abode;
And make the poor Antipodes to mourn,
Fearing lest he would never more return,
Were not for thee, it were my great'st exile,
To live within this sea-inuirond I Will.
Poles courage brooks not limmitting in bands,
But that (great Queen) thy sovereignty commands:
Our Falcons kind cannot the cage endure,
Nor buzzard-like does stoop to every lure;
Their mounting brood in open air does roue,
Nor will with Crows be cooped within a grove;
We all do breath upon this earthly ball,
Likewise one heaven encompasseth us all,
No banishment can be to him assignde,
Who does retain a true resolved mind.
Man in himself, a little world does bear,
His soul the Monarch, ever ruling there,
Where ever then his body does remain,
He is a King that in himself does reign,
And never fears Fortunes hot'st alarmes,
That bears against her Patience for his Arms,
This was the mean proud Warwick did invent,
To my disgrace at Leister Parliament,
That only I, by yielding up of Maine,
Should be the loss of fertile Aquitaine,
With the base vulgar sort to win him fame,
To be the heir of good Duke Humfreys name;
And so by treason spotting my pure blood,
Make this a mean to raise the Neuels brood.
With Salsbury his vile ambitions sire,
In Yorkes stern breast, kindling long hidden fire,
By Clarence title working to supplant,
The Eagle ayrie of great John of Gaunt.
And to this end did my exile conclude,
Thereby to please the rascal multitude;
Urged by these envious Lords to spend their breath,
Calling revenge on the Protectors death,
That since the old decrepit Duke is dead,
By me of force he must be murdered.
If they would know who robbed him of his life,
Let him call home Dame Ellinor his wife,
Who with a taper walked in a sheet,
To light her shame at noone through London street;
And let her bring her Negromanticke book,
That foul hag Iordane, Hun, and Bullenbrooke,
And let them call the spirits from hell again,
To know how Humfrey died, and who shall reign.
For twenty years and have I serude in France,
Against great Charles and bastard Orleance?
And seen the slaughter of a World of men,
Victorious now, and conquered again;
And have I seen Vernoylas batfull fields,
Strewn with ten thousand helms, ten thousand shields,
Where famous Bedford did our fortune try,
Or France, or England for the victory?
The sad innesting of so many Towns,
Scorde on my breast in honorable wounds;
When Mountacute and Talbot of such name,
Under my Ensign both first won their fame,
In heat and cold all fortunes have indurde,
To rowze the French, within their walls immurde;
Through all my life, these perrills have I past,
And now to fear a banishment at last?
Thou know how I (thy beauty to advance)
For thee refusde the infant Queen of France,
Brake the contract Duke Humfrey first did make,
Twixt Henry and the Princess Arminacke;
Only (sweet Queen) thy presence I might gain,
I give Duke Rayner, Aniou, Mauns and Maine,
Thy peerless beutie for a dower to bring,
To counterpoize the wealth of Englands King;
And from Aumerle withdrew my warlike powers,
And came my self in person first to Towers,
Th'Ambassadors for truce to entertain,
From Belgia, Denmark, Hungary and Spain,
And telling Henry of thy beauties story,
I taught my tongue a lovers Oratory,
As the report it self did so indite,
And make it ravish tears with such delight;
And when my speech did cease (as telling all)
My looks shewde more that was Angelical.
And when I breathde again and pawsed next,
I left mine eyes dilating on the text;
Then coming of thy modesty to tell,
In musickes numbers my voice rose and fell:
And when I came to paint thy glorious style,
My speech in greater cadences to file,
By true descent to wear the Diadem,
Of Naples, Cicils and Jerusalem,
And from the Gods thou did derive thy birth,
If heavenly kind could join with brood of earth;
Gracing each title that I did recite,
With some mellifluous pleasing Epethite,
Nor left him not, till he for love was sick,
Beholding thee in my sweet Rhetoric.
A fifteenes tax in France I freely spent
In triumphs, at thy nuptial tournament;
And solemnizde thy marriage in a gown,
Valude at more then was thy fathers Crown;
And only striving how to honor thee,
Gave to my King what thy love gave to me.
Judge if his kindness have not power to move,
Who for his loves sake gave away his love.
Had he which once the prize to Greece did bring,
(Of whom old Poets long ago did sing)
Seen thee for England but imbarqu'd at Deep,
Would ouer-boord have cast his golden sheep,
As too unworthy ballace to be thought,
To pester room, with such perfection fraught.
The briny seas which saw the ship enfold thee,
Would vaut up to the hatches to behold thee,
And falling back, themselves in thronging smother,
Breaking for grief, ennying one another;
When the proud Bark, for joy thy steps to feel,
Scornd the salt waves should kiss her furrowing keele,
And tricked in all her flags, her self she braues,
Capring for joy upon the silver waves;
When like a Bull from the Phenician strand,
Jove with Europa, tripping from the land,
Upon the bosom of the maine does scud,
And with his swannish breast cleaving the flood,
Towered the fair fields, upon the other side,
Bears Agenors joy, Ph^^icias pride.
All heavenly beauties join themselves in one,
To show their glory in thine eye alone;
Which when it turns that celestial ball,
A thousand sweet stars rise, a thousand fall.
Who justly says, mine banishment to be,
When only France for my recourse is free?
To view the plains where I have seen so often,
Englands victorious engines raisde aloft,
When this shall be my comfort in my way,
To see the place where I may boldly say,
Here mighty Bedford forth the vaward led,
Here Talbot charged, and here the Frenchmen fled,
Here with our Archers valiant Scales did lie,
Here stood the Tents of famous Willoughbie;
Here Mountacute rangde his conquering band,
Here forth we marched, and here we made a stand.
What should we stand to mourn and grieve all day,
For that which time does easily take away?
What fortune hurts, let patience only heal,
No wisdom with extreamities to deal.
To know our selves to come of humane birth,
These sad afflictions cross us here on earth.
A tax imposde by heavens eternal law,
To keep our rude rebellious will in awe.
In vain we prize that at so dear a rate,
Whose best assurance is a fickle state,
And needelesse we examine our intent,
When with prevention, we cannot prevent;
When we ourselves foreseeing cannot shun,
That which before, with destiny does run,
Henry has power, and may my life depose,
Mine honor mine, that none has power to lose;
Then be as cheerful, (beauteous royal Queen)
As in the Court of France we erst have been;
As when arrived in Porchesters fair road,
(Where, for our coming Henry made abode)
When in mine arms I brought thee safe to land,
And gave my love to Henry's royal hand,
The happy hours we passed with the King,
At fair South-hampton, long in banqueting,
With such content as lodged in Henry's breast,
When he to London brought thee from the West;
Through golden Cheap, when he in pomp did ride,
To Westminster, to entertain his Bride,
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Our Falcons kind cannot the cage endure.
HE alludes in these verses to the Falcon, which was the ancient device of the
Poles, comparing the greatness and haughtiness of his spirit, to the nature of
this bird. This was the mean proud Warwick did invent,
To my disgrace, etc.


The Commons at this Parliament, through Warwicks means, accused Suffolk of
treason, and urged the accusation so vehemently, that the king was forced to
exile him for five years. That only I by yielding up of Maine,
Should be the loss of fertile Aquitaine.


The Duke of Suffolk being sent into France to conclude a peace, chose Duke
Rainers daughter, the Lady Margaret, whom he espoused for Henry the sixth,
delivering for her to her father, the Countries of Aniou and Maine, and the
City of Mauns. Whereupon the Earl of Arminach (whose daughter was before
promised to the King) seeing himself to be deluded, caused all the Englishmen
to be expulsed Aquitino Gascoyne and Guyen. With the base vulgar sort to win
him same,
To be the heir of good Duke Humfreys name.


This Richard that was called the great Earl of Warwick, when Duke Humfrey
was dead, grew into exceeding great favor with the Commons.

With Salisburie, his vile ambicious Sire,
In Yorks stern breast, kindling long hidden fire,
By Clarence title, working to supplant,
The Eagle Ayrie of great John of Gaunt.
Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, in the time of Henry the sixth, claimed the
Crown (being assisted by this Richard Nea^ll Earl of Salisburie, and father
to the great Earl of Warwick, who favored exceedingly the house of York) in
open Parliament, as heir to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third son of Edward
the third, making his title by Anne his Mother, wife to Richard Earl of
Cambridge, son to Edmund of Langley, Duke of York; which Anne was daughter
to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, which Roger was son and heir to Edmund
Mortimer that married the Lady Philip, daughter and heir to Lionell Duke of
Clarence, the third son of King Edward, to whom the crown after King Richard
the seconds death, linealy descended, he dying without issue. And not to the
heirs of the Duke of Lancaster, that was younger brother to the Duke of
Clarence. Hall. cap. 1. Tit. Yor. and Lanc. Urged by these envious Lords to
spend their breath,
Calling revenge on the Protectors death.


Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and Lord Protector in the 25. year of Henry the
sixth, by the means of the Queen, and the Duke of Suffolk was arrested by the
Lord Beumond, at the Parliament holden at Berrie, and the same night after
murdered in his bed. If they would know who robbed him, etc. To this verse,
To know how Humfrey died, and who shall reign.
In these verses he jests at the Protectors wife, who (being accused and
convicted of treason, because with John Hun a priest, Roger Bullingbrooke a
Negromancer, and Margery Jordan, called the Witch of Eye, she had consulted by
sorcery to kill the king) was adjudged to perpetual prison in the I Will of Man,
and to do penance openly in three public places in London. For twenty
years and have I served in France,


In the sixth year of Henry the sixth, the Duke of Bedford being deceased, then
Lieutenant general, and Regent of France; this Duke of Suffolk, was promoted
to that dignity, having the Lord Talbot, Lord Scales, and the Lord Mountacute
to assist him. Against great Charles, and bastard Orleance.


This was Charles the seventh, and after the death of Henry the fifth obtained
the crown of France, and recovered again much of that his father had lost.
Bastard Orleance, was son to the Duke of Orleance, begotten of the Lord
Cawnies wife, preferred highly to many notable offices, because he being a
most valiant Captain, was continual enemy to the Englishmen, daily infesting
them with diverse incursions. And have I seen Vernoyla's batfull fields.


Vernoyle is that noted place in France, where the great battle was fought in
the beginning of Henry the sixth his reign, where the most of the French
Chivalry were overcome by the Duke of Bedford. And from Aumerle withdrew my
warlike powers,


Aumerle is that strong defenced town in France, which the Duke of Suffolk
got after 24. great assaults given unto it.

And came my self in person first to Towers
Th'Embassadours for truce to entertain,
From Belgia, Denmark, Hungary and Spain.
Towers is a City in France, built by Brutus as he came into Britain,
where, in the twenty and one year of the reign of Henry the sixth, was
appointed a great diet to be kept, whither came the Ambassadors of the
Empire, Spain, Hungary, and Denmark, to entreat for a perpetual peace, to
be made between the two Kings of England and France. By truo descent to
wear the Diadem,
Of Naples, Cicilie, and Jerusalem.


Rainer Duke of Aniou, father to Queen Margaret, called him self King of
Naples, Cicily, and Jerusalem, having the title alone of King of those
Countries. A fifteen tax in France I freely spent.


The Duke of Suffolk, after the marriage concluded twixt King Henry and
Margaret, daughter to duke Rayner, asked in open Parliament a whole fifteenth
to fetch her into England. Seen thee for England but imbarqu'd at Deep.


Deep is a town in France, bordering upon the Sea, where the Duke of
Suffolk with Queen Margaret, took ship for England. As when arrived in
Porchester fair Road.


Porchester, a haven town in the South-west part of England, where the King
tarried, expecting the Queens arrival, whom from thence he conuayed to
South-hamton.

Queen Margaret to William de-la-Poole Duke of Suffolk.
WHat news (sweet Pole) look thou my lives should tell,
But like the tolling of the doleful Bell?
Bidding the deaths-man to prepare the grave,
Expect from me no other news to have,
My breast, which once was mirths imperial throne,
A vast and desert wilderness is grown:
Like that cold Region, from the world remote,
On whose breeme seas the icie mountains flote
Where those poor creatures banished from the light,
Do live imprisond in continual night.
No joy presents my souls eternal eyes,
But divination of sad tragedies,
And Care takes up her solitary inn,
Where youth and joy their court did once begin.
As in September when our year resignes,
The glorious Sun unto the watrie signs,
Which through the clouds looks on the earth in scorn;
The little bird, yet to salute the morn,
Upon the naked branches sets her foot,
The leaves now lying on the mossie root;
And there a seely chitipping does keep,
As though she feign would sing, yet fame would weep,
Praising fair summer that too soon is gone,
Or sad for winter too fast coming on,
In this strange plight I mourn for thy depart,
Because that weeping cannot ease my heart.
Now to our aid, who stirs the neighboring kings?
Or who from France a puissant army brings?
Who moves the Norman to abet our war?
Or stirs up Burgoyne, to aid Lancaster?
Who in the North our lawful claim commends,
To win us credit with our valiant friends?
To whom shall I my secret grief impart?
Whose breast I made the closet of my heart.
The ancient Heroes fame thou did reuine,
And did from them thy memory derive,
Nature by thee, both gave and takes all,
Alone in Poole she was too prodigal;
Of so divine and rich a temper wrought,
As heaven for him perfections deep had sought;
Well knew king Henry what he pleaded for,
when he chose thee to be his Orator;
Whose Angell-eye by powerful influence,
Does utter more than humane eloquence,
That when Jove would his youthful sports have tried,
But in thy shape himself would never hide;
which in his love had bin of greater power,
Then was his Nymph, his flame, his swan, his shower,
To that allegiance York was bound by oath,
To Henry's heirs and safety of us both,
No longer now he means record shall bear it,
He will dispense with heaven, and will vnsweare it.
He that is in all the worlds black sins forlorn,
Is careless now how often he be forsworn;
And now of late his title has set down,
By which he make his claim unto the Crown.
And now I hear his hateful duchess chats,
And rips up their descent unto her brats,
And blesses them as Englands lawful heirs,
And tells them that our diadem is theirs.
And if such hap her goddess Fortune bring,
If three sons fail, she will make the fourth a King.
He that is so like his Damme, her youngest Dicke,
That foul, il-fauored, crook backed stigmaticke,
That like a carcas stolen out of a tomb;
Came the wrong way out of her mothers womb;
with teeth in's head, his passage to have torn,
As though begot an age ere he was borne.
Who now will curb proud York when he shall rise?
Or arms out right against his enterprise,
To crop that bastard weed which daily grows
To ouer-shadow our vermilian Rose?
Or who will muzzel that unruly Bear,
Whose presence strikes our peoples hearts with fear?
Whilst on his knees this wretched King is down,
To save them labor, reaching at his Crown,
Where like a mounting Cedar he should bear
His plumed top aloft into the air;
And let these shrubs sit underneath his shrowdes,
Whilst in his arms he does embrace the clouds,
O that he should his fathers right inherit,
Yet be an alien to that mighty spirit.
How were those powers dispersde, or whether gone,
Should sympathize in generation,
Or what apposed influence had force,
So much to abuse and alter natures course?
All other creatures follow after kind,
But man alone does not beget the mind.
My Daisie-flower, which erst perfumde the air,
Which for my favors Princes once did wear;
Now in the dust lies trodden on the ground.
And with Yorkes garlands every one is crowned.
When now his rising waits on our decline,
And in our setting he begins to shine,
Now in the skies that dreadful Comet waves,
And who be stars but Warwickes bearded staves?
And all those knees which bended once so low,
Grow stiff, as though they had forgot to bow;
And none like them pursue me with despite,
Which most have cride, God save Queen Margarite,
When fame shall brute thy banishment abroad,
The Yorkish faction then will lay on load;
And when it comes once to our western coast,
O how that hag Dame Elinor will boast,
And labor strait by all the means she can,
To be called home out of the I Will of Man,
To which I know great Warwick will consent,
To have it done by act of Parliament,
That to my teeth my birth she may defy,
Slaundring duke Rayner with base beggerie;
The only way she could devise to grieve me,
wanting sweet Suffolk, which should most relieve me,
And from that stock does sprowt another bloome,
A Kentish rebel, a base vpstart groom;
And this is he the white Rose must prefer,
By Clarence daughter, matched with Mortimer,
Thus by Yorkes means, this rascal pesant Cade,
Must in all haste Plantaginet be made;
Thus that ambitious duke sets all on work,
To sound what friends affect the claim of York,
whilst he abroad does practice to command,
And makes us weak by strengthening Ireland;
More his own power still seeking to increase,
Then for king Henry's good, or Englands peace.
Great Winchester untimely is deceasde,
That more and more my woes should be increasde.
Beuford, whose shoulders prowdly bare up all
The Churches prop, that famous Cardinal.
The Commons (bent to mischief) never let,
with France t'vpbraid that valiant Sommerset,
Railing in tumults on his soldiers loss,
Thus all goes backward, cross comes after cross,
And now of late duke Humfries old alies,
With banished Elnors base accomplices,
Attending their revenge grow wondrous crouse,
And threaten death and vengeance to our house;
And I lone the woeful remnant am,
To Endure these storms with woeful Buckingham.
I pray thee Poole, have care how thou do pass,
Never the Sea yet half so dangerous was;
And one foretold by Water thou should die,
(Ah! foul befall that foul tongues prophecy)
And every night am troubled in my dreams,
That I do see thee tosst in dangerous streams;
And oft-times shipwrackt, cast upon the land,
And lying breathless on the queachy sand;
And often in visions see thee in the night,
Where thou at Sea maintainst a dangerous fight;
And with thy proved target and thy sword,
Beatst back the pyrate which would come aboard.
Yet be not angry that I warn thee thus,
The truest love is most suspicious,
Sorrow does utter what us still does grieve,
But hope forbids us sorrovve to believe;
And in my counsel yet this comfort is,
It can not hurt, although I think amiss,
Then live in hope in triumph to return,
When cleerer days shall leave in clouds to mourn,
But so has sorrow girt my soul about,
That that word Hope (me thinks) comes slowly out;
The reason is, I know it here would rest,
Where it would still behold thee in my breast.
Farewell sweet Pole, feign more I would indite,
But that my tears do blot as I do write.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Or brings in Burgoyne to aid Lancaster.
PHillip Duke of Burgoyne and his son, were always great favorites of the
house of Lancaster, howbeit they often dissembled both with Lancaster and
York. Who in the North our lawful claim commends,
To win us credit with our valiant friends.


The chief Lords of the North parts, in the time of Henry the fixed, withstood
the Duke of York at his rising, giving him two great overthrows.

To that allegiance York was bound by oath
To Henry's heirs, and safety of us both,
No longer now he means Records shall bear it,
He will dispense with heaven, and will vnsweare it.
The Duke of York at the death of Henry the fifth, and at this Kings
coronation, took his oath to be true subject to him and his heirs for ever;
but afterward dispensing therewith, claimed the crown as his rightful and
proper inheritance. If three sons fail, she will make the fourth a King.


The Duke of York had four sons, Edward Earl of March, that afterward was
Duke of York, and King of England, when he had deposed Henry the sixth, and
Edmund Earl of Rutland, slain by the Lord Clifford at the battle at
Wakefield: and George Duke of Clarence, that was murdered in the Tower: and
Richard Duke of Gloucester, who was (after he had murdered his brothers sons)
King by the name of Richard the third.

He that is so like his Dam, her youngest Dicke,
That foul illfauored crookeback'd Stigmaticke, etc.
Till this verse, As though begot an age, etc.
This Richard (whom ironically she here calls Dicke) that by treason after his
Nephews murdered, obtained the crown, was a man low of stature,
crooke-back'd, the left shoulder much higher then the right, and of a very
crabbed and sower countenance: his mother could not be delivered of him, he
was borne toothd, and with his feet forward, contrary to the course of nature.
To ouershadow our vermilian Rose.


The red Rose was the badge of the house of Lancaster, and the white Rose of
York, which by the marriage of Henry the seventh, with Elizabeth indubitate
heir of the house of York, was happily united. Or who will muzzell that
unruly bear.


The Earl of Warwick, the setter up and puller down of Kings, gave for his
Arms the white Bear rampant, and the ragged staff. My Daisie flower which
erst perfumde the air,
Which for my favor Princes once did wear, etc.


The Daisie in French is called Margaret, which was Queen Margarets badge,
where-withall the Nobility and chivalry of the Land, at the first arrival
were so delighted, that they wore it in their hats in token of honor. And who
be stars but Warwikes bearded staves.


The ragged or bearded staff, was a part of the Arms belonging to the
Earldom of Warwick. Slandring Duke Rayner with base beggary.


Rayner Duke of Aniou, called himself King of Naples, Cicile, and Jerusalem,
having neither inheritance nor tribute from those parts, and was not able at
the marriage of the Queen, of his own charges, to send her into England,
though he gave no dower with her: which by the Duchess of Gloucester, was
often in disgrace cast in her teeth. A Kentish rebel, a base vpslart groom.


This was Jack Cade, which caused the Kentish-men to rebel in the 28. year
of King Henry the fixth. And this is he the white Rose must prefer,
By Clarence daughter matched to Mortimer.


This Jack Cade instructed by the Duke of York, pretended to be descended
from Mortimer, which married Lady Phillip, daughter to the Duke of Clarence.
And makes us weak by strengthening Ireland.


The Duke of York being made Deputy of Ireland, first there began to practice
his long pretended purpose, strengthening himself by all means possible, that
he might at his return into England by open war, claim that which so long
he had privily gone about to obtain. Great Winchester untimely is deceasde.


Henry Benford, Bishop and Cardinal of Winchester, son to John of Gaunt,
begot in his age, was a proud and ambitious Prelate, favoring mightily the
Queen and the Duke of Suffolk, continually heaping up innumerable treasure,
in hope to have been Pope, as himself on his deathbed confessed. With France
t'vpbraide the valiant Somerset.


Edmund Duke of Somerset, in the 24. of Henry the sixth, was made Regent of
France, and sent into Normandy to desend the English territories against the
French invasions, but in short time he lost all that King Henry the fifth won,
for which cause the Nobles and Commons ever after hated him. To Endure these
storms with woeful Buckingham.


Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, was a great favorite of the Queens faction, in
the time of Henry the sixth. And one sore-told, by water thou should die.


The Witch of Eye, received answer from her spirit, that the Duke of Suffolk
should take heed of water: which the Queen forwarnes him of, as remembering
the Witches prophecy, which afterward came to pass.

Finis.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Munson, Knight.
SIR, amongst many which most deservedly love you, though I the least, yet am
loath to be the last, whose endeavors may make known how highly they esteem of
your noble and kind disposition; Let this Epistle Sir (I beseech you) which
unworthily wears the badge of your worthy name, acknowledge my zeal with the
rest, (though much less deserving) which for your sake, do honor the house
of the Mounsons. I know true generositie accepts what is zealously offered,
though not ever deseruingly excellent; yet for love of the Art from whence it
receives resemblance. The light Phrigian harmony stirs delight, as well as
the melancholy Doricke moves passion; both have their motion in the spirit, as
the liking of the soul moves the affection. Your kind acceptance of my
labor, shall give some life to my Muse, which yet houers in the uncertainty
of the general censure.

Mich: Drayton.

Edward the fourth to Shores wife
The Argument.
This Mistress Shore, King Edward the fourths beauteous Paramore, was so called
of her husband a Gold smith, dwelling in Lombard street. Edward the fourth,
son to Richard Duke of York, after he had obtained the crown by deposing
Henry the sixth, (which Henry was after murdered in the Tower by Richard
Crookebacke) and after the battle sought at Barnet, where the famous Earl of
Warwick was slain, and that King Edward quietly possessed the Crown, hearing
(by report of many) the rare and wonderful beauty of the aforesaid Shores
wife, comes himself disguised to London to see her; where after he had once
beheld her, he was so surprised with her admirable beauty, as not long after
he robbed her husband of his dearest jewel; but first by this Epistle he
writes unto her.

Unto the fairest that ever breathed this air,
From English Edward to that fairest fair,
Ah would to God thy title were no more,
That no remembrance might remain of Shore,
To countermand a Monarchs high desire,
And bar mine eyes of what they most admire.
O why should Fortune make the City proud,
To give that more then is the Court allowed?
Where they like (wretches) hoard it up to spare,
And do engrosse it, as they do their ware.
When fame first blazed thy beauty here in Court,
Mine cares repulsde it as a light report,
But when mine eyes saw that mine ear had heard,
They thought report too nigardly had sparde;
And strooken dumb with wonder, did but mutter,
Conceiving more then she had words to utter.
Then think of what thy husband is possessed,
When I envy that Shore should be so blessed;
When much abundance makes the needy mad,
And having all, yet knows not what is had.
Into fools bosoms this good fortune creepes,
And wealth comes in the whilst the miser sleeps.
If now thy beauty be of such esteem,
Which all of so rare excellency deem,
What would it be, and prized at what rate,
Where it adorned with a kingly state?
Which being now but in so mean a bed,
Is like an uncut Diamond in lead,
E're it be set in some high-prized ring,
Or garnished with rich enamiling;
We see the beauty of the stone is spilt,
Wanting the gracious ornament of guilt.
When first attracted by thy heavenly eyes,
I came to see thee, in a strange disguise,
Passing thy shop, thy husband calls me back,
Demanding what rare jewel I did lack:
I want (thought I) one that I dare not crave,
And (one I fear) thou will not let me have;
He calls for Caskets forth, and shows me store,
But yet I knew he had one jewel more;
And deadly cursed him that he did deny it,
That I might not for love or money buy it.
O might I come a Diamond to buy,
That had but such a luster as thine eye.
Would not my treasure serve, my Crown should go,
If any jewel could be prized so;
An Agat, branched with thy blushing strains,
A Sapphire, but so az^rde as thy veins;
My kingly Scepter only should redeem it,
At such a price if judgment could esteem it.
How fond and senseless be those strangers then,
Who bring in toys to please the Englishmen?
I smile to think how fond th'Italians are,
To judge their artificial gardens rare,
When London in thy cheeks can show them here,
Roses and Lillies growing all the year:
The Portugal, that only hopes to win,
By bringing stones from farthest India in,
When happy Shore can bring them forth a girl,
Whose lips be Rubies, and her teeth be Pearl.
How silly is the Polander and Dane,
To bring us Cristall from the frozen maine?
When thy clear skins transparence does surpass
Their Crystal, as the Diamond does glass.
The foolish French which brings in trash and toys,
To turn our women, men, or girls to boys,
When with what tire thou do thy self adorn,
That for a fashion only shall be worn;
Which though it were a garment but of hair,
More rich then robe that ever Empress ware.
Me thinks thy husband takes his mark aw^y,
To set his plate to sale when thou art by;
When they which do thy Angel locks behold,
Like basest dross do but respect his gold,
And wish one hair before that massy heap,
And but one lock before the wealth of Cheap^;
And for no cause else, hold we gold so dear,
But that it is so like unto thy hair,
And sure I think Shore cannot choose but flowt,
Such as would find the great Elixar out,
And laugh to see the Alchimists, that choke
Themselves with fumes, and waste their wealth in smoke.
When if thy hand but touch the grossest mold,
It is con^erted to refined gold,
When theirs is chafferd at an easy rate,
Well known to all to be adulterate;
And is no more when it by thine is set,
Then paltry Beugle, or light-prized jeat.
Let others wear perfumes, for thee unmeet,
If there were none, thou could make all things sweet.
Thou comfort'st sense, and yet all sense do waste,
To hear, to see, to smell, to feel, to taste;
Thou a rich ship, whose very refuse ware,
Aromatickes, and precious odors are.
If thou but please to walk into the Pawn,
To buy thee Cambrieke, Callico, or Lawne,
If thou the whitenes of the same would prove,
From thy more whiter hand pluck off thy glove;
And those which buy, as the beholders stand,
Will take thy hand for Lawne, Lawne for thy hand;
A thousand eyes, closde up by envious night,
Do vvish for day, but to enjoy thy sight;
And when they once have blessed their eyes with thee,
Scorn every object else, what ere they see,
So like a goddess beauty still controules,
And has such powerful vvorking in our souls.
The Merchant which in traffike spends his life,
Yet loves at home to have a dainty wife,
The blunt spoke Cynicke poring on his book,
Sometimes (aside) at beauty loves to look.
The churchman, by whose teaching we are led,
Allovves what keeps love in the marriage bed;
The bloody Soldier spent in arms and broiles,
With beauty yet content to share his spoils;
The busy Lawyer wrangling in his pleas;
Finds that Beauty gives his labor ease;
The toyling tradesman, and the sweating clown,
Would have his wench fair, though his bread be brown;
So much is Beauty pleasing unto all,
To Prince and p^^sant like in general;
Nor never yet did any man despise it,
Except too dear, and that he could not prize it,
Vnlearn'd is learning, artlesse be all Arts,
If not imployde to praise thy several parts;
Poor plodding Schoolmen they are far too low,
Which by probations, rules, and axioms go;
He must be still familiar with the skies,
Which notes the reuolutions of thine eyes:
And by that skill which measures sea and land,
See beauties all, thy waste, thy foot, thy hand,
where he may find, the more that he does view,
Such rare delights as are both strange and new;
And other worlds of beauty more and more,
Which never were discovered before;
And to thy rare proportion to apply,
The lines and circles in Geometry,
Using alone Arithmetickes strong ground,
Numbering the virtues that in thee are found.
And when these all have done what they can do,
For thy perfections all too little too.
When from the East the dawne has broken out,
And gone to seek thee all the world about,
Within thy Chamber has she fixed her light,
Where but that place the world has all been night;
Then is it fit that every vulgar eye,
Should see Love banquet in her maiestie^
We deem those things our sight does most frequent,
To be but mean, although most excellent;
For strangers still the streets are swept and strowd,
Few look on such as daily come abroad;
Things much restraind, does make v^ much desire the^,
And beauties seldom seen makes us admire them.
Nor is it fit a city shop should (...)de,
The worlds delight and natures only pride,
But in a Princes sumptuous gallery.
Hung all with tissue, floorde with tapestrie^
Where thou shall sit, and from thy state shall see,
The tiltes and triumphs that are done for thee.
Then know the diffrence (if thou list to prove)
Betwixt a vulgar, and a kingly love;
And when thou findst, as now thou doubtst the troth,
Be thou thy self impartial Judge of both.
Where hearts be knit, what helps if not enjoy?
Delays breeds doubts, no cunning to be coy.
Whilst lazy Time his turn by tariance serves,
Love still grows sickly, and hope daily sterues,
Mean while receive that warrant by these lines,
which princely rule and soueraintie resignes:
Till when, these papers by their Lords commaund^
By me shall kiss thy sweet and dainty hand.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
THis Epistle of Edward to Shores wife, and of hers to him, being of unlawful
affection, ministers small occasion of historical notes, for had he mentioned
the many battles betwixt the Lancastrian faction and him, or other warlike
dangers, it had been more like to Plautus boasting Soldier then a kingly
Courtier. Notwithstanding, it shall not be amiss to annexe a line or two. From
English Edward to the fairest fair,


Edward the fourth was by nature very chiualrous, and very amorous, applying
his sweet and amiable aspect to attain his wanton appetite the rather, which
was so well known to Jews the French king, who at their interuiew invited him
to Paris, that as Comineus reports, being taken at his word, he
notwithstanding brake off the matter, fearing the Parisian Dames with their
witty conversation, would detain him longer then should be for his benefit,
by which means Edwad was disapointed of his iorny: and albeit Princes whilst
they live, have nothing in them but what is admirable; yet we need not mistrust
the flattery of the Court in those times: fot certain it is, that his shape
was excellent, his hair drew near to a black, making his faces favor to seem
more delectable. Though the smalnes of his eyes full of a shining moisture, as
it took away some comeliness; so it argued much sharpnes of understanding,
and cruelty mingled together. And indeed George Buccanan (that imperious Scot)
charge him and other Princes of those times, with affectation of tyranny, as
Richard the third manifestly did. When first attracted by thy heavenly eyes,


Edwards intemperate desires, with which he was wholly overcome, how tragically
they in his offspring were punished, is universally known. A mirror
representing their oversight; that rather leave their children what to
possess, then what to imitate. How seely is the Polander and Dane;
To bring us Cristall from the frozen maine.


Alluding to their opinions, who imagine Cristall to be a kind of Ice, and
therefore it is likely, they who come from the frozen parts, should bring great
store of that transparent stone, which is thought to be congealed with extreme
cold. Whether Cristall be Ice, or some other liquor, I omit to dispute, yet by
the examples of Amber and Coral, there may be such an induration; for Solinus
out of Pliny mentions, that in the Northerly Region, a yellow jelly is taken
up out of the sea at two tides, which he calls Succinum, we Amber; so likewise,
out of the Ligusticke deep, a part of the Meridian Sea, a greenish stalk is
gathered, which hardened in the air, becomes to be Corrall, either white, or
red. Amber notwithstanding is thought to drop out of trees, as appears by
Martials Epigram.

Et latet, and lucet Phaethonide condita gutta,
Vt vidcatur apis nectare clausa suo,
Dignum tantorum pretium tulit ille laborum,
Credibile est ipsam sic voluisse mors.
To behold a Be enclosed in Electrum, is not so rare as that a boys throat
should be cut with the fall of an Ice-sicle, the which Epigram is excellent, the
18. li. 4 He calls it Phaethontis G^tta, because of that fable which Ovid
rehearses, concerning the Heliades or Phaetons sisters, metamorphosed into
those trees, whose Gum is Amber, where flies alighting, are often times
tralucently imprisoned.

The Epistle of Shores wife to king Edward the fourth.
AS the weak child, that from the mothers wing,
Is taught the Lutes delicious fingering,
At every strings soft touch, is moved with fear,
Noting his masters curious listening ear;
whose trembling hand, at every strain bewraies.
In what doubt he his new set lesson plays;
As this poor child, so sit I to indite,
At every word still quaking as I write.
Would I had led an humble shepherds life,
Nor known the name of Shores admired wife,
And lived with them in Count^ie fields that range,
Nor seen the golden Cheap, nor glittering Change,
To stand a Comet gazed at in the skies,
Subject to all tongues, object to all eyes,
Often have I heard my beauty praisd of many,
But never yet so much admired of any;
A Princes Eagle eye to find out that,
which vulgar sights do seldom wonder at,
Makes me to think affection flatters sight,
Or in the object some thing exquisite.
To housed beauty, seldom stoop's report,
Fame must attend on that which lives in Court.
What Swan of great Apollos brood does sing
To vulgar love in courtly Sonetting?
Or what immortal Poets sugared pen,
Attends the glory of a Citizen?
Often have I wondered what should blind your eye,
Or what so far seduced Majesty,
That having choice of beauties so divine,
Amongst the most to choose this least of mine?
More glorious suns adorn fair Londons pride,
Then all rich Englands continent beside;
Who takes in hand to make account of this,
May number Rumneys flowers, or Isis fish;
Who does frequent our Temples, walks, and streets
Noting the sundry beauties that he meets,
Thinks not that Nature left the wide world poor
And made this place the Chequer of her store:
As heaven and earth were lately fallen at iarres,
And grown to vying wonders, dropping stars.
That if but some one beauty should incite,
Some sacred Muse, some ravished spirit to write,
Here might he fetch that true Promethian fire,
As after ages should his lines admire;
Gathering the honny from the choicest flowers,
Scorning the withered weeds in Country bowers.
Here in this garden (only) springs the Rose,
In every common hedge the Bramble grows,
Nor are we so turnde Neapolitan,
That might incite some fowle-mouth Mantuan,
To all the world to lay out our defects,
And have just cause to rail upon our sex;
To prancke old wrinckles up in new attire,
To alter Natures course, prove Time a lier,
Abusing fate, and heavens just doom reuerse,
On beauties grave to set a crimson hearse,
With a deceitful foil to lay a ground,
To make a glass to seem a Diamond.
Nor cannot without hazard of our name,
In fashion follow the V^netian Dame,
Nor the fantastic French to imitate,
Attirde half Spanish, half Italionate;
Nor wast, nor curle, body nor brow adorn,
That is in Florence, or in Genoa borne.
But with vain boasts how witless fond am I,
Thus to draw on mine own indignity?
And what though married when I was but young,
Before I knew what did to love belong,
Yet he which now is possessed of the room,
Cropped beauties flower when it was in the bloome,
And goes away enriched with the store,
Whilst others gleane, where he has reapt before;
And he dares swear that I am true and just,
And shall I then deceive his honest trust?
Or what strange hope should make you to assail,
Where strongest battery never could preuailt?
Belike you think that I repulst the rest,
To leave a King the conquest of my breast,
Or have thus long preserude my self from all,
A Monarch now should glory in my fall.
Yet rather let me die the vildest death,
Then live to draw that sinne-polluted breath;
But our kind hearts men's tears cannot abide,
And we least angry often, when most we chide;
Too well know men what our creation made us,
And nature too well taught them to invade us.
They know but too well, how, what, when, and where,
To write, to speak, to sue, and to forbear,
By signs, by sighs, by motions, and by tears,
When vows should serve, when oths, when smiles, when prayers,
What one delight our humors most does move,
Only in that you make us nourish love.
If any natural blemish blot our face,
You do protest it gives our beauty grace,
And what attire we most are used to wear,
That of all other excellentst you swear.
And if we walk, or sit, or stand, or lie,
It must resemble some one deity,
And what you know we take delight to hear,
That are you ever sounding in our ear;
And yet so shameless when you tempt us thus,
To lay the fault on beauty, and on us.
Romes vvanton O^id did those rules impart,
O that your nature should be helped with Art.
Who would have thought, a King that cares to reign,
Inforcde by love, so Poet-like should feign?
To say that Beauty, Times stern rage to shun,
In my cheeks (Lillies) hid her from the Sun;
And when she meant to triumph in her May,
Made that her East, and here she broke her day,
And swearst that summer still is in my sight,
And but where I am, all the world is night;
As though the fairst, ere since the world began,
To me a Sunne-burnt base Egyptian;
But yet I know more than I mean to tell,
(O would to God you knew it not too well)
That women often their most admirers raise,
Though publicly not flattering their own praise.
Our churlish husbands which our youth enjoyed,
Who with our dainties have their stomachs cloyd,
Do loathe our smooth hand with their lips to feel,
To Enrich our favors, by our beds to kneel;
At our command to wait, to send, to go,
As every hour our amorous servants do;
Which makes a stolen kisle often we bestow,
In earnest of a greater good we owe;
When he all day torments us with a frown,
Yet sports with Venus in a bed of dowlne;
Whose rude embracement, but too ill beseemes
Her span broad waste, her white and dainty limbs,
And yet still preaching abstinence of meat,
When he himself of every dish will eat.
Blame you our husbands then, if they deny
Our public walking, our loose liberty;
If with exception still they us debar,
The circuit of the public Theater;
To hear the smooth-tongude Poets Siren vain,
Sporting in his lascivious Comicke scene;
Or the young wanton wits, when they applawd
The sly persuasions of some subtle Bawd,
Or passionate Tragedian in his rage,
Acting a loue-sicke passion on the stage:
When though abroad restraining us to rome,
They very hardly keep us safe at home,
And often are touched with fear and inward grief,
Knowing rich prizes soonest tempt a theeefe.
What sports have we whereon our minds to set?
Our dog, our Parrat, or our Marmuzet;
Or once a week to walk into the field,
Small is the pleasure that those toys do yielde,
But to this grief, a medicine you apply,
To cure restraint with that sweet liberty;
And sovereignty, (O that bewitching thing)
Yet made more great, by promise of a King;
And more, that honor which does most entice
The holiest Nun, and she that is never so nice.
Thus still we strive, yet overcome at length,
For men want mercy, and poor women strength:
Yet grant, that we could meaner men resist,
when Kings once come, they conquer as they list.
Thou art the cause Shore pleases not my sight,
That his embraces give me no delight;
Thou art the cause I to my self am strange,
Thy coming is my full, thy set my change.
Long winter nights be minutes, if thou here,
Short minutes if thou absent be a year.
And thus by strength thou art become my fate,
And make me love even in the midst of hate.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Would I had led an humble Sheep herds life,
Nor known the name of Shores admired wife.
TWo or three Poemes written by sundry men, have magnified this woman's beauty;
whom that ornament of England and Londons more particular glory, Sir Thomas
Moore very highly has praised for her beauty, she being alive in his time,
though being poor and aged. Her stature was mean, her hair of a dark yellow,
her face round and full, her eye gray, delicate harmony being betwixt each parts
proportion, and each proportions color, her body fat, white, and smooth, her
countenance cheerful, and like to her condition. That picture which I have
seen of hers, was such as she rose out of her bed in the morning, having
nothing on but a rich mantle cast under one arm over her shoulder, and sitting
in a chair on which her naked arm did lie. What her fathers name was, or
where she was borne, is not certainly known; but Shore a young man of right good
person, wealth and behavior, abandoned her bed after the king had made her his
Concubine. Richard the third causing her to do open penance in Paul's
Churchyard, commanded that no man should relieve her, which the tyrant did
not so much for his hatred to sin, but that by making his brothers life
odious, he might cover his horrible treason the more cunningly. May number
Rumneys flowers, or Isis fish.


Rumney is that famous Marsh in Kent, at whose side Rye a Haven town does
stand. Hereof the excellent English Antiquarie Master Camden, and Master
Lambert in his preambulation do^ make mention. And Marshes are commonly called
those low grounds, which abut upon the sea, and from the Latin word are so
denominated. Isis is here used for Thamesis by a Synecdochicall kind of
speech, or by a Poetical liberty, in using one for another: for it is said
that Thamesis is compounded of Tame and Isis, making when they are met, that
renowned water running by London, a City much more renowned then that water:
which being plentiful of fish, is the cause also why all things else are
plentiful therein. Moreover, I am persuaded, that there is no river in the
world beholds more stately buildings on either side clean through, then the
Thames. Much is reported of the Graund Canale in Venice, for that the fronts on
either side are so gorgeous. That might entice some foul-mouthed Mantu^n,


Mantuan a pastoral Poet, in one of his Eglogs bitterly inueyeth against
womankind, some of the which by way of an Appendex, might be here inserted,
seeing the fantastic and insolent humors of many of that sex deserve much
sharper physic were it not that they are grown wiser then to amend, for such
an idle Poets speech as Mantuan, yea or for Euripides himself, or Senecas
inflexible Hippolitus. The circuit of the public Theater.


Ovid, a most fit Author for so desolute a Sectary, calls that place Chastities
shipwreck, for though Shores wife wantonly plead for liberty, which is the
true humor of a Curtizan, yet much more is the praise of modesty, then of such
liberty. Howbeit the Vestall Nuns had seats assigned them in the Roman
Theater, whereby it should appear, it was counted no impeachment to modesty,
though they offending therein, were buried quick: a sharp law for them, who
may say as Shores wife does. When though abroad restraining us to rome,
They very hardly keep us safe at home.


FINIS.
To the right Worshipful Sir Henry Goodere of Powlesworth Knight.
SIR, this Poem of mine, which I imparted to you, at my being with you at your
lodging at London in May last, brought at length to perfection, (emboldned by
your wonted favors) I adventure to make you Patron of. Thus Sir you see I have
adventured to the world, with what like or dislike, I know not, ^if it please,
(which I much doubt of) I pray you then be partaker of that which I shall
esteem not my least good; if dislike, it shall lessen some part of my grief;
if it please you to allow but of my love: howsoever, I pray you accept it as
kindly as I offer it, which though without many protestations, yet (I assure
you) with much desire of your honor. Thus until such time as I may in some
more larger measure, make known my love to the happy and generous family of
the Gooderes, (to which I confess my self to be beholding to, for the most
part of my education) I wish you all happiness.

Michaell Drayton.

Mary the French Queen, to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk.
The Argument.
Mary, the daughter of that renowned Prince King Henry the seventh being very
young at her fathers death, after by her brother King Henry the eight, was given
in marriage to Jews King of France, being a man old and decrepit: This fair
and beautiful Lady, long before had pla^^^her affection on Charles Brandon, Duke
of Suffolk, a brave and courageous young Gentleman, and an especial favorite
of the King her brother, and a man raised up by him. King Jews, the husband of
this beautiful Queen, lived not long after he was married; and Charles
Brandon having commission from the King to bring her back into England, but
being delaied by some sinister means, the French Queen writes this Epistle,
to hasten the Duke forward on his intended voyage to France.

SVch health from heaven my self may wish to me.
Such health from France, Queen Mary sends to thee.
Brandon, how long make thou excuse to stay,
And know how ill we women brook delay?
If one poor channel thus can part us two,
Tell me (unkind) what would an Ocean do?
Leander had an Hellespont to swim,
Yet this from Hero could not hinder him?
His bark (poor soul) his breast, his arms, his oars,
But thou a ship, to land thee on our shores;
And opposite to famous Kent does lie,
The pleasant fields of flowrie Picardie,
Where our fair Callice, walled in her sands,
In kenning of the cliffie Dover stands.
Here is no Beldame Nurse to powt or lower,
When wantoning, we revel in my Tower;
Nor need I top my Turret with a light,
To guide thee to me, as thou swim'st by night;
Comparde with me, were thou but half so kind,
Thy sighs should stuff thy sails, though wanting wind;
But thy breast is becalmd, thy sighs be slack,
And mine too stiff, and blow thy broad sails back.
But thou will say, that I should blame the flood,
Because the wind so full against thee stood;
Nay, blame it not it did so roughly blow,
For it did chide thee, for thou, wast so slow;
For it came not to keep thee in the Bay,
But came from me to bid thee come away.
But that thou vainly lett'st occasion slide,
Thou might have wafted hither with the tide.
If when thou come, I knit mine angry brow,
Blame me not Brandon, thou have broke thy vow;
Yet if I meant to frown, I might be dombe,
For this may make thee stand in doubt to come:
Nay come sweet Charles, have care thy ship to guide,
Come my sweet heart, in faith I will not chide.
Whenas my brother and his lovely Queen
In sad attire for my depart were seen,
The utmost date expired of my stay,
when I from Dover did depart away,
Thou know what woe I suffered for thy sake,
How often I feigned of thee my leave to take;
God and thou know with what a heavy heart
I took my farewell when I should depart;
And being shipped, gave signal with my hand,
Up to the Cliffe, where I did see thee stand,
Nor could reframe in all the peoples view,
But cried to thee, sweet Charles adieu, adieu.
Look how a little infant that has lost,
The things wherewith it was delighted most,
weary with seeking, to some corner creepes,
And there (poor soul) it sits it down and weeps;
And when the Nurse would feign content the mind,
Yet still it mournes for that it cannot find:
Thus in my careful Cabin did I lie,
whenas the ship out of the road did fly.
Think thou my love was faithful unto thee,
when young Castile to England su'd for me?
Be judge thy self, if it were not of power,
when I refused an Empire for my dovver.
To Englands Court, when once report did bring,
How thou in France did revel with the king,
when he in triumph of his victory,
Under a rich imbrodered Canapie,
E(...)d proud Tournay, which did trembling stand,
To^eg for mercy at his conquering hand;
To hear of his enderements, how I joyed?
But see, this calm was suddenly destroyed.
When Charles of Castile there to banquet came,
With him his sister that ambitious dame,
Sauoyes proud dutchesle, knowing how long she,
By her ^oue sought to win my love from me;
Fearing my absence might thy vows acquit,
To change thy Mary for a Margarite,
When in king Henry's tent of cloth of gold,
She often did thee in her arms enfold;
where you were feasted more deliciously,
Than Cleopatra did Mark Anthony,
Where sports all day did entertain your sight,
And then in maskes you passde away the night;
But thou will say, it is proper unto us,
That we by nature all are jealous.
I must confess it is often found in our sex,
But who not love, not any thing suspects:
True love does look with pale suspicious eye,
Take away love, if you take jealousy.
Turwin and Turney when King Henry took,
For this great change who then did ever look?
When Maximilian to those wars addressed,
Ware Englands Crosle on his imperial breast,
And in our army let his Eagle fly,
That viewd our ensigns with a wondering eye.
Little thought I when Bullen first was won,
VVedlocke should end, what angry war begunn^
From which I vow, I yet am free in thought,
But this alone by Wolseis wit was wrought.
To his advise the King gave free consent,
That will I, nill I, I must be content.
My virgins right, my state could not advance,
But now enriched with the dower of France;
Then, but poor Suffolkes Duchess had I been,
Now, the great Dowager, the most Christian Qucent.
But I perceive where all thy grief does lie,
Jews of France had my virginity;
He had indeed but shall I tell thee what,
Believe me Brandon he had scarcely that;
Good feeble King he could not do much harm,
But age must needs have something that is warm;
Small drops (God knows) do quench that hea^lesse fire,
When all the strength is only in desire.
And I could tell (if modesly might tell)
There Is somewhat else that pleases lovers well,
To rest his cheek, upon my softer cheek,
Was all he had, and more he did not seek.
So might the little babie clip the nurse,
And it content, she never awhit the worse;
Then think this Brandon, if that makes thee frown,
For may denhead, he on my head set a Crown,
who would exchange a kingdom for a kiss?
Hard were the heart that would not yield him this;
And time yet half so swiftly does not pass,
Not full five months yet elder than I was.
When thou to France conducted was by fame,
With many knights which from all countries came,
Installed at Saint Dennis in my throne,
Where Jews held my coronation;
Where the proud Dolphin, for thy valor sake,
Chose thee at tilt his princely part to take;
Whenas the staves upon thy caske did light,
Grieved there with, I turned away my sight;
And spoke alowd, when I my self forgot,
It Is my swee^e Charles my Brandon, hurt him not:
But when I fearde the King perceived this,
Good seely man, I pleased him with a kiss;
And to extol his valiant son began.
That Europe never bred a brauer man;
And when (poor King) he simply praised thee,
Of all the rest I asked which thou should be?
Thus I with him dissembled for thy sake,
Open confession now amends must make.
Whilst this old King upon a pallet lies,
And only holds a combat with mine eyes;
Mine eyes from his, by thy sight stolen away,
Which might too well their Mistres thoughts bewray.
But when I saw thy proud unconquered Lance,
To bear the prize from all the flower of France,
To see what pleasure did my soul embrace,
Might easily be discerned in my face.
Look as the dew upon a damask Rose,
How through that liquide pearl his blushing shows,
And when the sost air breathes upon his top,
From the sweet leaves falls easily drop by drop;
Thus by my cheek, distilling from mine eyes,
One tear for joy, another room supplies.
Before mine eye (like touch) thy shape did prove,
Mine eye condemned my too too partial love;
But since by others I the same do ^rie,
My love condemns my too too partial eye.
The precious stone most beautiful and rare,
When with it self we only do compare,
We deem all other of that kind to be,
As excellent as that we only see;
But when we judge of that with others by,
Too credulous we do condemn our eye,
Which then appears more orient and more bright,
As from their dimnesse borrowing great light.
Alansoon, a fine timbered man, and tall,
Yet wants the shape thou art adornd withal;
Vandon, good carriage, and a pleasing eye,
Yet has not Suffolkes princely majesty;
Courageous Burbon a sweet manly face,
But yet he wants my Brandons courtly grace.
Proud Longauile, our Court iudgde had no peer,
A man scarce made (was thought) whilst thou wast here.
County S. Paul, brau'st man at arms in France,
Would yield himself a Squire to bear thy lance;
Galleas and Bounearme, matchless for their might,
Under thy towering blade have cowcht in fight.
If with our love, my brother angry be,
I Will say to please him, I first fancied thee.
And but to frame my liking to his mind,
Never to thee had I been half so kind.
Worthy my love the vulgar judge no man,
Except a Yorkist, or Lancastrian:
Nor think that my affection should be set,
But in the line of great Plantaginet.
I pass not what the idle Commons say,
I pray thee Charles make haste and come away.
To thee what is England, if I be not there?
Or what to me is France, if thou not here?
Thy absence makes me angry for a while,
But at thy presence I must needsly smile,
When last of me his leave my Brandon took,
He swear an oath, (and made my lips the book)
He would make have, which now thou doo'st deny:
Thou art forsworn, o wilful periuricl
Sooner would I with greater sins dispense,
Then by entreatie pardon this offense.
But yet I think, if I should come to shriue thee,
Great were the fault that I should not forgive thee;
Yet were thou here, I should revenged be,
But it should be with too much loving thee.
I, that is all that thou shall fear to taste,
I pray thee Brandon come, sweet Charles make have.
Notes of the Chronicle-Historie.
The utmost date expired of my stay,
When I for Dover did depart away.
KIng Henry the 8. with the Queen and Nobles, in the 6. year of his reign,
in the month of September, brought this Lady to Dover, where she took
shipping for France. Think thou my love was faithful unto thee,
When young Castile to England su'd for me.


It was agreed and concluded betwixt Henry the seventh, and Philip King of
Castile, son to Maximilian the Emperor, that Charles eldest son of the
said Philip, should marry the Lady Mary, daughter to King Henry, when they
came to age: which agreement was afterward in the eight year of Henry the
eight annihilated.

When he in triumph of his victory,
Under a rich embrodered Canapie,
Entered proud Turney which did trembling stand. etc.
Henry the 8. after the long siege of Turnay, which was delivered to him upon
composition, entered the City in triumph, under a Canapie of cloth of gold,
borne by four of the chief and most noble Citizens; the king himself
mounted vpou a gallant courser barbed with the Arms of England, France and
Ireland.

When Charles of Castile there to banquet came,
With him his sister; that ambitious Dame.
Sauoys proud Duchess,
The King being at Turnay, there came to him the Prince of Castile, and the
Lady Margaret Duchess of Sanoy his sister, to whom King Henry gaus great
entertainment. Sauoys proud Duchess, knowing how long she
By her love sought to win my love from me.


At this time there was speech of a marriage to be concluded, between Charles
Brandron then Lord L^ste, and the Duchess of Sauoy, the Lord L^s^e being highly
favored, and exceedingly beloved of the Duchess. When in King Henry's Tent of
cloth of gold,


The King caused a rich Tent of cloth of gold to be erected, where he feasted
the Prince of Castile, and the Duchess, and entertained them with sumptuous
maskes and banquets during their abode. When Maximillian to those wars addressed
Were Englands Cross on his imperial breast.


Maximillian the Emperor with all his soldiers, which served under king
Henry, wore the Cross of S. George with the Rose on their breasts. And in our
Army let his Eagle fly.


The black Eagle is the badge imperial, which here is used for the displaying
of his ensign or standard. And had his pay from Henry's treasury.


Henry the 8. at his wars in France, retained the Emperor and al his soldiers
in wages, which served under him during those wars, But this alone by Wolseys
wit was wrought,


Thomas Wolsey, the kings Almoner, then Bishop of Lincoln, a man of great
authority with the king, and afterward Cardinal, was the chief cause that
the Lady Mary was married to the old French King, with whom the French had
dealt underhand to befriend him in that match. When the proud Dolphin for thy
valor sake,
Chose thee at tilt his Princely part to take.


Frauncis Duke of Valoyes, and Dolphin of France, at the marriage of the Lady
Mary, in honor thereof proclaimed a Iusts, where he chose the Duke of
Suffolk, and the Marquis Dorset for his aids, at all martial exercises.
Galeas, and Bounarme, matchless for their might,


This County Galeas at the Iusts ran a course with a spear, which was at the
head five inches square on every side, and at the But nine inches square,
whereby he showed his wo^drous force and strength. This Bounarme, a Gentleman of
France, at the same time came into the field armed at all points with ten
Spears about him: in each stirrup three, under each thigh one, one under his
left arm, and one in his hand, and putting his horse to the careere, never
stopped him till he had broken every staff. Hall.


Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, to Mary the French Queen.
But that thy faith commands me to forbear,
The fault thine own, if I impatient were;
Were my dispatch such as should be my speed,
I should want time thy loving lines to reed,
Here in the Court, Camelion-like I fare,
And as that creature feed, upon the air,
All day I wait, and all the night I watch,
And starve mine ears to hear of thy dispatch;
If Dover were th'Abydos of my rest,
Or pleasant Call(...)ce were my Mary's Cest,
Thou should not need, fair Queen, to blame me so,
Did not the distance to desire say no:
Noted ous night from travel should be free,
T^ll through the wanes, with swimming unto thee,
A snowy path I made unto thy Bay,
So bright as is that Nectar-stained way
The restless sun by traveling does wear,
Passing his course to finish up the year.
But Paris locks my love within the maine,
And London yet my Brandon does detain,
Of thy firm love thou putst me still in mind,
But of my faith, not one word can I find.
When Longauile to Mary was affide,
And thou by him wast made King Jews bride,
How often I wished that thou a prize might be,
That I in arms might combat him for thee,
And in the madness of my love distraught,
A thousand times his murder have sore thought,
But that th'all-seeing powers which sit a(...),
Regard not mad men's oaths, nor faults in love,
And have confirmde it by the grant of heaven,
That Lovers sins on earth should be forgiven;
For never than is half so much distressed,
As he that loves to see his love possessed.
Coming to Richmond after thy depart
(Richmond where first thou stolst away my heart)
Me thought it look not as it did of late,
But wanting thee ^or lo^ne and desolate,
In whose fair walks thou often have bin seen,
To sport with Katharine, Henry's beauteous Queen,
Ast^nishing sad winter with thy sight,
As for thy sake, the day has put back night;
That the small birds, as in the pleasant spring,
Forgot themselves, and have begun to sing:
So often I go by Thames, so often return,
Me thinks for thee the river yet does mourn,
Who I have seen to let her stream at large,
Which like a handmaid waited on thy Barge;
And if thou hapst against the flood to row,
Which way it ebd, it presently would flow,
Weeping in drops upon thy laboring oars,
For joy that it had got thee from the shoares.
The Swans with music that the Roothers make,
Ruffing their plumes, come gliding on the lake,
As the fleet Dolphins by Arion^ strings,
Were brought to land with their sweet rauishings,
The flocks and h^irdes that pasture near the flood,
To gaze upon thee, have forborne their food,
And sat down sadly mourning by the brim,
That they by nature were not made to swim.
Whenas the Post to Englands royal Court,
Of thy hard passage brought the true report,
How in a storm thy well rigd ships were tossed,
And thou thy self in danger to be lost,
I knew it was Venus loathed that aged bed,
Where beauty so should be dishonored;
Or fearde the Sea-Nimphs haunting of the lake,
If thou but seen, their Goddess should forsake.
And whirling round her Doue-drawne Coach about,
To view the Navy now in lanching out,
Her ayrie mantle loosely does unbind,
Which fanning forth a rougher gale of wind,
Wafted thy sails with speed unto the land,
And runs thy ship on Bullins harboring strand.
How should I joy of thy arrive to hear?
But as a poor seafaring passenger,
After long travail, tempest-torne and wracked,
By some vnpitting Pirat that is sacked;
Hears the false robber that has stolen his wealth,
Landed in some safe harbor, and in health,
Enriched with invaluable store,
For which he long has travailed before.
When thou to Abuile heldst the appointed day,
We heard how Jews met thee on the way;
Where thou in glittering Tissue strangely dight,
Appear'dst unto him like the Queen of light,
In cloth of silver all thy virgin train,
In beauty sumptuous as the Northern waine;
And thou alone the foremost glorious star,
Which lead'st the teame of that great Wagoner.
What could thy thought be, but as I do think,
When thine eyes tasted what mine ears did drink?
A cripple King laid bedridden long before,
Yet at thy coming crept out of the door,
It Was well he rid, he had no legs to go,
But this thy beauty forced his body to;
For whom a cullice had more fitter been,
Then in a golden bed a gallant Queen.
To use thy beauty as the miser gold,
Which hoards it up but only to behold,
Still looking on it with a jealous eye,
Fearing to lend, yet loving usury;
O Sacrilege (if beauty be divine)
The profane hand should touch the hallowed shrine.
To (...) sickness on the sound man's diet;
To rob content yet still to live unquiet;
And having all, to be of all beguild,
And yet still longing like a little child.
When Marquis Dorset and the valiant Graies,
To purchase fame first crossed the narrow Seas,
With all the Knights that my associates went,
In honor of thy nuptial turnament;
Think thou I joyed not in thy beauties pride,
When thou in triumph did through Paris ride?
Where all the streets as thou did pace along,
With Arras, Bisse, and Tapestry were hung;
Ten thousand gallant Citizens prepared,
In rich at^ire thy princely self to guard;
Next them, three thousand choice (...)igious men,
In golden vestments followed on again;
And in procession as they came along,
With Hymeneus sang thy marriage song.
Then five great Dukes as did their places fall,
To each of these, a princely Cardinal,
Then thou on thy imperial Chariot set,
Crowned with a rich imperled Coronet,
Whilst the Persian dames, as thy train past,
Their precious incence in abundance cast.
As Cinthia from the waue-embatteld shrowdes,
Opening the West, comes streaming through the clouds,
With shining troops of siluer-tressed stars,
Attending on her as her torch-bearers,
And all the lesser lights about her throne,
With admiration stand as lookers on;
Whilst she alone in height of all her pride,
The Queen of light, along her sphere does glide,
When on thy tilt my horse like thunder came,
No other signal had I but thy name;
Thy voice my trumpet, and my guide thine eyes,
And but thy beauty, I esteemde no prize.
That large-(...)d Almaine of the Giants race,
Which bare strength on his breast, fear in his face,
Whose sinewde arms, with his steele-temperd blade,
Through plate and male such open passage made,
Upon whose might the Frenchmens glory lay,
And all the hope of that victorious day;
Thou sawe'st thy Brandon beat him on his knee,
Offering his shield a conquered spoil to thee.
But thou will say perhaps I vainly boast,
And tell thee thee which thou already know.
No sacred Queen, my valor I deny,
It was thy beauty, not my chivalry;
One of thy tressed curles which falling down,
As loath to be imprisoned in thy crown,
I saw the soft air sportiuely to take it,
To diverse shapes and sundry forms to make it,
Now parting it to four, to three, to twain,
Now twisting it, and then untwist again;
Then make the thrids to dally with thine eye,
A sunny candle for a golden fly.
At length from thence one little tear it got,
Which falling down as though a star had shot,
My vp-turnde eye pursues it with my sight,
The which again redoubleth all my might.
It Is but in vain of my descent to boast,
When heavens lamp shines, all other lights be lost,
Faulcons gaze not, the Eagle sitting by,
Whose brood suruaies the sun with open eye;
Else might my blood find issue from his force,
In Bosworth plain beat Richard from his horse,
Whose puissant arms, great Richmond chose to wield,
His glorious colors in that conquering field;
And with his sword in his dear Sovereigns fight,
To his last breath, stood fast in Henry's right;
Then beauteous Empress, think this safe delay,
Shall be the even to a joyful day;
Foresight does still on all advantage lie,
Wisemen must give place to necessity;
To put back ill, our good we must forbear,
Better first fear, then after still to fear.
It Were ouer-sight in that at which we aim,
To put the hazard on an after-game;
With patience then let us our hopes attend,
And till I come, receive these lines I send.
Notes of the Chronicle-Historie.
When Longauile to Mary was affied.
THe Duke of Longauile, which was prisonet in England upon the peace to be
concluded between England and France, was delivered, and married the Princess
Mary, for Jews the French King his Master. How in a storm thy well rigged
ships were tossed,
And thou, etc.


As the Queen sailed for France, a mighty storm arose at sea, so that the
Navy was in great danger, and was severed, some driven upon the coast of
Flanders, some on Britain: the ship wherein the Queen was, was driven into
the haven at Bullen with very great danger. When thou to Abuile heldst
the appointed day.


King Jews met her by Abuile, near to the Forest of Arders, and brought her
into Abuile with great solemnity. Appear'dst unto him like the Queen of light.


Expressing the sumptuous attire of the Queen and her train, attended by the
chief of the Nobility of England, with 36. Ladies, al in cloth of silver,
their horses trapped with crimson velvet. A cripple King laid bedridden long
before.


King Jews was a man of great years troubled much with the gowt, so that he
had long time before little use of legs. When Marquis Dorset, and the valiant
Graies,


The Duke of Suffolk when the proclamation came into England, of iusts to be
holden in France at Paris, he for the Queens sake his Mistress, obtained of the
King to go thither: with whom went the Marquess Dorset and his four brothers,
the Lord Clinton, Sir Edward Neuell, Sir Giles Chapel, Tho: Cheyney, which
went all over with the Duke as his assistants. When thou in triumph did
through Paris ride.


A true description of the Queens entering into Paris, after her coronation
performed at S. Dennis. Then five great Dukes as did their places fall.


The Dukes of Alansoon, Burbon, Vandome, Longauile, Suffolk, with five
Cardinals. That large-limd Almaine of the Giants race.


Francis Valoys, the Dolphin of France, envying the glory that the Englishmen
had obtained at the Tilt, brought in an Almaine secretly, a man thought almost
of incomparable strength, which encountered Charles Brandon at Barriers, but the
Duke grapling with him, so beat him about the head with the pumell of his
sword, that the blood came out of the sight of his Caske. Else might my blood
find issue from his force.
In Bosworth, etc.


Sir William Brandon Standard Bearer to the Earl of Richmond, (after Henry the
7.) at Bosworth field, a brave and gallant Gentleman, who was slain by Richard
there; this was father to this Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk.

FINIS.
To my most dear friend Master Henry Lucas, son to Edward Lucas Esquire.
SIR, to none have I been more beholding, then to your kind parents, for (I
must truly confess) above the measure of my deserts: Many there be in England
of whom for some particularity I might justly challenge greater merit had I not
been borne in so evil an hour, as to be poisoned with that gaul of
ingratitude: to your self am I engaged for many more courtesies then I imagined
could ever have been found in one of so few years: nothing do I more desire,
then that those hopes of your toward and virtuous youth, may prove so pure in
the fruit, as they are fair in the bloome: long may you live to their comfort
that love you most, and may I ever wish you the increase of all good fortunes.

Yours ever, Mich: Drayton.

Henry Howard Earl of Surrey to Geraldine
The Argument.
Henry Howard, that true noble Earl of Surrey, and excellent Poet, falling in
love with Geraldine, descended of the noble family of the Fitzgeralds of
Ireland, a fair and modest Lady, and one of the honorable maids to Queen
Katherine Dowager: eternizeth her praises in many excellent Poemes, of rare and
sundry inventions: and after some few years being determined to see that
famous Italy, the source and Helicon of all excellent Arts; first visits that
renowned Florence, from whence the Geralds challenge their descent, from the
ancient family of the Geraldi; there in honor of his Mistress be aduanceth
her picture, and challenges to maintain her beauty by deeds of Arms,
against all that durst appear in the lists; where after the proof of his
brave and incomparable valor, whose arm crowned her beauty with eternal
memory, he writes this Epistle to his dearest Mistress.

FRom learned Florence (long time rich in fame)
From whence thy race, thy noble grandsires came,
To famous England, the kind nurse of mine,
Thy Surrey sends to heavenly Geraldine;
Yet let not Thuscan think I do her vvrong,
That I from thence write in my native tongue,
That in these harsh-tun'd cadences I sing,
Sitting so near the Muses sacred spring,
But rather think her self adorned thereby,
That England reads the praise of Italy.
Though to the Thuscan, I the smoothnes grant,
Our dialect no Majesty does want,
To set thy praises in as hie a key,
As France, or Spain, or Germany, or they.
That day I quit the Fore-land of fair Kent,
And that my ship her course for Flanders bent;
Yet think I with how many a heavy look,
My leave of England and of thee I took,
And did entreat the tide (if it might be)
But to convey me one sigh back to thee,
Up to the deck a billow lightly skips,
Taking my sigh, and down again it slips;
Into the gulf it self, it headlong throws,
And as a post to England-ward it goes;
As I sit wondering how the rough seas stird,
I might far off perceive a little bird,
Which as she feign from shore to shore would fly
Has lost her self in the broad vastie sky,
Her feeble wing beginning to deceive her,
The s^a^ of life still gaping to bereave her;
Unto the ship she makes which she discouers,
And there (poor fool) a while for refuge houers,
And when at length her flagging pinion fails
Panting she hangs upon the rattling sails,
And being forced to loose her hold with pain,
Yet beaten off, she straight lights on again,
And tosst with flaws, with storms, with wind, with wether,
Yet still departing thence, still turns thither,
Now with the poope, now with the prow does bear,
Now on this side, now that, now here, now there,
Me thinks these storms should be my sad depart,
The seely helpless bird is my poor bart,
The ship, to which for succor it repaires,
That is your self (regardlesse of my cares)
Of every surge does fall, or wave does rise,
To some one thing I sit and moralize.
When for thy love I left the Belgicke shore,
Divine Erasmus, and our famous Moore,
Whose happy presence gave me such delight;
As made a minute of a winters night;
With whom a while I staide at Roterdame;
Now so renowned by Erasmus name.
Yet every hour did seem a world of time;
Till I had seen that soule-reuiuing clime,
And thought the foggy Netherlands unfit,
A watery soil to clogge a fiery wit;
And as that wealthy Germany I past,
Coming unto the Emperors court at last,
Great learnd Agrippa, so profound in Art,
Who the infernal secrets does impart,
When of thy health I did desire to know,
Me in a glass my Geraldine did show,
Sick in thy bed, and for thou could not sleep,
By a wax tap^r set thy light to keep;
I do remember thou did read that Ode,
Sent back whilst I in Thanet made abode,
Where as thou came unto the word of love,
Even in thine eyes I saw how passion strove;
That snowy lawne which covered thy bed,
Me thought looked white, to see thy cheek so red,
Thy rosy cheek often changing in my sight,
Yet still was red, to see the lawne so white;
The little Taper which should give thee light,
Me thought waxt dim, to see thy eye so bright;
Thine eye again supplies the Tapers turn,
And with his beams does make the taper burn,
The shrugging air about thy Temple hurles,
And wraps thy breath in little clowded curles,
And as it does ascend it strait does ceaze it,
And as it sinks, it presently does raise it;
Can thou by sickness banish beauty so?
Which if put from thee, knows not where to go,
To make her shift, and for her succor seek,
To every riueld face, each bankrupt cheek,
If health preserved, thou beauty still do cherish,
If that neglected, beauty soon does perish.
Care draws on care, woe comforts woe again,
Sorrow breeds sorrow, one grief brings forth twain,
If live or die, as thou do, so do I,
If live, I live, and if thou die, I die,
One heart, one love, one joy, one grief, one troth,
One good, one ill, one life, one death to both,
If Howards blood, thou holdst as but too vile,
Or not esteemst of Norsfolkes Princely style,
If Scotlands coat no mark of fame can lend,
That Lion placde in our bright silver bend,
Which as a trophie beautifies our shield,
Since Scottish blood discolored Floden field;
When the proud Cheuiot our brave Ensign bear,
As a rich jewel in a Ladies hair,
And did fair Bramstons neighboring valies choke,
With clouds of Canons, fire disgorged smoke,
Or Surreys Earledom insufficient be,
And not a dower so well contenting thee;
Yet am I one of great Apollos heirs,
The sacred Muses challenge me for theirs.
By Princes, my immortal lines are sung,
My flowing verses graced with every tung;
The little children when they learn to go,
By painful mothers daded to and fro,
Are taught by s^gred numbers to ^^hea^s^,
And have their sweet-lips seasoned with my verse;
When heaven would strive to do the best it can,
And put an Angels spirit into a man;
The utmost power in that great work does spend,
When to the world a Poet it does intend,
That little difference twixt the Gods and us,
(By them confirmed) distinguished only thus;
Whom they in birth, ordain to happy days,
The Gods commit their glory to our praise,
To eternal life when they dissolve their breath,
We likewise share a second power by death:
When time shall turn those Amber colors to gray,
My verse again shall guild and make them gay,
And trick them up in knotted curles anew,
And in the Autumn give a Summers hew;
That sacred power, that in my Ink remains,
Shall put fresh blood into thy withered veins,
And on thy red decayed, thy whitenes dead,
Shall set a white, more white, a red, more red;
When thy dim sight thy glass cannot descry.
Thy crazed mirror cannot see thine eye;
My verse to tell, what eye, what mirror was,
Glass to thine eye, an eye unto thy glass,
Where both thy mirror and thine eye shall see,
What once thou sawst, in that, that saw in thee,
And to them both shall tell the simple truth,
What that in pureness was, what thou in youth.
If Florence once should loose her old renown,
As famous Athens, now a fisher town,
My lines for thee a Florence shall erect,
Which great Apollo ever shall protect,
And with the numbers from my pen that falls,
Bring marble mines to re-erect those walls;
Nor beauteous Stanhope, whom all tongues report,
To be the glory of the English Court,
Shall by our nation be so much admirde,
If ever Surrey truly were inspirde.
And famous Wyat, who in numbers sings,
To that enchanting Thracian harpers strings,
To whom Phoebus (the Poets god) did drink,
A bowl of Nectar filld unto the brinke,
And sweet-tongd Bryan, (whom the Muses kept,
And in his Cradle rockt him whilst he slept,)
In sacred verses (so divinely pend)
Upon thy praises ever shall attend.
What time I came unto this famous town,
And made the cause of my arrival known,
Great Medices a list (for triumphs) built,
Within the which, upon a ^ree of gilt,
With thousand sundry rare devises set,)
I did erect thy lovely counterfeit,
To answer those Italian dames desire,
Which daily came thy beauty to admire.
By which my lion in his gaping jaws
Holds my lance, and in his dreadful paws,
Reaches my gauntlet unto him that dare
A beauty with my Geraldines compare.
Which when each manly valiant arm assaies,
After so many brave triumphant days,
The glorious prize upon my lance I bare,
By Heralds voice proclaimde to be thy share;
The shiuered staves here for thy beauty broke,
with fierce encounters past at every shocke,
when stormy courses answered cuffe for cuffe,
Denting proud Beuers with the counter-buffe,
Upon an altar burnt with holy flame,
And sacrifi^de as ensence to thy fame.
Where, as the Phoenix from her spiced f^me,
Renues herself in that she does consume;
So from these sacred ashes live we both,
Even as that one Arabian wonder does.
When to my chamber I my self retire,
Burnt with the sparks that kindled all this fire,
Thinking of England which my hope contains,
The happy I Will where Geraldine remains,
Of Hunsdon, where those sweet celestial eyne,
At first did pierce this tender breast of mine;
Of Hampton Court, and Windsore, where abound
All pleasures that in Paradise werefound;
Near that fair Castle is alittle grove,
With hanging rocks all covered from above,
Which on the bancke of lovely Thames does stand,
Clipped by the water from the other land,
whose bushy top does bid the Sun for bear,
And checkes those provvde beams that would enter there,
whose leaves still muttring as the air does breathe;
with the svveet bubling of the stream beneathe,
Does rock the senses (whilst the small birds sing,)
Lulled asleep with gentle murmuring,
where light-soote Fairies sport at prison base,
No doubt there is some power frequents the place,
There the soft poplar and smoothe beech do bear,
Our names together carved every where,
And Gordian knots do curiously entwine,
The names of Henry, and of Geraldine.
Olet this Grove in happy times to come,
Be called, The Lovers blessde Elysium,
Whither my Mist^is wonted to resort,
In summers heat in pleasant shades to sport,
A thousand sundry names I have it given,
And called it Wonder-hider, Couer-heauen,
The roof where Beauty her rich Court does keep,
Under whose compass all the Stars do sleep.
There is one tree which now I call to mind,
Does bear these verses carved in his rind:
When Geraldine shall sit in thy fair shade,
Fan her sweet tresses with perfumed air,
Let thy large bonghes a Canopie be made,
To keep the Sun from gazing on my fair,
And when thy spredding braunched arms be suncke,
And thou no sap nor pith shall more retain,
Even from the dust of thy unwieldy Truncke,
I will renew thee Phoenix like again,
And from thy dry decayed root will bring,
Anew-borne Stem, another Aesons spring.
I find no cause, nor judge I reason why
My country should give place to Lombardy,
As goodly flowers on Thamisis do grow,
As beautify the banks of wanton Po;
As many Nymphs as haunt rich Arnus strand,
By silver Sabrine tripping hand in hand,
Our shades as sweet, though not to us so dear,
Because the sun has greater power here.
This distant place but gives me greater woe,
Far off, my sighs the farther have to go,
Ah absence! why thus should thou seem so long?
Or wherefore should thou offer Time such wrong?
Summer so soon, should steal on winters cold,
Or winters blasts, so soon make summer old?
Love did us both with one self arrow strike,
Our wounds both one, our cure should be the like,
Except thou have found out some mean by art,
Some powrefull medicine to withdraw the darte,
But mine is fixed, and absents physic proved,
It sticks too fast, it cannot be removed.
Adieu, adieu, from Florence when I go,
By my next letters Geraldine shall know,
Which if good fortune shall my course direct,
From Venice by some messenger exspect,
Till when, I leave thee to thy hearts desire,
By him that lives thy virtues to admire.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
From learned Florence, long time rich in fame.
FLorence a City of Thuscan, standing upon the River Arnus, (celebrated by
Dante Petrarch, and other the most noble wits of Italy) was the original of
the family, out of which this Geral line did spring, as Ireland the place of
her birth, which is intimated by these verses of the Earl of Surrey.

From Thuscan came my Ladies worthy race,
Fair Florence was sometime her ancient seat,
The Western I Will, whose pleasant shore does face
Wild Cambers cliffs, did give her lively heat.
Great learned Agrippa, so profound in Art.
Cornelius Agrippa, a man in his time so famous for Magic (which the books
published by him, concerning that argument, do partly prove) as in this place
needs no further remembrance. Howbeit, as those abstruse and gloomy Arts are
but illusions: so in the honor of so rare a Gentleman as this Earl, (and
therewithal so noble a Poet) (a quality, by which his other titles receive
their greatest luster) invention may make somewhat more bold with Agrippa above
the barren truth. That Lion set in our bright silver bend.


The blazon of the Howards honorable armor, was Gules between six crosselets
Fitches abend Argent, to which afterward was added by atchieuement, In the
Canton point of the bend an escutcheon, or within the Scottish tressure, a
Demi-lion rampant Gules, etc. as Master Camden now Clerenceaulx from
authority notes. Never shall time nor bitter envy be able to obscure the
brightness of so great a victory as that, for which this addition was
obtained. The Historian of Scotland George Bucchanan reports, that the Earl
of Surrey gave for his badge a Silver Lion, (which from antiquity belonged to
that name) tearing in pieces A Lion prostrate Gules; and withal, that this
which he terms insolency, was punished in him and his posterity, as if it
were fatal to the Conqueror, to do his Sovereign such loyal service as a
thousand such severe censurers were never able to perform. Since Scottish
blood discolored Floden field.


The batttle was fought at Bramstone near Floden hill, being a part of the
Cheuiot, a mountain that exceeds all the mountains in the North of England
for bigness, in which the wilful perjury of James the fifth was punished
from heaven by the Earl of Surrey, being left by King Henry the eight (then in
France before Turwin) for the defense of his Realm. Nor beauteous Stanhope,
whom all tongues report
To be the glory, etc.


Of the beauty of that Lady, he himself testifies in an Elegy which he writ
of her, refusing to dance with him, which he seems to alegorize under a
Lion and a Wolf. And of himself he says: A Lion saw I late, as white as any
snow,


And of her.

I might perceive a Wolf as white as Whales bone,
A fairer beast, of fresher hue, beheld I never none,
But that her looks were coy, and froward was her grace.
And famous Wyat who in numbers sings.
Sir Thomas Wyat the elder, a most excellent Poet, as his Poems extant do
witness, besides certain Encomions written by the Earl of Surrey upon some
of David's Psalms, by him translated. What holy grave, what worthy Sepulcher,
To Wyats Psalms shall Christians purchase then.


And afterward upon his death the said Earl writes thus:

What virtues rare were tempred in thy breast?
Honor that England such a jewel bred,
And kiss the ground whereas thy corpse did rest.
At Honsdon, where those sweet cel-stiall eyne,
It is manifest by a Sonnet written by this noble Earl, that the first time he
beheld his Lady, was at Hunsdon. Hunsdon did first present her to mine eyne.


Which Sonnet being altogether a description of his love, I do allege in
diverse places of this gloss, as proofs of what I write. Of Hampton Court and
Windsor, where abound
All pleasures, etc.


That he enjoyed the presence of his fair and virtuous Mistress, in those two
places, by reason of Queen Katherines usual abode there, (on whom this Lady
Geraldine was attending) I prove by these verses of his: Hampton me tanght to
wish her first for mine,
Windsor alas does chase me from her sight.


And in another Sonnet following: When Winsor walls sustainde my wearied arm,
My hand my chin, to ease my restless head.


And that his delight might draw him to compare Winsor to Paradise, an Elegy
may prove, where he remembers his passed pleasures in that place. With a Kings
son my childish years I passed,
In greater feast then Priams son of Troy.


And again in the same Elegy;

Those large green Courts, where we were wont to roue
With eyes cast up unto the maidens Tower,
With easy sighs, such as men draw in love.
And again in the same: The stately seats, the Ladies bright of hue,
The dances short, long tales of sweet delight.


And for the pleasantness of the place, these verses of his may testify in
the same Elegy before recited. The secret groves which we have made resound,
With silver drops the meads yet spread for ruth.


As goodly flowers from Thamisis do grow, etc.
I had thought in this place not to have spoken of Thames, being so often
remembered by me before, in sundry other places on this occasion: but thinking
of that excellent Epigram, which, as I judge, either to be done by the said
Earl, or Sir Frauncis Brian: for the worthiness thereof I will here insert,
which, as it seems to me, was compiled at the Authors being in Spain.

Tagus farewell, which Westward with thy streams,
Turn'st up the grains of gold already tried,
For I withspur and sail go seek the Thames,
Against the Sun that shows her wealthy pride;
And to the town that Brutus sought by dreams,
Like bended Moon that leanes her lusty side,
To seek my Country now, for whom I live,
O mighty Jove, for this the winds me give.
FINIS.
Geraldine to Henry Howard Earl of Surrey.
SVch greeting as the noble Surrey sends,
The same to thee thy Geraldine commends;
A maidens thoughts do check my trembling hand,
On other terms, or complements to stand,
Which (might my speech be as my heart affords)
Should come attired in far richer words;
But all is one, my faith as firm shall prove,
As hers that makes the greatest show of love.
In Cupids School I never read those books.
whose lectures oftvve practice in our looks,
Nor ever did suspicions rival eye,
Yet lie in wait my favors to epsy,
My virgin thoughts are innocent and meek,
As the chaste blushes sitting on my cheek:
As in a fever I do shiuer yet,
Since first my pen was to the paper set.
If I do err, you know my sex is weak,
Fear proves a fault, where maids are forced to speak;
Do I not ill? ah sooth me not herein,
O, if I do, reprove me of my sin,
Chide me infaith, or if my fault you hide,
My tongue will teach my self, my self to chide.
Nay noble Surrey, blot it if thou will,
Then too much boldness should return my guilt;
For that should be even from our selves concealde,
Which is disclosde, if to our thoughts reuealde,
For the least motion, more the smallest breath,
That may impeach our modesty, is death;
The page that brought thy letters to my hand,
(Me thinks) should marvel at my strange demand,
For till he blushed I did not yet epsy,
The nakedness of my immodestie,
Which in my face he greater might have seen,
But that my sanne I quickly put between;
Yet scarcely that my inward guilt could hide,
Fear seeing all, fears it of all espide.
Like to a taper lately burning bright,
Now wanting matter to maintain his light.
The blaze ascending forced by the smoke,
Living by that which seeks the same to choke;
The flame still hanging in the air, does burn,
Until drawn down, it back again return.
Then clear, then dim, then spreads, and then closes,
Now gets strength, and now his brightness loses.
As well the best discerning eye may doubt,
Whether it yet be in, or whether out:
Thus in my cheek my diverse passions showed,
Now ashy pale, and now again it glowed;
If in your verse there be a power to move,
It Is you alone, who are the cause I love,
It Is you bewitch my bosom by mine ear,
Unto that end I did not place you there.
Airs to assuage the bloody soldiers mind,
Poor women, we are naturally kind.
Perhaps you will think that I these terms enforce,
For that in Court this kindness is of course,
Or that it is that honny-steeped gall,
We often are said to bait our loves withal,
That in one eye we carry strong desire,
The other drops which quickly quench the fire;
Ah, what so false can Envy speak of us,
But shall find some too vainly credulous?
I do not so, and to add proof thereto,
I love in faith, in faith sweet Lord I do;
Nor let the envy of enuenom'd tongues,
Which still is grounded on poor Ladies wrongs,
Thy noble breast diasterly possess,
By any doubt to make my love the less:
My house from Florence I do not pretend,
Nor from Giraldi claim I to descend,
Nor hold those honors insufficient are,
That I receive from Desmond or Kyldare;
Nor add I greater worth unto my blood,
Than Irish milk to give me infant food,
Nor better air will ever boast to breathe,
Then that of Lemster, Mounster, or of Meathe,
Nor crave I other foreign far alies,
Then Windsor or Fitz-geralds families.
It is enough to leave unto my heirs,
If they will but acknowledge me for theires.
To what place ever did the Court remove,
But that the house gives matter to my love,
At Windsor still I see thee sit and walk,
There mount thy Courser, there devise, there talk:
The roabes, the garter, and the state of Kings,
Into my thoughts thy hoped greatness brings;
Non such, the name imports (me thinks) so much,
None such as thou, nor as my Lord, none such,
In Hamptons great magnificence I find,
The lively image of thy princely mind,
Fair Richmonds Towers like goodly pillars stand,
Rearde by the power of thy victorious hand;
White-halls triumphing galleries are yet
Adornde with rich devises of thy wit,
In Greenewich yet as in a glass I view,
Where last thou badst thy Geraldine adieu,
With every little gentle breath that blows,
How are my thoughts confusde with joys and woes,
As through a gate, so through my longing ears,
Pass to my heart whole multitudes of fears;
O in a map that I might see thee show,
The place where now in danger thou do go!
Whilst we discourse to travail with our eye,
Romania, ruscaine, and fair Lumbardy,
Or with thy pen exactly to set down,
The model of that Tempell, or that Town,
And to relate at large where thou have been,
And there, and there, and what thou there have seen.
Or to describe by figure of thy hand,
There Naples lies, and there does Florence stand;
Or as the Grecians finger dipped in wine,
Drawing a River in a little line,
And with a drop, a gulf to figure out,
To model Venice moted round about;
Then adding more, to counterfeit a Sea,
And draw the front of stately Genoa.
These from thy lips were like harmonious tones,
Which now do found like Mandrakes dreadful groans.
Some travel hence to enrich their minds with skill,
Leave here their good, and bring home others ill:
Which seem to like all Countries but their own,
Affecting most where they the least are known.
Their leg, their thigh, their back, their neck, their head,
As they had been in several Countries bred;
In their attire, their jesture, and their gate,
Fond in each one, in all Italionate.
So well in all deformity in fashion,
Borrowing a limb on every several Nation,
And nothing more then England hold in scorn,
So live as strangers where as they were borne.
But thy return in this I do not reed,
Thou art a perfect Gentleman indeed;
O God forbid that Howards noble line,
From ancient virtue should so far decline,
The Muses train (whereof your self are chief)
Only with me participate their grief:
To sooth their humors, I do lend them ears,
He gives a Poet, that his verses hears,
Till thy return, by hope they only live;
Yet had they all, they all away would give:
The world and they, so ill according be,
That wealth and Poets never can agree.
Few live in Court that of their good have care,
The Muses friends are every where so rare;
Some praise thy worth (that it did never know,)
Only because the better sort do so,
Whose judgment never further does extend,
Then it does please the greatest to commend,
So great an ill upon desert does chance,
When it does pass by beastly ignorance.
Why art thou slack whilst no man puts his hand
To raise the mount where Surreys towers must stand*
Or who the groundsill of that work does lay
Whilst like a wandrer thou abroad do stray?
Clipped in the arms of some lascivious dame,
When thou should rear an ^^on to thy name.
When shall the Muses by fair Norwhich dvvell,
To be the City of the learned Well?
Or Phoebus altars there with incense heapt,
As once in Cyrrha, or in Thebe kept?
Or when shall that fair hoofe-plowd spring distill
From great mount Surrey, out of Leonards hill;
Till thou return, the Court I will exchange
For some poor cottage, or some country Grange,
Where to our distaues as we sit and spin,
My maid and I will tell of things have bin,
Our Lutes vnstrung shall hang upon the wall,
Our lessons serve to wrap our Towe withal,
And pass the night, whiles winter tales we tell,
Of many things that long ago befell;
Or tune such homely Carrols as were sung
In Country sports when we our selves were yung.
In pretty R^ddles to bewray our loves,
In questions, purpose, or in drawing gloves.
The nob est spirits to virtue most inclind,
These here in Court thy greatest want do find.
Other there be, on which we feed our eye,
Like Arras work or such like Imagerie;
Many of us desire Queen Katherines state,
^ut very few her virtues imitate.
Then, as Vlyffes wife write I to thee,
Make no reply, but come thy self to me.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Then Windsore, or Fitzgeralds families.
THE cost of many Kings, which from time to time have adorned the Castle at
Windsor with their princely magnificence, ^at^ made it more noble then that it
need to he spoken of now, as though obscure, and I hold it more meet to
refer you to our (...) monuments for the founders and finishers thereof, then
to meddle with matter nothing near to the purpose. As for the family of the
Fitzgerald, of whence this excellent Lady was line^lly descended, the original
was English, though the branches did pr^^d themselves into distant places and
names nothing co^sonant, (...) in former times it was usual to denominate
themselves of their ^nanours o^ ^orenames: as may partly appear in that which
en^u^th the light whereof proceeded from my learned and very (...) friend,
Master Francis Thin, Walter of Windsor, the ^onne of Oterus, had issue
William, of whom Henry now Lord Windsor is descended, and Robert of Windsor, of
whom Robert the now Earl of Essex, and Gerald of Windsor his third son, who
married the daughter of R^es the great Prince of Wales, of whom came Nesta,
para^our to Henry the first. Which Gerald had issue Maurice Fitzgerald,
auncestor to Thomas Fitz-maurice, Justice of Ireland buried at Trayly; leaving
issue John his eldest son, first Earl of Kildare, ancestor to Geraldine, and
Maurice his second son, first earl of Des^oond. To raisethe mount where
Surreys Towers must stand,


Alludeth to the sumptuous house which was afterward builded by him upon
Leonards hill right against Norwich, which in the rebellion of Norffolke under
Ket, inking Edward the 6. time, was much defaced by that impure rabble.
Betwixt the hill and the City, as Alexander Neuill describes it, the river of
Yarmouth runs, having West and South thereof a wood, and a little Village
called Thorpe, and on the North, the pastures of Mousholl, which contains
about six miles in length and breadth. So that besides the stately greatness of
Mount-Surrey, which was the houses name: the prospect and site thereof was
passing pleasant and commodious; and no where else did that increasing evil of
the Norffolke fury enk^nnell it self but then there, as it were for a
manifest token of their intent, to debase all high things, and to prophaneall
holy. Like Arras work, or other imagerie.


Such was he whom ^^uenall taxes in this manner.

-- truncoque similimus Hermae
Nullo quippe al^o vineis discrimine quamquod,
Illi marmoreum caput est, tua v^^it image.
Being to be borne for nothing else but apparel and the outward appearance,
entitled Complement, with whom theridiculous fable of the Ape in Esope sorteth
fitly, who coming into a Caruers house, and viewing many Marble works, took
up the head of a man very cunningly wrought, who greatly in praising did seem
to pity it, that having so comely an outside, it had nothing within, like
empty figures walk and talk in every place, at whom the noble Geraldine
modestly glanceth.

Finis.
To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Francis Goodere, wife to sir Henry Goodere,
Knight.
MY very gracious and good Mistress, the love and duty I bare unto your father
whilst he lived, now after his decease is to your hereditarie; to whom by the
blessing of your birth he left his virtues. Who bequeathed you those which were
his, gave you whatsoever good is mine, as devoted to his, he being gone, whom
I honored so much whilst he lived; which you may justly challenge by all
laws of thankfulness. My self having been a witness of your excellent
education, and mild disposition (as I may say) ever from your Cradle, dedicate
this Epistle of this virtuous and godly Lady to your self; so like her in all
perfection, both of wisdom and learning, which I pray you accept, till time
shall enable me to leave you some greater monument of my love.

M. Drayton.

The Lady Jane Gray to the Lord Gilford Dudley.
The Argument.
After the death of that virtuous young Prince King Edward the sixth, the son
of that famous King Henry the eight, Jane the daughter of Henry Gray, Duke of
Suffolk by the consent of John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, was proclaimed
Queen of England, being married to Gilford Dudley, the fourth son of the
foresaid Duke of Northumberland; which match was concluded by their ambitious
fathers, who went about by this means, to bring the Crown unto their children
and to dispossess the Princess Mary eldest daughter to King Henry the eight,
heir to King Edward her brother. Queen Mary rising in Arms to claim her
rightful Crown, takes the said Jane Gray and the Lord Gilford her husband,
being lodged in the Tower for their more safety, which place being lastly
their Palace, by this means became their prison, where being severed in
sundry prisons, they write these Epistles one to another.

MIne own dear Lord, since thou art locked from me,
In this disguise my love must steal to thee,
Since to renew all loves, all kindness past,
This refuge scarcely left, yet this the last.
My Keeper coming, I of thee enquire,
Who with thy greeting answers my desire,
Which my tongue willing to return again,
Grief stops my words, and I but strive in vain;
Wherewith amazde, away in haste he goes,
When through my lips, my heart thrusts forth my woes,
Whenas the doors that make a doleful sound,
Drive back my words, that in the noise are drowned,
Which somewhat hushed, the Echo does record,
And twice or thrice reiterates my word;
When like an adverse wind in Isis course,
Against the tide bending his boistrous force;
But when the flood has wrought it self about,
He following on, does headlong thrust it out;
Thus strive my fighes with tears e're they begin,
And breaking out, again sighs drive them in.
A thousand forms present my troubled thought,
Yet prove abortiue when they forth are brought,
The depth of woe with words we hardely sound,
Sorrow is so insensibly profound:
As tears do fall and rise, sighs come and go,
So do these numbers ebb, so do they flow.
These briny tears do make my incke look pale,
My incke clothes tears in this sad mourning veil,
The letters mourners, weep with my dim eye,
The paper pale, grieved at my misery.
Yet miserable our selves, why should we deem,
Since none is so, but in his own esteem?
Who in distress from resolution flies,
Is rightly said, to yield to miseries;
They which begot us, did beget this sin,
They first begun, what did our grief begin,
we tasted not, it was they which did rebel,
Not our offense, but in their fall we fell;
They which a crown would to my Lord have linckt,
All hope of life and liberty extinct;
A subject borne, a Sovereign to have been,
Has made me now, nor subject, nor a Queen.
Ah vile ambition, how do thou deceive us,
which show us heaven and yet in hell do leave us?
Seldom untouched does innocence escape,
when error comes in good counsels shape,
A lawful title countercheckes proud might,
The weakest things become strong props to right.
Then my dear Lord, although affliction grieve us,
Yet let our spotless innocence relieve us.
Death but an acted passion does appear,
where truth gives courage, and the conscience clear,
And let thy comfort thus consist in mine,
That I bear part of whatsoever is thine;
As when we liude untouched with these disgraces,
whenas our kingdom was our dear embraces;
At Durham Palace, where sweet Hymen sang,
whose buildings with our nuptial music rang:
when Prothalamions praisde that happy day,
wherein great Dudley matched with noble Gray,
when they deuisde to lincke by wedlockes band,
The house of Suffolk to Northumberland;
Our fatal Dukedom to your Dukedom bound,
To frame this building on so weak a ground.
For what auailes a lawless usurpation,
which gives a Scepter, but not rules a Nation?
Only the surfeit of a vain opinion,
What gives content, gives what exceedes dominion.
When first mine ears were pierced with the fame,
Of Jane proclaimed by a Princess name,
A sudden fright my trembling heart appalls,
The fear of conscience enters iron walls.
Thrice happy for our fathers had it been,
If what we fearde, they wisely had foreseen,
And kept a mean gate in an humble path,
To have escapde the heavens impetuous wrath,
The true-bred Eagle strongly bears the wind,
And not each bird that is near unto their kind,
That like a King, does from the clouds command,
The fearful foul that moves but near the Land,
Though Mary be from mighty Kings descended,
My blood not from Plantaginet pretended;
My gransire Brandon did our house advance,
By princely Mary, Dowager of France;
The fruit of that fair stock which did combine,
And Yorkes sweet branch with Lancasters entwine,
And in one stalk did happily unite,
The pure vermilion Rose, with purer white;
I the untimely slip of that rich stem,
Whose golden bud brings forth a Diadem.
But oh forgive me Lord, it is not I,
Nor do I boast of this, but learn to die,
Whilst we were as our selves conjoined then,
Nature to nature, now an alien.
The purest blood, polluted is in blood,
Neerenes contemned, if sovereignty withstood;
A Diadem once dazeling the eye,
The day too dark to see affinity;
And where the arm is stretched to reach a Crown,
Friendship is broke, the dearest thing thrown down;
For what great Henry most strove to avoid,
The heavens have built, where earth would have destroide,
And seating Edward on his regal throne,
He gives to Mary, all that was his own,
By death assuring what by life is theirs,
The lawful claim of Henry's lawful he^res.
By mortal laws the bound may be diuorc'd,
But heavens decree by no means can be forced:
That rules the case, when men have all decreed,
Who took him hence, foresaw who should succeed,
For we in vain rely on human laws,
When heaven stands forth to plead the righteous cause,
Thus rule the heavens in their continual course,
That yeeldes to fate, that does not yield to force.
Man's wit does build for time but to devour,
But virtue's free from time and fortunes power;
Then my kind Lord, sweet Gilford be not grieved,
The soul is heavenly, and from heaven relieved;
And as we once have plighted troth together,
Now let us make exchange of minds to either;
To thy fair breast take my resolved mind,
Armde against black despair, and all her kind,
And to my bosom breathe that soul of thine,
There to be made as perfect as is mine;
So shall our faith as firmly be approved,
As I of thee, or thou of me beloved.
This life no life, were thou not dear to me,
Nor this no death, were I not woe for thee.
Thou my dear husband, and my Lord before,
But truly learn to die, thou shall be more.
Now live by prayer, on heaven fix all thy thought,
And surely find, what e're by zeal is sought;
For each good motion that the soul awakes,
A heavenly figure sees, from whence it takes
That sweet resemblance, which by power of kind,
Forms (like it self) an image in the mind,
And in our faith the operations be,
Of that divineness which through that we see;
Which never erres, but accidentally,
By our frail fleshes imbecillitie;
By each temptation ouer-apt to slide,
Except our spirit becomes our bodies guide;
For as these Towers our bodies do enclose
Their prisons, so unto our souls suppose
Our bodies, stopping that celestial light,
As these do hinder our exterior sight;
Whereon death seasing, does discharge the debt,
And us at blessed liberty does set.
Then draw thy forces all unto thy heart,
The strongest fortress of this earthly part,
And on these three let thy assurance lie,
On faith, repentance, and humility;
By which to heaven ascending by degrees,
Persist in prayer upon your bended knees;
Whereon if you assuredly be staide,
You need in peril not to be distnaide,
Which still shall keep you that you shall not fall,
For any peril that you can appall;
The key of heaven thus will^ you, you shall bear,
And grace you guiding, give you entrance there,
And you of those celestial joys possess,
Which mortal tongue's unable to express.
Then thank the heaven, preparing us this room,
Crowning our heads with glorious martiredome,
Before the black and dismal days begin,
The days of all idolatry and sin,
Not suffering us to see that wicked age,
When persecution vehemently shall rage,
When tyranny n^w tortures shall invent,
Inflicting vengeance on the innocent.
Yet heaven forbids, that Mary's womb shall bring,
Englands fair Scepter to a foreign King,
But unto fair Elizabeth shall leave it,
Which broken, hurt, and wounded, shall receive it;
And on her temples having placde the Crown,
Root out the dregs Idolatry has sown;
And Syons glory shall again restore,
Laid ruin, waste, and desolate before;
And from black sinders, and rude heaps of stones,
Shall gather up the Martires sacred bones,
And shall extirpe the power of Rome again,
And cast aside the heavy yoke of Spain.
Farewell sweet Gilford, know our end is near,
Heaven is our home, we are but strangers here.
Let us make haste to go unto the blessed,
Which from these weary worldly labors rest,
And with these lines my dearest Lord I greet thee,
Until in heaven thy Jane again shall meet thee.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
They which beg^t us did beget this si^ne.
Showing the ambition of the two Dukes their Fathers, whose pride was the cause
of the utter overthrow of their children. At Durham Palace where sweet Hymen
sang,
The buildings, etc.


The Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth son to John Dudley Duke of Northumberland,
married the Lady Jane Gray, daughter to the Duke of Suffolk at Durham house in
the Strand. When first mine ears were pierced with the fame,
Of Jane proclaimed by a princes name


Presently upon the death of King Edward, the Lady Jane was taken as Queen,
conveyed by water to the Tower of London for her safety, and after proclaimed
in diverse parts of the realm, as so ordained by king Edwards Letters-pattents,
and his will. My Grandsire Brandon did our house advance
By princely Mary, dowager of France.


Henry Gray, duke of Suffolk, married Frauncis the eldest daughter of Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by the French Queen, by which Frauncis he had this
Lady Jane: this Mary the French Queen, was daughter to king Henry the seventh,
by Elizabeth his Queen, which happy marriage conjoined the two noble families
of Lancaster and York. For what great Henry most strove to avoid,


Noting the distrust that King Henry the eight ever had in the Princess Mary
his daughter, fearing she should alter the state of Religion in the land, by
matching with a stranger, confessing the right that King Henry's issue had to
the Crown. And unto fair Elizabeth shall leave it.


A prophecy of Queen Mary's barrenness, and of the happy and glorious
reign of Queen Elizabeth, her restoring of Religion, the abolishing of the
Romish servitude, and casting aside the yoke of Spain.

Gilford Dudley to Jane Gray.
AS the Swanne singing at his dying hour,
So I reply from my imprisning tower:
O could there be that power but in my verse,
To express the grief my wounded heart does pierce!
The very walls that straightly thee enclose,
Would surely weep at reading of my woes;
Let your eyes lend, I Will pay you every tear,
And give you intrest, if you do forbear,
Drop for a drop, and if you will needs have lone,
I will repay you franckly, two for one.
Perhaps you will think (your sorrows to appease)
That words of comfort fitter were than these:
True, and in you when such perfection lives,
As in most grief most comfort always gives:
And think not (Jane) that cowardly I faint,
To beg man's mercy by my sad complaint,
That death so much my courage can control,
At the departing of my living roll.
For if one life a thousand lives could be,
All those too few to consummate with thee,
When thou this cross so patiently do bear,
As if thou were incapable of fear,
And do no more this desolution fly,
Than if long age constrained thee to die:
Yet it is strange thou art become my foe,
And only now add'st most unto my woe,
Not that I loathe, that most did me delight,
But that so long deprived of thy sight;
For when I speak, and would complain my wrong.
Straitwayes thy name possesses all my tongue,
As thou before me ouermore did lie
The present object to my longing eye.
No ominous starte did at thy birth tide shine,
That might of thy sad destiny divine;
It Is only I that did thy fall persuade,
And thou by me a sacrifice art made,
As in those countries where the loving wives
With their kind husbands end their happy lives,
And crowned with garlands in their Brides attire,
Burn with his body in the funeral fire;
And she the worthiest reckned is of all,
Whom loast the peril seems to appall.
I boast not of Northumberland great name,
Nor of Ket conquered, adding to our fame,
When he to Norffolke with his armies sped,
And thence in chains the rebels captive led;
And brought safe peace returning to our doors,
Yet soread his glory on the eastern shores,
Not of my brothers, from whose natural grace,
Virtue may spring to beautify our Race,
Not of Grates match my children borne by thee,
Of the great blood indoubtedly to be,
But of thy virtues only do I boast,
That wherein I may justly glory most:
I craved no kingdoms though I thee did crave,
It might suffice thy only self to have,
Yet let me say how-euer it befell,
Me thinks a Crown should have become thee well:
For sure thy wisdom merited (or none)
To have been heard with wonder from a throne.
When from thy lips the counsel to each deed,
Does as from some wise oracle proceed,
And more esteemd thy virtues were to me,
Then all that else might ever come by thee;
So chaste thy love, so innocent thy life,
As being a virgin when thou were a wife,
So great a gift the heaven on me bestowed,
As giving that it nothing could have owed,
Such was the good I did possess of late,
Ere worldly cares disturbde our quiet state,
Ere trouble did in every place abound,
And angry war our former peace did wound.
This is all that ambition us affordes,
One crown is guarded with a thousand swords,
To mean estates, mean sorrows are out shown,
But crowns h(...) cares whose workings be unknown,
When Dudley led his armies to the east,
Of our whole forces generally possessed,
What then was thought his enter prise could let,
Whom a grave counsel freely did abet,
That had the judgment of the powrefull laws,
In every point to justify the cause,
The holy Church a helping hand that laid,
Who would have thought that these could not have swayde:
But what alas can parlements avail,
Where Mary's right must Edwards Act(...)
When Suffolkes power does Suffolkes hopes withstand,
Northumberland does leave Northumberland;
And they that should our greatness undergo,
Us, and our actions only overthrow,
Ere greatness gained we give it all our heart,
But being once come, could wish it would depart,
And indescreetly follow that so fast,
Which overtaken punishes our haste;
If any one do pity our offense,
Let him be sure that it be far from hence:
Here is no place for any one that shall,
So much as (once) commiserate our fall;
And we of mercy vainly should but think,
Our timelesse tears the insatiate earth does drink.
All lamentations utterly forlorn,
Dying before they fully can be borne.
Mothers that should their woeful children rue,
Fathers in death too kindly bid adue.
Friends their dear farewell lovingly to take,
The faithful servant weeping for our sake.
Brothers and sisters waiting on our beer,
Mourners to tell what we were living hear:
But we alas deprived are of all,
So fatal is our miserable fall,
And where at first for safety we were shut
Now in dark prison woefully are put,
And from height of our ambitious state,
Lie to repent our arrogance too late,
To thy persuasion thus I then reply,
Hold on thy course resolved still to die,
And when we shall so happily be gone,
Leave it to heaven to give the rightful throne,
And with that health regreet I thee again,
Which I of late did gladly entertain.
Notes of the Chronicle History.
Not of Ket conquered adding to our fame;
John Duke of Northumberland, when before he was Earl of Warwike in his
expedition against Ket, overthrew the rebels of Norfolk and Suffolk, encamped
at Mount-Surrey in Norfolk. Nor of my brothers from whose natural grace,


Gilford Dudley as remembering in this place the towardness of his brothers,
which were all likely indeed to have raised that house of the Dudleys, of which
he was a fourth brother, if not suppressed by their fathers overthrow. Nor of
Grayes match my children borne by thee,


Noting in this place the aliance of the Lady Jane Gray, by her mother, which
was Francis the daughter of Charles Brandon, by Mary the French Queen,
daughter to Henry the seventh, and sister to Henry the eight. To have been
heard with wonder from a throne.


Seldom has it ever been known of any woman endued with such wonderful
gifts, as was this Lady, both for her wisdom and learning, of whose skill in
the tongues one reports by this Epigram.

Miraris Ianam Graio, sermon valere,
Quo ^^^mum nata est tempore Graia fuit.
When Dudley led his armies to the East.
The Duke of Northumberland prepared his power at London for his expedition
against the Rebels in Norfolk, and making haste away, appointed the rest of
his forces to meet him at Newmarket Heath: of whom this saying is reported,
that passing through Shorditch, the Lord Gray in his company, seeing the
people in great numbers came to see him, he said, the people press to see us,
but none bid God speed us. Whom a grave Council freely did abet.


John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, when he went out against Queen Mary, had
his commission sealed for the generalship of the Army, by the consent of the
whole Council of the land; insomuch that passing through the Council chamber
at his departure, the Earl of Arundell wished that he might have gone with
him in that expedition, and to spend his blood in the quarrel. When Suffolks
power does Suffolks hopes withstand,
Northumberland does lean Northumberland.


The Suffolk men were the first that ever resorted to Queen Mary in her
distress, repayring to her succors, whilst she remained both at Keningall,
and at Fermingham Castle, still increasing her aids, until the Duke of
Northumberland, was lest forsaken at Cambridge.

Finis.
THE worlds fair Rose, and Henry's frostie fire,
John's tyranny; and chaste Matilda's wrong,
The Enraged Queen, and furious Mortimer,
The scourge of France, and his chaste love I song,
Deposed Richard, Isabell exiled,
The gallant Tudor, and fair Katherine,
Duke Humfrey, and old Cobhams hapless child,
Courageous Pole, and that brave spritfull Queen,
Edward, and the delicious London Dame,
Brandon, and that rich dowager of France,
Surrey, with his fair paragon of fame,
Dudleys mishap, and virtuous Grayes mischaunce;
Their several loves since I before have shown,
Now give me leave, at last to sing mine own.
To the Reader of his Poems. Sonet. 1.
INto these loves who but for passion looks,
At this first sight, here let them lay them by,
And seek elsewhere in turning other books,
Which better may his labor satisfy,
No far-fetched sigh shall ever wound my breast,
Love from mine eye, a tear shall never w^ing,
Nor in ah-mees my whining Sonnets dressed,
(A Libertine) fantastickly I sing;
My verse is the true image of my mind,
Ever in motion, still desiring change,
The choice of all variety inclined,
And in all humors sportiuely I range,
My active Muse is of the worlds right strain,
That cannot long one fashion entertain.
The second to the Reader. Sonet. 2
MAny there be excelling in this kind,
Whose well tricked rimes with all invention swel;
Let each commend as best shall like his mind,
Some Sidney, Constable, some Daniell.
That thus their names familiarly I sing,
Let none think them disparaged to be,
Poor men with reverence may speak of a King,
And so may these be spoken of by me;
My wanton verse nere keeps one certain stay,
But now, at hand; then, seeks invention far,
And with each little motion runs astray,
Wild, madding, iocund, and irregular;
Like me that lust, my honest merry rimes,
Nor care for Critic, nor regard the times.
IDEA.
Sonnet 1.
THine eyes taught me the alphabet of love,
To kon my crosse-row ere I learnd to spell,
For I was apt, a Scholar like to prove,
Gave me sweet looks whenas I learned well,
Vows were my vowells when I then begun,
At my first lesson in thy sacred name,
My consonants the next when I had done,
Words consonant, and sounding to thy fame;
My liquids then, were liquide cristall tears,
My cares, my mutes, so mute to crave relief,
My doleful dipthongs, were my life's dispaires,
Redoubling sighs, the accents of my grief;
My loves Schoole-mistris now has taught me so,
That I can read a story of my woe.
Sonnet. 2.
MY heart was slain, and none but you and I,
who should I think the murder should commit?
Since but your self, there was no creature by
But only I, guiltless of murthring it.
It slew it self; the verdict on the view
Do quit the dead, and me not accessory;
Well, well, I fear it will be proved by you,
The evidence so great a proof does carry.
But O, see, see, we need enquire no further,
Upon your lips the scarlet drops are found,
And in your eye, the boy that did the murder,
Your cheeks yet pale since first they gave the wound.
By this, I see, how ever things be past,
Yet heaven will still have murder out at last.
Sonnet 3.
TAking my pen, with words to cast my woes,
Duly to count the sum of all my cares,
I find, my grief innumerable grows,
The recknings rise to millions of dispaires,
And thus dividing of my fatal hours,
The payments of my love I read, and cross
Substracting, set my sweets unto my sowers,
My joys arerage leads me to my loss;
And thus mine eyes a debtour to thine eye,
Which by extortion gains all their looks,
My heart has paid such grievous usury,
That all his wealth lies in thy beauties books.
And all is thine which has been due to me,
And I a Bankrupt, quite undone by thee.
An allusion to Narcissus. Sonnet. 4.
Beauty sometime in all her glory crowned,
Passing by that clear fountain of thine eye,
Her sunshine face there chauncing to epsy,
Forgot herself, deeming she had been drowned,
And thus whilst beauty, on her beauty gazed,
Whothen (yet living) thought she had been dying,
And yet in death some hope of life espying,
With her own rare perfections so amazed,
Twixt joy and grief, yet with a smiling frowning,
The glorious sunbeams of her eyes bright shining,
And she on her own destenie divining,
Cast her self, to save herself by drowning;
The well of Nectar, pau'd with pearl and gold,
Where she remains for all eyes to behold.
Sonnet. 5.
NOthing but no and I, and I and no,
How falls it out so strangely you reply?
I tell ye (Fair) i will not be answered so,
With this affirming no, denying I,
I say I love, you slender answer I,
I say you love, you pule me out a no;
I say I die, you echo me with I,
Save me I cry, you sigh me out a no:
Must woe and I, have naught but no and I,
No I am I, if I no more can have,
Answer no more, with silence make reply,
And let me take my self what I do crave;
Let no and I, with I and you be so,
Then answer no, and I, and I, and no.
To Harmony. Sonnet. 6.
Love once would dance within my Mistress eye.
And wanting music fitting for the place,
Swore that I should the instrument supply,
And suddenly presents me with her face;
Straitwaies my pulse play lively in my veins,
My panting breath does keep a meaner time,
My q^au'ring artires be the tenours strains,
My trembling sinews serve the counterchime,
My hollow sighs the deepest b^se do bear,
True diapason in distincted sound;
My panting heart the trebble makes the air,
And desken^s fineli^ on the musikes ground;
Thus like a Luteor Vial did I he,
Whilst he proud slave dauncde galliards in her eye.
Sonnet 7.
Love in an humor plaide the prodigal,
And bids my senses to a solemn feast,
Yet more to grace the company withal,
Inuit^s my ha^t to be the chiefest guest;
No other drink would serve this gluttons turn,
But precious tears distilling from mine eine,
Which with my sighs this Epicure does burn,
Quaffing carowses in this costly wine,
Where, in his cups overcome with foul excess,
Begins to play a swaggering ruffins part,
And at the banquet, in his drunkenness
S(...) my dear friend, his kind and truest heart;
A gent^e warning friends, thus may you see,
What it is to keep a drunkard company.
To the Moon. Sonct. 8
PHoebe look down, and here behold in me,
The elements within thy sphere enclosed,
How kindly Nature placed them under thee,
And in my world, see how they are disposed;
My hope is earth, the lowest, cold and dry,
The grosser mother of deep melancholy,
Water my tears, coolde with humidity,
Wan, flegmaticke, inclinde by Nature wholly;
My sighs, the air, hot, moist, ascending higher,
Subtle of sanguine, did in my ha^ts dolor,
My thoughts they be the element of fi^e,
Hot, dry, and piercing, still inclinde to choler,
Thine eye the Orb unto all these, from whence
Proceeds the effects of powerful influence.
To Lunacie. Sonnet. 9.
AS other men, so I my self do muse.
Why in this sort I wrest invention so,
And why these giddy metaphors I use,
Leaving the path the greater part do go;
I will resolve you; I am lunaticke,
And ever this in madmen you shall find,
What they last thought on when the brain grew sick,
In most distraction keep that still in mind.
Thus talking idely in this bedlam fit,
Reason and I (you must conceive) are twain,
It Is nine years now, since first I lost my wit,
Bear with me then, though troubled be my brain;
With diet and correction, men distraught,
(Not too far past) may to their wits be brought.
Sonnet. 10.
TO nothing fitter can I thee compare,
Then to the son of some rich penny father,
Who having now brought on his end with care,
Leaves to his son all he had heaped together;
This new rich nouice, lavish of his chest,
To one man gives, and on an other spends,
Then here he riots, yet amongst the rest,
Haps to send some to one true honest friend.
Thy gifts thou in obscurity do waste,
False friends thy kindenes, borne but to deceive thee,
Thy love, that is on the unworthy placed,
Time has thy beauty, which with age will leave thee;
Only that little which to me was lent,
I give thee back, when all the rest is spent.
Sonnet. 11.
YOu not alone, when you are still alone,
O God from you that I could private be,
Since you one were, I never since was one,
Since you in me, my self since out of me,
Transported from my self into your being,
Though either distant, present yet to either,
Senseless with too much joy, each other seeing,
And only absent when we are together.
Give me my self, and take your self again,
Devise some means but how I may forsake you,
So much is mine that does with you remain,
That taking what is mine, with me I take you;
You do bewitch me, O that I could fly,
From my self you, or from your own self I.
To the Soul. Sonnet. 12.
THat learned father, which so firmly proves
The Soul of man immortal and divine,
And does the several offices define:
Anima Gives her that name as she the body moves,
Amor Then is she love embracing Charity,
Animus Moving a will in us, it is the mind,
Men's Retaining knowledge, still the same in kind;
Memoria As intellectual it is the memory,
Ratio In iudgeing, Reason only is her name,
Sensus In speedy apprehension it is sense,
Conscientia In right or wrong, they call her conscience:
Spiritus The spirit, when it to Godward does inflame.
These of the soul the several functions be,
Which my heart lightened by thy love does see.
To the Shadow. Sonnet. 13.
LEtters and lines we see are soon defaced,
Mettells do waste, and fret with cankers rust,
The Diamond shall once consume to dust;
And freshest colors with foul stains disgraced,
Paper and incke, can paint but naked words,
To write with blood, offorce offends the sight,
And if with tears, I find them all too light,
And sighs and signs, a seely hope affords.
O sweetest shadow, how thou seru'st my turn,
Which still shall be, as long as there is sun,
Nor whilst the world is, never shall be done,
Whilst Moon shall shine, or any fire shall burn:
That every thing whence shadow does proceed,
May in his shadow, my loves story reed,
Sonnet. 14.
IF he from heaven that filch'd that living fire,
Condemned by Jove to end lesle torment be,
I greatly marvel how you still go free,
That far beyond Prometheus did aspire?
The fire he stole although of heavenly kind,
Which from above he craftily did take,
Of liuelesse clods us living men to make,
Again bestowed in temper of the mind.
^ut vou brok into heavens immortal store,
Where virtue, honor, wit and beauty lay,
Which taking thence, you have escaped away,
Yet stand as free as e're you did before;
But old Prometheus punished for his rape,
Thus poor thieves suffer, when the greater escape.
Sonnet. 15.
VIewing the glass of my youths miseries,
I see the face of my deformed ears,
With withered brows, all wrinckled with dispaires,
That for my youth the tears fall from mine eyes,
Then in these tears the mirrors of these eyes,
Thy fairest youth and be (...)y do I see,
Imprinted there by looking still on thee;
Thus midst my woes, ten thousand joys arise.
Yet in these joys the shadows of my good,
In this fa^e limmed ground as white as snow,
Painted the blackest image of my woe,
With murthring hands imbrude in mine own blood;
And in this image his dark clowdy eyes,
My life, and love, I here anatomi^e.
To the Phoeniae. Sonnet 16.
Within the compass of this spacious round,
Amongst all birds the Phoenix is alone,
Which but by you could never have been known.
None like to that, none like to you is found,
Heap your own virtues seasoned by their sun,
On heavenly top of your divine desire;
Then with your beauty set the same on fire,
So by your death, your life shall be begun.
Your self thus burned in this sacred flame,
With your own sweetness all the heavens perfuming,
And still increasing as you are consuming,
Shall spring again from th'ashes of your fame,
And mounting up shall to the heavens ascend,
So may you live, past world, past fame, past end.
To Time. Sonnet. 17.
STay, stay, sweet Time, behold or e're thou pass,
From world to world, thou long have fought to see,
That wonder now wherein all wonders be,
Where heaven beholds her in a mortal glass:
Nay look thee Time in this celestial glass,
And thy youth past, in this suite mirror see,
The first worlds beauty in the infancy,
What it was then, what thou before it was.
Now pass on Time, to af^r-worlds tell this:
(And yet shall tell) but truly what has been,
That they may say what former time has seen,
And heaven may joy to think on past worlds blis:
Here make a period Time, and say for me,
She was, whose like again shall never be.
To the Celestial numbers. Sonnet. 18.
Unto the world, to learning, and to heaven,
Three nines there are, to every one a nine,
One number of the earth, the other both divine,
One woman now makes three odd numbers even:
Nine orders first of Angels be in heaven,
Nine Muses do with learning still frequent,
These with the Gods are ever resident;
Nine worthy ones unto the world were given:
My worthy one to these nine worthies adds,
And my fair Muse, one Muse unto the nine,
And my good Angel in my soul divine,
With one more order, these nine orders gladdeth:
My Muse, my worthy, and my Angel then,
Makes every one of these three nines a ten.
To Humor. Sonnet. 19.
YOu cannot love my pretty heart and why?
There was a time you told me that you would,
But now again you will the same deny,
If it might pease you, would to God you could;
What will you hate? nay that you will not neither,
Nor love, nor hate, how then? what will you do,
What will you keep a mean then betwixt either?
Or will you love me, and yet hate me too?
Yet serves not this, what next, what other shift?
You will, and will not, what a coil is here?
I see your craft, now I perceive your drift,
And all this while I was mistaken there:
Your love and hate is this, I now do prove you,
You love in hate, by hate to make me love you.
Sonnet. 20.
AN evil spirit your beauty haunts me still,
Wherewith (alas) I have been long possessed,
Which cease not to tempt me unto ill,
Nor gives me once but one poor minutes rest:
In me it speaks whether I sleep or wake,
And when by means to drive it out I try,
With greater torments then it me does take,
And tortures me in most extreamitie,
Before my face, it lays all my dispaires,
And hastes me on unto a sudden death;
Now tempting me to drown my self in tears,
And then in sighing to give up my breath;
Thus am I still prouokde to every evil,
By this good wicked spirit, sweet Angel devil.
To the Spheres. Sonnet. 21.
THou which do guide this little world of love,
Thy planets mansions here thou may behold,
My brow the sphere where Saturn still does move,
wrinckled with cares, withered, dry and cold;
Mine eyes the Orb where Jupiter does trace,
Which gently smile because they look on thee,
Mars in my swartie visage takes his place,
Made lean with love, where furious conflicts be:
Sol in my breast with his hot scorching flame,
But in my heart alone does Venus reign;
Mercury my hands, the Organs of my fame,
Luna my wavering and unconstant vain;
The starry heaven thy praise by me expressed,
Thou the first mouer, guiding all the rest.
To Folly. Sonnet. 22.
WIth fools and children good discretion bears,
Then honest people bear with Love and me,
Nor older yet, nor wiser made by years,
Amongst the rest of fools and children be,
Love's still a baby, places with gawdes and joys,
And like a wanton, sports with every feather,
And idiots still are running after boys,
Then fools and children fitt'st to go together,
He still as young as when he first was borne,
No wiser I, then when as young as he,
You that be hold us laugh us not to scorn,
Give Nature thanks you are not such as we:
Yet fools and children sometimes tell in play,
Some wise in show, more fools indeed then they.
Sonnet. 23.
Love banished heaven, in earth was held in scorn.
Wandering ab^oad in need and beggary,
And wanting friends, though of a God desse borne,
Yet crau'de the alms of such as passed ^y,
I like a man, douote and charitable;
Clothed the naked, lodged this wandering guest,
With sighs and tears still furnishing his table,
With what might make the miserable blessed;
But this ungrateful for my good desert.
Enticde my thoughts against me to conspire,
Who gave consent to steal away my heart.
And set my breast his lodging on a fire:
Well, well, my friends, when beggars grow thus bold,
No marvel then though charity grow cold.
Sonnet 24.
I Hear some say, this man is not in love,
Who, can he love? a likely thing they say:
Read but his verse, and it will easly prove,
O judge not rashly (gentle Sir) I pray,
Because I loosely trifle in this sort,
As one that fame his sorrows would beguile:
You now suppose me, all this time in sport,
And please your felfe with this conceit the while.
You shallow censures, sometime see you not
In greatest perils some men pleasant be,
Where fame by death is only to be got;
They resolute, so stands the case with me;
Where other men in depth of passion cry,
I laugh at Fortune, as in jest to die.
Sonnet 25.
O Why should nature niggardly restrain.
The Southern nations relish not our tongue,
Else should my lines glide on the waves of R(...),
And crown the Pirens with my living song;
But bounded thus to Scotland get you forth,
Thence take you wing unto the Orcades,
There let my verse get glory in the north,
Making my sighs to thawe the frozen seas,
And let the Bards within that Irish i will,
To whom my Muse with firi^ wings shall pass,
Call back the stiff neckt rebels from exile,
And mollify the slaughtring Galliglasse;
And when my flowing numbers they rehearse,
Let wolves and bears be charmed with my verse.
To Despair. Sonnet 26.
I Ever love, where never hope appears,
Yet hope draws on my neuer-hoping care,
And my life's hope would die but for despair,
My neuer-certaine joy, breeds euer-certaine fears,
Vncertaine-dread, gives wings unto my hope,
Yet my hopes wings are laden so with fear,
As they cannot ascend to my hopes sphere,
Yet fear gives them more than a heavenly scope;
Yet this large room is bounded with despair,
So my love is still fettered with vain hope,
And liberty depriues him of his scope,
And thus am I imprisond in the air;
Then sweet despair, a while hold up thy head,
Or all my hope for sorrow will be dead.
To Fantasy. Sonnet 27.
I Gave my faith to Love, Love his to me,
That he and I sworn brothers should remain,
Thus faith received, faith given back again,
Who would imagine bond more sure could be?
Love flies to her, yet holds he my faith taken,
As from my virtue raising my offense,
Making me guilty by mine innocence;
And only bond by being so forsaken,
He makes her ask what I before had vowed,
Giving her that, which he had given me,
I bound by him, and he by her made free.
Who ever so hard breach of faith allowd?
Speak you that should of right and wrong discuss,
Was right ere wronged, or wrong ere righted thus?
Sonnet 28.
TO such as say, thy love I ouer-prise,
And do not stick to term my praises folly,
Against these folks that think themselves so wise,
I thus appose my force of reason wholly,
Though I give more, then well affords my state,
In which expense the most suppose me vain,
Would yield them nothing at the casiest rate,
Yet at this price, returns me trebble gain,
The value not unskillful how to use,
And I give much, because I gain thereby,
I that thus take, or they that thus refuse,
Whether are these deceived then, or I?
In every thing I hold this maxim still,
The circumstance does make it good or ill.
To the Senses. Sonnet 29.
WHen conquering love did first my heart assail,
Unto mine aid I sommond every sense,
Doubting if that proud tirant should prevail,
My heart should suffer for mine eyes offense;
But he with beauty first corrupted sight,
My hearing bribde with her tongues harmony,
My taste by her sweet lips drawn with delight,
My smelling won with her breaths spicerie;
But when my touching came to play his part,
(The King of senses, greater than the rest)
He yeeldes love up the keis unto my heart,
And tells the other how they should be blessed:
And thus by those of whom I hopde for aid,
To cruel love my soul was first betraide.
To the Vestalls. Sonnet 30.
THose Priests which first the Vestall fire begun,
Which might be borrowed from no earthly flame,
Deuisde a ves^ell to receive the Sun,
Being steadfastly opposed to the same;
Where, with sweet wood, laid curiously by Ar^^,
Whereon the Sun might by reflection beat,
Receiving strength from every secret part,
The fuel kindled with colestiall heat.
Thy blessed eyes, the Sun which lights this fire,
My holy thoughts, they be the Vestall flame,
The precious odours be my chaste desire,
My breast the fuel which includes the sa;
Thou art my Vesta, thou my goddess art,
Thy hallowed temple one lie is my heart.
Sonnet 31.
ME thinks I see some crooked Mimicks jeere,
And ^axe my Muse with this fantastic grace,
Turning my papers, asks, what have we here?
Making withal, some filthy an^ike face;
I fear no censure, nor what thou can say,
Nor shall my spirit one jo^e of vigor lose,
Think thou my wit shall keep the packe-horse way,
That every d^dgen low invention goes?
Since Sonnets thus in bundles are impressed,
And every drudge does dull our sa^iate e^re?
Think thou my Love shall in those rags be dressed,
That every dowdie, every t^ull does wea^e?
Unto my pitch no common judgment flies,
I scorn all earthly dung-bred scarabies.
To the river Ankor. Sonnet 32.
Our floudes Queen Thames; for ships and swans is crowned,
And stately Seuerne for her shoares is praised,
The cristall Trent, for Foords and Fish renowned,
And Anons fame, to Albions cliues is raised.
Carlegion Chester, vaunts her holy Dee,
York many wonders of her Owse can tell,
The Peake her Dove, whose banks so fertile be,
And Kent will say, her Medway does excel,
Cotswold commends her Isis and her Tame,
Our northern borders boast of Tweedes fair flood,
Our western parts extol her Wilis fame,
And old Legea brags of Danish blood;
Ardens sweet Ankor let thy glory be,
That fair Idea she does live by thee.
To Imagination. Sonnet 33.
WHilst yet mine eyes do surfeit with delight,
My woeful heart imprisond in my breast,
Wishes to be transformed in my sight,
That it like those, by looking might be blessed,
But whilst mine eyes thus greedily do gaze,
Finding their objects ouer-soone depart,
These now the others happiness do praise,
Wishing themselves that they had bin my heart;
That eyes were heart, or that the heart were eyes,
As covetous the others use to have;
But finding reason, their request denies,
This to each other mutually they crave;
That since the one cannot the other be,
That eyes could think, or that my heart could see.
To Admiration. Sonnet 34.
Marvel not Love, though I thy power admire,
Ravished a world beyond the farthest thought,
That knowing more than ever has bin taught,
That I am only sta^u'd in my desire;
Marvel not Love, though I thy power admire,
Aiming at things exceeding all perfection,
To wisdoms self to minister direction,
That I am only starved in my desire;
Marvel not Love, though I thy power admire,
Though my conceit I further seem to bend,
Than possibly invention can extend,
And yet am only starved in my desire;
If thou will wonder, here is the wonder Love,
That this to me does yet no wonder prove,
To Miracle. Sonnet 35.
SOme misbelieuing, and profane in love,
When I do speak of miracles by thee,
May say that thou art flattered by me,
Who only write, my skill in verse to prove.
See miracles, ye unbelieving see,
A dumb-borne Muse, made to express the mind,
A cripple hand to write, yet lame by kind,
One by thy name, the other touching thee;
Blind were mine eyes, till they were seen of thine,
And mine ears deaf, by thy fame healed be,
My vices curde, by virtues sprung from thee,
My hopes revived which long in grave had live:
All unclean thoughts, foul spirits cast out in me,
Only by virtue that proceeds from thee.
To Wonder. Sonnet 36.
REading sometime, my sorrows to beguile,
I find old Poets hills and floods admire,
One, he does wonder monster breeding Nyle,
Another maruells sulphur Aetn^es fire.
Now broad-brimd Indus, then of Pindus height,
Pe^ion and Ossa, frostie Cauc^se old,
The Delian Cinthus, then Olympus weight,
Slow Arrer, frantic Gallus, Cydnus cold.
Some Ganges, Ister, and of Tagus tell,
Some whirle-poole Po, and sliding Hypasis,
Some old Pernassus where the Muses dwell,
Some Helicon, and some fair Simois;
A fools think I, had you Idea seen,
Poor brooks and banks, had no such woonders been
Sonnet 37.
Dear, why should you command me to my (...)
When now the night does sommon all to sleep?
Me thinks this time becomes Lovers best,
Night was ordaind together friends to keep,
How happy are all other living things,
Which though the day disjoyne by several flight,
The quiet evening yet together brings,
And each returns unto his love at night.
O thou that art^ so cu^^eous unto all,
Why should thou Night abuse me only thus,
That every crea^ure to his kind do call,
And yet it is thou do only sever us:
Well could I wish it would be ever day,
If when night comes you bid me go away.
Sonnet 38.
SItting alone, Love bids me go and write,
Reason pluckes back, commanding me to stay,
Boasting that she does still direct the way,
Or else love were unable to indite;
Love growing angry, vexed at the spleen,
And scorning Reasons maimed argument,
Strait taxes Reason, wanting to invent,
Where she with Love conuersing has not been,
Reason reproched with this coy disdain,
Dispiteth Love, and laugheth at her folly,
And Love contemning Reasons reason wholly,
Thought it in weight too light by many a grain.
Reason put back, does out of sight remove,
And Love alone finds reason in my love.
Sonnet 39.
SOme, when in time they of their loves do tell,
With flames and lightning their exordiums paint,
Some call on heaven, some invoke on hell,
And Fates and Furies with their woes acquaint,
Elysium is too high a seat for me,
I will not come in Stix or Phlegiton,
The thriee three Muses but too wanton be,
Like they that lust, I care not, I will none.
Spiteful Errinis frights me with her looks,
My manhood dares not with foul Ate mell,
I quake to look on Heccats charming books,
I still fear bug-beares in Apolloes Cell.
I pass not for Minorua, nor Astrea,
Only I call upon divine Idea.
Sonnet. 40.
MY heart the a^uile where my thoughts do beat,
My words the hammers fashioning my desire,
My breast the forge, including all the heat,
Love is the fuel which maintains the fire:
My sighs the bellows which the same increases,
Filling mine ears with noise and nightly groaning,
Toiling with pain, my labor never cease,
In grievous passions my woes still bemoning:
Mine eyes with tears against the fire striving,
Whose scorching gleed my heart to cinders turns;
But with those drops, the flame again reviving,
Still more and more unto my torment burns:
With Sisiphus thus do I role the stone,
And turn the wheel with damned Ixion.
Sonnet. 41.
WHy do I speak of joy, or write of love,
When my heart is the very den of horror,
And in my soul the pains of hell I prove,
With all his torments and infernal terror?
What should I say, what yet remains to do?
My brain is dry with weeping all too long,
My sighs be spent in yttring of my woe,
And I want words wherewith to tell my wrong:
But still distracted in Loves lunacie,
And bedlam-like thus rauing in my grief,
Now rail upon her hair, now on her eye,
Now call her Goddess, then I call her thief;
Now I deny her, then I do confess her,
Now do I curse her, then again I bless her.
Sonnet. 42.
SOme men there be which like my method well,
And do commend the strangenes of my vain,
Some say, I have a passing pleasing strain,
Some say, that in my humor I excel:
Some, who not kindly relish my conceit,
They say (as Poets do) I use to feign,
And in bare words paint out my passions pain.
Thus sundry men their sundry minds repeat;
I pass not I, how men affected be,
Nor who commends, or discommends my verse,
It pleases me, if I my woes rehearse,
And in my lines, if she my love may see:
Only my comfort still consists in this,
Writing her praise, I cannot write amisso.
Sonnet. 43.
Why should your fair eyes with such sovereign grace,
Dispearse their rays on every vulgar spirit,
Whilst I in darkness in the self same place,
Get not one glance to recompense my merit:
So does the plowman gaze the wandering star,
And only rests contented with the light,
That never learnd what constellations are,
Beyond the bent of his unknowing fight.
O why should beauty (custom to obey)
To their gross sense apply her self so ill?
Would God I were as ignorant as they,
When I am made unhappy by my skill;
Only compeld on this poor good to boast,
Heavens are not kind to the that know them most.
Sonnet. 44.
Whilst thus my pen strives to eternize thee,
Age rules my lines with wrinckles in my face,
Where in the map of all my misery,
Is modeld out the world of my disgrace,
Whilst in despite of tyrannizing times,
Medea-like I make thee young again,
Prowdly thou scorust my world-outwearing rimes,
And murther'st Virtue with thy coy disdain;
And though in youth my youth untimely perish,
To keep thee from oblivion and the grave,
Ensuing ages yet my rimes shall cherish,
When I entombed my better part shall save;
And though this earthly body fade and die,
My name shall mount upon eternity.
Sonnet. 45.
Muses which sadly sit about my chair,
Drowned in the tears extorted by my lines,
With heavy sighs whilst thus I break the air,
Painting my passions in these sad dissignes;
Since she disdaines to bless my happy verse,
The strong-built Trophies to her living fame,
Ever henceforth my bosom be your hearse,
Wherein the world shall now entombe her name;
Enclose my music you poor senseless walls,
Since she is deaf and will not hear my mones,
Soften your selves with every tear that falls,
Whilst I like Orpheus sing to trees and stones;
Which with my plaint seem yet with pity moved,
Kinder then she who I so long have lived.
Sonnet. 46.
PLain path'd Experience the vnlearneds guide,
Her simple followers evidently shows,
Sometime what schoolmen scarcely can decide,
Nor yet wise Reason absolutely knows:
In making trial of a murder wrought,
If the yile actor of the he^nous deed,
Near the dead body happily be brought.
Often has been proved the breathless coarse will bleed;
She coming near that my poor heart has slain,
Long since departed (to the world no more)
The ancient wounds no longer can contain,
But fall to bleeding as they did before:
But what of this? should she to death be led.
It furthers justice, but helps not the dead.
Sonnet. 47.
IN pride of wit, when high desire of fame
Gave life and courage to my laboring (...)
And first the sound and virtue of my name,
Won grace and credit in the ears of men;
With those the througed Theaters that press.
I in the circuit for the Laurel strove,
Where the full praise I freely must confess,
In heat of blood and modest mind might move:
With showts and claps at every little pawse,
When the proud round on every side has rung.
Sadly I sit unmoved with the applawse,
As though to me it nothing did belong:
No public glory vainly I pursue.
The praise I strive, is to eternize you.
Sonnet. 48.
CUpid, dumb I doll, peevish faint of Love,
No more shall thou nor saint nor idol be,
No god art thou, Loves goddess she does prove,
Of all thine honor she has robbed thee:
Thy bow old broke, is peecde with half desire,
Her bow is beauty with ten thousand strings,
And every one of purest golden wire;
The least, of force to conquer hoasts of Kings:
Thy shafts be spent, and she (to war appointed)
Hides in those Cristall quiuers of her eyes,
More arrows with hart-piercing mettle pointed,
Then there be stars at midnight in the skies:
With these she steals men's hearts for her relief,
Yet happy he that is robbed of such a thief.
Sonnet. 49.
THou leaden brain which censur'st what I write
And say my lines be dull, and do not move.
I marvel not thou feel'st not my delight,
Which never feltst my fiery tuch of love:
But thou whose pen has like a Packe-horse served,
Whose stomach unto gaul has turned thy food,
Whose senses like poor prisners hunger-staru'd.
Whose grief has parched thy body, dride thy blood;
Thou which have scorned life, and hated death,
And in a moment mad, sober, glad and sorry,
Thou which have bann'd thy thoughts, and cursed thy birth
With thousand plagues more then in purgatory,
Thou thus whose spirit Love in his fire refines,
Come thou and read, admire and plawd my lines.
Sonnet. 50.
AS in some Countries far remote from hence,
The wretched creature destined to die,
Having the judgment due to his offense,
By Surgeons begged, their Art on him to try:
Which on the living work without remorce,
First make incision on each maistring vain,
Then stanch the bleeding, then transperce the coarse,
And with their balmes recure the wounds again,
Then poison and with Physic him restore,
Not that they fear the hopeless man to kill,
But their experience to increase the more;
Even so my Mistress works upon my ill,
By curing me, and killing me each hour,
Only to show her beauties sovereign power.
Sonnet. 51.
CAlling mind since first my love begun,
Th'incertaine times often varying in their course,
How things still unexpectedly have run,
As please the fates, by their resistlesse force:
Lastly, mine eyes amazedly have seen,
Essex great fall, Tyroue his peace to gain,
The quiet end of that long-liuing Queen,
This Kings fair entrance, and our peace with Spain,
We and the Dutch at length our selves to sever,
Thus the world does, and evermore shall reele,
Yet to my goddess am I constant ever;
How ere blind fortune turn her giddie wheel:
Though heaven and earth prove both to me untrue,
Yet am I still inuiolate to you.
An alusion to Dedalus and Icarus. Sonnet 52.
MY heart imprisoned in a hopeless I Will,
Peopled with Armies of pale jealous eyes,
The shores beset with thousand secret spies,
Must pass by air, or else die in exile;
He framde him wings with feathers of his thought,
Which by their nature learnd to mount the sky,
And with the same he practiced to fly,
Till he himself this Eagles Art had taught:
Thus soaring still, not looking once below,
So near thine eyes celestial sun aspired,
That with the rays his wafting pineons fired:
Thus was the wanton cause of his own woe,
Down fell he in thy beauties Ocean drenched,
Yet there he burns in fire that is never quenched.
Another to the River Ankor. Sonnet 53.
Clear Ankor, on whose siluer-sanded shore,
My soule-shrin'd saint, my fair Idea lies,
O blessed brook, whose milke-white swans adore
That cristall stream refined by her eyes,
Where sweet mirth-breathing Zephire in the spring,
Gently distills his Nectar-dropping showers,
Where Nightingales in Arden sit and sing,
Amongst the dainty dew-impearled flowers;
Say thus fair Brook, when thou shall see thy Queen,
Lo here thy sheep heard spent his wandering years;
And in these shades dear Nymph he often has been.
And here to thee he sacrifizde his tears:
Fair Arden, thou my Tempe art alone,
And thou sweet Ankor art my Helicon.
Sonnet. 54.
YEt read at last the story of my woe,
The drery abstracts of my endless cares,
With my like sorrow enterlined so,
Smokde with my sighs, and blotted with my tears;
The sad memorialls of my miseries,
Pend^n the grief of mine afflicted ghost;
My life's complaint in doleful Elegies,
With so pure love as time could never boast:
Receive the incence which I offer here,
By my strong faith ascending to thy fame,
My zeal, my hope, my vows, my praise, my prayer,
My souls oblations to thy sacred name:
Which name my Muse to highest heaven shall raise,
By chaste desire, true love, and virtues praise.
Sonnet 55.
MY Fair, if thou will register my love,
More then worlds volumes shall thereof arise;
Preserve my tears, and thou thy self shall prove,
A second flood down raining from mine eyes:
Note but my sighs, and thine eyes shall behold,
The sunbeams smothered with immortal smoke;
And if by thee my prayers may be enrold,
They heaven and earth to pity shall provoke;
Look thou into my breast, and thou shall see,
Chaste holy vows for my souls sacrifice,
That soul (sweet Maid) which so has honored thee,
Erecting Trophies to thy sacred eyes;
Those eyes to my heart shining ever bright,
When darkness has obscurde each other light.
An allusion to the Aegl^ts. Sonnet 56.
MY thoughts bred up with Eagle-birds of love,
And for their virtues I desirde to know;
Upon the neast I set them forth, to prove
If they were of the Eagles kind, or no.
But they no sooner saw my sun appear,
But on her rays with gazing eyes they stood,
Which proou'd my birds delighted in the air,
And that they came of this rare kingly brood.
But now their plumes full summde with sweet desire,
To show their kind, began to clime the skies:
Do what I could, my Eglets would aspire,
Strait mounting up to thy celestial eyes.
And thus (my Fair) my thoughts away be flowne,
And from my breast into thine eyes be gone.
Sonnet 57.
YOu best discerned of my interior eyes,
And yet your graces outwardly divine,
Whose dear remembrance in my bosom lies,
Too rich a relic for so poor a shrine:
You in whom Nature chose herself to view,
When she her own perfection would admire,
Bestowing all her excellence on you;
At whose pure eyes Love lights his hallowed fire,
Even as a man that in some trance has seen,
More than his wondering vttrance can unfold,
That rapt in spirit in better worlds has been,
So must your praise distractedly be told;
Most of all short, when I should show you most,
In your perfections altogether lost.
Sonnet 58.
IN former times, such as had store of coin,
In wars at home, or when for conquests bound,
For fear that some their treasures should purloyne,
Gave it to keep to spirits within the ground;
And to attend it, them so strongly tide,
Till they returned, home when they never came,
Such as by art to get the same have tried,
From the strong spirit by no means get the same,
Nearer you come, that further flies away,
Striving to hold it strongly in the deep:
Even as this spirit, so she alone does play,
With those rich Beauties heaven gives her to keep:
Pity so left, to coldenes of her blood,
Not to avail her, nor do others good.
To Proverb. Sonnet 59.
AS Love and I, late harbourde in one Inn,
With Proueths thus each other entertain;
In love there is no lack, thus I begin:
Fair words makes fools, replieth he again:
That spares to speak, does spare to speed (quoth I)
As well (says he) too forward as too slow.
Fortune assistes the boldest, I reply:
A hasty man (quoth he) never wanted woe.
Labor is light, where love (quoth I) does pay,
(Says he) light burdens heavy, if far borne:
(Quoth I) the maine lost, cast the by away:
You have spunne a fair thread, he replies in scorn.
And having thus a while each other thwarted,
Fools as we met, so fools again we parted.
Sonnet 60.
DEfine my love, and tell the joys of heaven,
Express my woes, and show the pains of hell,
Declare what fate unlucky stars have given,
And ask a world upon my life to dwell.
Make known that faith, unkindness could not move;
Compare my worth with others base desert,
Let virtue be the tuch-stone of my love,
So may the heavens read wonders in my heart;
Behold the clouds which have eclipsde my sun,
And view the crosses which my course does let;
Tell me, if ever since the world begun,
So fair a rising had so foul a set:
And by all means, let foul unkindness prove,
And show a second to so pure a love.
Sonnet 61.
WHen first I ended, then I first began,
The more I travel, further from my rest,
Where most I lost, there most of all I wanne,
Pined with hunger, rising from a feast.
Me thinks I flee, yet want I legs to go,
Wise in conceit, in act a very sot,
Ravished with joy amidst a hell of woe,
What most I seem, that surest am I not.
I build my hopes a world above the sky,
Yet with the Mole I creep into the earth,
In plenty am I ^^aru'd with penury,
And yet I surffet in the greatest dearth:
I have, I want, despair, and yet desire,
Burned in a sea of ice, and drowned amidst a fire.
Sonnet 62.
TRuce gentle Love, a parlee now I crave,
Me thinks it is long since first these wars begun,
Nor thou nor I, the better yet can have:
Bad is the match where neither party won.
I offer free conditions of fair peace,
My heart for hostage, that it shall remain,
Discharge our forces here, let malice cease,
So for my pledge, thou give me pledge again.
Or if nothing but death will serve thy turn,
Still thirsting for subversion of my state;
Do what thou can, raze, massacre, and burn,
Let the world see the utmost of thy hate:
I send defiance, since if overthrown,
Thou vanquishing, the conquest is mine own.
Certain other Sonnets to great and worthy Personages.
To the high and mighty Prince, James king of Scots. Sonnet 61.
NOt thy grave Counsels, nor thy subjects love,
Nor all that famous Scottish royalty,
Or what thy sovereign greatness may approve,
Others in vain do but historifie,
When thine own glory from thy self does spring,
As though thou did all meaner praises scornee
Of Kings a Poet, and the Poets King,
They Princes, but thou Prophets do adorn;
Whilst others by their Empires are renowned,
Thou do enrich thy Scotland with renown,
And Kings can but with diadems be crowned,
But with thy laurel thou do crown thy Crown;
That they whose pens (even) life to Kings do give,
In thee a King, shall seek themselves to live.
To Lucy Countess of Bedford. Son. 61.
GReat Lady, essence of my chiefest good,
Of the most pure and finest tempred spirit,
Adorned with gifts ennobled by thy blood,
Which by descent true virtue do inherit:
That virtue which no fortune can deprive,
Which thou by birth take from thy gracious mother,
Whose royal minds with equal motion strive,
Which most in honor shall excel the other;
Unto thy fame my Muse herself shall task,
Which rainst upon me thy sweet golden showers,
And but thy self, no subject will I ask,
Upon whose praise my soul shall spend her powers.
Sweet Lady yet, grace this poor Muse of mine,
whose faith, whose zeal, whose life, whose al is thine.
To the Lady Anne Harington. Sonnet. 62.
MAdam, my words cannot express my mind,
My zealous kindness to make known to you,
When your deserts all severally I find;
In this attempt of me do crave their due:
Your gracious kindenes first does claim my heart,
Your bounty bids my hand to make it known,
Of me your virtues each do challenge part,
And leave me thus the least that is mine own:
What should commend your modesty and wit,
Is by your wit and modesty commended,
And stands dumb, in most admiring it,
And where it should begin, is only ended;
Returning this your praises only due,
And to your self, say you are only you.
To the Lady L. S. Sonet 63.
BRight star of Beauty, on whose cie-lids sit,
A thousand Nymph-like and enamoured graces,
The goddesses of memory and wit,
which in due order take their several places,
In whose dear bosom, sweet delicious love,
Lays down his quiver, that he once did bear,
Since he that blessed Paradise did prove,
Forsook his mothers lap to sport him there.
Let others strive to entertain with words,
My soul is of another temper made;
I hold it vile that vulgar wit affords,
Devouring time my faith shall not invade:
Still let my praise be honored thus by you,
Be you most worthy, whilst I be most true.
To sir Anthony Cook. Sonet 64.
VOuchsafe to grace these rude vnpollisht rimes,
Which but for you had slept in sable night,
And come abroad now in these glorious times,
Can hardly brook the pureness of the light.
But since you see their destenie is such,
That in the world their fortune they must try,
Perhaps they better shall abide the tuch,
Wearing your name their gracious liuerie.
Yet these mine own, I wrong not other men,
Nor traffike further then this happy clime,
Nor filch from Ports, not from Petrarchs pen,
A fault too common in this latter time;
Divine sir Philip, I avouch thy writ,
I am no picke-purse of another wit.
Finis.
The Legend of Robert Duke of Normandy.
WHat time soft night had silently begun,
To steal by minutes on the long-liu'd days,
The furious dog pursuing of the sun,
Whose noisome breath adds feruor to his rays,
That to the earth sends many a sad disease:
Which then inflamed with his intemprate fires,
Her self in light habiliments attires.
When the rathe morning newly but awake,
Scarce with fresh beauty burnished her brows,
Her self beholding in the general Lake,
(To which she paies her neuer-ceasing vows,)
With the new day me willingly to rowze;
Down to fair Thames I softly took my way,
Where the mild winds continually do play.
Striving to fancy his chaste breast to move,
Whereas all pleasures plentifully flow,
When him along the wanton tide does ^houe,
And to keep back they easily do blow,
Still meet him coming, thinking him too slow:
He forcing waves to check their hot embrace,
They fanning breath upon his cristall face.
Still forward sallying from his bounteous ^ource,
Along the shores lasciuio^sly does strain,
And often times retreating in his course,
As to his fountain he would back again,
Or turnde to look upon his silver (...);
With coy regards the goodly soil he greetes,
Till with fair Medway happily he meets.
Steering my compass by the wandering stream,
whose flight might teach me (...)es ne'r-turning howrs,
Delighted thus as in a pretty dream,
Where pleasure wholly had possessed my powers;
Yet looking back on Londons c(...)g Towers,
So Troy, thought I, her stately head did rear,
Whose crazed ribs the furrowing plow does eire.
Weary at length, a willow-tree I found,
Which on the bank of this great torrent stood,
Whose root, with rich grass greatly did abound,
(Forced by the moisture of the surging flood)
Ordained it seemde to sport her Nimphish brood;
Whose curled top denied the heavens great eye,
To view the stock he was maintained by.
The Lark that learnes observance to the Sun,
Quauers her clear notes in the quiet air,
That on the rivers murmuring base does run,
And the pl(...)sde heavens, their fairest livery ware,
The place such pleasure gently does prepare;
The flowers my scent, the flood my taste to steep,
Each sense thus s^ted, (...)ed me asleep.
When in a dream it seemed unto me,
Triumphall music from the flood arose,
As when the Sovereign we embargde do see,
And by fair London for his pleasure rows,
whose tender welcome the glad City shows;
The people swarming thick upon the shores,
And the curlde water ouer-spread with oa^es.
A troop of Nimphs came suddenly on land,
In the full end of this triumphall sound,
And me incompast, taking hand in hand,
Casting themselves about me in a round,
And so down set them on the easy ground;
Their sober eyes cast with a modest grace,
Upon my swarth and melancholy face.
Next, twixt two Ladies came a goodly Knight,
As newly brought from some distressefull place,
To me who seemed some right worthy wight,
Though his attire were miserable base,
Many deep furrows in his manly face;
And though cold age had frosted his fair hairs,
It rather seemde with sorrow then with years.
The one a Lady of a p^incely port,
Leading this sad Lord, scarcely that could stand,
The other fleering in disdainefull sort,
with scornful iestures drew him by the hand,
who lame and blind, yet bound with many a band;
which (I perceived nearer as they came)
That this was Fortune, that more constant fame.
Fame on the right hand in a robe of gold,
whose train old Time obsequiously did bear,
whereon in rich Embraudry was enrolde,
The acts of all the worthies ever wear,
which all might read depainted lively there,
Set down in lofty well composed verse,
First the great deeds of Heroes to rehearse.
On her fair breast she two broad Tablets wore,
Of cristall the one, the other Ebony,
where were engraven all the names of yore,
In the large Toombe of lasting memory,
Or the black book of endless obloquy;
The first with Poets and with Conquerours pilde,
That with base worldlings every where defilde.
And in her words appeared (as a wonder)
Her instant force and after-during might,
which softly spoke, far off were heard to thunder,
About the world that quickly took their flight,
And brought the most obscurest things to light:
That still the farther off, the greater still
Did sound our good, or manifest our ill.
Fortune, as blind as he whom she did lead,
Her feature often changing in an hour,
Fantastically carrying her head,
Soon would she smile, and suddenly would lower,
And with one breath, her words both sweet and sower
Upon her foes she amorously would glance,
And on her followers coily look askance.
About her neck in manner of a chain,
Torn diadems and broken scepters hung,
If any on her steadfastly did lean,
Them to the ground di^dainefully she flung;
And in this order as she passt along,
Great bags of gold out of her bosom drew,
Which to the unworthiest evermore she threw.
A duskie veil which hid her sightlesse eyes,
Like clouds that cover our uncertain lives,
wherein were portraide direful tragedies,
Fools wearing Crowns, and wisemen clogged in gives,
All things how she preposterously contriues;
That as a map her regency discouers,
In Camps, in Courts, and in the fate of lovers.
An easy bancke near to this place there was,
A seat fair Flora used to sit upon,
Curling her fair locks in this liquid glass,
Putting her rich gems and attirings on,
Fitter then this about us was there none;
Here set they down this poor distressed man,
And in this sort proud Fortune thus began.
Behold this Duke of Normandy quoth she,
The heir of William, Conqueror of this I Will,
Appealing to be iustifi'd by thee,
(whose tragedy this Poet must compile)
He of all other that I hold most vile,
His birth being markde with my unlucky brand,
For whom I see thou come preparde to stand.
What art thou but a tumor of the mind,
A bubble blown up with deceitful breath,
Which never yet exactly were definde,
In whom no wise man t'rereposed faith,
Speaking of few well until after death,
That from loose humor have thy timelesse birth,
Unknown to heaven, and less esteemde on earth?
First in opinion had thou thy creation,
On whom thou still do seruilely attend,
Like whom thou long retainst not any fashion,
But with the world uncertainly do wend,
Which as a post, does up and down thee send;
Without profane tongs, thou could never rise,
Nor be vpholden, were it not with lies.
In every corner prying like a thief,
And through each cranny subtilely do creep,
Apt to report, and easy of belief:
What Is he whose counsel thou did ever keep,
That into clossets sawcily darste peepe^
Telling for truth, what thou can but suppose,
And that divulging, thou should not disclose.
With extreme toil and labor thou art sought,
The way is danger leads to thy Cell,
Only with blood thy favor must be bought,
And who would have thee, fetches thee from hell,
Where thou impalde with fire and sword do dwell,
And when thou art in all this peril found,
What art thou? only but a tinckling sound.
Such as the world holds (of all other) base,
And of the rest reproachfully does scorn,
That amongst men sit in the seruilst place,
These be the creatures which thou do subborne,
Those wait on fame, whose weeds be nearly worn,
Yet these poor wretches come not unto thee,
Unless preferrde and dignifide by me.
Thy trumpe such men supposed to advance,
Is but as those fantastically deem,
Whom folly, youth, or vanity intrance,
Only to sound sufficing but to seem,
(Which the wise sort a dotage but esteem;)
And with this toy the humerous abusing,
Their wilful error, and thy fault excusing.
Except in peril thou do not appear,
And yet not then, but with intreates and wooing.
Flying often times when thou art very near
At hand, diminishd and augmented going,
On slightest things the greatest cost bestowing;
In promising their losses to repair,
When the performance is but only air.
On balefull hearses as the fittest grounds,
(Written with blood) thy sad memorialls lie,
Whose letters are immedicable wounds,
Only fit objects for the weeping eye,
And from the dust thou worth do only try;
And what sometime thou falsely did deprave,
Thou do acknowledge only in the grave.
The mighty Orb is witness of my power,
And how I reign with the eternal fates,
With whom I sit in council every hour,
On th'alterations of the times and states,
Them setting down their changes and their dates,
In fore-apointing every thing to come,
Until the great and universal doom.
The stars to me an everlasting book,
In that eternal register the sky,
Whose mighty volumes I do ouer-looke,
Still turning over the leaves of destiny;
which man I to inuiolate, deny,
And his frail will imperiously control,
By such strong clauses as I there enrole.
Predestination giving me a being,
whose depth man's wit could never thoroughly sound,
Into those secrets have I only seeing,
wherein wise Reason does herself confound,
Searching where doubts do more and more abound;
where sacred texts unlock the way to me,
To lighten those that will my glory see.
What names old Poets to their gods did give,
were ouely figures to express my might,
To show the virtues that in medo live,
And my great power in this all-moouing wight,
And all their altars unto me were dight;
Up alterations evermore did bring,
Matter whereon, continually they sing.
Still most uncertain varying in my course,
Yet in all changes aim one certain end,
Crossing man's forecast (he may know my force)
Still foe to none, to none a perfect friend,
To him least thought of, soonest I do send;
That all should find I worthily bestow,
Nor reasonvrge, but that I hold it so.
Forth of my lap I power abundant bliss,
All good proceeds from my all-giuing hand,
By me, man happy or unhappy is;
For whom I stick, or whom I do with stand,
And it is I am friendships only band;
And upon which, all greedily take hold,
Which being broke, love suddenly grows cold.
Pawsing, she frowns, when suddenly withal,
A fearful noise arises from the stood,
As when a tempest furiously does fall,
within the thick waste of some ancient wood,
That in amazement every mortal stood;
As though her words such powerfulness did bear,
That every thing her minaces did fear.
When fame yet smiling, mildely thus replies,
Alas quoth she, what labor thou have lost,
what wondrous mists thou casts before our eyes?
Yet will the gain not countervaile the cost;
what would thou say if thou had cause to boast,
which sett'st thy state forth in such wondrous sort,
Which but thy self, none ever could report^
A thing constrained only by event,
Breeding in some a transitory terror;
A, what men will, that comes by accident,
And only named to excuse their error.
What then is Fortune? or who does prefer her?
Or who to thee so foolish is to lean,
Which weak tradition only does maintain?
A toy whereon the doting world does dream,
Soothed by that uncertain observation
Of all attempts, that being the extreme,
Fastneth thereby on weak imagination;
Yet notwithstanding all this usurpation,
Unto thy self art incidently loathing
Most, when thou woldst be, that art rightly nothing.
That slightly by insinuating thus,
And under so allowable pretense,
Closely incroacheth on man's Genius,
In good and evil taking refidence,
And having got some small pre-eminence,
Unto thy self a being that would frame,
Finds in conclusion only but a name.
Those ignorant which made a god of Nature,
And Natures God divinely never knew,
Were those to Fortune did direct a stature,
From whom thy worship ignorantly grew,
Which being adored foolishly by few,
Grounded thy looser and uncertain laws,
Upon so weak and indigent a cause.
First, stouth did bear thee in her sleepy cell,
And thee with ease dishonourably fed,
Delivering thee with Cowardice to dwell,
Which with base thoughts continually thee bred.
By superstition idely being led:
A lewd imposture after did thee make,
Whom for a goddess fools do only take.
And as thy followers, nothing do forecast.
And as thou art improuident, as light;
And this the chiefest property thou have,
That against virtue thou bendst all thy might,
With whom thou wagest a continual fight;
The yielding spirit in fetters thou do bind,
But weak and slavish to the constant mind.
Such is thy froward and malignant kind,
That thou do all things crossely in despite,
Thou art inamored of a barbarous hind,
Whom thou do make thy only favorite,
None but the base in baseness does delight;
For were thou heavenly; thou in love would be,
with that which nearest does resemble thee.
But I alone the herald am of heaven,
Whose spacious kingdom shetcheth far and wide,
To every coast as swift as lightning driven,
And on the sunne-beames gloriously I ride;
Now mount I up, now down again I slide:
I register the worlds eternal hours,
That know the hid will of the immortal powers.
Men to the stars, me guiding them, do clime,
That all dimensions perfectly express,
And I alone the vanquisher of time,
Bearing that sweere that cures deaths bitterness,
That do all labor plentifully bless,
That all obstruse profundities impart,
Leading man through the tedious ways of Art.
My palace placed betwixt earth and skies,
Which many a Tower ambitiously vpheares,
Whereof the windows are composde of eyes,
The walls as strongly edifide of ears,
where every thing in heaven and earth appears,
Nothing so softly whispered in the round,
But through my palace presently does sound.
And underfoot floor'd all about with drums,
The rafters trumpets admirably clear,
Sounding alowde each name that thither comes,
The crannies tongues, and talking every where,
And all things past do in remembrance bear:
The doors unlock with every little breath,
And open wide with every word man says.
And throwout hung with arms and conquered spoils,
The posts whereon the goodly roof does stand,
Are Pillars graven with Herculian toiles,
Th'atchieuements great of many a warrelike hand,
Both in the christened and in heathen land;
Done by those Nobles that are most renowned,
Which there by me immortally are crowned.
Here in the bodies likeness whilst it lives,
Appear the thoughts proceeding from the mind,
To which the place a glorious habit gives,
When unto me they freely are resignde,
To be preserved there, by my power refinde;
That when the body by plae death does perish,
Then does this place the minds true Image cherish.
My beauty never Fades, but as newborn,
As years increase, so ever waxing young,
My strength is not diminished, nor worn,
What weakeneth all things, makes me only strong,
Nor am I subject unto worldly wrong,
The rape of time I carelessly defy,
Nor am I awde by all his tyranny.
The brow of heaven my monuments contain,
which is the mighty register of Fame,
which there in fiery characters remain,
The gorgeous seeling of the immortal frame,
The Constellations publishing my name
where my memorialls evermore abide,
In those pure bodies highly glorifide.
F(...) having ended, Fortune next began,
Further to urge what she before had said,
when (lo quoth she) duke Robert is the man,
which as my prisners I in bonds do lead,
For whom thou comst against me here to plead,
Whom I alone deprined of his crown,
Who can raise him that Fortune will have down?
A fitter instance (Fame replying) none,
Then is Duke Robert, Fortune do thy worst,
Greater to man thy might was never shown,
Doing on him what ever Fortune durst;
And since thy turn allotted thee the first,
Proceed; see which the Norman Duke shall have,
Whether that Fame, or Fortune and the grave.
Quoth Fortune then, I found th'vnstedfast star,
Whose lucklesse working limited his fate,
That marked his sad nativity with war,
And brothers most unnatural debate,
Public sedition and with private hate,
And on that good his father him begun,
Grounded the wrack and down fall of this son.
What bounteous nature franckly did bestow,
Wherein her best she strained her to try,
Thereby, himself I made him overthrow,
Above you both so powerful am I;
His breast to all so openly did lie,
Judged from his fashion differing so far,
For peace too mild, too merciful for war.
And yet the courage that he did inherit,
And from the greatness of his blood did take,
Though shrouded in so peaceable a spirit,
When now his wrong so roughly did awake,
Forthwith such fury violently brake,
As made the world impartially to see,
All humane actions managed by me.
That till revenge was wholly him bere^t,
Opposde against so absolute a power,
And him to lean on nothing being left,
when danger most him threatened to devour,
Unto the period of the utmost hour;
Him flattering still with promise of my love,
Did make him all extreamities to prove.
That whilst his father with the Norman sword,
On fruitful England prosperous entrance made,
I cast the project that this youthful Lord,
In the mean time should Normandy invade;
And with as proved and powerful a blade,
Him I persuaded (constantly by this)
To make his own yet doubtful to be his.
That Robert daily in disgrace might run,
As still the Conqueror toward his end did grow,
who well in years, thus vexed by his son,
which now his will so openly did show;
His state devised wisely to bestow,
For his own safety that his days to close.
He might himself more quietly repose.
And that lest time might cool his weakened blood,
This lucklesse war by lingering I supplide,
That whilst Duke Robert justly censured stood,
Under the weight of his unnatural pride;
In heat of all, this Conqueror William did,
Setting young Rufus on th'vnrightfull throne,
Leaving h(...) struggling for his own.
Which in small time so many mischiefs bred,
As sundry plagues on Williams of-springs sent,
Attaining to so violent a head,
which policy not after could prevent;
when to destruction all things headlong went,
And in the end, as consumating all,
Was Roberts irrecouerable fall.
When none could prosperous Nonmandie dissuade,
From sending ensigns to the English field,
Brother opposde the brother to invade,
Sword against sword, shield menaced to shield,
whose equal worth to other scorn to yield;
One arm a front, the others furious stroke,
Scepter with septer violently broke.
These sundry soiles, in both of which was sown,
By so approved and fortunate a hand,
The seed to both might prosprously have grown,
By their (...) in a mutual band;
Now when these Princes opposite do stand;
what them should foster, greater wounds them lent,
Then the prowd'st power that Europe could have sent.
Having my self won William in his life,
This conquered Realm to Rufus that did give,
Getting by strength what he did leave in strife,
Those to molest that after him should live;
In this advantage cunningly I drive,
T'afflict his issue with a general ill,
Yet the extreme in Robert to fulfill.
As when stowt Odo (that with William held,
Daily pricked forward by proud Lanfrancks spite,
Both powerful Prelates rigorously compeld,
Rufus to leave abetting Roberts right,
Drawing both Mortaines and Mongomeries might,
Mangling the I Will with many a grievous scarre,
Scarcely yet cured of the former war.
That being set in so direct a way,
Strong friends at hand his enterprise to beck,
Ready before him when his entrance lay,
Of all supplide that he did lately lack,
Him I persuade the remedy to slack,
Stopping the course which he did lately run,
All to undo that he had ever done.
Thus did I stir up that unkindly rage,
That did so far prevail upon his blood,
And at my pleasure did again assuage,
When now this heat in sted might him have stood;
Thus with his humor altered I my mood,
That first by Arms his vigor he might lose,
Which then laid down gave strength unto his foes.
That by concluding this untimely peace,
I might thereby a lingering war begin,
That whilst these tumults did a little cease,
Craft more advantage cunningly might win;
Thus let I treason secretly in,
Giving deceitful Policy the kay,
To the fair closet where his counsels lay,
Thus reconciling outwardly a friend,
I drew an inward and a dangerous foe,
That all his wit ambitiously did lend,
To clothe his treasons in a virtuous show;
Which were contrived ^so currantly to go,
That secret malice strengthened more and more,
Lastly, should prove more dangerous then before.
And now poor Fame, my power to thee addressed,
And thee mine only instrument I made,
That whilst these brothers at this pass do rest,
Him to the wars I won thee to persuade,
With those that now were going to invade,
With great Duke Godfrey pressing for his bands,
From Pagans power t'regaine the holy lands.
His youthful humor finely thus I feed,
The mean most fit to draw him forth abroad,
When now at home his presence most should need,
In foreign lands to fasten his abode,
Him in this order only I bestowed;
That William dying, Robert being gone,
Henry might seat him on his brothers throne.
So sweet the sounds of these aduent'rous Arms,
And every sense so strougly they do bind,
That he has now no feeling of his harms,
So far away transported is his mind,
Declaring well the greatness of his kind;
That him so high and forcibly does bear,
As when most cause, he least his ill does fear.
Him having thrown into eternal thrall,
Wisely fore-casting how the same should be,
When every thing made fit unto his fall,
Which none could hinder, though the most foresee,
For which I made an instrument of thee;
For where destruction sadly I pretend,
Mischief like lines, all to their center bend.
He gone, and William yielded up the breath,
The younger Henry covetous of reign,
Offered so fairly by his brothers death,
whilst Robert does in Palestine remain,
And now a Kingdom easily might gain;
what by his power and science to persuade,
Himself a Monarch absolutely made.
Whilst this great Duke embraced is by thee,
which thou as thine do absolutely claim,
Finding mere shadows only missing me,
And idle Castles in the air does frame;
Lot, such a mighty Monarchesse is Fame,
That what she gives, so easy is to bear,
As none therefore needs violence to fear.
Until returning from those holy wars,
So highly honored with the Pagans flight,
From foreign battles unto civil ^arres,
And getting others for his own to fight,
Enforced to use the utmost of his might;
with that rich sword in Pagan blood imbrued,
Himself to save by his own friends pursued.
When wanting sums, the sinews of his force,
which his great courage quickly comes to find,
Even in the high speed of his forward course,
So skilfully I managed his mind,
That I a way out readily did find;
To his destruction, Henry to supply,
His future safety happily to buy.
Him by all ways to amity to win,
Not fully yet established as he would,
Having thus far already gotten in,
Setting himself substantially to hold,
By the francke offers of bewitching gold;
The yearly tribute from his Crown to rise,
Which might all former injuries suffice.
Which entertaind by confident belief,
By which to pass his purposes were brought,
Not yet suspicious of this secret thief,
By which he soon and cunningly was caught;
Of which the least when princely Robert thought,
Even in a moment did annoy him more,
Then all their power could ever do before.
Which to this great Lord utterly unknown,
Not understanding, easily could not fly,
Into his way that subtly was thrown,
which to avoid, Duke Robert looked too hie,
Into good minds fraud does the soonest pry;
whose pliant nature I securely chose,
To work what form it pleased me to dispose.
This fatal tribute cutting off the claim,
A lawful Prince to Englands Empire laid,
His former right does altogether maime,
As they agreed yearly to be paid;
Thereon relying after being staid,
As from a fountain plenteously did spring,
The efficient cause of Roberts ruining.
Whenas his friends so well to him that meant,
And for this day did wholly them prepare,
Seeing him thus their purpose to prevent,
And how thereby it was like with him to fare;
Now upon Henry bended all their care,
Giving their power their peace with him to make,
Gathered at first the Norman part to take.
And I by whom yet every thing had been,
Since Norman William conquest here begun,
To show my self the worlds emperious Queen,
Direct my course against his eldest son,
Things falling out disastrously to run,
On Englands part against Normandy to stand,
Conquered but lately by the Norman hand.
The conquest William made upon this I Will,
When Norman blood the Englishmen did tame,
That native now enriched with her style,
Turnde with revenge to captiuate the same,
As back descending whence it lately came,
As Norman power did English thrall provoke,
That Norman necks should bear the English yoke.
For which, being up, and fallne to open Arms,
Such mortal hate between them daily grows,
And pressing in where deadly peril swarms,
The angry brothers dealing furious blows,
Back to regaine what they before did loose,
Either to quit him of the others thrall,
Either to rise, or evermore to fail.
Him on whom late in Palestine I smilde,
Returnde from France now dreadfully I frown,
Being called home that chiefly is exilde,
And in his kingdom only leaves his crown,
Him in the deluge of mischance to drown:
Lastly, himself contemptfully does lose,
Leaving his realm to his injurious foes.
Which home to England prisner do him bring,
Left as a spoil and prey unto his own,
Become her captive should have bin her king,
Such was the lot upon his life was thrown,
Where he remaining in continual moan,
Prescribed to one poor solitary place,
Whose lawful bounds the ocean did embrace,
Could humane knowledge comprehend my hate,
Or reason sound the depth of things divine,
The world amazed at Duke Roberts state,
Might think no might to be comparde with mine,
And all the chances unto me resign,
In Roberts fall apparently to see,
Amongst the stars the strength that rests in me.
That sword upon him which resumes such power,
Yet is too weak to consumate his days,
Time, whose swift course does every thing devour,
In his most need, prolongs him with delays,
Whilst he his brothers tyranny obeies,
That he in life a thousand deaths might die,
In every course so forcible am I.
And whilst in such extremity he lies,
Depriude of all comfort but the blessed light,
Yet it was not this that could my rage suffice,
But to abridge that, rob him of his sight,
To suit his days directly with the night;
That, that to all men lastly which should be,
Due to the wretchedst, him denide by me.
That Robert so infortunately blind,
No outward object night dispearse his care,
The better to illuminate his mind,
To see his sorrows thoroughly what they are,
To do so much unto this Prince I dare,
That being deprived of that which was the chief,
Did of the other amplify the grief.
And when bereaved of his nightly rest,
With the remembrance of so great a wrong,
Fastening so deeply on his pensive breast,
His heart the while that violently stung,
Nature in him does show herself so strong;
That grief, which many does of life deprive,
Seems to preserve and keeps him still alive.
Him I denide his enemy to kill,
Nor by his own hand wretchedly to die,
That life unto him should be loathsome still,
And that death from him evermore should fly,
Making them both to him an enemy;
Willing to die by life, him double killing,
Urged to live, twice dying he unwilling,
So many years as he has worn a Crown,
So many years as he has hopde to rise,
So many years upon him did I frown,
So many years he lives without his eyes,
So many years in dying e're he dies,
So many years shut up in prison strong,
Sorrow does make the shortest time seem long.
Thus sway I in the course of earthly things,
That time might work him everlasting spite,
To show how I can tyrannize on Kings,
And in the fall of great ones do delight,
In fined things my working infinite;
All worldly changes at my will disposed,
For that in me all wonder is enclosed.
At Fortunes speech amazed whilst they stand,
And Fame herself yet wondreth at his woe,
When from Duke Robert Fortune takes her hand,
Whose misery she thus had let them know;
When now to answer her dispightfull foe,
Fame from deep silence seeming to awake,
Thus for her Client modestly bespake.
Quoth she, returning from renowned Rome,
Seeking my self in Europe to advance,
To win her Princes to regaine the tomb,
Which had been lost by her misgouernance,
Calling to England, Germany and France
(At length) persuaded happily by me,
From Pagan hands fair Palestine to free.
That holy hermit long that did bemone
This their so great and evident a loss,
With famous Godfrey forwards that was gone,
Bearing the banner of the bloody Cross.
Now whilst in so fair forwardnes it was,
And every care attentive now did stand,
To this great buisnes only then in hand.
Thither did all the noblest spirits resort,
Which I that time successefully did bring,
Allured by the confident report
That from so great an enterprise did spring.
T'aduenture in so popular a thing;
And no man deemed worthy to be mine,
That was not forward in this great design.
Where now this duke the Conqu'rors eldest son,
Which with his birthright Normandy did wrest,
When of what else his noble father won,
His brother Rufus strongly was possessed;
Which whilst he strives from his hands to rest,
This great attempt now gloriously broke forth,
Which was by me divulged through the north.
Which having got free entrance to his care,
Such entertainment happily did find,
As no persuasion suffers to be there,
From this high purpose to divert his mind,
And being so religiously inclinde,
wooed with this offer fitly does prepare
Himself to furnish to this great affair.
That kingdom he does carelessly neglect,
His brother Rufus wrongfully does keep,
And only that does constantly respect,
where he once in his sepulcher did sleep,
At whose dear death the very rocks did weep,
His crown of gold this christian Prince does scorn,
So much he loved him that was crowned with thorn.
The want that him did grievously oppress,
Of those great sums in leuying power were spent,
Himself again of England to possess,
Much hinders his religious intent,
Yet could not this his purpose so prevent,
Although a while it seemd delay to make,
Of that which he did bravely undertake.
Wherefore this noble and high spirited Lord.
whilst now his buisnes stands at this stay,
And since his state no better could afford,
In gage to Henry Normandy does lay,
Providing first his soldiers how to pay,
Rather himself chose kingdomlesse to leave,
His countries hopes then basely to deceive.
To his victorious ensign comes from far,
Th'inlled Red-shanks touched with no remorse,
The light-foote Irish that with darts do war,
The Scot so much delighting in his horse,
The English Archer of a Lions force,
The valiant Norman most his troops among,
With the brave Britton wonderfully strong.
Remote from comfort in this colder clime,
To other Countries kindly does you bring,
(And wisely teach you to redeem the time,
Whence your eternal memory might spring)
Unto the place whereas the heavenly King.
Your dear redemption happily began,
Living on earth, which was both God and man.
Poor Ilanders which in the Oceans chain,
Too long imprisoned from the cheerful day,
Your warlike leader brings you to the maine,
Which to my Court does show the open way,
And his victorious hand becomes the key;
Unto so high adventures that you bears,
Glory to you, and honor to your heirs.
And does thereto so zealously proceed,
As those fair locks his temples that adorn,
Until the great Jerusalem were freed,
He made a vow should never more be shorn,
Which since they so religiously were worn;
In every eye did beautify him more,
Then did the Crown of Normandy before.
Whilst he still on his upright course does hold,
As we the sequel briefly shall relate,
Bearing himself (as worthily he could)
And best became his dignity and state,
Teaching how his themselves should moderate,
Not following life, so with his chance content,
Nor flying death, so truly valient.
So did he all his faculties bestow,
That every thing exactly might be done,
That due foresight before the act might go,
Others gross errors happily to shun,
Wisely to finish well that was begun;
Justly directed in the course of things,
By the straight rule from sound experience springs.
Idle regards of greatness that did scorn,
Careless of pomp, magnificent to be,
That man reputing to be noblest borne,
That was the most magnanimous and free,
In honor so impartial was he,
Esteeming titles meritlesse and naught,
Unless with danger absolutely bought.
Giving the soldier comfortable words,
And often imbalmes his well-receiued wound,
To him that needed maintenance affords,
To brave attempts encouraging the sound,
Never dismaide in any perrill found,
His Tent a seat of judgment to the grieved,
And as a Court to those should be releeu'd.
So perfect was that rarifying fire,
That did compose and rectify his mind,
Unto that place that raised his desire,
Above the usual compass of his kind,
And from the world so clearly him refinde,
As him did wholly consecrate to glory,
A subject fit whereon to build a story.
Who in embassage to the Emperor sent,
Passing along through Macedon and Thrace,
Never did sleep but only in his tent,
Till he reviewd that famous Godfreis face,
Nor till he came unto that hallowed place,
Never did repose his body in a bed,
Such were the cares possess his troubled head.
O wherefore then great singer of thy days,
Renowned Tasso in thy noble story,
Should thou be taxed as partial in his praise,
And yet so much should set forth others glory?
Me thinks for this thou should be inly sorry,
That thou should leave another to recite,
That which so much thou did neglect to write.
There was not found in all the christian host,
Any than he more forward to the field,
Nor their battallions could another boast,
To bear himself more bravely with his shield,
So well his arms this noble Duke could wield,
As such a one he properly should be,
That^ I did mean to consecrate to me.
Of so approved and deliver force,
Charging his lance or brandishing his blade,
Whether on foot, or managing his horse,
That open passage through the ranckes he made,
At all assaies so happy to invade,
That were he absent in the charge or chase,
It was supposde the day did loose the grace.
In doubtful fights where danger soon'st did fall,
He would be present ever by his will,
And where the Christians for supplies did call,
Thither through peril Robert pressed still,
To help by valor, or relieve by skill;
To every place so prouidently seeing,
As power in him had absolutely being.
When in the morn his Courser he bestrid,
He seemd composde essentially of fire,
But from the field he ever drowping rid,
As he were vanquished only to retire,
Nearest his rest, the furth'st from his desire,
And in the spoils his soldiers share the crowns,
They rich in gold, he only rich in wounds.
And when the fair Jerusalem was won,
And king thereof they gladly him would make,
All worldly titles he so much does shun,
As he refusde the charge on him to take,
One the vain world that clearly did forsake,
So far it was from his religious mind,
To mix things vile with those of heavenly kind.
No triumph did his victories adorn,
But his high praise for sinful man that did,
Nor other mark of victory is worn,
But that red Cross to tell him crucifide,
All other glories that himself denide:
A holy life so willingly he leads,
In dealing alms, and bidding of his beads.
Thus a poor Pilgrim he returns again,
For glittring arms in Palmers homely gray,
Leaving his Lords to lead his warrelike train,
Whilst he alone comes sadly on the way,
Dealing abroad his lately purchasde pray;
An aged staff his careful hand does hold,
That with a lance his heathen foe controlde.
But now to end this long continued strife,
Henceforth thy malice takes no further place,
The hate thou bar'st him ended with his life,
By thee his spirit can suffer no disgrace,
Now in mine arms his virtues I embrace,
His body thine, his crosses witness be,
But mine his mind, that from thy power is free.
Thou gave up rule when he gave up his breath,
And where thou end'st, even there did I begin,
Thy strength was buried in his timelesse death,
when as thy Conqueror lastly came I in,
That all thou gotst from thee again did win;
To whom thy right thou wholly did resign,
That all thou had was absolutely mine.
To the base world then Fortune get thee back,
The same with drery tragedies to fill,
There by thy power bring all things unto wrack,
And on weak mortalles only work thy will,
And since so much thou do delight in ill,
Hear his complaint, who wanting eyes to see,
May give thee sight, which art as blind as he.
At her great words amazed whilst they stand,
The Prince which looked dreadfully and grimme,
Bearing his eyes in his distressefull hand,
Whose places stood with blood unto the brimme,
In the great anguish shaking every limme;
After deep sighs and lamentable throws,
Thus began at length to utter forth his woes.
Says he, farewell, the lights are now put out,
And where they were, is buried all my joy,
That are with darkness compassed about,
Which tyranny did wilfully destroy,
To breed my more perpetual annoy,
That even that sense I only might forgo;
That could alone give comfort to my woe.
You which beheld fair Palestine restorde,
And from profane hands of the Pagans freed,
The Sepulcher of that most gracious Lord,
And seen the mount where his dear wounds did bleed
That with these sights my zealous soul did feed;
Since from your functions night does you disseuer,
Seclude me now from worldly joys for ever.
They saw no Sun, nor did they view the day,
Except a candle, they beheld no light,
Strong walls before those blessings kept away,
What could be feard'? they could not hurt the night,
For then tears wholly hindered them of sight;
O then from whence should Henry's hate arise,
Though I saw nothing that I should have eyes?
The wretchedst thing the most despisedst beast,
Enioyes that sense as generally as we,
The very Gnat, or what than that is least,
Of sight by nature kindly is made free,
What thing has mouth to feed, but eyes to see,
O that a tyrant then should me deprane,
Of that which else all living creatures have:
Whilst yet the light did mittigate my moan,
Tears found a mean to sound my sorrows deep,
But now ay me, that comfort being gone,
By wanting eyes wherewith I erst did weep,
My cares alas concealed I must keep;
O God, that blindness stealing my delight,
Should above all things give my sorrow sight
Where sometime stood the beauties of this face,
Those lamps once lighted with the vestall flame,
Is now a dungeon, a distressed place,
A harbor fit for infamy and shame,
Which but with horror none can scarcely name;
Out of whose dark grates misery and grief,
Starued for vengeance, daily beg relief.
The day abhorres me, and me still does fly,
Night still me follows, yet too long does stay,
This never comes though it be ever nie,
And this in coming vanishes away,
What now me booteth either night or day;
All Is one, still day, or be it ever night,
Since one to me the darkness and the light.
You wherewith once my comforts I did view,
Th'alcouering heaven and glory that it bears,
No more the same shall e're be seen of you,
That happy sight that every mortal cheares,
No more to me for ever now appears;
Betake you selves unto your darkesome cell,
And bid the world eternally farewell.
His speech thus ending, Fortune discontent,
Turning herself as she away would fly,
Playing with babes and fools incontinent,
As never tutch'd with humane misery,
As what she was herself to verify;
And strait forgetting what she had to tell,
To other speech and girl^sh laughter fell.
When graceful Fame conueying thence her charge,
With all these troops that did to her resort,
Gave me this book, wherein was writ at large,
His life set out in admirable sort,
T'amaze the world with this so true report,
But Fortune angry with her foe therefore,
Gave me this gift, that I should still be pore.
FINIS.
The Legend of Matilda
IF yet a Muse there happily remain,
That is by truth so diligently taught,
As vninstructed wantonly to feign,
Declares but what modestly she ought;
If this be such which I so long have sought,
I crave by her my life may be reuealde,
By black oblivion enuiously concealde.
Oh if such favor I might hope to find,
Here in this world yet once to live again,
As I yet lastly might express my mind,
By the endeavor of a powrefull pen,
In all my sorrows happy were I then;
Three hundredth years by all men ouer-past,
Finding one friend to pity me at last.
O you of him so happily elect,
Whom I entreat to prosecute my story,
Lady most dear, most worthy all respect,
The worlds best jewel, and your sexes glory,
It shall suffice me, be Idea sorry,
Reading my Legend sadly in his verse,
Which now alone must serve me for a her^^.
(...) you the pattern by whose perfect view,
Like your fair self he wisely may me make,
For sure alive none fitter is then you,
Whose form unspotted chastity may take,
Be you propitious, for whose only sake
For me I know he will gladly do his best,
So you and I may equally be blessed.
Bright Rosamond so highly that is graced,
Inroled in the register of same,
That in our saincted calendar is placed,
By him who strives to stellifie her name;
Yet will the modest say she was too blame,
Though full of state and pleasing be his rhyme,
Yet can his skill not expiate her crime.
The wife of Shore winnes general applause,
Finding a pen laborious in her praise,
^lstr^d revived to plead her pitied cause,
After the envy of so many days,
Happie's the man their glories highest can raise;
Thus the loose wanton liked is of many,
Vice shall find friends, but virtue seldom any.
To vaunt of my Nobility were vain,
Which were I know, not bettered by the best,
Nor should beseem an honorable strain,
And me a maiden fits not of the rest,
Nor worldly titles fondly will suggest;
A virtuous life I mean to boast alone,
Our birth our syres, our virtues be our own:
It Is shame to fetch our long descent from Kings,
If from the gods derived thou should be,
The old atchieuements of those wondrous things,
Which thou thy self then liuedst not to see,
What be their acts material unto thee?
Staining that blood and honor that was theirs,
Which could not leave their virtues to their heirs.
Heaven powered down more abundance on my birth,
Then it before had usually bestowed,
And was in me so bountiful to earth,
As though the fullness meaning to have showed,
On me it so immeasurably flowed,
That such a shape with such a spirit inspired,
Did of the wisest make me most desired.
Upon my brow sat Beauty in her pride,
Unto the world as ministering her law,
And unto all such riches did divide,
As unto her all generally did draw;
And yet mine eye did keep them so in awe,
As that which only could true virtues measure,
Ordainde by Nature to preserve her treasure.
My carrige such as might content the wise,
My speech such comely decen^^e retain,
As of the younger was not deemde precise,
Nor of the aged was accounted vain;
So well instructed to observe the mean,
So well compact, and native was cach good,
That did coher^ with temper of my blood.
Nature in me did such perfections vary,
As that the least allowed not of compare,
And yet so well did teach me them to carry,
That then themselves did make them seem more rare,
As in my portion suffering none to share,
In her fair grace by placing me so hie,
That there should sit the darling of the sky.
When Fame began my beauty first to blaze,
That soon became too lavish of the same,
Having her trumpet laden with my praise,
That every place was filled with my name,
For which report thou too much were too blame;
But unto thee is beauty subject still,
Which I may say, is causer of our ill.
This jealous monster has a thousand eyes,
Her ayrie body has as many wings,
Now about earth, now up to heaven she flies,
And here and there with every breath she flings,
Even from the deep her messages she brings,
Nothing so secret but to her appears,
As apt to credit every thing she hears.
And Princes ears as open to report,
As skill in blazing beauty to a King,
Subject unto the censure of the Court,
From whence Fame carries, thither she does bring,
And which soever she does lowdly ring,
Thither ah me unhappily she brought,
Where I my bar unfortunately caught.
There stood my beauty boldly for the prize,
Where the most clear and perfectst judgments be,
And of the same the most judicial eyes,
Did give the gole impartially to me;
So did I stand unparalleled and free,
And like a comet in the euenings sky,
Struck with amazement every wondering eye.
This it was possessed the breast of princely John,
This on his hart-strings endless music made,
This wholly won him unto it alone,
And fully did his faculties invade,
From which not reason ever could dissuade;
This taught his eyes their due attendance still,
Holding the reins which ruled his princely will.
When yet my father fortunate in Court,
And by his blood ranck'd equal with the best,
Having his quick ear touched with this report,
Which yet the news but hardly could digest,
And on my youth his only care did rest;
Straightly pursues it by those secret spies,
As still in Courts attend on Princes eyes.
And he thus while who seemed but to sleep,
Till he the Princes purposes could sound,
And to himself yet secretly did keep,
What he but late had prouidently found;
So well that wise Lord could conceal his wound,
That well foresaw how daugerous it would prove,
To cross the course of his impatient love.
When having found how violent a flame,
Unbridled will had kindled in the King,
If on the sudden he should stop the same,
A greater inconvenience might bring,
Which being known so dangerous a thing,
Me does bethink him fittest to persuade,
E're for my safety further means he made.
Dear girl quoth he, thou see who does await,
T'intrap that beauty bred to be thy foe,
Being so fair and delicate a bait,
Tempting all eyes themselves there to bestow,
Whose power the King is taught too soon to know;
Of his desire that what the end may be,
Thy youth may fear my knowledge does foresee.
And for thou live publicly in Court,
Whose privilege does every mean protect,
Where the ensample of the greatest sort,
Does more then opportunity effect,
None thriuing there that dwell upon respect,
Being a lottery where but few do win,
Falsehood th'aduenture, and the prize but sin.
Subt'ly opposing to thy longing sight,
What may to pleasure possibly provoke,
And fitly fashioned unto thy delight,
That with the grauest strikes too great a stroke,
Having withal emperious power thy cloak;
With such strong reasons on her part propounded,
As may leave virtue seemingly confounded.
Many the ways inducing to thy fall,
And to thy safety none is left to guide thee,
And when thy danger greatest is of all,
Even then thy succor soonest is denide thee:
So sundry means from virtue to divide thee,
Having with all mortality about thee,
Frailty with in, temptation set without thee.
The leachers tongue is never void of guile,
Nor wants he tears when he would win his pray,
The subtilst tempter has the smoothest style,
Sirens sing sweetly when they would betray,
Lust of it self had never any stay,
Nor to contain it bounds could have deuisde,
That when most filled, is least of all suffisde.
With every mean and majesty is fraught,
That all things has contained in his power,
And who will conquer, leaves no mean vnsaught,
Soft golden drops did pierce the brazen Tower,
Watching the advantage of each passing hour,
Time offering still each hour to do amiss,
Thy banefull poison spiced with thy bliss.
And when this heady and vnseasned rage,
Which in his blood does violently reign,
Time, that the heat shall peceably assuage,
Shall show the more apparently thy stain,
Which unto ages ever shall remain;
Sin in a chain leads on her sister shame,
And both in gyues fast fettered to defame.
Kings use their loves as garments they have worn,
Or as the meat whereon they fully fed,
The Saint once gone, who does the shrine adorn?
Or what is Nectar carelessly if shed,
what Princes wealth redeemes thy maidenhead,
which should be held as precious as thy breath,
whose desolution consumates thy death.
The stately Eagle on his height does stand,
And from the maine the fearful foul does smite,
Yet scorns to tuch it lying on the land,
When he has felt the sweet of his delight,
But leaves the same a prey to every kite;
With much we surffet, plenty makes us poor,
The vvretched Indian spurns the golden ore.
When now he points the periode with a tear,
which in my bosom made so great a breach,
As every precept firmly fixed there,
And still his council unto me did preach,
A father so effectually should teach,
That then his words I after ever found,
Written on so immaculate a ground.
The youthful king deluded but the while,
That in his breast did bear this quenchlesse fire,
Whilst flattring hope his senses does beguile,
That with fresh life still quickened his desire,
And gone so far now meant not to retire;
Thinks if that aptly winning him but place,
By love or power to purchase him my grace.
Which still deferring, found he still did fail,
Nor to his mind aught (kindly) took effect.
Courageously resolving to assail,
That other means does utterly neglect,
In spite what fear could any way object,
And finding time, not booting to be mute,
Thus to me lastly did prefer his suit.
Dear maid (quoth he) when Nature had ordained
Thee to the world her workmanship to bring,
All other creatures knowing she had stained,
By so divine and excellent a thing,
Only therefore to gratify a King,
Sealed thee the Charter dated at thy birth,
Mirror of heaven, the wonder of the earth.
Hoord not thy beauty, heaven does give thee store,
Pity such treasure should lie idely dead,
Which being imparted shall increase the more,
And by the interest evermore be fed,
To be man's comfort that was only bred,
which of it self is of such power and might,
As like the sun joys all things with the sight.
From those bright stars such streams of lightning glide
As through the eyes do wound the very heart,
Whose virtues may be sundry ways applide,
Hurting and healing like Achilles dart;
Such bounty Nature did to them impart,
Those lamps two planets clearer then the seven,
That with their splendour light the world to heaven.
Had Art such colors as could truly show,
Each rare perfection rightly in his kind,
And on each one sufficiently bestow,
Unto the glory properly assignde,
Painting the beauties aptly to the mind,
But O alone thy excellence is such,
As words though many lessen worth so much.
He is thy king, who is become thy subject,
Sometimes thy Lord now servant to thy love,
Thy graceful features be his only object,
Who for thy sake a thousand deaths durst prove,
A Princes prayer should some compassion move;
Let woolues and bears be cruel in their kinds,
But women meek and have relenting minds.
Daine (dear) to look upon these brimfull eyes,
With tides of tears continually frequented,
Where hope without food hunger-staruen lies,
which to betray me trecherously consented,
That for the fact being lawfully conuented,
Iudgde in these waters still to have their being,
For their presumption thy perfections seeing.
Sit thou commanding under mine estate,
Having thy tresses honored with my Crown,
As not unworthy of a meaner fate
And make the prowd'st to tremble with a frown,
Raise whom thou will, cast who^ it please thee down:
And be my love renowned through this I Will,
With all the titles fame may thee instile.
What if my Queen repining at our bliss,
Thee as did Juno Jove's fair darling keep,
Mine I Will preserve as that great god did his,
Wise Mercury lulld Argus eyes to sleep,
Love ever laughs when jealousy does weep,
When most she stirs, our power shall keep her under,
She may raise storms, but we do rule the thunder.
Thus having made the entrance to his love,
Which he supposde assuredly in time,
Of better tidings messenger might prove,
By which he after to his joys might clime,
And of my youth now being in the prime,
Leaves me, not knowing well which way to turn me,
warmed with the fire which unawares might burn me.
Upon my weakness that so strongly wrought,
Whilst in my breast a mutiny arose,
Fear and Desire a doubtful combat fought,
As like two eager and ambitious foes,
This strives to win, the other fears to loose;
By this often cleared, and by that accused,
Flattred by that most, most which me abused.
And in my self that well suspected treason,
Knowing who watched to have me for his pray,
And in so apt and dangerous a season,
when youth and beauty bare so great a sway,
And where he battery still to me might lay,
who girt so strongly every way about,
well might suspect I could not long hold out.
All doubts end fears cast utterly aside,
Resolved at last away from Court to go,
Whither it pleased my happy stars to guide,
There I my self determinde to bestow,
Until time might this passion ouer-blow,
Or if at least it wrought not the extrusion,
Might lend me power to help my resolution.
When he whose care this while me not forsook,
That many a sweet sleep for my safety brake,
Much that was pleased with the course I took,
As one that truly suffered for my sake,
Did his abode at Baynards Castle make,
which since the Court so happly did leave one,
To his protection kindly did receive me.
Whence sorrow seemed utterly exilde,
wherein my life I long before did waste,
The present time that happily beguilde,
with thought of that which was already past,
where I was now so fortunately placed;
Even as a bird escaped the Fowlers snare,
whom former danger warns to beware.
When now the King whose purposes were crossd,
which this evasion subt'ly did prevent,
And that the mean to which he trusted most,
was that which most did frustrate his intent,
Seeing his suit preposterously went,
Another course bethinkes himself to run,
Else now as far off, as when first begun.
Thenceforth devising to dissolve the mass,
That lay so full betwixt him and the light,
That in his suit so great a hindrance was
And least exspected wrought him most dispite,
Finding the cause that all things went not right,
Casts forth with my father to remove,
To make the way more cleerer to his love.
When scarcely cured of that sickely qual(...)
And that my heart was happily at case,
But as a ship that in a gentle calm,
Floates up and down upon the quiet seas,
By some rough gust some adverse star does raise,
Driven again into the troubled maine,
wh(...) well had hopde securely to have lain.
The powrefull Prince whom I did thus reject,
Heereon in Court does first this Peer disgrace,
Thereby to give the people to suspect,
To Offend in some thing sitting near his place,
Them it (by all means) urging to embrace;
Which if he clearly modeld out, that path
Should give a passage freely to his wrath.
And giving color to his ran'ckrous hate,
By such false council as to him he drew,
Cunning in all the stratagems of state,
My guiltless father ceaselesly pursue,
Whose kingly power too quickly overthrew
Him which I hoped me succor should have given,
Till from all refuge absolutely driven.
And not their clear and intellectual sight,
Into the quarrel that did thoroughly look,
Nor our alies that to their utmost might
Against his proceeding that our party took,
Unto the end that never me forsook;
Could the effect of his great power prevent,
To stay from France my banished father sent.
Not all his service to his sovereign done,
In war as valiant as in council sound,
Which from this Prince compassion might have won,
To him that faithful evermore was found,
How deeply thou ingratitude do wound:
Sure first devised to no other end,
But to grieve those whom nothing could offend.
Ay me forsaken, left unto my foe,
Thus by my fortune fro wardly betraide,
Never poor maiden was besieged so,
And all depressed that should lend me aid,
Such weight the heavens upon my birth had laid,
Yet her due merit virtue never loses,
Against her fair course though heaven it self opposes.
Embarkt for France his sd dejected eyes,
Filled with tears in plentifullest store,
His parting threatened by the lowering skies,
Then under sail from sight of any shore,
Fear him behind, and sorrow him before;
Wasting withal his sad laments in vain,
To the rude waters only to complain.
When like a dear before the hounds imboste,
when him his strength begins to forsake,
Leaves the smoothe lawnes to which he trusted most,
And to the covert does it self betake,
Doubling that creepes from brake again to brake;
Thus still I shift me from the Princes face,
which has me now continually in chase.
The coast now clear, suspicion laid to rest,
And each thing fit to further his intent,
which with much pleasure quieted his breast,
That every thing so prosperously went,
And if the rest successefully consent,
Of former aid that being quite forsaken,
He hopes the fort may easily be taken.
A Princes arms are stretched from shore to shore,
Kings sleeping see with eyes of other men,
Craft finds a key to open every door,
Little it boots in walls my self to pen,
The lamb enclosed in the lions den;
whose watchful eyes too easily descride me,
And found me soonst, where ^ur'st I thought to hide me.
My paths by spies are diligently noted,
Over me he holds so vigilant a watch,
And on my beauty he so fondly doted,
That at my looks he enuiously did catch;
Ready that stood attending at my ^atch,
where jealous love continually did ward,
Treason my handmaide, Falshoode on my guarde.
Wherefore since this so badly sorted out,
He to my shifts so narrowly me drove,
Another course must needesly cast about,
Where safer harbor happily to have,
Since insufficient this was me to save,
His power so spacious every way did lie,
That still I stood in his ambitious eye.
And fear which taught me every way to prove,
When I of many long time did debate,
Me at the last it pleased the powers to move,
To take upon me a religious state,
The holy Cloister none might violate;
Where after all these storms I did endure,
There yet at last might hope to live secure.
Wherefore to Dunmow secretly conuaide,
Unto a house that sometime was begun,
By Iuga, of our ancestry, a maid,
At whose great charge this Monastry was done,
In which she after did become a Nun;
And kept her order strictly with the rest,
Which in that place virginity professed.
Where I my self did secretly bestow,
From the vain world which I too long had tried,
One whom affliction taught my self to know,
My youth and beauty gently that did chide,
And me instructing as a skillful guide;
Printed with all such coldness in my blood,
That it might so perpetuate my good.
The King who with an envious eye did see,
His power deluded, strongly discontent,
who thence his power not possibly could free,
Which his sad breast does grievously torment;
which since that I so wilfully was bent,
And he past hope now ever to enjoy me,
Resolves by some means lastly to destroy me.
And he that knew one fit for such a fact,
To whom he durst his secret thoughts impart,
One that for him would any thing enact,
And in performance wanted not his Art,
That had a strong hand, a relentlesse heart;
On him the King (in madness so enraged)
Imposde my death, himself thereto that gagged.
Who making haste the fatal deed to do,
Thither repaires, but not as from the King,
One that did well know what belonged thereto,
Nor therein needed any tutoring,
But as one sent upon some needful thing;
with a smooth countenance and with settled brows,
Obtaines to get in where I paid my vows.
Where I alone and to his tale exposde,
As one to him a willing ear that lent,
Aye me, too soon himself to me disclosde,
And who it was that him unto me sent,
From point to point, relating his intent;
Which whilst I stood struck dumb with this invasion,
He thus pursues me strongly with persuasion.
Says he but hear how greatly thou do err,
Fondly to dote upon thine own perfection,
Whenas the King thee highly will prefer,
And that his power desires thy protection;
So indiscreetly sort not thy election,
To shut up in a melancholy cell,
That in the Court ordained was to dwell.
How dangerous is so bountiful an offer,
If thy neglect do retchlesly abuse it,
who was it ever that did see a coffer,
Filled with gold, and proffered did refuse it;
Greater thy fault the more thou do excuse it,
Thy self condemning in thine own good hap,
Refusing treasure cast into thy lap.
Wrong not thy fair youth, nor the world deprive
Of that great riches Nature freely lent,
Pity it were they by niggardize should thrive,
whose wealth by waxing craves to be spent,
For which thou after justly shall be shent;
Like to some rich churl burying his pelf,
Both to wrong others, and to starve himself.
What is this vain, this idle reputation,
which to the show you seemingly respect,
Only the weakness of imagination.
which in conclusion works no effect?
Less then that, can the worshippers protect,
That only stands upon fading breath,
And has at once the being, and the death.
A fear that grew from doting superstition,
To which still weak credulity is prone,
And only since maintained by tradition,
Into our ears impertinently blown,
By folly gathered, as by error sown;
Which us still threatening, hinders our desires,
Yet all it shows us be but painted fires.
Thee let it like this Monastry to leave,
Which youth and beauty justly may forsake,
Do not the Prince of those high joys bereave,
Which happy him eternally may make,
Which sends me else thy life away to take;
For dead to him if needsly thou will prove,
Die to thy self, and buried with his love.
Rage that resumde the color of his face,
Whose eye seemde as the Basalisks to kill,
The horror of the solitary place,
Being so fit wherein to work his will,
Each good omitted, every present ill;
Which all do seem my overthrow to further,
By fear dissuaded, menaced by murder.
In this so great and peremptory trial,
With strong temptations grievously afflicted,
With many a yielding, many a denial,
Often times acquitted, oftentimes convicted,
Whilst fear before me lively stands depicted,
And at the instant by a little breath,
Gives me my life, or sends me unto death.
When now my soul that gathred all her powers,
Which in this need might friendly give her aid,
The resolution of so many hours,
whereon herself she confidently staide;
(In this distress their help together laid,)
Making the state which she maintained good,
Expeld the fear, usurping on by blood.
The which my tongue did modestly enlarge,
From those strict limits terror it confinde,
My grieved bosom sadly to discharge,
And my lost spirits did liberally vnbinds;
To my clear eyes their residence resignde,
And strongly there mine honor to maintain,
Checked his presumption with a chaste disdain.
Finding me thus inuiolably bent,
He for my death that only did abide,
Having a poison murdring by the seent,
Unto the organ of that sense applide;
which for the same when fittest time he spide,
Unto my nosthrills forcibly did strain,
Which at an instant wrought my deadly baine.
With his rude tuch (my veil disordered then)
My face discovering, whose delitious check
Tinckted with crimson, fading soon again,
with such a sweetenes as made death even meek,
Seeming to him, beholding it even like
Unto a spark extinguished to the eye,
Breaks forth in fire e're suddenly it die.
And whilst thereat amazed he does stand,
wherein he such an excellency saw,
Ruing the spoil done by his fatal hand,
whom nothing else my beauty now did awe,
And from his eyes would force him tears to draw;
Of which deprived and settled even as dead,
Greeuing for me that it had none to shed.
When life retreating gently toward the heart,
(On whom cold death invasion now did make,
winning by little every outward part)
As more and more her succors her forsake,
To this last fort enforced her to betake,
To him whom sadly yet did me behold,
Thus with mild speech my grief I did unfold.
Is this the gift the King on me bestows,
which in this sort he sends thee to present me?
I am his friend, what gives he to his foes,
If this in token of his love be sent me?
His pleasure thus, it must not discontent me;
Yet after sure a proucrhe this shall prove,
The gift King John bestowed upon his love.
When all that race to memory are set,
And by their statues their atchieuements done
which won abroad, and which at home did get.
From son to sire, from sire unto the son,
Graced with the spoils that gloriously they won;
O that of him it only should be said,
This was that King, the murderer of a maid!
O keep it safely from the ears of Fame,
That none do hear of this unhallowed deed,
To him be secret and conceal his shame,
Lest after ages hap the same to reed,
And in their eyes the very letters bleed;
O let the grave my innocence hold,
Ere of a King so heinous sin be told.
Uttering my mind my sorrow to assuage,
The heavy burden of my pensive breast,
The poison now that inwardly did rage,
The present vigor forcibly expressed,
Me no way suffering to declare the rest;
Longer for him it was now no time to stay,
And death called on to hasten me away.
Thus in my closet being left alone.
Upon the floor uncomfortably lying,
The deed committed and the murderer gone,
Almost arrived at the point of dying,
Some of the sisters me by chance espying,
Calls all the rest that in most woeful plight,
Came to behold this miserable sight.
Where like a rose by an unkindly blast,
Among many buds that round about it grow,
The withered leaves improsp'rously does cast.
Yet all the rest their sovereign beauties show,
Amidst this goodly sisterhood even so;
Nipt with cold death untimely did I fade,
Whilst they about me pitteous wailing made.
When as my poor soul in her sudden flight,
Neglects the organ of each several sense,
with all that horror could the same affright,
Being disturbed in her parting hence,
Only constrained for her best defense,
Unto her spotless innocence to take her,
Which her not leaves when all the rest forsake her.
When all our pleasures are but childrens toys,
And as mere shadows presently do pass,
As years increasing, waning are our joys,
As we forget our favors in a glass,
Even as a tale of that which never was;
Death our delights continually does sever,
Virtue alone abandoneth us never.
And now my spirit thus liberally enlargde,
By gently flitting from this earthly room,
The debt to Nature faithfully dischargde,
And at the hour conditiond on my toombe;
Such is the heavens inevitable doombe,
Me Baynards Castle to the earth did bring,
D(...) again my place of burying.
Now scarsly was my breathless body cold,
But every where my tragedy was spread,
For tatling Fame in every place had told,
My resolution being lately dead,
Ruing my blood so prodigally shed,
And to my father flies with this mischance,
Which then remained in the Court of Frarce.
His loss too great to be bewailde with tears,
Nor were there found words to express his woe,
Terror it self so settled in his ears,
No more might enter, nothing out might go,
O while again should grief distract me (...)?
Enough of sorrow is already shown,
And telling his renewing of mine own.
Me t'shall suffice my fortunes to relate,
And bear the burden of my proper ill,
If I express my pitiful estate,
It Is all I ask, and I obtain my will,
For why, true sorrow needs not others skill,
It is too much the bitterness we taste,
without remembrance when the same is past.
Somesaie, the King repentant for this deed,
whenas remorce to thoughts thereof him drove,
Poorly disguised in a Pilgrims weed,
Offered his tears on my untimely grave,
For which, no doubt but heaven his sin forgave;
And did thereby my grieved spirit appease,
H^^^^ing contrite, I happly at ease.
Thus told my story, I my state devise,
To you sweet Madam, fitt'st with you to r^st,
which do my virtues daily exercise,
That be impressed in your patient breast,
By whom alone I rightliest am expressed;
For whom my praise (it grieves me) is too scant,
Whose happy name an Epethite shall want.
Then most dear Lady for a maidens sake,
To shead one tear, if gently you but daine,
For all my wrongs it full amends may make,
And be my pass to the Elizian plain,
In your chast^ eyes such power there does remain^,
As can the afflicted prosprously deliver,
Happy be they may look upon them ever.
FINIS.
The Legend of Pierce Gaueston.
FRom gloomy shadows of eternal night,
Shut up in darkness where I long did dwell,
O here behold me miserable wight,
Lastly, inuokt my tragedy to tell;
Give me then leave my sorrows to impart,
Somewhat to ease my poor afflicted heart.
Goddess of Arts and Arms, Pallas divine,
Let thy bright fawchion lend me Cipresse bughes,
Be thou assisting to this Poet of mine,
With funeral wreathes incompassing his brows,
Pitying my case when none would hear me weep,
To tell my sorrows, lays his own to sleep.
And mournefulst maiden of the sacred Nine,
That balefull sounds immoueably do breathe,
With thy swollen visage, and thy blubbred eine,
I unto thee my sad complaints bequeathe;
Matter that yields sufficient for thy glory,
If thou exactly prosecute my story.
Tell how the stars my wandering state did guide,
Th'unconstant turns of every changing hour,
Of many a low ebb, many as high a tide,
Many a smoothe calm, many a stormy shower,
The height whereto I lastly did ascend,
My strange beginning, and my fatal end.
When Edward sat upon the English throne,
Long-shankes that so victoriously did reign;
First of that name, and second unto none,
In all to knighthoode ever did pertain,
My life begun, and then begun my bliss,
Even in those days, those happy days of his.
So much did virtue gracious hearts inflame,
Promotion then not purchased with gold,
And in those times he that desired fame,
Bought it of them that it full dearly sold,
Hateful excess so much did not devour,
Laws had less force, and honesty more power.
And since that time so violently prays
Upon those ages that even holiest be,
Let me remember those more happy days,
In these sad hours my grieved eyes do see,
With greater grief that makes me these deplore,
When I do think of those that were before.
And Muse, to thee I sadly then appeal,
Since thou my life wilt need^ly have me show,
That I by thee may faithfully reveal,
Even what the most inquisitiue would know,
Whilst that my soul here bodied did abide,
In the vain world that pampred mein pride.
From Gascony our name and our descent,
Of which my father naturally was borne,
In all his wars that with king Edward went,
To him a (...)ege man and a soldier sworn:
And in his country ventred his estate.
To follow him that seemd to govern fate.
Whose trust that great king highly did employ,
And near his person took him for the same,
Who with my self, but then a little boy,
Unto the Court of famous England came;
Whereas the King for service he had done,
Made me a page unto the Prince his son.
In me what shape that man's did not excel,
Where every part such harmony did beat,
As in this model Nature seemd to tell,
It Was not perfection if it were not there,
As every age reserved his rarest feature,
Thereof to make so excellent a creature.
My looks the powrefull adamants to love,
Which unto them attracted every sight,
With which the same was fixed or did move,
As svmpathizing naturally delight,
That where my thoughts intended to surprise,
I at my pleasure conqu'red with mine eyes.
If even the best in Paintings curious art,
In some rare piece his workmanship should show,
Imag(...)on helping with her part,
vv^^n the hand had done the utmost it could do
Unto that body modelling a mind,
Such a one was I the mirror of my kind.
This was the bait was laid for Edwards love,
That bred the league of amity thereby,
That no misfortune after could remove,
when she the utmost of her force did try,
Nor death it self retained power to sunder,
Friendship seld seen, and in the world a wonder.
Here on this earth the only mean thou art,
Whereby we hold intelligence with heaven,
And it is thou that only do impart,
All good can to mortality be given;
That (...)red bo^d that never can be broken,
O word divine to be with reu'r^nce spoken!
With this sweet Prince in height of worldly bliss;
whilst Tutors care his wandering ears did guide,
I lived enjoying whatsoever was his,
who never my pleasures any thing denide,
Whose dear affection still me so attended,
As on my joys his happiness depended.
Whether that it my rare perfections were,
That won my youth such favor in his eye,
Or that the heavens to whom I seemde so dear,
On me down showered this blessing from the sky;
I cannot tell, but well it did direct,
That could produce such wonderful effect.
Thou Arc of heaven where wonders are enrouled,
O depth of Nature, who can look unto thee?
What might he be that has thy doom controuled?
Or has the key of Reason to undo thee?
Thy works divine, which thine alone do know,
Shallow man's wit, too short for things below.
The soul her liking subt'ly does epsy,
In the high power that is to her assignde,
By the clear sight discovering through the eye,
The thing agreeing aptliest with her kind;
And by each motion quickly apprehends,
That which it self past humane sense extends.
This Edward in the April of his age,
Whilst yet the crown sat on his fathers head,
Like that great love with his raped Phrigian page,
Me with Ambrosiall delicacies fed;
He might command that was the Sovereigns son,
And what I said, that only must be done.
My will a law autentically past,
My yea by him was never crossd with no,
Who in affection chained was so fast,
He as my shadow still with me did go,
To me this Prince so pliant was in all,
Still as an echo answering to my call.
My smiles his life, his heaven was in my sight,
And his delight confinde by my desire,
Who from my clear eyes borrowed all his light,
As pal(...)i would Cinthia from her brothers fire;
My cheek the pillow where he laid his head,
My brow his book, my bosom was his bed.
Like fair Idalia bent to amorous sportes,
With young Adonis in the wanton shade,
Figuring her passions in as sundry sorts,
As he to her indeerements to persuade
Eithers affections happily to move,
With all the tender daliances of love.
The table (thus) of our delight was laid,
Scru'd with what dainties pleasure could devise,
And many a Siren music sweetly played,
(O that youth had us wherewith to suffice)
whilst we on that vnsatiately do feed,
Which our confusion afterward did breed.
For still I spurd his violent desire,
Holding the reins wherewith he ruled the sun,
My blandishment the fuel to the fire,
In which to fry already he begun;
waxing his wings taught him Art to fly,
Who on his back might bear me through the sky.
Whilst the vain world upon us still did win,
Inticde his flatteries steadfastly to trust,
Loosing the clew which led us safely in,
Are lost within this Labyrinth of lust;
For when the flesh is nussed once in vice,
The sweet of sin makes hell a paradise
Who thy deceits vile world yet ever told,
In thee what is that is not extremely ill?
A shop where poison's only to be sold,
whose very entrance instantly does kill,
where all deformed wickedness do dwell,
And all thy ways guide head long into hell.
The King that saw his hopeful son betraide,
That like young Phaeton ventred on the skies,
Perceived his course with danger hardly staide,
(For he was grave and prouidently wise;)
That wanting skill to master youths desire,
Might by misguidance set his throne on fire.
This was a corsiue to King Edwards days,
That without ceasing fed upon his bones,
That in the day bereaved him of his case,
Breaking his night-sleepe with unquiet groans;
That did depresse and burdened him down,
More then the weight that sat upon his Crown.
When now their judgment that severely tried,
The matter whence this malladie first grew,
Likewise must now a remedy provide,
To prevent the peril likely to ensue,
The cause must end e're the effect could cease,
Else (well) of one, there many might increase.
When such in Court my opposites as were,
On all advantage that could wisely play,
Who did to me inuetterate malice bear,
That for their purpose found so fair a way;
On this their forces instantly did ground,
My name and fame perpetually to wound.
And the time fit for venting their untruth,
Me into hate more forcibly to bring,
Stick not to charge the looseness of my youth,
To Offend even in th'vnnaturalest thing,
And old fore-passed outrages awake,
With all that me contemptible might make.
Wherefore the Prince to priuacie bestowed
In Realms remote I banished to rome,
Censured of all men fitst to be abroad,
That had betraide my honest trust at home,
A diudg'd to die, if after I were found,
The day prescribed upon the English ground.
So much astonished with the sudden blow,
That I became insensible of pain,
Until awaked with sharpness of my woe,
I saw the wound which open did remain;
By which my joys still fainted more and more,
No hope at all me ever to restore.
Even as a Turtle for her faithful make,
Whose youth her dear virginity enioyde,
Sits shrouded in some solitary brake,
With melancholy pensiveness annoide;
Thus without comfort sit I all alone,
From the sweet Prince infortunately gone.
My beauty once which sdainde the summers sight,
Beaten with bleake and chilly winter storms,
Those tender limbs must travel day and night,
So often hugged in Edwards princely Arms;
Those eyes often viewing pleasure in her pride,
With fearful objects every way supplide.
And whilst these storms me strangely thus did toss,
where I my self confined yet in France,
Thwarted the while with many a grievous cross,
Inseperables to my sad mischance;
Others that stem'd the current of the time,
By which I fell, proved afterward to clime.
Camelion-like the world does alter hue,
And as false Proteus puts on sundry shapes,
One change scarce gone, another does ensue,
This filled, that likewise for promotion gapes;
Thus did they swarm like Bees about the brim,
Some drowned, and some as dang'rously swim.
And some on whom the higher powers looked fair,
Yet of the season little seemde to vaunt,
For there were clouds hung in the troubled air,
which showed something to their desire did want,
That forced them stoop which otherwise would fly,
Whilst with much care they fading honor buy.
When restless Time that never turns again,
Whose winged feet are sliding with the sun,
By the fleet hours attending on his train,
His resolution fatally begun;
In a just course eftsoone to bring about,
That which long since the wiser sort did doubt.
For whilst the King does seriously attend,
His long-hop'd voyage to the Holy Land,
For which his subjects mighty sums did lewd,
Even whilst this buisnes only was in hand;
All on the sudden happily does fall,
The death of Edward quickly altered all.
Should I assay his virtues to report,
To do the honor due unto his name,
My mean endeavors should come far too short,
And I thereby should greatly wrong the same;
But leave it to some sacred Muse to tell,
Upon whose life a Poets pen might dwell.
His princely body scarsly wrapped in lead,
Before his mournful obsequies were done,
But that the Crown was set on Edwards head,
With whom too soon my happy days begun;
After black night like brightness of the day.
All former sorrows vanished away.
When now Carnaruan calls within a while,
Whom Edward Long-shanks hated to the death,
He whom the father lately did exile,
Is to the son as precious as his breath,
What the old inscribed the younger forth did blot,
Kings wills performed, and dead men's words forgot.
When the wind wafts me to that happy place.
And soon did set me safely on that shore,
From whence I seemde but banished for a space,
That my return might honored be the more;
Unto this new King happily to leave me,
Whose princely arms were ready to receive me.
Who would have seen how that kind Roman dame.
O^e-come with joy did yield her latest breath,
Hersonne returning laden with such fame,
When thankful Rome had mourned for his death,
Might here behold her personated right,
When I approached to the Princes sight.
My Jove now Lord of the Ascendant is,
In an aspect that promisde happy speed,
Whilst in that luckie influence of his,
Some praisde the course wherein I did proceed;
Yet it to some prodigiously appears,
Telling the troubles of ensuing years.
When like to Midas all I touched was gold,
Powered as it was once down into Danaes lap,
For I obtained any thing I would,
Fortune had yet so lotted out my hap;
The chests of great men like to Oceans are,
To whom all floods by course do still repare.
The Isle of Man he first unto me gave,
To show how high I in his grace did stand,
But fearing me sufficient not to have,
I next received from his bounteous hand,
Fair Wallingford that anciently had been,
The wealthy dower of many an English Queen.
The sums his father had been leuying long,
By impositions for the war abroad,
Other his princely benefits among,
At once on me he bounteously bestowed;
When those which saw how much on me he cast,
Soon found his wealth sufficed not his waste.
He gives me then chief Secretaries place.
Thereby to train me in affairs of state,
And those high rooms that I did hold to grace,
Me Earl of Cornwall franckly did create;
And that in Court he freely might partake me,
Of England Lord high Chamberlain did make me.
And that he would more strongly me alie,
To back me against their insolent ambition,
Does his fair Cosen unto me affie,
A Lady of right virtuous condition,
which his dear sister prosperously bare,
To the Earl of Gloucester blood-ennobled Clare.
O sacred bounty, mother of content,
Fautresse and happy nourisher of Arts,
That give success to every high intent,
The Conqueror of the most noblest hearts:
High grace into mortality infused,
Pity it is that e're thou wast abused.
When those that did my banishment procure,
Still in my bosom hated did abide,
And they before that could me not endure,
Are now much more impatient of my pride;
For emulation ever did attend,
Upon the great, and shall unto the end.
And into favor closly working those,
That from mean places lifted up by me,
And factious spirits being fittest to oppose,
Them that perhaps too powerful else might be;
That even against envy raised by my hand,
Me must uphold to make themselves to stand.
And since the frame by fortune so contrived,
To give protect to my ambitious ways,
Urging thereby their hate to me derived,
From those hie honors (...) upon me lays,
Drawing the King my courses to partake,
Still to maintain what he himself did make.
Thus does my youth still exercise extremes,
My heed fond rashness to forerunne my fall,
My wit mere folly, and my hopes but dreams,
My council serves my self but to inthrall,
That me abused with a vain illusion,
When all I did intending my confusion.
And now the King, to hasten his repair,
Himself by marriage highly to advance,
With Isabel a Princess, young and fair,
As was her father Philip king of France,
When now the more to perfect my command,
Leaves unto me protection of the land.
My power confirmed so absolute withal.
That I drank pleasure in a plenteous cup,
when there was none me to account to call,
All to my hands so freely rendered up,
That earth to me no greater bliss could bring,
Except to make me greater than a King.
When being now got as high as I could clime,
That the vain world thus bountifully blessed,
Franckly embrace the benefit of time,
Fully t'enioy that freely I possessed;
Strongly maintaining he was worse than mad,
Fondly to spare, a Princes wealth that had.
Their counsels when continually I crosst,
As scorning their authority and blood;
And in those things concernd their honor's most,
In those against them ever most I stood:
And things most public privately extend,
To feed my riot that had never end.
When lastly Fortune like a treacherous foe,
That had so long attended on my fall,
In the plain path wherein I was to go,
Lays many a bait, to train me on withal;
Till by her skill she cunningly had brought me,
Unto the place where at her will she caught me.
The mighty business falling then in hand,
Triumphs ordained to welcome his return
(Before the French in honor of the land)
with all my power I labourd to adiourne;
Till all their charge was lastly over thrown,
who likde to have seen no glory but mine own.
Thus every thing me forward still does set,
Even as an engine forcing by the slight,
One mischief thus a second does beget,
And that does lead the other but to right;
Yet every one himself employing wholly,
In their just course to prosecute my folly.
Which when they found how still I did retain,
The Ambitious course wherein I first began,
And lastly felt, that under my disdain
Into contempt continually they ran;
Take arms at once to remedy their wrong,
which their cold spirits had suffered but too long.
Me boldly charging to abuse the King
A wastefull spender of his needful treasure,
A secret thief of many a sacred thing,
And that I led him to unlawful pleasure,
That never did in any thing delight,
But what might please my sensual appetite.
That as a scourge upon the land was sent,
Whose hateful life the cause had only been,
The State so universally was rent,
Whose ill increasing every day was seen;
I was reproached openly of many,
Who pitti'd none, not pitti'd now of any.
And for opposde by men of greatest might,
(The King my danger that had wisely waide)
That did pursue me with such deadly spite,
Me into Ireland secretly conuaide,
Until he might my peace again procure,
And his own safety better might assure.
As one whose house remedilesly burning,
Seeing his goods now heapt together lost,
His grief no whit disburthen'd by his mourning,
Taking some one thing that he loves most,
To some remote place does with that retire,
Leaving the rest to the mercy of the fire.
Yet he so much that still did me esteem,
That ever strove to cover my disgrace,
To make my absence otherwise to seem,
And to the world to bear a fairer Face,
Lest my exile suggested by their hate,
Might overthrow my liuelihoode and estate.
By their near council that were him about,
His Deputy of Ireland does me make,
And causde it each-where to be given out,
My journey thither instantly to take,
To stop their mouths that gladly would embrace,
Any report might tend to my disgrace.
There lived I in that honorable sort,
As to my high place purchased renown;
with no less bounty managing a court,
Then hourly craved th'reuenues of a Crown;
To me his love such sovereignty did bring.
That though he raignde, I absolutely King.
Few weeks there went but some the channel crosst,
With some such present Princes hold in price,
Some jewel that him infinitely cost,
Or sumptuous roabe of excellent devise;
When they that saw what he upon me cast,
Found that his treasure long time could not last.
And since the flood me followed in this wise,
His fulness I as amply entertain,
It might show folly to be found precise,
That to refuse which fell as did the rain,
Such as no age before did ever win,
And since his being, yet has never bin.
When now th'abated Baronry that found,
The cunning used for covering of my flight,
That me but shifted to a surer ground,
On which so vainly they bestowed their might;
Perceived far off where greater peril rose,
Then they could find how rightly to dispose.
Like those that strive to stop some violent sourse,
whose plenty Nature planted not for bounds,
Climes above all the opposers of his course,
Or let at large the neighboring plain surrounds,
That in it self s'enated is blessed,
That will the more be, more it depressed.
And fearing now the force I had abroad,
who knew the way the Irish hearts to win,
Fitter by far at home to be bestowed,
(And to the State more safety found therein)
where though my riots they could not prevent,
Yet might survey the giddy course I went.
Whereof they scarsly entertained the thought,
And did thereto but seemingly descend,
But that his love immediately it caught,
Nor cares he by it what they do intend;
Plot what they could, so he thereby might gain him,
That with delight, which still did entertain him.
O how thy presence majesty commands!
That so severely humbles every eye,
whose only self acts more than many hands,
In thee such virtue secretly does lie,
Having about thee the high power of fate,
Art both emperious over love and hate.
He that occasion never did neglect,
That aught unto my happiness might win,
My buisnes did so carefully effect,
That ever was so fortunate therein,
As he to pass does prouidently bring,
Before deemde so impossible a thing.
And Messengers immediately are sent,
Me into England instantly to call,
Authorizde by the general consent,
Although not likde of inwardly of all;
Yet, it was sufficient that it freedom gave me,
But to be there where he desirde to have me.
My sails now swelling with a prosperous wind,
The boisterous seas do homage to mine eyes,
That much above their usual course are kind,
All lowering clouds abandoning the skies,
Nothing discerned that any whit might fear me,
Fortune herself sittes at the helm to steare me.
What time the King his progress then did take,
That part of Wales pretending now to see,
For which he forward instantly did make,
which was (indeed) there but to meet with me,
with all the favor that he could devise,
To give me honor in the public eyes.
Where for my landing long he did provide,
That ^ought might want intending my delight,
And at each place as leasurely we ride,
Did (...) with some pleasing sight,
And unto L^ndon to the pompous Court,
Bring, me in the magnificentest sort.
Which proved but spurs to my vntamde desire,
Giving the (...) to my (...)ious will,
^ho let me forth unto my full ca^^re,
On places slippe^y, and my manage ill,
Small my forefight, and overmuch my haste,
That me alas infortunately cast.
The Princes ear, that having at command,
That who would aught have, me must entertain,
And yet before it passde my gripple hand,
Got the greatst share unto my private gain;
Nor card I what from any I did wring,
Many thereby too much impouerishing.
And daily begging of Monopolies,
Taking the lands belonging to the Crown,
(...) ^ence transporting those commodities,
(...) England useful coming of her own,
And basely selling offices (ere then)
The due reward of best deserving men.
And being irrecouerably proud,
Held all things vile that suited not my vain,
Nothing might pass, my judgment not allowed,
A great opinion to my wit to gain,
Giving vile terms and nicke-names of disgrace,
To men that sat in honorable place.
By which brake out that execrable rage,
That long before had boiled in their blood,
And for revenge they boldly them engage,
When lastly for their liberty they stood;
And in this quarrel open Arms they take,
Or to mar all, or better it to make.
They durst affirm my mother was a witch,
And for the fact condemned burnt to be,
And I her son and rightly of her pitch,
She had bequeathed her damned Art to me;
Urging it an inseparable thing,
That I by Magic wrought upon the King.
And into France did charge me to convey,
A goodly table that was massy gold,
A relic kept at Windsor many a day,
^^at to King Arthur did belong of old;
Upon whose margent as they did surmise,
Merlin ingraued many prophecies.
And by appealing to the sea of Rome,
A Legate thence procuring to the land,
With malediction by the Churches doom,
On any one that on my part should stand:
The King suspending should he not consent,
And ratify the general intent.
Which they did but to prosperously effect,
Being so strong to counterprize his force,
The Clergy still being ready to direct
Them the best way in all their restless course,
That at the last they strongly him procure,
By solemn oath me ever to abjure.
Th'vncertaine biding of each earthly thing,
(Set out most lively in my starre-crost state)
That does remain in Fortunes mannaging,
Appearing in my variable fate
On me that frowned and flattered me so often,
Casting me down and setting me aloft.
To Flanders then my present course I cast,
Which being the near'st, lay fittest for my ease,
Safest the way the sooner it was past,
All not my friends that were abroad at seas;
Such means in France they daily do procure,
That there my self I doubted to secure.
And though I changed my habit and my name,
Because I meant to live unknown to any,
Yet swift report had so divulged my shame,
My hated life was published to too many;
In every street that as I pas'd along,
I was the talk of every common tongue.
And finding that which only I did crave,
A secret means to send unto the King,
To me certain intelligence that gave,
Of the state and course of every thing;
Who labored now (more ever then before)
Me into England safely to restore.
For which relying on my Sovereigns love,
(To whom my life had ever been so dear)
Which I then now had never more cause to prove,
Striving t'obtaine (if any mean there were;)
A dispensation for his former oath,
In their dispight that thereto seemed most loath.
Where casting many a sundry course at length,
(Being by marridge mightily alide,
And but too much presuming of my strength)
Resolved for England, come what could be^ide;
And in a ship that for the journey lay,
Thither my self did suddenly convey.
And safely landed on the wished shore.
Unto the Court me secretly betook,
Of which the King had notice long before,
And for my coming every day did look,
Wisely that plotted when I should arrive,
All helpefull means my safety to contriue.
Which soon being known whilst yet their blood was hot,
That to their strength now only were to trust,
For what before was done prevailed not,
And for my sake the King did prove unjust;
Bringing thereby whilst trifling they did stand,
Wrong to themselves, and danger to the land.
Now when the time did generally distaste,
Our lewd and inconsiderate neglect,
when those in Court that our high favors plac'de,
Give us just cause their dealings to suspect,
And they that viewed us with the pleasedst eye,
Yet at our actions sometimes look awric.
Wherefore the King enforced to provide,
A present Army trusting to his friends,
Rep^irde to York until he were supplide,
From whence for, aid he into Scotland sends,
To warlike Balioll and to Wales, from whence
He might get power to frustrate their pretense.
But they his purpose wholly intercept,
Not now to seek in any secret thing,
The marches that so vigilantly kept,
And yet renounce all malice to the King;
Only to chastise my abhorred sin,
Who had the cause of all this trouble bin.
Thus Like a ship dismembered of the sails,
Forced by the wind against the streamefull tide,
From place to place with every billow hales,
And as it haps from shore to shore does ride;
As that poor vessel rests my brittle stay,
Nearer the land, still nearest cast away.
Corsiue of kingdoms home-begotten hate,
which in no limits ever yet wast bounded,
when did thou seize even on the greatest state,
By thee that was not utterly confounded?
How many kingdom be there that do rue thee?
Happy the world was till too well it knew thee.
Thus of our succor instantly bereft,
Having but now some little force at sea,
Lastly to trust to, only us was left,
On which our hope infortunately lay;
Which he to hasten, speedily does make,
His former courses forced to forsake.
The present danger mannaging it so,
That did for aid importunately call,
Wherefore in York as farthest from the foe,
Leaves me unto the safeguard of the wall;
Till his return me further help might give,
Whom more and more he studied to relecue.
From Bedford now the Army setting on,
The Appointed randy whore they gathered head,
When they had notice that the King was gone,
Upon their way more hastily them sped,
(Me t'afflict as purposed they were,)
Whose presence else might force them to forbear.
To Skarborough immediately I post,
With the small force my fortune then did lend me,
A Fort best fitting standing on the coast,
And of all other likest to defend me,
And came the worst, resistlesse were their might.
The sea should safely privilege my flight.
But they the City lying round about,
Keep every passage with a watchful spy,
That gave them notice of my passing out,
With their light horse pursue me by and by;
Whereas upon me suddenly they came,
E're I had time to fortify the same.
Along the lands toward Oxford they convey me,
Wondering my sight as birds do at the Owl,
And by the way continually they bray me,
As hungry woolues at passengers do howl;
Each one exulting that I now was caught,
That in the land such mischief ever wrought.
And being brought to Dedington at last,
Where the Ea^le of Pombrooke wild me to be staid,
To understand (...) further that I past,
Things to my charge that secretly were laid;
And to the King he speedily had sent.
T'acquaint him with the general intent.
But the Earl of Warwick (lying but too near)
(The dog of Arden that I used to call,)
That deadly hatred still to me did bear,
And that I ever doubted most of all;
Thither repairing with a powerful band,
Ceazed upon me with a violent hand.
And unto Warwick carrying me along,
Where he had long desired me to get,
With friends and tenants absolutely strong,
Whom all the puissant Barronry abet;
Since now occasion offered them such hold,
Hasten my death by all the means they could.
North from the Town, a mile or very near,
An easy hill in public view does lie,
Blacklow then called of those that dwelled there,
Near to the ancient Hermitage of Guy;
Thither with armed bands strongly they me led,
Whereas I lastly forfa^ed my head.
My sundry passions having thus expressed,
In the sad tenor of my tragic Tale,
Let me return unto the fields of rest,
Thither transported by a prosperous gale;
I leave the world my destiny to view,
Bidding it thus for evermore a diew.
FINIS.

