POEMS:

BY WILLIAM DRVMMOND, of Hawthrone-denne.

The second Impression.

EDINBVRGH,

Printed by ANDRO HEART. 1616.

To the Author.
WHile thou do praise the Roses, Lillies, Gold,
Which in a dangling Tresse and Face appear,
Still stands the Sun in Skies thy Songs to hear,
A Silence sweet each Whispering Wind does hold;
Sleep in Pasitheas Lap his Eyes does fold,
The Sword falls from the God of the fifth Sphere,
The Herds to feed, the Birds to sing, forbear,
Each Plant breathes Love, each Flood and Fountain cold:
And hence it is, that that once Nymphe, now Tree,
Who did the Amphrisian Shepherds Sighs disdain,
And scorned his Lays, mo^'d by a sweeter Vein,
Is become pitiful, and follows Thee:
Thee loves, and vanteth that she has the Grace,
A Garland for thy Locks to enterlace.
PARTHENIVS.

POEMS:
BY W. D.
THE FIRST PART.
SONNET.
IN my first Years, and Prime yet not at Hight,
When sweet Conceits my Wits did entertain,
Ere Beauties Force I knew or false Delight,
Or to what Oar she did her Captives chain;
Led by a sacred Troop of Phoebus Train,
I first began to read, then Love to write,
And so to praise a perfect Red and White,
But (God wot) wist not what was in my Brain:
Love smylde to see in what an awful Guise
I turned those Antiques of the Age of Gold,
And that I might more Mysteries behold,
He set so fair a Volumne to mine Eyes,
That I [quires closed which (dead) dead Sighs but breath]
Joy on this living Book to read my Death.
SON.
I Know that all beneath the Moon decays,
And what by Mortalles in this World is brought,
In Times great Periods shall return to naught,
That fairest States have fatal Nights and Days:
I know how all the Muses heavenly Lays,
With Toil of Spright which are so dearly bought,
As idle Sounds of few, or none are sought,
And that naught lighter is than airie Praise.
I know frail Beauty like the purple Flower,
To which one Morn of Birth and Death affords,
That Love a Iarring is of Minds Accords,
Where Sense and Will inuassall Reasons Power:
Know what I list, this all can not me move,
But that ( o me!) I both must write, and love.
SON.
Ye who so curiously do paint your Thoughts,
Enlightening every Line in such a Guise,
That they seem rather to have fallen from Skies,
Than of a humane Hand be mortal Draughts;
In one Part Sorrow so tormented lies,
As if his Life at every Sigh would part,
Love here blindfolded stands with Bow and Dart,
There Hope looks pale, Despair with rainie Eyes:
Of my rude Pincell look not for such Art,
My Wit I find now lessened to devise
So high Conceptions to express my Smart,
And some think Love but feigned, if too too wise:
These troubled Words and Lines confused you find,
Are like unto their Model my sick Mind.
SON.
Fair is my Yoke, though grievous be my Pains,
Sweet are my Wounds, although they deeply smart,
My Bit is Gold, though shortened be the Raines,
My Bondage brave, though I may not depart:
Although I burn, the Fire which does impart
Those Flames, so sweet reviving Force contains,
That (like Arabias Bird) my wasted Heart
Made quick by Death, more lively still remains.
I joye, though often my waking Eyes spend Tears,
I never want Delight, even when I groan,
Best companied when most I am alone,
A Heaven of Hopes I have midst Hells of Fears:
Thus every Way Contentment strange I find,
But most in Her rare Beauty, my rare Mind.
SON.
HOw that vaste Heaven entitled First is rold,
If any other Worlds beyond it lie,
And People living in Eternity,
Or Essence pure that does this All uphold:
What Motion have those fixed Sparks of Gold,
The wandering Carbuncles which shine from hie,
B^ Sprights, or Bodies, contrare-Wayes in Sky
If they be turned, and mortal Things behold:
How Sun posts Heaven about, how Nights pale Queen
With borrowed Beams looks on this hanging Round,
What Cause fair Iris has, and Monsters seen
In Aires la^ge Fields of Light, and Seas profound,
Did hold my wand^ing Thoughts; when thy sweet Eye
Bade me leave all, and only think on Thee.
SON.
VAunt not, fair Heavens, of your two glorious Lights,
Which though most bright, yet see not when they shine,
And shining, cannot show their Beams divine
Both in one Place, but part by Days and Nights,
Earth, vaunt not of those Treasures ye enshrine,
Held only dear because hid from our Sights,
Your pure and burnished Gold, your Diamonds fine,
Snow-passing Iuorie that the Eye delights:
Nor Seas of those dear Wares are in you found,
Vaunt not, rich Pearl, red Corrall, which do stir
A fond Desire in Fools to plunge your Ground
Those all (more fair) are to be had in Her:
Pearl, Iuorie, Corrall, Diamond, Suns, Gold,
Teeth, Neck, Lips, Heart, Eyes, Hair, are to behold.
SON.
THat learned Grecian (who did so excel
In Knowledge passing Sense, that he is named
Of all the after-Worlds Divine) does tell,
That at the Time when first our Souls are framed,
Ere in these Mansions blind they come to dwell,
They live bright Rays of that Eternal Light,
And others see, know, love, in Heavens great Hight,
Not toylde with ought to Reason does rebel;
Most true it is, for straight at the first Sight
My Mind me told, that in some other Place
It elsewhere saw the Idea of that Face,
And loved a Love of heavenly pure Delight?
No Wonder now I feel so fair a Flame,
Since I Her loved ere on this Earth she came.
SON.
NOw while the Night her sable Veil has spread,
And silently her restie Coach does roll,
Rowsing with Her from TETHIS azure Bed
Those starrie Nymphs which dance about the Pole,
While CYNTHIA in purest Cipres cled,
The Latmian Shepherd in a Trance descries,
And whiles looks pale from hight of all the Skies,
Whiles dies her Beauties in a bashful Red,
While Sleep (in Triumph) closed has all Eyes,
And Birds and Beasts a Silence sweet do keep,
And PROTE us monstrous People in the Deep,
The Winds and Waves (hushed up) to rest entise,
I wake, muse, weep, and who my Heart has slain
See still before me to augment my Pain.
SON.
Sleep, Silence Child, sweet Father of soft Rest,
Prince whose Approach Peace to all Mortals brings,
Indifferent Host to Shepherds and to Kings,
Sole Comforter of Minds with Grief oppressed.
Lo, by thy charming Rod all breathing things
Lie slumbring, with forgetfulness possessed,
And yet over me to spread thy drowsy Wings
Thou spares (alas) who cannot be thy Guest.
Since I am thine, O come, but with that Face
To inward Light which thou art wont to show,
With fained Solace ease a true felt Woe,
Or if deaf God thou do deny that Grace,
Come as thou will, and what thou will bequeath,
I long to kiss the Image of my Death.
SON.
Fair Moon who with thy Cold and Silver Shine
Makes sweet the Horror of the dreadful Night,
Delighting the weak Eye with Smiles divine,
Which PHEBVS dazells with his too much Light.
Bright Queen of the first Heaven, if in thy Shrine
By turning often, and Heauenseternall Might,
Thou have not yet that once sweet Fire of thine
ENDEMION, forgot, and Lovers Plight?
If Cause like thine may Pity breed in thee,
And Pity somewhat else to it obtain,
Since thou have Power of Dreams as well as He
Who paints strange Figures in the slumbring Brain:
Now while She sleeps in doleful Guise her Show
These Tears, and the black Map of all my Woe.
SON.
Lamp of Heavens Crystal Hall that brings the Hours,
Eye-dazaler who makes the ugly Night
At thine Approach fly to her slumbrie Bowrs,
And fills the World with Wonder and Delight:
Life of all Life's, Death*giuer by thy Flight
To Southern Pole from these six Signs of ours,
Goldsmiths of all the Stars, with Silver bright
Who Moon enamells, Apelles of the Flowrs.
Ah, from those watrie Plains thy golden Head
Raise up, and bring the so long lingering Morn,
A Grave, nay Hell, I find become this Bed,
This Bed so grievously where I am torn:
But (woe is me) though thou now brought the Day,
Day shall but serve more Sorrow to display.
SONG.
IT was the time when to our Northern Pole
The brightest Lamp of Heaven begins to roll,
When Earth more wanton in new Robes appears,
And scorning Skies her Flowrs in Raine-bowes bears,
On which the Air moist Saphires does bequeath,
Which quake to feel the kissing Zephires breath:
When Birds from shadie Groves their Love forth warble,
And Sea like Heaven, Heaven looks like smoothest Marble,
When I, in simple Course, free from all Cares,
Far from the muddie Worlds captiuing Snares,
By Oras flowrie Bancks alone did wander,
Ora that sports her like to old Meander,
A Flood more worthy Fame and lasting Praise
Than that which Phaetons Fall so high did raise:
Into whose moving Glass the Milke-white Lillies
Do dress their Tresses and the Daffadillies.
Where Ora with a Wood is crowned about
And seems forget the Way how to come out,
A Place there is, where a d^licious Fountain
Springs from the swelling Paps of a proud Mountain,
Whose falling Streams the quiet Caves do wound,
And make the Echoes shrill resound that Sound.
The Laurel there the shining Channel graces,
The Palm her Love with long-stretch'd Arms embraces,
The Poplar spreds her Branches to the Sky,
And hides from sight that azure Cannopie.
The Streams the Trees, the Trees their leaves still nourish,
That Place grave Winter finds not without Flourish.
If living Eyes Elysian fields could see
This little Arden might Elysium be.
Here Diane often used to repose Her,
And Acidalias Queen with Mars rejoice her:
The Nymphs often here do bring their Maunds with Flowers,
And Anadeames weaue for their Paramours,
The Satyrs in those Shades are heard to languish,
And make the Shepherds Partners of their Anguish,
The Shepherds who in Barks of tender Trees
Do grave their Loves, Disdaines, and Ielousies,
Which Phillis when there by Her Flocks she feeds
With Pity whiles, sometime with laughter reedeth.
Near to this place when Sun in midst of Day,
In highest top of Heaven his Coach did stay,
And (as aduising) on his Carier glanced
The way did rest, the space he had advanced
His panting Steeds along those Fields of light,
Most princely looking from that ghastly hight:
When most the Grasshoppers are heard in Meadows,
And lofty Pines have small, or else no Shadows,
It was my hap, O woeful hap! to bide
Where thick^st Shades me from all Rays did hide
Into a shut-vp-place, some Syluans Chamber,
Whose Seeling spread was with the Locks of Amber
Of new-bloom'd Sicamors, Floor wrought with Flowers,
More swe^te and rich than those in Princes Bowres*
Here Adon blush't, and Clitia all amazed
Looked pale, with Him who in the Fountain gazed,
The Aramanthus smyl'd, and that sweet Boy
Which sometime was the God of Delos joy:
The brave Carnation, speckled Pinke here shined,
The Violet her fainting Head declined
Beneath a drowsy Chasbow, all of Gold
The Marigo^d her leaves did here unfold.
Now ^hile that ravished with delight and wonder,
Half in a trance I lay those Archers under,
The season, silence, place, did all entise
Eyes heavy lids to bring Night on their Skies,
Which softly having stolen themselves together
(Like Evening Clouds) me placed I wot not whether.
As Cowards leave the Fort which they should keep
My senses one by one gave place to Sleep,
Who followed with a Troop of golden Slombers
Thrust from my quiet Brain all base Encombers,
And thrice me touching with his Rod of Gold,
A Heaven of Visions in my Temples rolled,
To countervaile those Pleasures were bereft me,
Thus in his silent Prison closed he left me.
Me thought through all the Neighbor Woods a noyce
Of Quiristers, more sweet than Lute or voice,
(For those harmonious sounds to JOVE are given
By the swift touches of the nyne-string'd Heaven,
Such are, and nothing else) did wound mine Ear,
No Soul, that then became all Ear to hear:
And whilst I listening lay O ghastly wonder!
I saw a pleasant Myrtle cleave asunder,
A Myrtle great with birth, from whose rent womb
Three naked Nymphs more white than snow forth come.
For Nymphs they seemed, about their heavenly Faces
In Waves of Gold did flow their curling Tresses,
About each Arm, their Arms more white than milk,
Each wear a blushing Armelet of silk,
The Goddesses such were that by Scamander,
Appeared to the Phrygian Alexander,
Aglaia, and her Sisters such perchance
Be, when about some sacred Spring they dance*
But scarce the Grove their naked Beauties graced,
And on the amorous Verdure had not traced,
When to the Flood they ran, the Flood in Robes
Of curling Crystal to breasts Yuorie Globes
Who wrapped them all about, yet seemed take pleasure
To show warm Snowes throughout her liquid Azure.
Look how Prometheus Man when heavenly Fire
First gave him Breath Days Brandon did admire,
And wondered of this Worlds Amphitheater,
So gazed I on those new guests of the Water.
All three were fair, yet one excelled as far
The rest, as Phoebus does the Cyprian Star,
Or Diamonds small Gemmes, or Gemmes do other,
Or Pearls that shining shell is called their Mother.
Her hair more bright than are the Mornings Beams
Hang in a golden shower above the Streams,
And (sweetly tous'd) her forehead sought to cover,
Which seen did straight a Sky of Milk discover,
With two fair Brows, Loves Bows, which never bend
But that a Golden Arrow forth they send.
Beneath the which two burning Planets glancing
Flasht Flames of Love, for Love there still is dancing.
Her either Cheek resembl'd a blushing Morn,
Or Roses Gueules in field of Lillies borne:
Betwixt the which a Wall so fair is raised,
That it is but abased even when praised.
Her Lips like Rows of Corrall soft did swell,
And the one like the other only does excel:
The Tyrian Fish looks pale, pale look the Roses,
The Rubies pale, when Mouths sweet Cherrie closes.
Her Chinne like silver Phebe did appear
Dark in the midst to make the rest more clear:
Her Neck seemed framed by curious Phidias Master,
Most smooth, most white, a piece of Alabaster.
Two foaming Billows flowed upon her Breast,
Which did their tops with Corrall red encrest:
There all about as Brooks them sport at leisure,
With Circling Branches veins did swell in Azure:
Within those Crookes are only found those Isles
Which Fortunate the dreaming old World Styles.
The rest the Streams did hide, but as a Lilly
Suncke in a Christalls fair transparent Belly.
I, who yet humane weakness did not know
(For yet I had not felt that Archers Bow,
Ne could I think that from the coldest Water
The winged Youngling burning Flames could scatter)
On every part my vagabounding Sight
Did cast, and drown mine Eyes in sweet Delight.
What wondrous Thing is this that Beautie's named
(Said I) I find I heretofore have dreamed?
And never known in all my flying Days
Good unto this, that only merits Praise.
My Pleasures have been Pains, my Comforts Crosses,
My Treasure Poverty, my Gains but Losses.
O precious Sight! which none does else descrie
Except the burning Sun, and quiuering I.
And yet O dear bought Sight! O would for ever
I might enjoy you, or had joyed you never!
O happy Flood! if so ye might abide,
Yet ever glory of this Moments Pride,
Adjure your Rillets all now to behold Her,
And in their Crystal Arms to come and fold Her:
And since ye may not ay your Bliss embrace,
Draw thousand Pourtraits of Her on your Face,
Pourtraits which in my Heart be more apparent,
If like to yours my Breast but were transparent.
O that I were while she does in you play,
A Daulphine to transport Her to the Sea,
To none of all those Gods I would Her rander
From Thule to Inde though I should with Her wander.
Oh! what is this? the more I fix mine Eye,
Mine Eye the more new Wonders does epsy,
The more I spy, the more in uncouth fashion
My Soul is ravished in a pleasant Passion.
But look not Eyes, as more I would have said
A Sound of whirling Wheels me all dismayde,
And with the Sound forth from the timorous Bushes
With storme-like Course a sumptuous Chariot rushes,
A Chariot all of Gold, the Wheels were Gold,
The Nails, and Axetree Gold on which it rolled:
The vpmost Part a Scarlet Veil did cover,
More rich than Danaes Lap spread with her Lover:
In midst of it in a triumphing Chair,
A Lady sat miraculously fair,
Whose pensive Countenance, and Looks of Honor,
Do more allure the Mind that thinks on Her,
Than the most wanton Face and amorous Eyes,
That Amathus or flowrie Paphos sees.
A Crew of Virgins made a Ring about Her,
The Diamond she, they seem the Gold without Her.
Such Thetis is when to the Billows rore
With Mcrmaids nyce she danceth on the Shore:
So in a sable Night the Suns bright Sister
Among the lesser twinkling Lights does glister.
Fair Yoakes of Ermelines, whose Color pass
The whitest S^owes on aged Grampius Face,
More swift than Venus B^rds this Chariot guided
To the astonished Bancke where as it bided.
But long it did not bide, when poor those Streams
Aye me! it made, transporting those rich Gemmes,
And by that Burden lighter, swiftly driued
Till (as me thought) it at a Tower arrived.
Upon a Rock of Crystal shining clear
Of Diamonds this Castle did appear,
Whose rising Spires of Gold so high them reared
That Atlas* like it seemed the Heaven they beared.
Amidst which Hights on Arches did arise
(Arches which guilt Flames brandish to the Skies)
Of sparking Topaces, Proud, Gorgeous, Ample,
(Like to a little Heaven) a sacred Temple:
Whose Walls no Windows have, nay all the Wall
Is but one Window, Night there does not fall
More when the Sun to Western World* declineth,
Than in our Zenith when at Noone He shines.
Two flaming Hills the Passage strait defend
Which to this radiant Building does ascend,
Upon whose Arching tops on a Pilastre
A Port stands open, raised in Loves Disastre,
For none that narrow Bridge and Gate can pass,
Who have their Faces seen in Venus Glass.
If those within, but to come forth do venture,
That stately Place again they never enter.
The Precinct strengthened with a Ditch appears,
In which does swell a Lake of Inkie Tears
Of madding Lovers, who abide there moning,
And thicken even the Air with piteous Groaning.
This Hold (to brave the Skies) the Destines framed,
The World the Fort of Chastity it named.
The Queen of the third Heaven once to appall it,
The God of Thrace here brought who could not thrall it,
For which he vowed never Arms more to put on,
And on Riphean Hills was heard to groan.
Here Psyches Lover hurles his Darts at randon,
Which all for naught him serve as does his Brandon.
What bitter Anguish did invade my Mind,
When in that Place my Hope I saw confinde,
Where with high-towring Thoughts Ionely reached Her,
Which did burn up their Wings when they approacht Her?
Me thought I set me by a Cypress Shade,
And Night and Day the Hyacinthe there read:
And that bewa^ling Nightingalles did borrow
Plaints of my Plaint, and Sorrows of my Sorrow.
My Food was W^rmewood, mine own Tears my Drink,
My Rest on Death, and sad Mishaps to think.
And for such Thoughts to have my Heart enlarged,
And ease mine Eyes ^ith brinie Tribute charged,
Over a Brook (me thought) my pining Face
I laid, which then (as grieved at my Disgrace)
A Face Me showed again so ouer-clouded,
That at the Sight mine Eyes afray'd them shrouded.
This is the guerdon Love, this is the Gain
In end which to thy Servants does remain,
I would have said, when Fear made Sleep to leave me,
And of those fatal Shadows did bereave me.
But ah alas! in stead to dream of Love,
And Woes, me made them in effect to prove,
For what into my troubled Brain was painted,
I waking found that Time, and Place presented.
SON.
AH burning Thoughts now let me take some Rest,
And your tumultuous Broils a while appease,
Is It not enough, Stars, Fortune, Love molest
Me all at once, but ye must to displease?
Let Hope (though false) yet lodge within my Breast,
My high Attempt (though dangerous) yet praise,
What though I trace not right Heavens steppie Ways?
It does suffice, my Fall shall make me blessed.
I do not doat on Days, nor fear not Death,
So that my Life be brave, what though not long?
Let me Renowned live from the vulgar Throng,
And when ye list (Heavens) take this borrowed Breath.
Men but like Visions are, Time all does claim,
He lives, who dies to win a lasting Name.
MADRIGALL.
ADEDALE of my Death,
Now I resemble that subtle Worm on Earth
Which prone to its own evil can take no rest.
For with strange Thoughts possessed,
I feed on fading Leaves
Of Hope, which me deceaues,
And thousand Webs does warpe within my Breast*
And thus in end unto my self I weaue
A fast-shut Prison, no, but even a Grave.
SEXTAIN.
THe Heaven does not contain so many Stars,
So many Leaves not prostrate lie in Woods,
When Autumne's old, and Boreas sounds his Wars,
So many Waves have not the Ocean Floods,
As my rent Mind has Torments all the Night,
And Heart spends Sighs, when PHE^VS brings the Light.
Why should I been a Partner of the Light?
Who crossed in Birth by bad Aspects of Stars,
Have never since had happy Day nor Night,
Why was not I a Liver in the Woods,
Or Citizen of THETIS Crystal Floods,
Than made a Man, for Love and Fortunes Wars?
I look each Day when Death should end the Wars,
Uncivil Wars, twixt Sense and Reasons Light,
My Pains I count to Mountains, Meads, and Floods,
And of my Sorrow Partners makes the Stars,
All desolate I haunt the fearful Woods
When I should give my self to Rest at Night.
With watchful Eyes I never behold the Night,
Mother of Peace, but ah to me of Wars,
And CYNTHIA Queen like shining through the Woods,
When straight those Lamp^ come in my Thought, whose Light
My Judgment dazel'd, passing brightest Stars,
And then mine Eyes en-isle themselves with Floods.
Turn to their Springs again first shall the Floods,
Clear shall the Sun the sad and gloomie Night,
To dance about the Pole cease shall the Stars,
The Elements renew their ancient Wars
Shall first, and be deprived of Place and Light,
Ere I find Rest in City, F^elds, or Woods.
End these my Days Endwellers of the Woods,
Take this my Life ye deep and raging Floods,
Sun never rise to clear me with thy Light,
Horror and Darkness keep a lasting Night,
Consume me Care with thy intestine Wars,
And stay your Influence over me bright Stars.
In vain the Stars, Endwellers of the Woods,
Care, Horror, Wars I call and raging Floods,
For all have sworn no Night shall dim my Sight.
SON.
O Sacred Blush impurpling Cheeks pure Skies,
With crimson Wings which spread thee like the Morn,
O bashful Look sent from those shining Eyes,
Which (though cast down on Earth) could Heaven adorn!
O Tongue in which most lushious Nectar lies,
That can at once both bless and make forlorn,
Dear Corrall Lip which Beauty beautifies,
That trembling stood ere that her words were borne.
And you her Words, Words no, but Golden Chains
Which did captive mine Ears, ensnare my Soul,
Wise Image of her Mind, Mind that contains
A Power all Power of Senses to control:
Ye all from Love dissuade so sweetly me,
That I love more, if more my Love could be.
SON.
NOr Arne, nor Mincius, nor stately Tyber,
Sebethus, nor the Flood into whose Streams
He fell who burnt the World with borrowed Beams,
Gold-rolling Tagus, Munda, famous Iber;
Sorgue, Rosne, Loire, Garron, nor prowd-banked Seine,
Peneus, Phasis, Xant^us, humble Ladon,
Nor She whose Nymphs excel her who loved Adon
Fair Tamesis, nor Ister large, nor R^eine,
Euphrates, Tigris, I^dus, Hermus, Gange,
Pearlie Hydaspes, Serpent-like Meander,
The Golfe bereft sweet Hero her Leander,
Nile that far far his hidden Head does range,
Have ever had so rare a Cause of Praise,
As Ora, where this Northern Phoenix stays.
SON.
TO hear my Plaints fair River Christalline
Thou in a silent Slumber seems to stay,
Delicious Flowrs, Lilly and Columbine,
Ye bow your Heads when I my Woes display.
Forests, in you the Myrtle, Palm, and Bay,
Have had compassion listening to my Groans,
The Winds with Sighs have solemnized my Mones
Mong Leaves, which whispered what they could not say.
The Caves, the Rocks, the Hills the Syluans Thrones
(As if even Pity did in them appear)
Have at my Sorrows rent their ruethlesse Stones,
Each thing I find has sense except my Dear
Who does not think I love, or will not know
My Grief, perchance delighting in my Woe.
SON.
SWeet Brook, in whose clear Crystal I mine Eyes
Have often seen great in Labor of their Tears,
Enameled Bank, whose shining Gravel bears
These sad Characters of my Miseries.
High Woods, whose mounting Tops menace the Spheres,
Wild Citizens, Amphions of the Trees,
You gloomie Groves at hottest Noones which freeze,
Elysian Shades which Phoebus never cleares,
Vaste solitary Mountains, pleasant Plains,
Embrodred Meads that Ocean-wayes you reach,
Hills, Dales, Springs, all that my sad Cry constraines
To take part of my Plaints, and learn Woes Speech,
Will that remorselesse Fair e're Pity show,
Of Grace now answer if ye ought know? No.
SON.
WIth flaming Horns the Bull now brings the Year,
Melt do the horride Mountains Helmes of Snow,
The silver Floods in pearlie Channels flow,
The late-bare Woods green Anadeams do wear.
The Nightingall forgetting Winters Woe,
Calls up the lazy Morn her Notes to hear,
Those Flowrs are spread which Names of Princes bear,
Some red, some azure, white, and golden grow.
Here lowes a Heifer, there bea-wailing st^ayes
A harmless Lamb, not far a Stag rebounds,
The Sheepe-heards sing to grazing Flocks sweet Lays,
And all about the Ecchoing Air resounds.
Hills, Dales, Woods, Floods, and every thing does change,
But She in Rigor, I in Love am strange.
SON.
WHen Nature now had wonderfully wrought
All AVRISTELLAS Parts, except her Eyes,
To make those Twins two Lamps in Beauties Skies,
She Counsel of her starrie Senate sought.
Mars and Apollo first did Her advise
In Color Black to wrappe those Comets bright,
That Love him so might soberly disguise,
And unperceived Wound at every Sight.
Chaste PHEBE spoke for purest azure Dies,
But JOVE and VENUS green about the Light
To frame thought best, as bringing most Delight,
That to pined Hearts Hope might ^or ay arise:
Nature (all said) a Paradise of Green
There placed, to make all love which have them seen.
MAD.
To the delightful Green
Of you fair radiant Eine,
Let each Black yield beneath the starrie Arche.
Eyes, burnisht Heavens of Love,
Sinople Lamps of Jove,
Save that those Hearts which with your Flames ye parche
Two burning Suns you prove,
All other Eyes compared with you (dear Lights)
Be Hells, or if not Hells yet dumpish Nights.
The Heavens (if we their Glass
The Sea*beleeue) be green, not perfect blew.
They all make fair what ever fair yet was,
And they be fair because they look like you.
SON.
IN vain I haunt the cold and silver Springs,
To quench the Fever burning in my Veins,
In vain ( Loves Pilgrim) Mountains, Dales, and Plains,
I overrun, vain Help long Absence brings*
In vain (my Friends) your Counsel me constraines
To fly, and place my Thoughts on other Things,
Ah! like the Bird that fired has her Wings,
The more I move, the greater are my Pains.
Desire (alas) Desire a Zeuxis new,
From Indies borrowing Gold from Western Skies
Most bright Cynoper, sets before mine Eyes
In every Place, her Hair, sweet Look and Hew:
That fly, run, rest I, all does prove but vain,
My Life lies in those Looks which have me slain.
SON.
ALl other Beauties how so e're they shine
In Hairs more bright than is the golden Ore,
Or Cheeks more fair than fairest Eglantine,
Or Hands like Hers who comes the Sun before:
Matched with that Heavenly Hue, and Shape divine,
With those dear Stars which my weak Thoughts adore,
Look but like Shadows, or if they be more,
It is in that that they are like to thine.
Who sees those Eyes, their Force and does not prove,
Who gazeth on the Dimple of that Chinne,
And finds not Venus Son entrenched therein,
Or has not Sense, or knows not what is Love.
To see thee had Narcissus had the Grace,
He sure had died with wondering on thy Face.
SON.
MY Tears may well Numidian Lions tame,
And Pity breed into the hardest Heart
That ever Pirrha did to Maid impart,
When She them first of blushing Rocks did frame.
Ah Eyes which only serve to wail my Smart,
How long will you mine inward Woes proclaim?
Let it suffice you bear a weeping Part
All Night, at Day though ye do not the same:
Cease idle Sighs to spend your Storms in vain,
And these calm secret Shades more to molest,
Contain you in the Prison of my Breast,
You not do ease but aggrauate my Pain,
Or (if burst forth you must?) that Tempest move
In Sight of Her whom I so dearly love.
SON.
Nymphs, Sister Nymphs which haunt this crystal Brook,
And (happy) in these Floting Bowrs abide,
Where trembling Roofes of Trees from Sun you hide,
Which make Ideall Woods in every Crook,
Whether ye Garlands for your Locks provide,
Or pearlie Letters seek in sandy Book,
Or count your Loves when Thetis was a Bride?
Lift up your golden Heads and on me look.
Read in mine Eyes mine agonizing Cares,
And what ye read recount to Her again:
Fair Nymph^s, say all th^se Streams are but my Tears,
And if She ask you how they sweet remain,
Tell that the bittrest Tears which Eyes can power,
When shed for Her do cease more to be sour.
MAD.
LIke the Idalian Queen
Her Hair about her Eyne,
With Neck and Breasts ripe Apples to be seen,
At first Glance of the Mo^ne
In Cyprus Gardens gathering those fair Flowrs
Which of her Blood were borne,
I saw, but fainting saw, my Paramours.
The Graces naked danced about the Place,
The Winds and Trees amazed
With Silence on Her gazed,
The Flowrs did smile, like those upon her Face,
And as their Aspine Stalks those Fingers band,
(That She might read my Case)
A Hyacinth I wished me in her Hand.
SON.
THen is She gone? O Fool and Coward I!
O good Occasion lost, never to be found!
What fatal Chains have my dull Senses bound
When best they may that they not Fortune try?
Here is the flowrie Bed where She did lie,
With Roses here She stellified the Ground,
She fixed her Eyes on this (yet smyling) Pond,
Nor Time, nor courteous Place seemed ought deny.
Too long, too long ( Respect) I do embrace
Your Counsel, full of Threats and sharp Disdain,
Disdain in her sweet Heart can have no Place,
And though come there, must straight retire again:
Henceforth Respect farewell, I often hear told
Who lives in Love can never be too bold.
SON.
IN Minds pure Glass when I my self behold,
And viuely see how my best Days are spent,
What Clouds of Care above my Head are rolled,
What coming Harms, which I can not prevent:
My begun Course I (wearied) do repent,
And would embrace what Reason often has told,
But scarce thus think I, when Love has controld
All the best Reasons Reason could invent.
Though sure I know my Labors End is Grief,
The more I strive that I the more shall pine,
That only Death can be my last Relief:
Yet when I think upon that Face divine,
Like one with Arrow shot in Laughters Place,
Malgre my Heart I joy in my Disgrace.
SON.
Dear Quirister, who from those Shadows sends
(Ere that the blushing Dawne dare show her Light)
Such sad lamenting Strains, that Night attends
Become all Ear, Stars stay to hear thy Plight.
If one whose Grief even Reach of Thought transcends,
Who never (not in a Dream) did taste Delight,
May thee importune who like Case pretends,
And seems to joy in Woe, in Woes Despite?
Tell me (so may thou Fortune milder try,
And long long sing) for what thou thus complains?
Since ( Winter gone) the Sun in dapled Sky
Now smiles on Meadows, Mountains, Woods and Plains:
The Bird, as if my questions did her move,
With trembling Wings sobb'd forth I love, I love.
SON.
TRust not sweet Soul those curled Wa^s of Gold
With gentle Tides which on your Temples flow,
Nor Temples spread with Flackes of Virgin Snow,
Nor Snow of Cheeks with Tyrian Grain enrolled.
Trust not those shining Lights which wrought my Woe,
When first I did their burning Rays behold,
Nor Voice, whose Sounds more strange Effects do show
Than of the Thracian Harper have been told:
Look to this dying Lill^e, fading Rose,
Dark Hyacinthe, of late whose blushing Beams
Made all the neighboring Herbs and Grass rejoice,
And think how little is twixt Life's Extremes:
The cruel Tyrant that did kill those Flowrs,
Shall once ( aye me) not spare that Spring of yours.
SON.
THat I so slenderly set forth my Mind,
Writing I wot not what in ragged Rimes,
And charged with Brass into these golden Times
When others tower so high am left behind:
I crave not PHEBVS leave his sacred Cell
To bind my Brows with fresh Aonian Bays,
Let them have that who tuning sweetest Lays
By Tempe sit, or Aganippe Well,
Nor yet to Venus Tree do I aspire,
Since She for whom I might affect that Praise,
My best Attempts with cruel Words gainsayes,
And I seek not that Others me admire.
Of weeping Myrrh the Crown is which I crave,
With a sad Cypress to adorn my Grave.
SON.
SOund hoarse sad Lute, true Witness of my Woe,
And strive no more to ease self* chosen Pain
With Soule-enchanting Sounds, your Accents strain
Unto these Tears incessantly which flow.
Shrill Treeble weep, and you dull Basses show
Your Masters Sorrow in a deadly Vain,
Let never joyful Hand upon you go,
Nor Consort keep but when you do complain.
Fly Phoebus Rays, nay, hate the irksome Light,
Woods solitary Shades for thee are best,
Or the black Horrors of the blackest Night,
When all the World (save Thou and I) does rest:
Then sound sad Lute, and bear a mourning Part,
Thou Hell may move, though not a Woman's Heart.
SON.
YOu restless Seas, appease your roaring Waves,
And you who raise hudge Mountains in that Plain
Aires Trumpeters, your blustering Storms restrain,
And listen to the Plaints my Grief does cause.
Eternal Lights, though adamantine Laws
Of Destin^es to move still you ordain,
Turn hitherward your Eyes, your Axetree pause,
And wonder at the Torments I sustain.
Earth (if thou be not dulled by my Disgrace,
And senseless made?) now ask those Powers above
Why they so crossed a Wretch brought on thy Face?
Framed for Mis-hap, the Anachorite of Love,
And bid them if they would more AETNAS burn,
In Rhodopee or Erimanthe me turn.
SON.
WHat cruel Star into this World me brought?
What gloomie Day did dawne to give me Light?
What unkind Hand to nourse me (Orphane) sought,
And would not leave me in eternal Night?
What thing so dear as I has Essence bought?
The Elements, dry, humid, heavy, light,
The smallest living things by Nature wrought,
Be freed of Woe if they have small Delight.
Ah only I, abandoned to Despair,
Nailed to my Torments, in pale Horrors Shade,
Like wandering Clouds see all my Comforts fled,
And Evil on Evil with Hours my Life impair:
The Heaven and Fortune which were wont to turn,
Fixed in one Mansion stay to cause me mourn.
SON.
Dear Eye which daign'st on this sad Monument
The sable Scroule of my Mis-haps to view,
Though with the mourning Muses Tears besprent,
And darkly drawn, which is not feigned, but true,
If thou not dazell'd with a Heavenly Hue,
And comely Feature, did not yet lament?
But happy live unto thy self content,
O let not Love thee to his Laws subdue.
Look on the woeful Shipwreck of my Youth,
And let my Ruins for a Phare thee serve
To shun this Rock Capharean of Untruth,
And serve no God who does his Churchmen sterue:
His Kingdom is but Plaints, his Guerdon Tears,
What he gives more are Iealousies and Fears.
SON.
IF crossed with all Mil haps be my poor Life,
If one short Day I never spent in Mirth,
If my Spright with it self holds lasting Strife,
If Sorrows Death is but new Sorrows Birth?
If this vain World be but a sable Stage
Where slaue-borne Man plays to the scoffing Stars,
If Youth be tossed with Love, with Weakness Age,
If Knowledge serueto hold our Thoughts in Wars?
If Time can close the hundredth Mouths of Fame,
And make what long since past, like that to be,
If Virtue only be an idle Name,
If I when I was bome was borne to die?
Why seek I to prolong these loathsome Days,
The fairest Rose in shortest time decays?
SON.
LEt Fortune triumph now, and Io sing,
Since I must fall beneath this Load of Care,
Let Her what most I prize of every Thing
Now wicked Trophies in her Temple rear.
She who high Palmie Empires does not spare,
And tramples in the Dust the prowdest King,
Let Her vaunt how my Bliss She did impair,
To what low Ebb She now my Flow does bring.
Let Her count how ( a new Ixion) Me
She in her Wheel did turn, how high nor low
I never stood, but more to tortured be:
Weep Soul, weep plaintfull Soul, thy Sorrows know,
Weep, of thy Tears till a black River swell,
Which may C^cytus be to this thy Hell.
SON.
O Cruel Beauty, Meekness inhumaine,
That Night and day contend with my Desire,
And seek my Hope to kill, not quench my Fire,
By Death, not Baulme to ease my pleasant Pain.
Though ye my Thoughts tread down which would aspire,
And bound my Bliss, do not ( alas) disdain
That I your matchless Worth and Grace admire,
And for their Cause these Torments sharp sustain.
Let great Empedocles vaunt of his Death
Found in the midst of those Sicylian Flames,
And Phaeton that Heaven him r^ft of Bre^th,
And Daedals Son He named the Samian Streams:
Their Haps I envy not, my Praise shall be,
The fairest She that lived gave Death to me.
SON.
THe Hyperborean Hills, Ceraunus Snow,
Or (...) (cruel) first thee bred,
The Caspian Tigers with their Milk thee fed,
And Faunes did humane Blood on thee bestow.
Fierce Orithyas Lo^er in thy Bed
Thee lulled asleep, where he enraged does blow,
Thou did not drink the Floods which here do flow,
But T^ares, or those by ycie Tanais Head.
Since thou disdaines my Love, neglects my Grief,
Laughs at my Groans, and still affects my Death,
Of thee, nor Heaven I Will seek no more Relief,
Nor longer entertain this loathsome Breath,
But yield unto my Star, that thou may prove,
What Loss thou had in losing such a Love,
SONG.
PHoebus arise,
And paint the sable Skies
With azure, white, and Red:
Rowse Memmons Mother from her Tythons Bed,
That She thy Cariere may with Roses spread,
The Nightingalles thy Coming each where sing,
Make an eternal Spring,
Give L^fe to this dark World which lies dead.
Spread forth thy golden Hair
In larger Locks than thou wast wont before,
And Emperour-like decore
With Diadem of Pearl thy Temples fair:
Chase hence the ugly Night
Which serves but to make dear thy glorious Light.
This is that happy Morn,
That Day long wished Day,
Of all my Life so dark,
(If cruel Stars have not my Ruin sworn,
And Fates not Hope betray?)
Which (only white) deserves
A Diamond for ever should it mark:
This is the Morn should bring unto this Grove
My Love, to hear, and recompense my love.
Fair King who all preserues,
But show thy blushing Beams,
And thou two sweeter Eyes
Shall s^e than those which by Peneus Streams
Did once thy Heart surprise:
Nay, Suns, which shine as clear
As thou when two thou did to Rome appear.
Now Flora deck thy self in fairest Guise,
If that ye, Winds, would hear
A Voice surpassing far Amphions Lyre,
Your stormy chiding stay,
Let Zephyre only breath,
And with her Tresses play,
Kissing sometimes these purple Ports of Death.
The Winds all silent are,
And Phoebus in his Chair
Ens^ffroning Sea and Air,
Makes van^sh every Star:
Night like a Drunkard r^eles
Beyond the Hills to sh^nne his flaming Wheels.
The Fields with Flowrs are decked in every Hue,
The Clouds bespangle with bright Gold their Blew:
Here is the pleasant Place
And every thing, save Her, who all should grace.
SON.
WHo has not seen into her saffron Bed
The Mornings Goddess mildly Her repose,
Or Her of whose pure Blood first sprang the Rose,
Lulled in a Slumber by a Mi^tle Shade.
Who has not seen that sleeping White and Red
Makes Phoebe look so pale. which She did close
In that Ionian Hill, to ease her Woes,
Which only lives by Nectare Kisses fed:
Come but and see my Lady sweetly sleep,
The sighing Rubies of those heavenly Lips,
The Cupids which Breasts golden Apples keep,
Those Eyes which shine in midst of their Eclipse,
And He them all shall see (perhaps) and prove
She waking but persuades, now forces Love.
SON.
OF Cithereas Birds that milke-white pair
On yonder leauie Myrtle Tree which groan,
And waken with their kisses in the Air
Enamored Zephyres murmuring one by one,
If thou but Sense had like Pigmalions Stone?
Or had not seen Medusas snakie hair,
Loves Lessons thou might learn? and learn sweet Fair,
To Summers Heat ere that thy Spring be grown.
And if those kissing Lovers seem but Cold,
Look how that Elm this Iuie does embrace,
And binds, and claspes with many a wanton Fold,
And courting Sleep o'reshadowes all the Place:
Nay seems to say, dear Tree we shall not part,
In Sign whereof lo in each Leaf a Heart.
SON.
THe Sun is fair when he with crimson Crown,
And flaming Rubies leaves his Eastern Bed,
Fair is Thaumantias in her crystal Gown
When Clouds engemm'd hang azure, green, and Red.
To Western Worlds when wearied Day goes down,
And from Heavens Windows each Star shows her Head,
Earths silent Daughter Night is fair, though brown,
Fair is the Moon though in Loves Liuerie cled.
Fair Chloris is when She does paint Aprile,
Fair are the Meads, the Woods, the Floods are fair,
Fair looks Ceres with her yellow Hair,
And Apples Queen when Rose-cheekt She does smile.
That Heaven, and Earth, and Seas are fair is true,
Yet true that all not please so much as you.
MAD.
WHen as she smiles I find
More light before mine Eyes,
Nor when the Sun from Inde
Brings to our World a flowrie Paradise:
But when she gently weeps,
And powers forth pearlie Showers,
On Checkes fair blushing Flowers,
A sweet Melancholy my Senses keeps.
Both feed so my Disease,
So much both do me please,
That often I doubt, which more my Heart does burn,
Like Love to see her smile, or Pity mourn.
SON.
SLide soft fair FORTH, and make a crystal Plain,
Cut your white Locks, and on your foamie Face
Let not a Wrinckle be, when you embrace
The Boat that Earths Perfections does contain.
Winds wonder, and through wondering hold your Peace,
Or if that ye your Hearts cannot restrain
From sending Sighs, moved by a Lovers Case,
Sigh, and in her fair Hair your selves enchaine:
Or take these Sighs which Absence makes arise
From mine oppressed Breast and wave the Sails,
Or some sweet Breath new brought from Paradise:
Floods seem to smile, Love over the Winds preuailes,
And yet hudge Waves arise, the Cause is this,
The Ocean strives with FORTH the Boat to kiss.
SON.
AH! who can see those Fruits of Paradise,
Celestial Cherries which so sweetly swell
That Sweetness self confinde there seems to dwell,
And all those sweetest Parts about despise?
Ah! who can see and feel no Flame surprise
His hardened Heart? for me ( alas) too well
I know their Force, and how they do excel,
Now burn I through Desire, now do I freeze:
I die (dear Life) unless to me be given
As many Kisses as the Spring has Flowrs,
Or as the silver Drops of Iris Showrs,
Or as the Stars in all* embracing Heaven,
And if displeased ye of the Match complain,
Ye shall have leave to take them back again.
SON.
Is It not enough (aye me) me thus to see
Like some Heauen-banish'd Ghost still wailing go?
A Shadow which your Rays do only show,
To vex me more, unless ye bid me die?
What could ye worse allotte unto your Foe?
But die will I, so ye will not deny
That Grace to me which mortal Foes even try,
To choose what sort of Death should end my Woe.
One Time I found when as ye did me kiss,
Ye gave my panting Soul so sweet a Touch,
That half I sown'd in midst of all my Bliss,
I do but crave my Deaths Wound may be such*
For though by Grief I die not and Annoy,
Is It not enough to die through too much Joy?
MAD.
Sweet Rose whence is this Hue
Which does all Hues excel?
Whence this most fragrant Smell?
And whence this Form and gracing Grace in you?
In flowrie Paestums Field (perhaps) ye grew,
Or Hyblas Hills you bred,
Or odoriferous Ennas Plains you fed,
Or Tmolus, or where Bore young Adon slew,
Or has the Queen of Love you died of new
In that dear Blood, which makes you look so red?
No, none of those, but Cause more high you blist,
My Ladies Breast you bare, and Lips you kissed.
SON.
She whose fair flowrs no Autumn makes decay,
Whose Hue celestial, earthly Hues does stain,
Into a pleasant odoriferous Plain
Did walk alone, to brave the P^ide of May:
And whilst through chekred Lists she made her Way,
Which smiled about her Sight to entertain,
Lo (unawares) where Love did hid remain
She spide, and sought to make of him her Prey:
For which of golden Locks a fairest Hair
(To bind the Boy) she took, But he afraid
At her Approach sprang swiftly in the Air,
And mounting ^arre from Reach looked back and said,
Why should thou (Sweet) me seek in Chains to bind,
Since in thine Eyes I daily am confinde.
MAD.
ON this cold World of Ours,
Flower of the Seasons, Season of the Flowrs,
Son of the Sun sweet Spring,
Such hot and burning Days why do thou bring?
Is this for that those high Eternal Powers
Flash down that Fire this All enuironing?
Or that now Phoebus keeps his Sisters Sphere?
Or does some Phae^ton
Inflame the Sea and Air?
Or rather is it (Usher of the Year)
For that last Day amongst thy Flowrs alone
Unmasked thou saw my Fair?
And whilst thou on her gazed she did thee burn,
And in thy Brother Summer does thee turn.
SON.
Dear Wood, and you sweet solitary Place,
Where from the vulgar I estranged live,
Contented more with what your Shades me give,
Than if I had what Thetis does embrace:
What snakie Eye grown jealous of my Peace,
Now from your silent Horrors would me drive?
When Sun progressing in his glorious Race
Beyond the Twins, does near our Pole arrive.
What sweet Delight a quiet Life affords,
And what it is to be of Bondage free,
Far from the madding Worldlings hoarse Discords,
Sweet flowrie Place I first did learn of thee:
Ah! if I were mine own, your dear Resorts
I would not change with Princes stately Courts.
SEXTAIN.
Since gone is my Delight and only Pleasure,
The last of all my Hopes, the cheerful Sun
That cleared my Life's dark Day, Natures sweet Treasure,
More dear to me than all beneath the Moon,
What rests now, but that upon this Mountain
I weep, till Heaven transform me in a Fountain?
Fresh, fair, delicious, crystal, pearlie Fountain,
On whose smoothe Face to look she often took Pleasure,
Tell me (so may thy Streams long cheer this Mountain,
So Serpent never thee stain, nor scorch the Sun,
So may with gentle Beams thee kiss the Moon)
Do thou not mourn to want so fair a Treasure?
While she her glass'd in thee, rich TAGVS Treasure
Thou envy needed not, nor yet the Fountain
In which that Hunter saw the naked Moon,
Absence has robbed thee of thy Wealth and Pleasure,
And I remain like Marigold of Sun
Deprived, that dies by Shadow of some Mountain.
Nymphs of the Forests, Nymphs who on this Mountain
Are wont to dance, showing your Beauties Treasure
To Goate-feete Syluans, and the wondering Sun,
When as you gather Flowers about this Fountain,
Bid Her Farewell who placed here her Pleasure,
And sing her Praises to the Stars and Moon.
Among the lesser Lights as is the Moon,
Blushing through Scarf of Clouds on LATMOS Mountain,
Or when her silver Locks she looks for Pleasure
In Thetis Streams, proud of so gay a Treasure,
Such was my Fair when She sat by this Fountain
With other Nymphs, to shun the amorous Sun.
As is our Earth in Absence of the Sun,
Or when of Sun deprived is the Moon,
As is without a verdant Shade a Fountain,
Or wanting Grass, a Mead, a Vale, a Mountain,
Such is my State, bereft of my dear Treasure,
To know whose only Worth was all my Pleasure.
Never think of Pleasure Heart, Eyes shun the Sun,
Tears be your Treasure, which the wandering Moon
Shall see you shed by Mountain, Vale, and Fountain.
SON.
THou Window, once which served for a Sphere
To that dear Planet of my Heart, whose Light
Made often blush the glorious Queen of Night,
While She in thee more beauteous did appear,
What mourning Weeds (alas) now do thou wear?
How loathsome to mine Eyes is thy sad Sight?
How poorly look thou, with what heavy cheer,
Since that Sun set, which made thee shine so bright?
Unhappy now thee close, for as of late
To wondering Eyes thou wast a Paradise,
Bereft of Her who made thee fortunate,
A Gulf thou art, whence Clouds of Sighs arise:
But unto none so noisome as to me,
Who hourly see my murth'red Joys in thee.
SON.
ARe these the flowrie Banks? is this the Mead
Where She was wont to pass the pleasant hours?
Did here her Eyes exhale mine Eyes salt Showrs,
When on her Lap I laid my weary Head?
Is this the goodly Elm did us o'respread,
Whose tender Rine cut out in curious Flowrs
By that white Hand, contain^s those Flames of Ours?
Is this the rusling Spring us Music made?
Deflourish'd Mead where is your heavenly Hue?
Bank, where that Arras did you late adorn,
How look ye Elm all withered and forlorn?
Only sweet Spring naught altered seems in you:
But while here changed each other thing appears,
To sour your Streams take of mine Eyes these Tears.
SON.
ALexis, here she stayed among these Pines
(Sweet Hermitresse) she did alone repair,
Here did she spread the Treasure of her Hair,
More rich than that brought from the Colchian Mines.
She set Her by these musket Eglantines,
The happy Place the Print seems yet to bear,
Her Voice did sweeten here thy sugared Lines,
To which Winds, Trees, Beasts, Birds did lend their Ear.
Me here she first perceived, and here a Morn
Of bright Carnations did o'respreade her Face,
Here did she sigh, here first my Hopes were borne,
And I first got a Pledge of promised Grace:
But ( ah) what served it to be happy so?
Since passed Pleasures double but new Woe.
SON.
O Night, clear Night, O dark and gloomie Day!
O woeful Waking! O Soule-pleasing Sleep!
O sweet Conceits which in my Brains did creep!
Yet sour Conceits which went so soon away.
A Sleep I had more than poor Words can say,
For closed in Arms (me thought) I did thee keep,
A sorry Wretch plunged in Misfortunes deep
Am I not waked? when Light does Lies bewray.
O that that Night had ever still been black!
O that that Day had never yet begun!
And you mine Eyes would ye no time saw Sun!
To have your Sun in such a Zodiac:
Lo, what is good of Life is but a Dream,
When Sorrow is a neuer-ebbing Stream.
SON.
Hair, precious Hair which Midas Hand did strain,
Part of the Wreathe of*Gold that crowns those Brows
Which Winters whitest White in Whiteness stain,
And Lilly, by Eridians Bank that grows.
Hair (fatal Present) which first caused my Woes,
When loose ye hang like Danaes golden Rain,
Sweet Nets, which sweetly do all Hearts enchaine,
Strings, deadly Strings, with which Love bends his Bows.
How are ye hither come? tell me, O Hair,
Dear Armelet, for what thus were ye given*
I know a Badge of Bondage I you wear,
Yet Hair for you, o that I were a Heaven!
Like Berenices Lock that ye might shine
(But brighter far) about this Arm of mine.
MAD.
Unhappy Light,
Do not approach to bring the woeful Day,
When I must bid for ay
Farewell to Her, and live in endless Plight.
Fair Moon, with gentle Beams
The Sight who never marres,
Long clear Heavens sable Vault, and you bright Stars
Your golden Locks long glass in Earths pure Streams,
Let Phoebus never rise
To dim your watchful Eyes:
Prolong (alas) prolong my short Delight,
And if ye can, make an eternal Night.
SON.
WIth Grief in Heart, and Tears in sowning Eyes,
When I to Her had given a sad Farewell,
Close sealed with a Kiss, and Dew which fell
On my else-moystned Face from Beauties Skies.
So strange Amazement did my Mind surprise,
That at each Pace I fainting turned again,
Like One whom a Torpedo stupifies,
Not feeling Honors Bit, nor Reasons Rain.
But when fierce Stars to part me did constrain,
With backe-cast Looks I ^nui'd both and blessed
The happy Walls and Place did Her contain,
Till that Sights Shafts their flying Object missed,
So wailing parted Ganamede the fair,
When Eagles Talents bare him through the Air.
MAD.
I Fear not henceforth Death,
Since after this Departure yet I breath,
Let Rocks, and Seas, and Wind,
Their highest Treasons show,
Let Sky and Earth combinde
Strive (if they can) to end my Life and Woe:
Since Grief can not, me nothing can overthrow,
Or if that ought can cause my fatal Lot,
It will be when I hear I am forgot.
SON.
HOw many times Nights silent Queen her Face
Has hid, how often with Stars in silver Mask
In Heavens great Hall she has begun her Task,
And cheered the waking Eye in lower Place*
How often the Sun has made by Heavens swift Race
The happy Lover to forsake the Breast
Of his dear Lady, wishing in the West
His golden Coach to run had larger Space:
I ever count, and number, ^ince alas
I bade Farewell to my Hea^ts dearest Guest,
The Miles I compass, and in Mind I chase
The Floods and Mountains hold me from my Rest:
But (woe is me) long count and count may I,
Ere I see Her whose Absence makes me die.
SON.
SO grievous is my Pain, so painful Life,
That often I find me in the Arms of Death,
But (Breath half gone) that Tyrant called Death
Who others killes, restores me to Life:
For while I think how Woe shall end with Life,
And that I quiet Peace shall joy by Death,
That Thought even does o'repowre the Pains of Death,
And call me home again to lothed Life:
Thus does mine evil transcend both Life and Death,
While no Death is so bad as is my Life,
Nor no Life such which does not end by Death,
And Protean Changes turn my Death and Life:
O happy those who in their Birth find Death,
Since but to languish Heaven affords Life.
SON.
FAme, who with golden Pens abroad do range
Where Phoebus leaves the Night, and brings the Day,
Fame, in one Place who (restless) do not stay
Till thou have flowne from Atlas unto Gange:
Fame, Enemy to Time that still does change,
And in his changing Course would make decay
What here below he finds in his Way,
Even making Virtue to her self look strange.
Daughter of Heaven; Now all thy Trumpets sound,
Raise up thy Head unto the highest Sky,
With Wonder blaze the Gifts in Her are found,
And when she from this mortal Globe shall fly,
In thy wide Mouth, keep long long keep her Name,
So thou by Her, she by thee live shall Fame.
MAD.
THe Iuorie, Corrall, Gold,
Of Breast, of Lips, of Hair,
So lively Sleep does show to inward Sight,
That wake I think I hold
No Shadow, but my Fair:
My self so to deceive
With long-shut Eyes I shun the irksome Light.
Such Pleasure thus I have
Delighting in false Gleames,
If Death Sleeps Brother be?
And Souls relieved of Sense have so sweet Dreams?
That I would wish me thus to dream and die.
SON.
I Curse the Night, yet does from Day me hide,
The Pandionian Birds I tire with Mones,
The Echoes even are weari'd with my Groans,
Since Absence did me from my Bliss divide.
Each Dream, each Toy, my Reason does affright,
And when Remembrance reads the curious Scroule
Of pass*d Contentments caused by her Sight,
Then bitter Anguish does invade my Soul.
While thus I live ecclipsed of her Light
( O me!) what better am I than the Mole?
Or those whose Zenith is the only Pole,
Whose Hemispheare is hid with so long Night?
Save that in Earth he rests, they hope for Sun,
I pine, and find mine endless Night begun.
SON.
OF Death some tell, some of the cruel Pain
Which that bad Crafts-man in his Work did try,
When (a new Monster) Flames once did constrain
A humane Corpse to yield a brutish Cry.
Some tell of those in burning Beds who lie,
For that they durst in the Phlegraean Plain
The mighty Rulers of the Sky defy,
And siege those crystal To^res which all contain.
An other countes of Phlegethons hot Floods
The Souls which drink, Ixions endless Smart,
And his to whom a Vulture eats the Heart,
One tells of Specters in enchanted Woods:
Of all those Pains he who the wo^st would prove,
Let him be absent, and but pine in Love.
MAD.
TRitons, which bounding diue
Through Neptunes liquide Plain,
When as ye shall arrive
With tilting Tides where silver Ora plays,
And to your King his watrie Tribute pays,
Tell how I dying live,
And burn in midst of all the coldest Maine.
SON.
PLace me where angry Titan burns the More,
And thirsty Afric fir^e Monsters brings,
Or where the newborn Phoenix spreades her Wings,
And Troops of wondering Birds her Flight adore.
Place me by Gange, or Indes empampred Shore,
Where smyling Heavens on Earth cause double Springs,
Place me where Neptunes Quire of Sirens sings,
Or where (made hoarse through Cold) he leaves to roar.
Me place where Fortune does her Darlings crown,
A Wonder, or a Spark in Enuies Eye,
Or late outrageous Fates upon me frown,
And Pity wailing see disastred Me,
Affections Print my Mind so deep does prove,
I may forget my Self* but not my Love.
POEMS: BY W. D.
THE SECOND PART.
SONNET.
OF mortal Glory o soon darkened Raye!
O posting Joys of Man! more swift than Wind,
O fond Desires! which winged with Fancies straye,
O traitrous Hopes! which do our Judgments blind:
Lo, in a Flash that Light is gone away,
Which dazell did each Eye, Delight each Mind,
And with that Sun (from whence it came) combinde,
Now makes more radiant Heavens eternal Day.
Let Beauty now be blubbred Cheeks with Tears,
Let widowed Music only roar, and plain,
Poor Virtue get thee Wings, and mount the Spheres,
And let thine only Name on Earth remain.
Death has thy Temple razed, Loves Empire foylde,
The World of Honor, Worth, and Sweetness spoylde.
SON.
THose Eyes, those sparkling Saphires of Delight,
Which thousand thousand Hearts did set on fire,
Which made that Eye of Heaven that brings the Light
(Often jealous) stay amazed them to admire.
That living Snow, those crimson Roses bright,
Those Pearls, those Rubies, which did breed Desire,
Those Locks of Gold, that Purple fair of Tire,
Are wrapped (aye me!) up in eternal Night.
What have thou more to vaunt of, wretched World?
Since she (who cursed thee made blessed) is gone?
Thine ever burning Lamps, Rounds ever whorld,
Can unto thee not model such a one:
For if they would such Beauty bring on Earth,
They should be forced again to make Her breath.
SON.
O Fate! conspired to power your Worst on me,
O rigorous Rigor, which does all confound!
With cruel Hands ye have cut down the Tree,
And Fruit and Flower dispersed on the Ground.
A little Space of Earth my Love does bound,
That Beauty which did raise it to the Sky,
Turned in n^glected Dust, now low does lie,
Deaf to my Plaints, and senseless of my Wound.
Ah! did I live for this, ah! did I love?
For this and was it sh^e did so excel?
That ^re she well Lif^s sweet-sowre Joys did prove,
She should (too dear a Guest) with Horror dwell?
Weak Influence of H^auen! what fair ye frame,
Falls in the Prime, and passes like a Dream.
SON.
O Woeful Life! Life, no, but living Death,
Frail Boat of Crystal in a rockie Sea,
A Sport exposed to Fortunes stormy Breath,
Which kept with Pain, with Terror does decay:
The false Delights, true Woes thou do bequeath,
Mine all-appalled Mind do so affraye,
That I those envy who are laid in Earth,
And pity them that run thy dreadful Way.
When did mine Eyes behold one cheerful Morn?
When had my tossed Soul one Night of rest?
When did not hateful Stars my Projects scorn?
O! now I find for Mortals what is best:
Even, since our voyage shameful is, and short,
Soon to strike Sail, and perish in the Port.
SON.
MIne Eyes, dissolve your Globes in brinie Streams,
And with a Cloud of Sorrow dim your Sight,
The Sunn^s bright Sun is set, of late whose Beams
Gave Luster to your Day, Day to your Night.
My Voice now deafen Earth with Anatheames,
Roar foo^th a Challenge in the Worlds Despite,
Tell that disguised Grie^e is her Delight,
That Life a Slumber is of fearful Dreams.
And woeful Mind abhor to think of Joy,
My Senses all now comfortless you hide,
Accept no Object but of black Annoy,
Tears, Plaints, Sighs, mourning Weeds, Graves gaping wide,
I have naught left to wish, my Hopes are dead,
And all with Her beneath a Marble laid.
SON.
SWeet Soul, which in the April of thy Years
So to enrich the Heaven made poor this Round,
And now with golden Rays of Glory crowned
Most blessed abid'st above the Sphere of Spheres*
If heavenly Laws ( alas) have not thee bound
From looking to this Globe that all vpbeares?
If Rueth and Pity there above be found?
O daigne to l^nd a Look unto those Tears.
Do not disdain (dear Ghost) this sacrifice,
And though I raise not Pillars to thy Praise
Mine Offerings take, let this for me suffice,
My Heart a living Piramide I raise:
And whilst Kings Tombs with Laurels flourish green,
Thine shall with Mirtles, and these Flowrs be seen.
MADRIGALL.
THis Life which seems so fair,
Is like a Bubble blown up in the Air,
By sporting Childrens Breath,
Who chase it every where,
And stri^e who can most Motion it bequeath:
And though it sometime seem of its own Might
(Like to an Eye of gold) to be fixed there,
And firm to houer in that empty Hight,
That only is because it is so light,
But in that Pomp it does not long app^are;
For even when most admired, it in a Thought
As swelled from nothing, does dissolve in naught.
SON.
O! It is not to me bright Lamp of Day,
That in the East thou show thy rosy Face,
O! it is not to me thou leau'st that Sea,
And in these azure Lists beginst thy Race.
Thou shin'st not to the Dead in any Place,
And I (dead) from this World am gone away,
Or if I seem (a Shadow) yet to stay,
It is a while but to bemone my Case.
My Mirth is lost, my Comforts are dismayed,
And unto sad Mis-haps their Place do yield;
My Knowledge does resemble a bloody field,
Where I my Hopes, and Helps see prostrate laid:
So painful is Life's Course which I have run,
That I do wish it never had begun.
SONG.
SAd Damon being come
To that for ever lamentable Tomb,
Which those eternal Powers that all control,
Unto his living Soul
A melancholy Prison had prescriu'd:
Of Hue, of Heat, of Motion quite deprived,
In Arms wake, trembling, cold,
A Marble, he the Marble did infold:
And having made it warm with many a Shower,
Which dimmed Eyes did power,
When Grief had given him leau^, and Sighs them stayed,
Thus with a sad alas at last he said.
Who would have thought to me
The Place where thou did lie could grievous be?
And that (dear Body) long thee having sought
(O me!) who would have thought?
Thee once to find it should my Soul confound,
And give my Heart than Death a deeper Wound?
Thou did disdain my Tears,
But grieve not that this ruethfull Stone them bears,
Mine Eyes serve only now for thee to weep,
And let their Course them keep,
Although thou never would them Comfort show,
Do not repine, they have Part of thy Woe.
Ah Wretch! too late I find,
How Virtues g^ious Titles prove but Wind;
For if she any could release from Death,
Thou yet eni^y'd had Breath;
For if she ere appeared to mortal Eine,
It was in thy fair Shape that she was seen.
But o! if I was made
For thee, with thee why too am I not dead?
Why do outrageous Fates which dimmed thy Sight,
Let me see hateful Light?
They without me made Death thee to surprise
Tyrants (perhaps) that they might kill me twice.
O Grief! and could one Day
Have Force such Excellence to take away?
Could a swift flying Moment (ah) deface
Those matchless Gifts, that Grace
Which Art and Nature had in thee combinde,
To make thy Body paragone thy Mind?
Have all past like a Cloud,
And does eternal Silence now them shroud?
Is what so much admired was naught but Dust,
Of which a Stone has trust?
O Change! o cruel Change! thou to our Sight
Shows Destines Rigor equal does their Might.
When thou from Earth did pass
(Sweet Nymph) Perfections Mirror broken was,
And this of late so glorious World of ours,
Like Meadow without Flowrs,
Or Ring of a rich Gemme made blind, appeared,
Or Night, by Star nor Cynthia neither cleared.
Love when he saw thee die,
Entombed him in the Lidde of either Eye,
And left his Torch within thy sacred Vrne,
There for a Lamp to burn:
VVorth, Honor, Pleasure, with thy Life expired,
Death since (grown sweet) begins to be desired.
Whilst thou to us wast given,
The Earth her Venus had as well as Heaven:
Nay and her Sun, which burnt as many Hearts,
As he does Eastern Parts;
Bright Sun, which forced to leave these Hemispheares,
Benighted set into a Sea of Tears.
Ah Death! who shall thee fly?
Since the most worthy be o'rethrowne by thee?
Thou spar'st the Ravens, and Nightingalles do kill,
And triumphs at thy will:
But give thou can not such an other Blow,
Because like Her Earth can none other show.
O bitter-Sweets of Love!
How better is it at all you not to prove?
Than when we do your Pleasure most possess,
To find them then made less?
O! that the Cause which does consume our Joy,
Remembrance of it too, would too destroy!
What does this Life bestow
But Flowrs on Th^rnes which grow?
Which though they sometime blandishing delighte,
Yet afterward us smite?
And if the rising Sun them fair does see,
That Planet setting, too beholdes them die.
This World is made a Hell,
Deprived of all that in it did excel.
O Pan, Pan, Winter is fallen in our May,
Turned is in Night our Day:
Forsake thy Pipe, a Scepter take to thee,
Thy Locks disgarland, thou black Jove shall be.
The Flocks do leave the Meads,
And loathing three-leaf'd Grass, hold up their Heads.
The Streams not glide now with a gentle Rore,
Nor Birds sing as before,
Hills stand with Clouds like Mourners, veiled in Black,
And Owls on Caban Roofes foretell o^r Wrack.
That Zephyre every Year
So soon was heard to sigh in Forests here,
It was for Her: that wrapped in Gowns of Green,
Meads were so earelie seen,
That in the saddest Months often s^ng the Mearles,
It was for Her: for her Trees dropped forth Pearls.
That proud, and stately Courts,
Did envy those our Shades, and calm Resorts,
It was for Her: and she is gone, o Woe!
Woods cut, again do grow,
Budde does the Rose, and Dazie, Winter done,
But we once dead no more do see the Sun.
Whose Name shall now make ring
The Echoes? of whom shall the Nymphettes sing?
Whose heavenly Voice, whose Soule-inuading Strains,
Shall fill with Joy the Plains?
What Hair, what Eyes, can make the Morn in East
Weep, that a fairer rises in the West?
Fair Sun, post still away,
No Music here is found thy Course to stay.
Sweet Hybla Swarms with Wormwood fill your Bowrs,
Gone is the Flower of Flowrs,
Blush no more Rose, nor Lilly pale remain,
Dead is that Beauty which yours late did stain*
Aye me! to wail my Plight
Why have not I as many Eyes as Night?
Or as that Shepherd which Jove's Love did keep?
That I still still may weep:
But though I had, my Tears unto my Cross
Were not yet equal, nor Grief to my Loss,
Yet of you brinie Showrs,
Which I here power, may spring as many Flowrs,
As came of those which fell from Helens Eyes,
And when ye do arise,
May every Leaf in sable Letters bear
The doleful Cause for which ye spring up here.
MAD.
Dear Night, the Ease of Care,
Untroubled Seat of Peace,
Times eldest Child, which often the Blind do see,
On this our Hemispheare,
What makes thee now so sadly dark to be?
Comm'st thou in funeral Pomp her Grave to grace?
Or do those Stars which should thy Horror clear,
In Jove's high Hall advise,
In what Part of the Skies,
With them, or Cynthia she shall appear?
Or (ah alas!) because those matchless Eyes
Which shone so fair, below thou do not find,
Striu'st thou to make all other Eyes look blind?
SON.
MY Lute, be as thou wast when thou did grow
With thy green Mother in some shadie Grove,
When immelodious Winds but made thee move,
And Birds on thee their Ramage did bestow.
Since that dear Voice which did thy Sounds approve,
Which used in such harmonious Strains to flow,
Is reft from Earth to tune those Spheres above,
What art thou but a Harbenger of Woe?
Thy pleasing Notes, be pleasing Notes no more,
But orphane Wailings to the fainting Ear,
E^ch Stop a Sigh, each Sound draws forth a Tear,
Be therefore silent as in Woods before,
Or if that any Hand to touch thee daigne,
Like widowed Turtle, still her Loss complain.
SON.
SWeet Spring, thou turn'st with all thy goodly Train,
Thy Head with Flames, thy Mantle bright with Flowrs,
The Zephyres curle the green Locks of the Plain,
The Clouds for Joy in Pearls weep down their Showrs.
Thou turn'st (sweet Youth) but ah my pleasant Hours,
And happy Days, with thee come not again,
The sad Memorialls only of my Pain
Do with thee turn, which turn my Sweets in Sowres.
Thou art the same which still thou wast before,
Delicious, wanton, amiable, fair,
But she, whose Breath embaulm'd thy wholesome Air,
Is gone: nor Gold, nor Gemmes Her can restore.
Neglected Virtue, Seasons go and come,
While thine forgot lie closed in a Tomb.
SON.
WHat does it serve to see Suns burning Face?
And Skies enameled with both the Indies Gold?
Or Moon at Night in jettie Chariot rolled?
And all the Glory of that starrie Place?
What does it serve Earths Beauty to behold?
The Mountains Pride, the Meadows flowrie Grace,
The stately Comeliness of Forests old,
The Sport of Floods which would themselves embrace?
What does it serve to hear the Syluans Songs,
The wanton Mearle* the Nightingalles sad Strains,
Which in da^ke Shades seem to d^plore my W^ongs?
For what does seru^ all that this World contains,
Since she for whom those once to me were dear,
No Part of them can have now with me here?
MAD.
THe Beauty, and the Life,
Of Life's, and Beauties fairest Paragon,
(O Tears! o Grief!) hang at a feeble Thread,
To which pale Atropos had set her Knife,
The Soul with many a Groan
Had left each outward Part,
And now did take his last Leave of the Heart,
Naught else did want* sa^e Death, ^uen to be dead:
When the afflicted Band about her Bed
(Seeing so fair him come in Lips, Cheeks, Eyes)
Cried, ah! and can Death enter Paradise?
SON.
AH Napkin, ominous Present of my Dear,
Gift miserable, which does now remain
The only Guerdon of my helpelesse Pain,
When I thee got thou showed my State too clear:
I ^euer since have ceased to complain,
Since, I the Badge of Grief did ever wear,
Joy on my Face durst never since appear,
Care was the Food which did me entertain:
Now (since made mine) dear Napkin do not grieve
That I this Tribute pay thee from mine Eine,
And that (these posting Hours I am to live)
I laundre thy fair Figures in this Brine:
No, I must yet even beg of thee the Grace,
That thou would daigne in Grave to shrowdemy Face.
MAD.
Poor Turtle, thou bemones
The Loss of thy dear Love,
And I for mine send forth these smoking Groans,
Unhappy widowed Dove,
While all about do sing,
I at the Root, Thou on the Branche above,
Even weary with our Mones the gaudie Spring.
Yet these our Plaints we do not spend in vain,
Since sighing Zephyres answer us again.
SON.
AS in a duskie and tempestuous Night,
A Star is wont to spread her Locks of Gold,
And while her pleasant Rays abroad are rolled,
Some spiteful Cloud does rob us of her Sight:
(Fair Soul) in this black Age so shined thou bright,
And made all Eyes with Wonder thee behold,
Till ugly Death depriving us of Light,
In his grimme mistie Arms thee did enfolde.
Who more shall vaunt true Beauty here to see?
What Hope does more in any Heart remain,
That such Perfections shall his Reason rain?
If Beauty with thee borne too died with thee?
World, plain no more of Love, nor count his Harms,
With his pale Trophies Death has hung his Arms.
SON.
Since it has pleased that First and only Fair
To take that Beauty to himself again,
Which in this World of Sense not to remain,
But to amaze, was sent, and home repair,
The Love which to that Beauty I did bear
(Made pure of mortal Spots which did it stain,
And endless, which even Death cannot impair)
I place on him who will it not disdain.
No shining Eyes, no Locks of curling Gold,
No blushing Ro^es on a virgin Face,
No outward Show, no, nor no inward Grace,
Shall Force hereafter have my Thoughts to hold:
Love here on Earth hudge Storms of Care do toss,
But placed above, exempted is from Loss.
MAD.
MY Thoughts hold mortal Strife,
I do detest my Life,
And with lamenting Cries
(Peace to my Soul to bring)
Often calls that Prince which here does Monarchise,
But He grimme grinning King,
VVh^ Catiues scorns, and does the Blessed surprise,
Late having decked with Beauties Rose his Tomb,
D^sdaines to croppe a VVeede, and will not come.
SONG.
IT Autumn was, and on our Hemispheare
Fair Ericyne began bright to appear,
Night Westward did her gemmie World decline,
And hide her Lights, that greater Light might shine:
The crested Bird had given Alarm twice
To lazy Mortals, to unlock their Eyes,
The Owl had left to plain, and from each Thorn
The winged Musicians did salute the Morn,
Who (while she glass'd her Locks in Ganges Streams)
Set open wide the crystal Port of Dreams:
When I, whose Eyes no drowsy Night could close,
In Sleeps soft Arms did quietly repose,
And, for that Heavens to die me did deny,
Deaths Image kissed, and as dead did lie.
I lay as dead, but scarce charmed were my Cares,
And slaked scarce my Sighs, scarce dried my Tears,
Sleep scarce the ugly Figures of the Day
Had with his sable Pincell put away,
And left me in a still and calmie Mood,
When by my Bed (me thought) a Virgin stood,
A Virgin in the blooming of her Prime,
If such rare Beauty measured be by Time?
Her Head a Garland ware of Opalls bright,
About Her flowed a Gown as pure as Light,
Dear amber Locks gave Vmbrage to her Face,
Where Modesty high Majesty did grace,
Her Eyes such Beams sent foo^th, that but with Pain
Here, weaker Sights their sparckling could sustain:
No Deity faign'd which haunts the silent Woods
Is like to Her, nor Syrene of the Floods:
Such is the golden Planet of the Year,
When blushing in the East he does appear.
Her Grace did Beauty, Voice yet Grace did pass,
Which thus through P^arles and Rubies broken was.
How long will thou (said she) estranged from Joy,
Paint Shadows to thy self of false Annoy?
How long thy Mind with horride Shapes affrighte,
And in imaginary Evils delighte?
Esteem that Loss which (well when viewed) is Gain,
Or if a Loss, yet not a Loss to plain?
O leave thy tired Soul more to molest,
And think that Woe when shortest then is best.
If she for whom thou deafnest thus the Sky
Be dead? what then? was she not borne to die?
Was she not mortal borne? if thou do grieve
That Times should be, in which she should not live,
Ere e're she was, weep that Days Wheel was rolled,
Weep that she lived not in the Age of Gold:
For that she was not then, thou may deplore
As duly as that now she is no more.
If only she had died, thou sure had Cause
To blame the Destines and Heavens yrone Laws:
But look how many Millions Her advance,
What numbers with Her enter ^n this Dance,
With those which are to come: shall Heavens them stay,
And Alls fair Order break, thee to obaye?
Even as thy Birth, Death which thee does appall,
A Piece is of the Life of this great All.
Strong Cities die, die do high palmie Reigns,
And (weakling) thou thus to be handled plains.
If she be dead? then she of loathsome Days
Has past the Line, whose Length but Loss bewrayes;
Then she has lef^ this filthy Stage of Care,
Where Pleasure seldom, Woe does still repair:
For all the Pleasures which it does contain,
Not conteruaile the smallest Minutes Pain.
And tell me, Thou who do s^ much admire
This little Vapor, Smoke, this Spark, or Fire,
Which Life is called, what does it thee bequeath,
But some few Years which Birth draws out to Death?
Which if thou paragone, with Lusters run,
And them whose Carriere is but now begun,
In Days great Vaste they shall far less appear,
Than with the Sea when matched is a Tear.
But why would thou Her longer wish to be?
One Year does serve all Natures Pomp to see,
Nay, even one Day, and Night: This Moon, that Sun,
Those lesser Fires about this Round which run,
Be but the same which under Saturnes Reign
Did the serpenting Seasons enterchaine.
How often does Life grow less by living long?
And what excels but what di^th young?
For Age which all abhor (yet would embrace)
Whiles makes the Mind as wrinckled as the Face:
And when that Destinies conspire with Worth,
That Years not glory Wrong, Life soon goes forth.
Leave then L^nts, and think thou did not live,
Laws to that first eternal C^use to give,
But to obey those L^wes which he has given,
And bow unto the just Decrees of Heaven,
Which can not err, what ever foggie Mists
Do blind Men in these sublunarie Lists.
But what if she for whom thou spend'st those Groans,
And wastest Life's dear Torch in ruethfull Mones,
She for whose sake thou hat'st the joyful Light,
Court'st solitary Shades, and irksome Night,
Does live? o! (if thou can) through Tears a Space
Lift thy dimmed Lights, and look upon this Face,
Look if those Eyes which (fool) thou did adore,
Shine not more bright than they were wont before?
Look if those Roses Death could ought impair,
Those Roses to thee once which seemed so fair?
And if these Locks have lost ought of that Gold,
Which erst they had when thou them did behold?
I live, and happy live, but thou art dead,
And still shall be, till thou be like me made.
Alas! whilst we are wrapped in Gowns of Earth,
And blind, here suck the Air of Woe beneath,
Each thing in Senses Balances we wie,
And but with Toil, and Pain the Truth descrie.
Above this waste and admirable Frame,
This Temple visible, which World we name,
Within whose Walls so many Lamps do burn,
So many Arches opposite do turn,
Where Elementall Brethren nurse their Strife,
And by intestine Wars maintain their Life,
There is a World, a World of perfect Bliss,
Pure, immateriall, bright, more far from this,
Than that high Circle which the rest enspheares
Is from this dull ignoble Vale of Tears,
A World, where all is found, that here is found,
But further discrepant than Heaven and Ground:
It has an Earth, as has this World of yours,
With Creatures peopled, stored with Trees, and Flowrs,
It has a Sea, like Sapphire Girdle cast,
Which decketh of harmonious Shores the Waste,
It has pure Fire, it has delicious Air,
Moon, Sun, and Stars, Heavens wonderfully fair:
But there Flowrs do not fade, Trees grow not old,
The Creatures do not die through Heat nor Cold,
Sea there not tossed is, nor Air made black,
Fire does not nurse it self on others Wrack;
There Heavens be not constrained about to range,
For this World has no need of any Change:
The Minutes grow not Hours, Hours rise not Days,
Days make no Months, but euer-blooming Mayes.
Here I remain, and hitherward do tend
All who their Spanne of Days in Virtue spend:
What ever Pleasure this low Place contains,
It is a Glance but of what high remains.
Those who (perchance) think there can nothing be
Without this wide Expansion which they see,
And that naught else mounts Stars Circumference,
For that naught else is subject to their Sense,
Feel^ such a Case, as one whom some Abisme
Of the Deep Ocean kept had all his Time:
Who borne and nourished there, can scarcely dream
That ought can live without that brinie Stream,
Cannot believe that there be Temples, Towers,
Which go beyond his Caves and dampish Bowres,
Or there be other People, Manners, Laws,
Than them he fi^ds within the roaring Waves,
That sweet^r Flowrs do spring than grow on Rocks,
Or Beasts be which excel the skalie Flocks,
That other Elements be to be found,
Than is the Water, and this Ball of Ground.
But think that Man from those Abismes were brought,
And saw what curious Nature here has wrought,
Did see the Meads, the tall and shadie Woods,
The Hills did see, the clear and ambling Floods,
The diverse Shapes of Beasts which Kinds forth bring,
The feathred Troops, that fly and sweetly sing:
Did see the Palaces, the Cities fair,
The Form of humane Life, the Fire, the Air,
The brightness of the Sun that dimmes his Sight,
The Moon, the ghastly Splendors of the Night:
What uncouth Rapture would his Mind surprise?
How would he his (late-deare) Resort despise?
How would he muse how foolish he had been
To think naught be, but what he there had seen?
Why did we get this high and vaste Desire,
Unto immortal things still to aspire?
Why does our Mind extend it beyond Time,
And to that highest Happiness even clime?
If we be naught but what to Sense we seem,
And Dust, as most of Worldlings us esteem?
We be not made for Earth, though here we come,
More than the Embryon for the Mothers Womb:
It weeps to be made free, and we complain
To leave this loathsome Iayle of Care and Pain.
But thou who vulgar Footsteps do not trace,
Learn to raise up thy Mind unto this Place,
And what Earth-creeping Mortalles most affect,
If not at all to scorn, yet to neglect:
O chase not Shadows vain, which when obtained,
Were better lost, than with such Travel gained.
Think that, on Earth which Humanes Greatness call,
Is but a glorious Title to live thrall:
That Scepters, Diadems, and Chaires of State,
Not in themselves, but to small Minds are great:
How those who loftiest mount, do hardest light,
And deepest Falls be from the highest Hight;
How Farne an Echo is, how all Renown
Like to a blasted Rose, ere Night falls down:
And though it something were, think how this Round
Is but a little Point, which does it bound.
O leave that Love which reaches but to Dust,
And in that Love eternal only trust,
And Beauty, which when once it is possessed,
Can only fill the Soul, and make it blessed.
Pale Envy, jealous Emulations, Fears,
Sighs, Plaints, Remorse, here have no Place, nor Tears,
False Joys, vain Hopes, here be not, Hate nor Wrath,
What ends all Love, here most augments it, Death.
If such Force had the dim Glance of an Eye,
Which some few Days thereafter was to die,
That it could make thee leave all other things,
And like the Taper-slie there burn thy Wings?
And if a Voice, of late which could but wail,
Such Power had* as through Ears thy Soul to steal?
If once thou on that only Fair could gaze,
What Flames of Love would he within thee raise?
In what a mazing Maze would it thee bring,
To hear but once that Quire cel^sliall sing?
The fairest Shapes on which thy Love did sease,
Which carst did breed Del^ght, then would displease,
Then (...) hoarse were Earths entising Sounds,
All Music but a Noise which Sense confounds.
This great and burning Glass that cleares all Eyes,
And musters with such Glory in the Skies,
That silver Star which with its sober Light,
Makes Day o^t envy the eye-pleasing Night,
Those golden Letters which so brightly shine
In Heavens great Volume gorgeously divine,
The Wonders all in Sea, in Earth, in Air,
Be but dark Pictures of that Sovereign Fair,
Be Tongues, which still thus cry into your Ear,
(Could ye amidst Worlds Cataracts them hear)
From fading things (fond VVights) lift your Desire,
And in our Beauty, his us made admire,
If we seem fair? o think how fair is He,
Of whose fair Fairness, Shadows, Steps, we be.
No Shadow can compare it with the Face,
No Step with that dear Foot which did it trace;
Your Souls immortal are, then place them hence,
And do not drown them in the Must of Sense:
Do not, o do not by false Pleasures Might
Deprive them of that true, and sole Delight.
That Happiness ye seek is not below,
Earths sweetest Joy is but disguised VVoe.
Here did she pause, and with a mild Aspect
Did toward me those lamping Twins direct:
The wonted Rays I knew, and thrice essayed
To answer make, thrice faultring Tongue it stayed.
And while upon that Face I fed my Sight,
Me thought she vanished up in Titans Light,
Who guilding with his Rays each Hill and Plain,
Seemed to have brought the Goldsmiths World again.
TEARS, ON THE DEATH of Moeliades.

To the Author.
IN Waves of Woe thy Sighs my Soul do toss,
And do burst up the Conduits of my Tears,
Whose ranckling Wound no smoothing Baulme long bears,
But freshly bleedes when Ought vpbraides my Loss.
Then thou so sweetly Sorrow makes to sing,
And troubled Passions do so well accord,
That more Delight thine Anguish does afford,
Than others Joys can Satisfaction bring.
What sacred Wits (when ravished) do affect,
To force Affections, metamorphose Minds,
Whilst numbrous Power the Soul in secret binds,
Thou have performed, transforming in Effect:
For never Plaints did greater Pity move,
The best Applause that can such Notes approve.
Sr. W. Alexander.

TEARS, ON THE DEATH of Moeliades.
THE N^ which in these Verses is given Prince HENRI^, is that which he himself
in ye Challenges of his Martial Sports, and Mascarads, was wont to use,
Moeliades Princ^ of the Isle^ which in (...) makes Miles A DEO.
O Heavens! then is it true that Thou art gone,
And left this woeful I Will her Loss to moan,
Moeliades? bright Day Star of the West,
A Comet, blazing Terror to the East:
And neither that thy Spright so heavenly wise,
Nor Body (though of Earth) more pure than Skies,
Nor royal Stem, nor thy sweet tender Age,
Of adamantine Fates could quench the Rage?
O fading Hopes! O short-while-lasting Joy!
Of Earth-borne Man, which one Hour can destroy!
Then even of Virtues Spoils Death Trophies reares,
As if he gloried most in many Tears.
Forced by grimme Desti^es, Heavens neglect our Cries,
Stars seem set only to act Tragoedies:
And let them do their Worst, since thou art gone,
Raise whom they list to Thrones, enthroned dethrone,
Stain Princely Bowres with Blood, and even to Gange,
In Cypress sad, glad Hymen's Torches change.
Ah! thou have left to live, and in the Time,
When scarce thou blossomed in thy pleasant Prime,
So falls by Northern Blast a virgin Rose,
At half that does her bashful Bosom close:
So a sweet Flourish languishing decays,
That late did blush when kissed by Phoebus Rays:
So Phoebus mounting the Meridians Hight,
Choack'd by pale Phoebe, faints unto our Sight,
Astonished Nature sullen stands to see
The Life of all this All, so changed to be,
In gloomie Gowns the Stars about deplore,
The Sea with murmuring Mountains beats the Shore,
Black Darkness reeles over all, in thousand Showers
The weeping Air, on Earth her Sorrow powers,
That (in a Palsy) quakes to find so soon
Her Lover set, and Night burst forth ere Noone.
If Heaven (alas) ordained thee young to die,
Why was it not where thou thy Might did try?
And to the hopeful World at least set forth
Some little Spark of thine expected Worth?
Moeliades, o that by Isters Streams,
Amongst shrill-sounding Trumpets, flaming Gleames
Of warm encrimson'd Swords, and Cannons Roar,
Balls thick as Rain poured by the Caspian Shore,
Amongst crushed Lances, ringing Helmes, and Shields,
Dismembered Bodies rauishing the Fields,
In Turkish Blood made red like Marses Star,
Thou end^d had thy Life, and Christian War!
Or as brave Burbon thou had made old Rome,
Queen of the World, thy Triumphs Place, and Tomb!
So Heavens fair Face to the unborn which reads
A Book had been of thine illustrous Deeds:
So to their Nephews aged Syres had told
The high Exploits performed by thee of old,
Towns razed, and raised, victorious, vanquished Bands,
Fierce Tyrants flying, foiled, killed, by thy Hands.
And in dear Arras, Virgins fair had wrought
The Bays and Trophies to thy Country brought:
While some new Homer imping Pens to Fame,
Deaf Nilus Dwellers had made hear thy Name.
That thou did not attain those Honors Spheres,
It was not want of Worth, o no, but Years.
A Youth more brave, pale Troy with trembling Walls
Did never see, nor she whose Name apalles
Both Titans golden Bowres, for bloody Fights
Mustring on Marses Field such Marse* like Knights.
The Heavens had brought thee to the highest Hight,
Of Wit, and Courage, showing all their Might
When they thee framed: Ay me! that what is brave
On Earth, they as their own so soon should crave.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
When Forth thy Nurse, Forth where thou first did pass
Thy tender Days (who smyl'd often on her Glass
To see thee gaze) Meandring with her Streams,
Heard thou had left this Round, from Phoebus Beams
She sought to fly, but forced to return
By neighbor Brooks, She gave her self to mourn:
And as she rushed her Cyclades among,
She seemed to plain, that Heaven had done her wrong.
With a ho^rse Plaint, Cleyd down her steepie Rocks,
And Tweed through her green Mountains cled with Flocks,
Did wound the Ocean, murmuring thy Death,
The Ocean that roared about the Earth,
And it to Mauritanian Atlas told,
Who shrunk through Grief, and down his white Hairs rolled
Hudge Streams of Tears, that changed were in Floods,
With which he drowned the neighbor Plains and Woods.
The lesser Brooks as they did bubbling go,
Did keep a Consort unto public Woe*
The Shepherds left their Flocks with downe-cast Eyes,
Disdaining to look up to angry Skies:
Some broke their Pipes, and some in sweet-sad Lays,
Made senseless things amazed at thy Praise.
His Reed Alexis hung upon a Tree,
And with his Tears made Doven great to be.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
Chaste Maids which haunt fair Aganippe Well,
And you in Tempes sacred Shade who dwell,
Let fall your Harpes, cease Tunes of loy to sing,
Discheueled make all Parnassus ring
With Antheames sad, thy Music Phoebus turn
In doleful Plaints, whilst Joy it self does mourn:
Dead is thy Darling, who decor'd thy Bays,
Who often was wont to cherish thy sweet Lays,
And to a Trumpet raise thine amorous Style,
That floting Delos envy might this I Will.
You Acidalian Archers break your Bows,
Your Brandons quench, with Tears blot Beauties Snowes,
And bid your weeping Mother yet again
A second Adons Death, nay, Marses plain:
His Eyes once were your Darts, nay, even his Name
Where ever heard, did every Heart inflame:
Tagus did court his Love, with golden Streams,
Rhein with his Towns, fair Seine, with all she claims.
But ah (poor Lovers) Death did them betrey,
And (not suspected) made their Hopes his Prey!
Tagus bewailes his Loss, with golden Streams,
Rhein with his Towns, fair Seine with all she claims.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
Delicious Meads, whose checkred Plain forth brings,
White, golden, azure Flowers, which once were Kings,
In mourning Black, their shining Colors dye,
Bow down their Heads, whilst sighing Zephyres fly.
Queen of the Fields, whose Blush makes blushe the Morn,
Sweet Rose, a Princes Death in Purple mourn.
O Hyacinthes, for ay your AI keep still,
Nay, with more Marks of Woe your Leaves now fill:
And you, O Flower of Helens Tears first borne,
Into those liquide Pearls again you turn.
Your green Locks, Forests, cut, in weeping Myrrhes,
The deadly Cypress, and Inke-dropping Firres,
Your Palms and Mirtles change; from Shadows dark
VVing'd Sirens wail, and you sad Echoes mark
The lamentable Accents of their Moan,
And plain that brave Moeliades is gone.
Stay Sky thy turning Course, and now become
A stately Arche, unto the Earth his Tomb:
Over which ay the watrie Iris keep,
And sad Electras Sisters which still weep.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
Dear Ghost, forgive these our untimely Tears,
By which our loving Mind, though weak, appears,
Our Loss not Thine (when we complain) we weep,
For thee the glistring Walls of Heaven do keep,
Beyond the Planets Wheels, above that Source
Of Spheres, that turns the lower in its Course,
Where Sun does never set, nor ugly Night
Ever appears in mourning Garments dight:
Where Boreas stormy Trumpet does not sound,
Nor Clouds in Lightnings bursting, Minds astound.
From Cares cold Climates far, and hot Desire,
Where Time is banished, Ages never exspire:
Amongst pure Sprights environed with Beams,
Thou think all things below to be but Dreams,
And joy'st to look down to the azur'd Bars
Of Heaven, indented all with streaming Stars;
And in their turning Temples to behold,
In silver Robe the Moon, the Sun in Gold,
Like young Eye-speaking Lovers in a Dance,
With Majesty by Turns retire, advance,
Thou wondrest Earth to see hang like a Ball,
Closed in the ghastly Cloister of this All:
And that poor Men should prove so madly fond,
To toss themselves for a small Foot of Ground.
Nay, that they even dare brave the Powers above,
From this base Stage of Change, that cannot move.
All worldly Pomp and Pride thou see arise
Like Smoke, that scattreth in the empty Skies.
Other Hills and Forests, other sumptuous Towers,
Amazed thou find'st, excelling our poor Bowres,
Courts void of Flattery, of Malice Minds,
Pleasure which lasts, not such as Reason blindes:
Far sweeter Songs thou hear'st and Carrolings,
Whilst Heavens do dance, and Quire of Angels sings,
Than moldie Minds could feign, even our Annoy
(If it approach that Place) is changed in Joy.
Rest blessed Spright, rest saciate with the Sight
Of him, whose Beams both dazell and delight,
Life of all Lives, Cause of each other Cause,
The Sphere, and Center, where the Mind does pause:
Narcissus of himself, himself the Well,
Lover, and Beauty, that does all excel.
Rest happy Ghost, and wonder in that Glass,
Where seen is all that shall be, is, or was,
While shall be, is, o^ was do pass away,
And naught remain but an Eternal Day.
For ever rest, thy Praise Fame may enroule
In golden Annalles, whilst about the Pole
The slow Boots turns, or Sun does rise
With skarlet Scarf, to cheer the mourning Skies:
The Virgins to thy Tomb may Garlands bear
Of Flowers, and on each Flower let fall a Tear.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From Thuly to Hydaspes pearlie Shore.
SONNET.
A Passing Glance, a Lightning long the Skies
That vsh'ring Thunder dies straight to our Sight,
A Spark, of Contraries which does arise,
Then drownes in the huge Depthes of Day and Night:
Is this small-Small called Life, held in such Price
Of blinded Wights, who nothing judge aright,
Of Parthian Shaft so swift is not the Flight
As Life, that wastes it self, and living dies.
O! what is humane Greatness, Valor, Wit?
What fading Beauty, Riches, Honor, Praise?
To what does serve in golden Thrones to sit,
Thrall Earths vaste Round, triumphall Arches raise?
All is a Dream, learn in this Princes Fall,
In whom (save Death) naught mortal was at all.
Of IET,
Or Porphyrie,
Or that white Stone
PAROS affordes alone,
Or those in Azure Dye,
Which seem to scorn the Sky;
Here MEMPHIS Wonders do not set,
Nor ARTEMISIAS hudge Frame,
That keeps so long her LOVERS Name.
Make no great Marble Atlas tremble with Gold,
To please a vulgar EYE that does behold:
The Muses, Phoebus, LOVE, have raised of their Tears
A crystal Tomb to Him, through which his Worth appears.
URANIA, OR Spiritual Poems.

URANIA* OR Spiritual Poems.
Triumphing Chariots, Statues, Crowns of Bays,
Sky threatening Arches, the Rewards of Worth,
Works heavenly wise in sweet ^armonious Lays,
Which Sprights divine unto the World set forth:
States, which ambitious Minds with Blood do raise
From frozen Tanais to Sunne-gilded Gange,
Giganticke Frames held Wonders rarely strange,
Like Spiders Webbes, are made the Sport of Days.
All on^y constant is in constant Change,
What done is, is undone, and when undone,
Into some other Fashion does it range*
Thus goes the floting World beneath the Moon,
Where for (my Mind) above Time, Motion, Place,
Thee raise, and Steps unknown to Nature Trace.
TOo long I followed have my fond Desire,
And too long painted on the Ocean Streams:
Too long Refreshment sought amidst the Fire,
And hunted Joys, which to my Soul were Blames.
Ah! when I had what most I did admire,
And seen of Life's Delights the last Extremes,
I found all but a Rose hedged with a Bryer,
A Naught, a Thought, a Show of mocking Dreams.
Henceforth on thee mine only Good I Will think,
For only thou can grant what I do crave,
Thy Nail my Pen shall be, thy Blood mine Ink,
Thy Winding Sheet my Paper, Study Grave,
And till that Soul forth of this Body fly,
No Hope I Will have but only only Thee.
TO spread the azure Canopie of Heaven,
And make it twinckle all with Spanges of Gold,
To place this pondrous Globe of Earth so even,
That it should all, and naught should it uphold:
To give strange Motions to the Planets seven,
And Jove to make so meek, and Mars so bold,
To temper what is moist, dry, hot, and cold,
Of all their Iarres that sweet Accords are given.
LORD, to thy Wit is naught, naught to thy Might,
But that thou should ( thy Glory laid aside)
Come basely in Mortality to bide,
And die for them deserved eternal Plight,
A Wonder is, so far above our Wit,
That Angels stand amazed to think on it.
COme forth, come forth, ye blessed triumphing Bands,
Fair Citizens of that immortal Town:
Come see that King, who all this All commands,
Now (ouercharg'd with Love) die for his own.
Look on those Nails which pierce his Feet and Hands,
What a strange Diadem his Brows does crown?
Behold his pallide Face, his Eyes which sown,
And what a Throng of Thieues him mocking stands:
Come forth ye Empyrean Troops, come forth,
Preserve this sacred Blood, which Earth adornes,
Gather those liquide Roses from his Thorns,
O! to be lost they be of too much Worth:
For Streams,1 Juice,2 Baulme,3 they are, which quench,1 killes,2 charms,3
Of God,1 Death,2 Hell,3 the Wrath,1 the Life,2 the Harms.3
Soul, which to Hell wast thrall,
He, he for thine Offense
Did suffer Death, who could not die at all:
O sovereign Excellence,
O Life of all that lives,
Eternal Bounty, which all Goodness gives,
How could Death mount so hie?
No Wit this Point can reach,
Faith only does us teach,
For us he died, at all who could not die.
IF with such passing Beauty, choice Delights,
The Architect of this great Round did frame
This Palace visible, which World we name?
(Yet silly Mansion but of mortal Wights)
How many Wonders? what amazing Lights,
Must that triumphing Seat of Glory claim?
Which does transcend all this great Alls high Hights,
Of whose bright Sun ours here is but a Beam?
O blessed Abode! o happy dwelling Place!
Where visiblie th'Inuisible does reign,
Blessed People, who do see true Beauties Face,
With whose dark Shadows He but Earth does daigne,
All Joy is but Annoy, all Concord Strife,
Matched with your endless Bliss, and happy Life.
Love which is here, a Care
That Wit and Will does mar,
Uncertain Truce, and a most certain War,
A shrill tempestuous Wind,
Which does disturb the Mind,
And like wild Waves our Dessignes all commoue:
Among those Sprights above
Which see their Makers Face,
It a Contentment is, a quiet Peace,
A Pleasure void of Grief, a constant Rest,
Eternal Joy, which nothing can molest.
WHat hapless Hap had I now to be borne,
In these unhappy Times, and dying Days,
Of this else-doating World? when Good decays,
Love is quenched forth, and Virtue held a Scorn.
When such are only prized, by wretched Ways
Who with a golden Fleece them can adorn,
When Avarice, and Lust, are counted Praise,
And noble Minds live Orphane* like forlorn.
Why was not I into that golden Age,
When Gold yet was not known? and those black Arts,
By which base Mortalles vildely play their Parts,
And stain with horride Acts Earths stately Stage?
Then to have been, Heaven, it had been my Bliss^,
But bless me now, and take me soon from this.
Thrice happy he, who by some shadie Grove
Far from the clamarous World does live his own,
Though solitare, yet who is not alone,
But does converse with that Eternal Love.
O how more sweet is Birds harmonious Moan,
Or the soft Sobbings of the widowed Dove?
Than those smoothe Whisp'rings near a Princes Throne,
Which Good make doubtful, do the Evil approve.
O how more sweet is Zephyres wholesome Breath,
And Sighs perfumed, which do the Flowers unfold,
Than that Applause vain Honor does bequeath?
How sweet are Streams to Poison drunk in Gold?
The World is full of Horrors, Falsehoods, Slights,
Woods silent Shades have only true Delights.
WHy (Worldlings) do ye trust frail Honors Dreams?
And lean to gilded Glories which decay?
Why do ye toil to registrate your Names
In ycie Columns, which soon melt away?
True Honor is not here, that Place it claims,
Where blacke-brow'd Night does not exile the Day,
Nor no farre-shining Lamp dives in the Sea,
But an eternal Sun spreades lasting Beams.
There it attends you, where spotless Bands
Of Sprights, stand gazing on their sovereign Bliss,
Where Years not hold it in their cankring Hands,
But who once noble ever noble is:
Look home, lest he your weakened Wit make thrall,
Who Edens foolish Gardener erst made fall.
AStrea in this Time
Now does not live, but is fled up to Heaven;
Or if she live, it is not without Crime
That she does use her Power,
And she is no more Virgin, but a Whoure,
Whoure prostitute for Gold:
For she does never hold her Balance even,
And when her Sword is rolled,
The Bad, Injurious, False, she not o'rethrowes,
But on the Innocent lets fall her Blows.
WHat serves it to be good? Goodness by thee
The Holy-wise is thought a Fool to be,
For thee the Man to Temperance inclin'de,
Is held but of a base and abject Mind,
The Continent is thought for thee but cold,
Who yet was good, that ever died old?
The pitiful who others fears to kill,
Is killed himself, and Goodness does him ill:
The meek and humble Man who cannot brave,
By thee is to some Giants Brood made Slave.
Poor Goodness, thine thou to such Wrongs sett'st forth,
That o! I fear me, thou art nothing worth:
And when I look to Earth, and not to Heaven,
Ere I were turned Dove, I would be Raven.
GReat GOD, whom we with humble Thoughts adore,
Eternal, infinite, almighty King,
Whose Palace Heaven transcends, whose Throne before
Archangells serve, and Seraphins do sing:
Of Naught who wrought all that with wondering Eyes
We do behold within this spacious Round,
Who make the Rocks to rock, and stand the Skies,
At whose Command the horride Thunders sound:
Ah! spare us Worms, weigh not how we (alas)
Evil to our Selves, against thy Laws rebel,
VVash off those Spots, which still in Conscience Glass
(Though we be loath to look) we see too well.
Deserved Revenge, o do not, do not take,
If thou revenge* what shall abide thy Blow?
Pass shall this World, this World which thou did make,
Which should not perish till thy Trumpet blow.
For who is he whom Parents Sin not stains?
Or with his own Offense is not defiled?
Though Justice Ruin threaten, Justice Raines
Let Mercy hold, and be both just and mild.
Less are our Faults far far tha^ is thy Love,
O! what can better seem thy Power divine?
Than those who Evil deserve thy Goodness prove?
And where thou thunder should there fair to shine?
Then look, and pity, pitying forgive
Us guilty Slaves, or Servants, at thy Will,
Slaves, if (alas) thou look how we do live,
^r doing naught at all, or doing ill:
Of an ungrateful Mind a foul Effect,
But if thy Gifts, which largely heretofore
Thou have upon us powered, thou do respect?
We be thy Servants, nay, than Servants more,
Thy Children, yes, and Children dearly bought,
But what strange Chance us of this Lot bereaues?
Vile Rebels, o! how basely are we brought?
Whom Grace made Children, Sin has now made Slaves:
Sin Slaves has made, but let thy Grace Sin thrall,
That in our Wrongs thy mercy may appear*
Thy Wisdom not so weak is, Power so small,
But thousand Ways they can make Men thee fear.
O Wisdom bound-lesse! admirable Grace!
Grace, Wisdom, which do dazell Reasons Eye,
And could Heavens King bring from his placelesse Place,
On this infamous Stage of Woe, to die:
To die our Death and with the sacred Stream
Of Blood, and Water, gushing from his Side,
To expiate that Sin, and deadly Blame,
Contrived first by our First Parents Pride.
Thus thy great Love, and Pity, heavenly King,
Love, Pity, which so well our Loss preuents,
Could even of Evil it self all Goodness bring,
And sad Beginnings cheer with glad Events.
O Love, and Pity! ill known of these Times,
O Love and Pity! careful of our Bliss,
O Goodness! with the heinous Acts and Crimes
Of this black Age, that almost vanquished is:
Make this excessive ardour of thy Love,
So warm our Coldness, so our Lives renew,
That we from Sin, Sin may from us remove,
Wit may our Will, Faith may our Wit subdue*
Let thy p^re Love burn up all mortal Lust,
That Band of Ills which thralles our better Part,
And fondly makes us worship fleshly Dust,
In stead of Thee in Temple of our Heart.
Grant, when at last the Spright shall leave this Tomb,
This loathsome Shop of Sin, and Mansion blind,
And (call*d) before thy Royal Seat does come,
It may a Savior, not a Judge, thee find.
To the Author.
THe sister Nymphs who haunt the Thespian Springs,
Never did their Gifts more liberally bequeath
To them who on their Hills sucked sacred Breath,
Than unto thee, by which thou sweetly sings.
Never did Apollo raise on Pegase Wings
A Muse more near himself, more far from Earth,
Than thine; if She do weep thy Ladies Death,
Or sing those sweet-sowre Panges which Passion brings.
To write our Thoughts in Verse does merit Praise,
But those our Verse to gild in Fictions Ore,
Bright, rich, delightful, does deserve much more,
As thou have done these thy delicious Lays:
Thy Muses Morning (doubtless) does bewray
The near Approach of a more glistring Day.
D. Murray.

MADRIGALLS, AND Epigrammes.

BY W. D.



MADRIGALS, AND EPIGRAMMES.
The Statue of MEDVSA.
OF that MEDVSA strange,
Who those that did her see in Rocks did change,
None Image carved is this;
MEDVSAS self it is,
For whilst at Heat of Day,
To quench her Thirst She by this Spring did stay,
Her curling Snakes beholding in this Glass,
Life did Her leave, and thus transformed She was.
The Trojane Horse.
AHorse I am, whom Bit,
Rain, Rod, ^or Spur, not fear;
When I my Riders bear,
Within my Womb, not on my Back they sit:
No Streams I drink, nor care for Grass, nor Corn,
Art me a Monster wrought,
All Natures Works to scorn:
A Mother, I was without Mother borne,
In End all armed my Father I forth brought:
What thousand Ships, and Champions of Renown,
Could not do free, I captive razed a Town.
A Lovers Heaven.
THose Stars, nay Suns, which turn
So stately in their Spheres,
And daz'ling do not burn,
The beauty of the Morn
Which on those Cheeks appears,
The Harmony which to that Voice is given,
Make me think ye are Heaven:
If Heaven ye be? o that by powerful Charms
I Atlas were, to hold you in mine Arms!
Deep Impression of Love.
WHom raging Dog does bite,
He does in Water still
That Cerberus Image see;
Love Mad (perhaps) when he my Heart did smite,
(More to dissemble Ill)
Transformed himself in thee,
For ever since thou present art to me:
No Spring there is, no Flood, nor other Place,
Where I (alas) not see thy heavenly Face.
The Pourtrait of MARS and VENUS.
Fair PAPHOS wanton Queen,
Not drawn in White and Red,
Is truly here, as when in VVLCANS Bed
She was of all Heavens laughing Senate seen:
Gaze on her Hair, and Eine,
Her Brows, the Bows of Love,
Her back with Lillies spread:
And ye should see her turn, and sweetly move,
But that She neither so will do, nor darre,
For fear to wake the angry God of War.
IOLAS Epitaph.
HEre dear Iolas lies,
Who whilst he lived in Beauty did surpass
That Boy, whose heavenly Eyes
Brought Cypris from above,
Or him till Death who looked in watrie Glass,
Even Judge the God of Love:
And if the Nymphe once held of him so dear,
Dorine the fair, would here but shed one Tear,
Thou should (in Natures Scorn)
A purple Flower see of this Marble borne.
Upon the Death of a LINNET.
IF cruel Death had Ears,
Or could be pleased by Songs?
This winged Musician lived had many years,
And Chloris mine had never wept these Wrongs:
For when it first took Breath,
The Heavens their Notes did unto it bequeath:
And (if that Samians sentence be found true)
Amphion in this Body lived of new:
But Death, for that he nothing spares, naught hears,
As he does Kings, it killed, o Grief! o Tears!
ALCONS Kiss.
WHat others at their Ear
Two Pearls Camilla at her Nose did wear,
Which Alcon who naught saw
(For Love is blind) robbed with a pretty Kiss,
But having known his Miss,
And felt what Ore he from that Mine did draw,
When she to charge again him did desire,
He fled, and said, foul Water quenched Fire.
ICARVS.
WHilst with audacious Wings
I sprang those airie Ways,
And filled (a Monster new) with Dread and Fears,
The feathred People, and their Eagle Kings:
Dazel'd with Phoebus Rays,
And charmed with the Music of the Spheres,
When Pens could move no more, and Force did fail,
I measured by a Fall these lofty Bounds;
Yet does Renown my Losses counteruaile,
For still the Shore my brave Attempt resounds:
A Sea, an Element does bear my Name,
Who has so vaste a Tomb in Place, or Fame?
Cherries.
MY Wanton, weep no more
The ^osing of your Cherries,
Those, and far sweeter Berries,
Your Sister in good store
Has, spread on Lips, and Face:
Be glad, kiss but with me, and hold your peace.
Of THAVMANTIA, beholding her self in a Marble.
WOrld, wonder not that I
Engraue thus in my Breast
This Angel Face, which me bereaues of Rest:
Since things even wanting Sense, cannot deny
To lodge so dear a Guest,
And this hard Marble Stone
Receives the same, and Jove's, but cannot groan.
Love suffers no Parasol.
THose Eyes, dear Eyes, be Spheres,
Where two bright Suns are rolled,
That fair Hand to behold,
Of whitest Snow appears:
Then while ye coylie stand,
To hide from me those Eyes,
Sweet, I would you advise
To choose some other Fan than that white Hand:
For if ye do, for Truth most true this know,
That Suns ere long must needs consume warm Snow.
Sleeping Beauty.
O Sight! too dearly bought,
She sleeps, and though those Eyes,
Which lighten Cupids Skies,
Be closed, yet such a Grace
Enuironeth that Place,
That I through Wonder to grow faint am brought:
Suns, if eclipsed ye have such Power divine?
O! how can I endure you when ye shine?
The quality of a Kiss.
THe Kiss with so much Strife,
Which I late got (sweet Heart)
Was it a Sign of Death, or was it Life?
Of Life it could not be,
For I by it did sigh my Soul in thee,
Nor was it Death, Death does no Joy impart:
Thou silent stand'st, ah! what thou did bequeath,
To me a dying Life was, living Death.
Of PHILLIS.
IN Peticote of Green,
Her Hair about her Eine,
Phillis beneath an Oak
Sat milking her fair Flock:
Among that strained Moisture (rare Delight!)
Her Hand seemed Milk in Milk, it was so white.
Kisses desired.
THough I with strange Desire
To kiss those rosy Lips am set on Fire,
Yet will I cease to crave
Sweet Touches in such store,
As he who long before
From Lesbia them in thousands did receive;
Heart mine, but once me kiss,
And I by that sweet Bliss
Even swear to cease you to importune more,
Poor one no Number is:
Another Word of me ye shall not hear,
After one Kiss, but still one Kiss, my Dear.
Of DAMETAS.
DAMETAS dreamed he saw his Wife at Sport,
And found that sight was through the hornie Port.
The Canon.
WHen first the Canon from her gaping Throat,
Against the Heaven her roaring Sulphur shote,
Jove wak'ned with the Noyce, and asked with Wonder,
What mortal Wight had stolen from him his Thunder,
His crystal Towers he feared, but Fire, and Air,
So deep, did stay the Ball from mounting there.
APELLES enamored of CAMPASPE, ALEXANDERS Mistress.
Poor Painter, whilst I sought
To counterfaite by Art
The fairest Frame that Nature ever wrought,
And having limm'd each Part
Except her matchless Eyes:
Scarce on those Twins I gazed,
As Lightning falls from Skies,
When straight my Hand benumbed was, Mind amazed:
And ere that Pincell half them had expressed,
Love all had drawn, no, graven within my Breast.
CAMPASPE.
ON Stars shall I exclame,
Which thus my Fortune change?
Or shall I else revenge
Upon my self this shame?
Unconstant Monarch, or shall I thee blame?
Who let'st APELLES prove
The sweet Delights of Alexanders Love;
No, Stars, my self, and thee, I all forgive,
And joye that thus I live:
Kings know not Beauty, hence mine was despised,
The Painter did, and me he dearly prized.
Unpleasant Music.
IN Fields Ribaldo strayed,
Mayes Tapestrie to see,
And hearing on a Tree
A Cuckooe sing, he sighed, and softly said,
Lo, how (alas) even Birds sit mo^king m^e.
A Jest.
IN a most holy Church* a holy Man,
Unto a holy Saint, with Visage wan,
And Eyes like Fountains, mumbled forth a Prayer,
And with strange Words, and Sig^es, made black the Air:
And having long so stayed, and long long prayed,
A thousand Crosses on himself he laid,
Then with some sacred Beads hung on his Arm,
His Eyes, his Mouth, Breast, Temples did he charm.
Thus not content (strange Worship has none End)
To kiss the Earth at last he did pretend,
And bowing down, besought with humble Grace
An aged Woman near to give some Place:
She turned, and turning up her Pole beneath,
Said, Sir, kiss here, for it is all but Earth.
NARCISSUS.
Floods cannot quench my Flames, ah! in this Well
I burn, not drown, for what I cannot tell.
TO THAVMANTIA singing.
IS it not too too much
Thou late did to me prove,
A Basiliske of Love?
And did my Wits bewitch:
Unless (to cause more Harm)
Made Syrene too thou with thy Voice me charm?
Ah! though thou so my Reason did control,
That to thy Looks I could not prove a Mole:
Yet do me not that Wrong,
As not to let me turn Aspe to thy Song.
Of her Dog.
WHen her dear Bosom clips
That little Curre, which faunes to touch her Lips*
Or when it is his Hap
To lie lapp'd in her Lap,
O! it grows Noone with me,
With hotter-pointed Beams
My burning Planet streams,
What Rays were erst, in Lightnings changed be:
When often I muse, how I to those Extremes
Am brought, I find no Cause, except that she
In Loves bright Zodiac having traced each Room,
To fatal Syrius now at last is come.
A Kiss.
Hark happy Lovers, hark,
This first and last of Joys,
This Sweetner of Annoyes,
This Nectare of the Gods,
Ye call a Kiss, is with it self at ods:
And half so sweet is not
In equal Measure got,
At Light of Sun, as it is in the Dark,
Hark, happy Lovers, hark.
Cornucopia.
IF for one only Horn
Which Nature to him gave,
So famous is the noble Unicorn?
What Praise should that Man have,
Whose Head a Lady brave
Does with a goodly Pair at once adorn?
Of AMYNTAS.
OVer a crystal Source
Amyntas laid his Face,
Of popling Streams to see the restless Course:
But scarce he had o'reshadowed the Place,
When (spying in the Ground a Child arise,
Like to himself in Stature, Face, and Eyes)
He rose o'rejoy'd, and cried,
Dear Mates approach, see whom I have descried,
The Boy of whom strange Stories Shepherds tell
(Oft-called Hylas) dwells in this Well.
PAMPHILVS.
SOme, Ladies wed, some love, and some adore them,
I like their wanton Sport, then care not for them.
Upon a Glass.
IF thou would see Threedes purer than the Gold,
Where Love his Wealth does show?
But take this Glass, and thy fair Hair behold:
If Whiteness thou would see more white than Snow,
And read on Wonders Book?
Take but this Glass, and on thy For^head look:
Would thou in Winter see a crimsin Rose,
Whose Thorns do hurt each Heart?
Look but in Glass how thy sweet Lips do close:
Would thou see Planets which all Good impart,
Or Meteores divine?
But take this Glass, and gaze upon thine Eine:
No, Planets, Rose, Snow, Gold, cannot compare
With you, dear Eyes, Lips, Brows, and amber Hair.
Of a Be.
AS an audacious Knight
Come with some Foe to fight,
His Sword does brandish, makes his Armor ring:
So this proud Be (at home (perhaps) a King)
Did buzzing fly about,
And (Tyrant) after thy fair Lip did sting:
O Champion strange as stout!
Who have by Nature found,
Sharp Arms, and Trumpet shrill, to sound, and wound.
Of that same.
O Do not kill that Be
That thus has wounded thee,
(Sweet) it was no Despite,
But Hue did him deceive:
For when thy Lips did close,
He deemed them a Rose,
What would thou further crave?
He wanting Wit, and blinded with Delight,
Would feign have kissed* but Mad with Joy did bite.
Of a Kiss.
AH! of that cruel Be
Thy Lips have sucked too much:
For when they mine did touch,
I found tha^ both they hurt, and sweetened, me:
This by the Sting they have,
And that they of the Honey do recea^e:
Dear Kiss, else by what Art
Could thou at once both please and wound my Heart?
IDMON to VENUS.
IF (Acidalias Queen)
Thou quench in me thy Torch,
And with the same Thaumantias Heart shall scorch;
Each Year a Myrtle Tree
Here I do vow to consecr^te to thee:
And when the Meads grow green,
I will of sweetest Flowrs
Weaue thousand Garlands, to adorn thy Bowrs.
A Lovers Plaint.
IN midst of silent Night,
When Men, Birds, Beasts, do rest,
With Love, and Fear possessed
To Heaven, and Flore, I count my heavy Plight.
Again with roseate Wings
When Morn peepes forth, and Philomela sings,
Then Void of all Relief,
Do I renew my Grief:
Day follows Night, Night Day, whilst still I prove,
That Heaven is deaf, Flore careless of my Love.
His Firebrand.
Leave Page that slender Torch,
And in this gloomie Night
Let only shine the Light
Of Loves hot Brandon, which my Heart does scorch:
A Sigh, or Blast of Wind,
My Tears, or Drops of Rain,
May that at once make blind;
Whilst this like Aetna burning shall remain.
DAPHNIS VOW.
WHen Sun does bring the Day
From the Hesperian Sea,
Or Moon her Coach does roll
Above the Northern Pole,
When Serpents can not hiss,
And Lovers shall not kiss:
Then may it be, but in no time till then,
That Daphnis can forget his Orienne.
Of NISA.
NIsa Palemons Wife him weeping told,
He kept not Grammar Rules, now being old:
For why (quoth she) Position false make ye,
Putting a short thing where a long should be.
Beauties Idea.
WHo would Perfections fair Idea see,
Let him come look on Chloris sweet with me;
White is her Hair, her Teeth white, white her Skin,
Black be her Eyes, her Eyebrows, Cupids Inn:
Her Locks, her Body, Hands, do long appear,
But Teeth short, Belly short, short either Ear;
The Space twixt Shoulders, Eyes, is wide, Brows wide,
Strait Waste, the Mouth strait, and her virgin Pride:
Thick are her Lips, Thighs, with Banckes swelling there,
Her Nose is small, small Fingers, and her Hair,
Her sugared Mouth, her Cheeks, her Nails, be red,
Little her Foot, Pap little, and her Head.
Such Venus was, such was the Flame of Troy,
Such Chloris is, my Hope, and only Joy.
CRATONS Death.
AMidst the Waves profound,
Far far from all Relief,
The honest Fisher Craton, ah! is drowned
Into his little Skife:
The Boords of which did serve him for a Bear,
So that to the black World when he came near,
Of him no Waftage greedy Charon got,
For he in his own Boat
Did pass that Flood, by which the Gods dow swear.
ARMELINS Epitaph.
Near to this Eglantine
Enclosed lies the milke-white Armeline:
Once Chloris only Joy,
Now only her annoy;
Who envied was of the most happy Swains,
That keep their Flocks in Mountains, Dales, or Plains:
For often she bare the wanton in her Arm,
And often her Bed, and Bosom did he warm:
Now when unkindly Fates did him destroy,
Blessed Dog he had the Grace,
With Tears for him that Chloris wet her Face.
The Statue of VENUS sleeping.
Break not my sweet Repose
Thou, whom free Will, or Chance, brings to this Place,
Let Lids these Comets close,
O do not seek to see their shining Grace:
For when mine Eyes thou see, they thine will blind,
And thou shall part, but leave thy Heart behind.
LILLAS Prayer.
Love, if thou will once more
That I to thee return,
(Sweet God) make me not burn
For quiuering Age, that does spent Days deplore:
Nor do not wound my Heart
For some unconstant Boy,
Who joys to love, yet makes of Love a Toy:
But (ah) if I must prove thy golden Dart?
Of grace O let me find
A sweet young Lover with an aged Mind.
Thus Lilla prayed, and Idas did reply
(Who heard) Dear have thy wish, for such am I.
The unkindness of RORA.
WHilst sighing forth his Wrongs,
In sweet, though doleful Songs,
Alexis seeks to charm his Roras Ears,
The Hills are heard to moan,
To sigh each Spring appears,
Trees, even heard Trees, through Rine distill their Tears,
And soft grows every Stone:
But Tears, Sighs, Songs, can not fair Rora move,
Proud of his Plaints she glories in his Love.
ANTHEA Gift.
THis virgin Lock of Hair
To Idmon Anthea gives,
Idmon for whom she lives,
Though often she mix his Hopes with cold Despair:
This now, but absent if he constant prove,
With Gift more dear she vows to meet his Love.
TO THAVMANTIA.
Come, let us live, and love,
And kiss, Thaumantia mine,
I shall the Elm be, be to me the Vine,
Come let us teach new Billing to the Dove:
Nay, to augment our Bliss,
Let Souls even other kiss,
Let Love a Worke-man be,
Undo, distemper, and his Cunning prove,
Of Kisses three make one, of one make three:
Though Moon, Sun, Stars, be Bodies far more bright,
Let them not vaunt they match us in Delight.
Epitaph.
THis dear (though not respected) Earth does hold
One for his Worth, whose Tomb should be of Gold.
Of LIDA.
SVch Lida is that who Her sees
Through Envy, or through Love straight dies.
A Wish.
To forge to mighty Jove
The Thunderbolts above,
Nor on this Round below
Rich Midas Skill to know,
And make all Gold I touch,
I do not crave, nor other Cunning such:
For all those Arts be underneath the Sky,
I wish but Phillis Lapidare to be.
A Lovers Day and Night.
BRight Meteore of Day,
For me in Thetis Bowres for ever stay:
Night, to this flowrie Globe
Never show for me thy starre-embrodred Robe;
My Night, my Day, do not proceed from you,
But hang on Miras Browe:
For when she Iowres, and hides from me her Eyes,
Midst clearest Day I find black Night arise,
When smyling she again those Twins does turn,
In midst of Night I find Noones Torch to burn.
The Statue of ADONIS.
WHen Venus longst that Plain
This Parian Adon saw,
She sighed, and said, What Power breaks Destines Law,
World mourned Boy, and makes thee live again?
Then with stretched Arms she ran him to enfold:
But when she did behold
The Bore, whose snowie Tuskes did threaten Death,
Fear closed up her Breath:
Who can but grant then that these Stones do live,
Since this bred Love, and that a Wound did give?
CLORVS to a Grove.
OLd Oak, and you thick Grove,
I ever shall you love,
With these sweet smelling Briers,
For Briers, Oak, Grove, ye^ crowned my Desires,
When underneath your Shade
I left my Woe, and Flore her Maidenhead.
A Couplet encomiasticke.
Love1, Cypris2, Phoebus3, will feed1, deck2, and crown3,
Thy Heart1, Brows2, Verse3, with Flames1, with Flowrs2, Renown3.
An other.
THy Muse not-able, full, il-lustred Rimes,
Make thee the Poet^ Aster of our Times.
The Rose.
Flower, which of ADONS Blood
Sprang, when of that clear Flood
Which Venus wept, an other white was borne,
The sweet Cynarean Youth thou right do show:
But this sharpe-pointed Thorn,
Which does (so proud) about thy Crimsin grow,
What does it represent?
Boares Tuskes (perhaps) his snowie Flancke which rent:
O Show of Shows! of vnesteemed Worth,
Which both what killed, and what was killed sett'st forth.
To a River.
Since she will not that I
Show to the World my Joy,
Thou who often mine Annoy
Have heard (dear Flood) tell Thetis Nymphettes bright,
That not a happier Wight
Does breath beneath the Sky:
More sweet, more white, more fair,
Lips, Hands, and amber Hair,
Tell none did ever touch;
A smaller, daintier Waste
Tell never was embract:
But Peace, since she forbids thou tell too much.
Thais Metamorphose.
IN Briareus hudge
Thais wished she might change
Her Man, and prayed him herefore not to grudge,
Nor fondly think it strange:
For if (said she) I might the Parts dispose,
I wish you not an hundredth Arms, nor Hands,
But hundredth Things, like those,
With which Priapus in our Garden stands.
Upon a Baye Tree, not long since growing in the Ruins of VIRGILS Tomb.
THose Stones which once had Trust
Of Maros sacred Dust,
Which now of their first Beauty spoylde are seen,
That they due Praise not want,
Inglorious and remain,
A Delian Tree (fair Natures only Plant)
Now courts, and shadows with her Tresses green^
Sing Io Paean, ye of Phoebus Train,
Though Envy, Avarice, Time, your Tombs throw down,
With Maiden Lawrells Nature will them crown.
Epitaph.
THen Death thee has beguild
Alectos first borne Child?
Thou who did thrall all Laws
Then against Worms can not maintain thy Cause?
Yet Worms (more just than thou) now do no Wrong,
Since all do wonder they thee spared so long,
For though from Life but lately thou did pass,
Ten Springs are gone since thou corrupted was.
FLORAS Flower.
VEnus does love the Rose,
Apollo those dear Flowrs
Which were his Paramours,
The Queen of sable Skies,
The subtle Lunaries,
But Flore likes none of those,
For fair to Her no Flower seems save the Lilly:
And why? because one Letter turns it P.
MELAMPVS Epitaph.
ALl that a Dog could have
The good Melampus had:
Nay, he had more than what in Beasts we cra^e,
For he could play the Brave,
And often like a Thraso stern go Mad:
And if ye had not seen, but heard him bark,
Ye would have sworn he was your Parish Clarke.
KALAS Complaint.
KAla old Mopsus Wife,
Kala with fairest Face,
(For whom the Neighbor Swains often were at Strife)
As she to milk her milke-white Flock did tend,
Sighed with a heavy Grace,
And said, What Wretch like me does lead her Life?
I see not how my Task can have an End:
All Day I draw these streaming Dugs in Fold,
All Night mine empty Husbands soft and cold.
The Happiness of a Flea.
HOw Happier is that Flea
Which in thy Breast does play,
Than that pied Butterfly
Which courts the Flame, and in the same does die?
That has a light Delight
(Poor Fool) contented only with a Sight,
When this does sport, and swell with dearest Food,
And if he die, he Knight-like dies in Blood.
Of that same.
Poor Flea, then thou did die,
Yet by so fair a Hand,
That thus to die was Destine to command:
Thou die did, yet did try
A Lovers last Delight,
To vault on virgin Plains, Her kiss, and bite:
Thou diedst, yet have thy Tomb
Between those Pappes, o dear and stately Room!
Flea, happier far, more blessed,
Than Phoenix burning in his spicie Nest.
LINAS Virginity.
WHo Lina weddeth, shall most happy be,
For he a Maid shall find,
Though Maiden none be she,
A Girl, or Boy, beneath her Waste confinde:
And thought bright Ceres Locks be never shorn,
He shall be sure this Year to lack no Corn.
LOVE naked.
ANd would ye (Lovers) know
Why Love does naked go?
Fond, waggish, changeling Lad,
Late whilst Thaumantias Voice
He wondering heard, it made him so rejoice,
That he o'rejoy'd ran Mad:
And in a frantic Fit threw Clothes away,
And since from Lip, and Lap hers can not straye.
NIOBE.
WRetched Niobe I am,
Let Wretches read my Case,
Not such who with a Tear never wet their Face;
Seven Daughters of me came,
And Sons as many, which one fatal Day
(Orb'd Mother!) took away:
Thus reft by Heavens unjust,
Grief turned me Stone, Stone too me does entombe,
Which if thou do mistrust,
Of this hard Rock but open the flintie Womb,
And here thou shall find Marble, and no Dust.
Change of Love.
ONce did I weep, and groan,
Drink Tears, draw loathed Breath,
And all for Love of one
Who did affect my Death:
But now (Thanks to Disdain)
I live relieved of Pain,
For Sighs, I singing go,
I burn not as before, no, no, no, no.
Wild Beauty.
IF all but Ice thou be,
How do thou thus me burn?
Or how at Fire which thou do raise in me
(Since Ice) thy self in Streams do thou not turn*
But rather (plaintfull Case!)
Of Ice art Marble made to my Disgrace:
O Miracle of Love! not heard till now,
Cold Ice does burn, and hard by Fire does grow.
Constant Love.
TIme makes great States decay,
Time does Mayes Pomp disgrace,
Time draws d^epe Furrows in the fairest Face,
Time Wisdom, Force, Renown, does take away,
Time does consume the Years,
Time Changes works in Heavens eternal Spheres:
Yet this fierce Tyrant which does all devour,
To lessen Love in me shall have no Power.
TO CHLORIS.
SEe Chloris, how the Clouds
Tilte in the azure Lists,
And how with Stygian Mists
Each horned Hill his giant Forehead shroudes,
Jove thundreth in the Air,
The Air grown great with Rain,
Now seems to bring Deucalions Days again:
I see thee quake, come, let us home repair,
Come hide thee in mine Arms,
If not for Love, yet to shun greater Harms.
UPON A POVRTRAIT.
THe Goddess that in Amathus does reign,
With silver Tramells, and Saphire-colour'd Eyes,
When naked from her Mothers crystal Plain
She first appeared unto the wondering Skies;
Or when (the golden Apple to obtain)
Her blushing Snowes amazed Idas Trees,
Did never look in half so fair a Guise
As she here drawn, all other Ages Stain.
O God what Beauties! to inflame the Soul,
And hold the wildest Hearts in Chains of Gold,
Fair Locks, sweet Face, Loves stately Capitole,
Dear Neck, which do that heavenly Frame vp-hold:
If Virtue would to mortal Eyes appear,
To ravish Sense, she would your Beauty wear.
Upon that same.
IF Heaven, the Stars, and Nature, did her grace
With all Perfections found the Moon above,
And what excels in this lower Place,
Did place in her, to breed a World of Love?
If Angels Gleames shine on her fairest Face?
Which make Heavens Joy on Earth the Gazer prove?
And her bright Eyes (the Orbs which Beauty move)
Do glance like Phoebus in his glorious Race?
What Pincell paint? what Color to the Sight
So sweet a Shape can show? the blushing Morn
The Red must lend, the milkie- Way the White,
And Night the Stars, which her rich Crown adorn,
To draw her right: But then that all agree,
The Heaven, the Table, Zeuxis Jove must be.
Upon that same, drawn with a Pansie.
WHen with brave Art the curious Painter drew
This heavenly Shape, the Hand why made he bear
With golden Veins that Flower of purple Hue,
Which follows on the Planet of the Year?
Was it to show how in our Hemispheare
Like him she shines? Nay, that Effects more true
Of Power, and Wonder do in her appear,
Whilst he but Flowers, she does brave Minds subdue?
Or would he else to Virtues glorious Light
Her constant Course make known? or is it he
Does parallel her Bliss with Clytias Plight?
Right so, and thus, he reading in her Eye
Some woeful Lovers End, to grace his Grave,
For Cypress Tree this mourning Flower her gave.
Upon that same.
IF Sight be not beguilde?
And Eyes right play their Part?
This Flower is not of Art,
But is fair Natures Child:
And though when Phoebus from us is exilde,
She does not lock her Leaves, his Loss to moan,
No Wonder, Earth has now more Suns than one.
THIRSIS in Dispraise of Beauty.
THat which so much the doting World does prise,
Fond Ladies only Care, and sole Delight,
Soone-fading Beauty, which of Hues does rise,
Is but an abject Let of Natures Might;
Most woeful Wretch, whom shining Hair and Eyes,
Lead to Loves Dungeon, traitor'd by a Sight,
Most woeful: for he might with greater Ease
Hells Portalls enter, and pale Death appease.
As in delicious Meads beneath the Flowers,
And the most wholesome Herbs that May can show,
In crystal Curles the speckled Serpent lowres,
As in the Apple (which most fair does grow)
The rotten Worm is closed, which it deuoures,
As in gilt Cups with Gnossian Wine which flow,
Often Poison pompously does hide its Sowres:
So Lewdness, Falsehood, Mischief, them advance,
Clad with the pleasant Rays of Beauties Glance.
Good thence is chased, where Beauty does appear,
Mild Lowliness with Pity from it fly,
Where Beauty reigns as in their proper Sphere,
Ingratitude, Disdain, Pride, all des^rie,
The Flower, and Fruit which Virtues Tree should bear,
With her bad Shadow Beauty makes die:
Beauty a Monster is, a Monster hurld
From angry Heaven, to scourge this lower World.
As Fruits which are unripe, and sour of Taste,
To be confect'd more fit than sweet we prove,
(...) Sweet in Spite of Care themselves will waste,
When they long kept, the Appetite do move:
So in the Sweetness of his Nectare, Love
The foul confects, and seasons for his Feast:
Sour is far better which we sweet may make,
Than sweet which sweeter Sweetness will not ^ake.
Foul may my Lady be, and may her Nose
(A Tanarife) give Vmbrage to her Chinne;
May her gay Mouth (which she no Time may close)
So wide be, that the Moon may turn therein,
May Eyes, and Teeth, be made conform to those,
Eyes set by Chance, and white, Teeth black and thin:
May all what seen is, and is hid from Sight,
Like unto these rare Parts be framed right.
I shall not fear thus though she straye alone,
That others Her pursue, entice, admire,
And though she sometime counterfaite a Groan,
I shall not think her Heart feels uncouth Fire,
I shall not style Her ruethlesse to my Moan,
Nor proud, disdainful, wayward to Desire:
Her Thoughts with mine will hold an equal Line,
I shall be hers, and she shall all be mine.
EVRYMEDONS Praise of MIRA.
GEmme of the Mountains, Glory of our Plains,
Rare Miracle of Nature, and of Love,
Sweet Atlas, who all Beauties Heavens sustaines,
No, Beauties Heaven, where all her Wonders move,
The Sun from East to West who all does see,
On this low Globe sees nothing like to thee.
One Phoenix only lived ere thou wast borne,
And Earth but did o^e Queen of Love admire,
Three Graces only did the World adorn,
But thrice three Muses sung to Phoebus Lyre,
Two Phoenixes be now, Loves Queens are two,
Four Graces, Muses ten, all made by you.
For those Perfections which the bounteous Heaven
To diverse Worlds in diverse Times assigned,
With thousands more, to thee at once were given,
Thy Body fair, more fair they made thy Mind:
And that thy like no Age should more behold,
When thou wast framed they after brake the Mold.
Sweet are the Blushes, on thy Face which shine,
Sweet are the Flames, which sparkle from thine Eyes,
Sweet are his Torments, who for thee does pine,
Most sweet his Death, for thee who sweetly dies,
For if he die, he dies not by Annoy,
But too much Sweetness and abundant Joy.
What are my slender Lays to show thy Worth?
How can base Words a thing so high make known?
So wooden Globes bright Stars to us set forth;
So in a Crystal is Suns Beauty shown:
More of thy Praises if my Muse should write,
More Love and Pity, must the same indite?
THAVMANTIA at the departure of IDMON.
Fair Diane, from the Hight
Of Heavens first Orb who chear'st this lower Place,
Hide now from me thy Light,
And pitying my Case,
Spread with a Skarfe of Clouds thy blushing Face.
Come with your doleful Songs,
Nights sable Birds, which plain when others sleep,
Come, solemnize my Wrongs,
And Consort to me keep,
Since Heaven, Earth, Hell, are set to cause me weep.
This Grief yet I could bear,
If now by Absence I were only pinde,
But ah! worse Evil I fear,
Men absent prove unkind,
And change (unconstant like the Moon) their Mind.
If Thought had so much Power
Of thy Departure, that it could me slaye?
How will that ugly Hour
My feeble Sense dismaye?
Farewell sweet Heart, when I shall hear thee say.
Dear Life, since thou must go,
Take all my Joy and Comfort hence with thee,
And leave with me thy Woe,
Which until I thee see,
Nor Time, nor Place, nor Change shall take from me.
ERYCINE at the departure of ALEXIS.
ANd will thou then, Alexis mine, depart?
And leave these slowrie Meads, and crystal Streams?
These Hills as green as great with Gold and Gemmes,
Which court thee with rich Treasure in each Part?
Shall nothing hold thee? not my loyal Heart,
That burstes to lose the Comfort of thy Beams?
Nor yet this Pipe which wildest Satyrs tames?
Nor Lambkins Wayling? nor old Dorus Smart?
O ruethlesse Shepherd, Forests strange among
What can thou else but fearful Dangers find?
But ah! not thou, but Honor does me Wrong;
O cruel Honor! Tyrant of the Mind,
This said sad Erycine, and all the Flowers
Empearled as she went, with Eyes salt Showers.
ALEXIS to DAMON.
THe Love Alexis did to Damon bear,
Shall witnessed be to all the Woods, and Plains,
As singular, renowned by neighboring Swains,
That to our Relicts Time may Trophies rear:
Those Madrigals we sung amidst our Flocks,
With Garlands guarded from Apollos Beams,
On Ochells whiles, whiles near Bodotrias Streams,
Are registrate by Echoes in the Rocks.
Of foreign Shepherds bent to try the States,
Though I (Worlds Guest) a Vagabond do straye,
Thou may that Store, which I esteem Suruaye,
As best acquainted with my Souls Conceits*
What ever Fate Heavens have for me designed,
I trust thee with the Treasure of my Mind.
FINIS.

