Mortimeriados.

THE LAMENtable ciuell wars of Edward the second and the Barrons.

AT LONDON, Printed by I.R. for Humfry Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop
at the West end of Paul's Church.

To the excellent and most accomplished Lady, Lucie Countess of Bedford.
RArest of Ladies, all, of all I have,
Anchor of my poor Tempest-beaten state,
Which give life, to that life Nature gave,
And to thy self, do only consecrate:
My hopes true Goddess, guider of my fate,
Vouchsafe to grace what here to light is brought,
Begot by thy sweet hand, borne of my thought.
And though I sing of this tumultuous rage,
Still paynting passions in these Tragedies,
Thy milder looks, this fury can aswage,
Such is the virtue of thy sacred eyes,
Which do contain a thousand purities;
And like them selves, can make their object such,
As does Th'elixar all things it does tuch.
Sweet fruit, sprung from that ever sacred tree,
That happy womb from whom thou life do take,
And with that life, gives virtue unto thee,
Thus made of her, her like of thee to make,
She loved for thee, thou honored for her sake;
And eithers good, from other so derived,
Yet she, nor thou, of any due deprived.
The Harringtons, whose house thy birth has blessed,
Adding such honor to their family,
And famous Bedfords greatness still increast,
Raising the height of their Nobility,
That Earledomes title more to dignifie?
That Virtue lively pictured forth in thee,
May truly be discernd, what she should be.
And Lawrell-crowned Sidney, Natures pride,
Whom heaven to earth, but only showed this good,
Betwixt the world, and thee did then divide,
His fame, and virtues, which both equal stood,
The world his fame, to thee of her own blood
He gave his virtues, that in his own kind,
His neuer-matched worth might be enshrined.
That whilst they boast but of their sunburned brayns,
Which Tramontani long have termd us so,
With all their Po's, their Tyburs, and their Rheyn's,
Greeuing to see how tidefull Thames shall flow,
Our Groves which for the graceful Muses grow:
Thy name shall be the glory of the North,
The fairest fruit that ever she brought forth.
And in despite of tyranizing times,
This hope great Lady yet to thee is left,
Thy name shall live in steele-out-during rimes,
Still scorning ages sacraligious theft,
What fame does keep, can never be bereft:
Nor can thy past-priz'd honor ever die,
If lines can give thee immortality.
Leaving unto succeeding times to see,
How much thy sacred gyfts I did adore.
What power thy virtues ever had in me,
And what thou were compared with those before,
Which shall in age, thy youth again restore:
And still shall ad more vigor to thy fame,
Then earthly honors, or a Countess name.
Proclayming unto ages yet to come,
Whilst Bedford lyu'd, what living Bedford was,
Enclosing thee in this immortal toombe,
More durable then letter-grauen brass,
To show what thy great power could bring to pass,
And other hopes I utterly refuse,
And thou my hope, my Lady, and my Muse.
Your Honors ever devoted servant Michaell Drayton.

To the right Honorable Lady, Lucie Countess of Bedford.
WHen God this wondrous Creature did create,
This euer-mouing body, this huge weight,
Whose head, whose lofty head high situate,
Is crowned with stars and constellations bright.
He causd the same one certain way to move,
Which moving (some say) does sweet tunes beget,
Another way the Sun and Planets prove,
For they from thence move where the sun does set;
Yet he the Pole Star, Cynosura clear,
Causd steddily to stand, though heaven did gyre,
For an example to men's actions here:
Madam, you are the star of his desire;
Whilst he his thoughts heaven moves, o gracious be,
And wonders in your Creature you shall see.
Your honors and eternities Humble, E. B.

Mortimeriados.
THE lowering heaven had masked her in a cloud,
Dropping sad tears upon the sullen earth,
Bemoning in her melancholy shrowde,
The angry stars which reigned at Edwards birth,
With whose beginning ended all our mirth.
Edward the second, but the first of shame,
Scourge of the crown, eclipse of Englands fame.
Whilst in our blood, ambition hotely boyles,
The Land bewailes her, like a woeful Mother,
On every side besieged with civil broils,
Her dearest children murdering one another,
Yet she in silence forced her grief to smother:
Groaning with pain, in travail with her woes,
And in her torment, none to help her throws.
What care would plot, discention strives to cross,
Which like an earthquake rents the tottering state;
Abroad in wars we suffer public loss,
At home, betrayed with grudge and private hate,
Faction attending bloodshed and debate;
Confusion thus our Countries peace confounds,
No help at hand, and mortal be her wounds.
Thou Church then swelling in thy mightines,
Thou which should be this poor sick bodies soul,
O nurse not factions which should sin suppress,
And with thy members should all grief condole,
Persuade thy heart and not thy head control;
Humble thy self, dispense not with the word,
Take Peter's keys, but cast aside his sword.
The ragefull fire which burnt Carnaruans breast,
Blown with revenge of Gauestons disgrace,
Awakes the Barrons from their nightly rest,
And makes way to give the Spensers place,
Whose friendship Edward only does embrace;
By whose alurements he is fondly led,
To leave his Queen, and fly his lawful bed.
This Planet stirred up that tempestious blast
By which our fortunes Anchorage was torn,
The storm wherewith our spring was first desac'd,
Whereby all hope unto the ground was borne:
Hence came the grief, the tears, the cause to mourn.
This bred the blemish which her beauty staind,
Whose ugly scarr's, to aftertimes remaind.
In all this heat his greatness first began,
The serious subject of my sadder vain,
Great Mortimer, the wonder of a man,
Whose fortunes here my Muse must entertain,
And from the grave his griefs must yet complain,
To show our vice nor virtues never die,
Though under ground a thousand years we lie.
This gust first threw him on that blessed Coast
Which never age discovered before:
This luckie chance drew all King Edward lost,
This shypwrack cast the prize upon his shore,
And this all-drowning Deluge gave him more;
From hence the sun of his good fortune shone,
The fatal step, to Edwards fatal throne.
^
That uncle now, whose name this Nephew bare,
The only comfort of the woeful Queen,
And from his cradle held him as his care,
And still the hope of all his house had been,
Whilst yet this deep hart-goring wound is green,
On this well-seene advantage wisely wrought,
To place him highly in her princely thought.
He saw his inclination from his birth,
A mighty spirit, a mind which did aspire;
Not of the drossy substance of the earth,
But of the purest element of fire,
Which sympathizing with his own desire,
Name, nature, feature, all did so agree,
That still in him, himself he still might see.
The temper of his nobler moving part,
Had that true tutch which purified his blood,
Insusing thoughts of honor in his heart,
Whose flaggie feathers were not soyld in mud,
The edge he bare declared the metal good;
The towering pitch wherein he flew for fame,
Declared the ayrie whence the Eagle came.
Worthy the Grand-chyld of so great a sier,
Brave Mortimer who lived whilst Long-shanks reigned, Roger Mortimer his
Grandfather, who kept (...) table ^^ Kenelworth.

Our second Arthur, whom all times admire,
At Kenelworth the Table round ordayn'd,
And therein Arms, a hundredth Knights maintaind;
A hundredth gallant Ladies in his Court,
Whose stately presence royaliz'd this sport.
And whilst this poor vvife-widdowed Queen alone,
In this dispayring passion pines away,
Beyond all hope, to all but heaven unknown,
A little spark which yet in secret lay,
Breaks forth in flame, and turns her night to day,
The woeful winter of her sorrows cheering,
Even as the world at the fair Suns appearing.
Yet still perplexed in these hard extremes,
All means deprest which might her faith prefer,
Black foggs opposed in those cleere-shining beams,
Which else might lend their friendly light to her,
This in her looks direful revenge does stir:
Which strange eclipse placed in this irefull sign,
Our Countries plague and ruin might divine.
Her snowy curled brow makes anger smile,
Her laughing frown gives beauty better grace,
Blushing disdain, disdain does quite exile,
Sweet love and silence wrestling in her face,
Two capering Cupids in her eyes do chase;
Her veins like tides often swelling with delight,
Making Vermilion fair, white more then white.
Her beauty florish'd whilst her favors fade,
Her hopes grown old, but her desires be young,
Her power wants power her passion to persuade,
Her sex is weak, her will is ouer-strong,
Patience pleades pity, but revenge her wrong;
What reason urges, rage does still deny,
With arguments of vvrathfull jealousy.
Pale Jealousy, child of insatiate love,
Of hart-sick thoughts with melancholy bred,
A hell tormenting fear no faith can move,
By discontent with deadly poison fed,
With heedlesse youth and error vainly led,
A mortal plague, a vertue-drowning flood,
A hellish fire, not quenched but with blood.
The hate-swolne Lords with fury set on fire,
Whom Edwards wrongs to vengeance do provoke,
With Lancaster and Herford now conspire,
No more to bear the Spensers servile yoke,
The bonds of their alegiance they have broke:
Resolved with blood their liberty to buy,
To live with honor, or with fame to dye.
Amid this faction Mortimer does enter,
The ghastly Prologue to this tragic act:
His youth and courage boldly bids him venture,
And tells him still how strongly he was backed:
Synon persuades how Illion might be sacked;
The people still applauding in his ears,
The fame and credit of the Mortimers.
This vapor-kindled Commet drew her eyes,
Which now began his streamie flagge to rear;
This beauty-blushing orient of his rise,
Her clowdy frowns does with his brightness clear,
The ioyfull'st sight that ever did appear;
The messenger of light, her happy star,
Which told her now the dawning was not far.
As after pale-faced Night, the Morning fair
The burning Lamp of heaven does once erect,
With her sweet Crimson sanguining the air,
On every side with streakie dappl's fleckt,
The circled roof in white and Azure decked,
Such color to her cheeks these news do bring,
Which in her face does make a second spring.
Yet trembling at the Spensers Lordly power,
Their wrongs, oppression, and controling pride,
Th'vnconstant Barrons, wavering every hour,
The fierce encounter of this raging tide,
No stratagem yet strongly policied;
She from suspicion seemingly retyers,
Careless in show of what she most desires.
Grounded advice, in danger seldom trips,
The deadliest poison, skill can safely drink,
Foresight stands fast, where giddy rashness slips,
VVisdome seems blind, when eyed as a Linxe
Prevention speaks all but what he thinks;
The deadliest hate, with smyles securely stands,
Revenge in tears does ever wash his hands.
Lo for her safety this she must desemble,
A benefit which women have by kind,
The nearest color finely to resemble,
Suppressing thus the greatness of her mind,
Now is she shrouded closely under wind,
And at her prayers (poor soul) she plainly meant,
A silly Queen, a harmless innocent.
The least suspicion cunningly to heal,
Still in her looks humility she bears,
With patience she with mightines must deal,
So policy religions habit wears,
He Is mad which takes a Lion by the ears.
This knew the Queen, and this well know the wise,
This must they learn, which toil in Monarchies.
Torlton the learned Prelate in the Land, Adam Torlton Bishop of Herford, a
mighty politician.

Upon a text of politics to preach,
Cared not on Paul's preciser points to stand,
Poor Moralls to believing men to teach,
For he at Kingdoms had a further reach:
This learned Tutor, Isabell had taught,
In nicer points then ever Edward sought.
Now in mean time, the smothered flame brake forth,
The Mortimers march from the western plain,
The Lords in arms at Pomfret in the North,
The King from London, comes with might and main,
Their factious followers in the streets are slain.
No other thing is to be hoped upon,
But horror, death, and desolation.
Like as Sabrina from the Ocean flancks,
Comes sweeping in along the tawny sands,
And with her billows tilting on the bancks,
Rowles in her flood upon the western strands,
Stretching her watrie arms along the lands,
With such great fury do these legions rise,
Filling the shores with lamentable cries.
Thus of three hands, they all set up their rest,
And at the stake their lives they franckly lay,
He Is like to win who cuts his dealing best,
And for a Kingdom at the least they play,
The fayr'st in show must carry all away;
And though the King himself in sequence came,
He saw the Queen lay right to make his game.
But Fortune masking in this strange disguise,
Whose prodigy, whose monster he was borne,
Now in his life her power, t'anotomize,
Ordayning him her darling and her scorn,
His Tragedy her triumph to adorn.
She straight begins to bandy him about,
At thousand ods before the set goes out.
As when we see the spring-begetting Sun,
In heavens black night-gowne covered from our sight,
And when he yet, but few degrees has run,
Some fennie fogge damps up his gladsome light,
That at his noon-sted he may shine more bright.
His cheerful morning Fortune cloudeth thus,
To make his day more fair, more glorious.
Edward whom danger warnd to dread the worst,
Unto the heart with poysned ranckor stung,
Now for his crown must scuffle if he durst,
Or else his scepter in the dust were flung,
To stop the head from which these mischiefs sprung.
First with the Marchers thinks it fit to cope,
On whom he knew lay all the Barrons hope.
Like to a vvhirle-wind comes this irefull King,
Whose presence soon the VVelchmens power had staid,
The Cornish yet their forces fayld to bring,
And Lancaster too slack forslow'd their aid,
Faynt-harted friends, their succors long delayed.
Deprived of means, forlorn of farther good,
And wanting strength to stem so great a flood.
They who perceived, their trust was thus betrayed,
Their long expected purpose thus to quayle,
How mischief still upon their fortune played,
That they perforce their high-borne top must veil,
This storm still blew so stiffly on their sail.
Of Edwards mercy now the depth must sound,
Where yet their Ankor might take hold on ground.
This took the King in presage of his good,
Who this event to his success applied,
Which coold the fury of his boiling blood,
Before their force in arms he yet had tried,
His stern approach this easily molified
That on submission he dismissed their power,
And sends them both as prisoners to the Tower.
Not cowardice but wisdom warnes to yield,
When Fortune aids the proud insulting foe,
Before dishonor ever blot the field;
Where by advantage hopes again may grow,
When as too weak to bear so great a blow:
That whilst his pity pardons them to live,
To his own wrongs he full revenge might give.
Lo now my Muse must sing of dreadful Arme^,
And task her self to tell of civil vvarres,
Of Ambuscados, stratagems, alarmes,
Of murder, slaughter, monstrous Massacarres,
Of blood, of wounds, of neuer-healed scarres,
Of battles fought by brother against brother,
The Son and Father one against the other.
O thou great Lady, Mistress of my Muse,
Renowned Lucie, virtues truest friend,
Which do a spyrit into my spyrit infuse,
And from thy beams the light I have do lend,
Into my verse thy living power extend.
O breathe new life to write this Tragic story,
Assist me now brave Bedford for thy glory.
Whilst in the Tower the Mortimers are mewed,
The Barrons drew their forces to a head,
Whom Edward (spurd with vengeance) still pursued
By Lancaster and famous Herford led,
Toward eithers force, forthwith both Armies sped.
^urton upon ^rent.
At Burton both in camping for the day,
Where they must try who bears the spurs away.
^eedwood.
Upon the East from bushie Needwoods side,
There rises up an easy clyming hill,
At whose fair foot the silver Trent does slide,
And all the shores with rattling murmr ^ill,
Whose tumbling waves the flowrie Meadows swill,
Upon whose stream a Bridge of wondrous strength,
Does stretch her self, near forty Arches length.
Upon this mount the King his Tents has fixed,
And in the Town the Barrons lie in sight,
This famous River risen so betwixt,
Whose fury yet prolonged this deadly fight,
The passage stopped, not to be won by might.
Things which presage both good and ill there be,
Which heaven fore-shewes, yet will not let us see.
The raging flood has drowned up all her foards,
Sok'd in excess of cloud-congealed tears,
And steepes the bancks within her watrie hoards,
Supping the whir-pooles from the quaggie mears,
Now does she wash her tressed rushie hayrs.
Swollen with the dropsy in her grieved woombe,
That this her channel must become a Toombe.
O warlike Nation hold thy conquering hand,
Even senseless things do warn thee yet to pawse,
Thy Mother soil on whom thy feet do stand,
O then infrindge not Natures sacred laws,
Still run not headlong into mischiefs jaws:
Yet stay thy foot in murders ugly gate,
Ill comes too soon, repentance ost too late.
And can the clouds weep over thy decay,
Yet not one drop fall from thy droughtie eyes?
See thou the snare yet wilt not shun the way,
Nor yet be warned, by passed miseries?
Or ere too late, yet learn once to be wise.
A mischief seen, may easily be prevented,
But being hap'd, not helped, yet still lamented.
Behold the Eagles, Lions, Talbots, Bears,
The Badges of your famous ancestries,
And shall they now by their inglorious heyrs:
Be thus displayed against their families?
Relics unworthy of their progenies.
Those Beasts you bear do in their kinds agree
And then those Beasts more savage will you be?
Cannot the Scot of your late slaughter boast?
And are you yet scarce healed of the sore?
Is It not enough you have already lost,
But your own madness now must make it more?
Your VViues and Children pitied you before.
But when your own blood, your own swords imbrue,
Who pitties them, which once have pitied you?
What, shall the Sister weep her Brothers death,
Who sent her Husband to his timelesse grave?
The Nephewe moan his Uncles loss of breath,
Which did his Father of his life deprave?
Who shall have mind your memories to save?
^r shall he burial to his friend afford,
Who lately put his Son unto the sword?
But whilst the King, and Lords in counsel sit,
Yet in conclusion variably do houer,
See how misfortune still her time can fit:
Such as were sent the Country to discover,
Have found a way to land their forces over.
Ill news has wings, and with the wind does go,
Comfort's a Cripple, and comes ever slow.
And Edward fearing Lancasters supplies,
Great Surry, Richmond, and his Pembrooke sent,
On whose success his chiefest hope relyes,
Under whose conduct half his Army went,
And he himself, and Edmond Earl of Kent,
Upon the hill in sight of Burton lay.
Watching to take advantage of the day.
Stay Surry stay, thou may too soon begone;
Stay till this rage be somewhat ouer-past,
Why runn'st thou thus to thy destruction?
Pembrooke and Richmond, whether do you have?
Never seek sorrow, for it comes too fast.
Why strive you thus to pass this fatal flood,
To fetch new wounds, and shed your nearest blood?
Great Lancaster, sheath up thy conquering sword,
On Edwards Arms, whose edge thou should not whet,
Thy natural Nephew, and thy sovereign Lord,
Both one, one blood, and both Plantaginet.
Can thou thy oath to Longshanks thus forget?
Yet call to mind, before all other things,
Our vows must be performed to Gods and Kings.
Know, noble Lord, it better is to end,
Then to proceed in things rashly begun:
Which o^t ill counseld worser do offend,
Speech has obtaind, where weapons have not won;
By good persuasion what cannot be done?
And when all other hopes and helps be past,
Then fall to Arms, but let that be the last.
The winds are hushed, no little breath does blow,
The calmed air as all amazed stood,
The earth with roaring trembles below,
The Sun besmeared his glorious face in blood,
The fearful Herds bellowing as they were wood:
The Drums and Trumpets give a signal sound,
With such a noise as they had torn the ground.
The Earls now charging with three hundred horse,
The Kings vantgard assay the Bridge to win,
Forcing the Barrons to divide their force,
T'auoyde the present danger they were in:
Never till now the horror does begin;
That if the elements our succor had not sought,
All had that day been to confusion brought.
Now from the hill the Kings maine power comes down,
Which had Aquarius to their valiant guide, Aquary a notable soldier.

Brave Lancaster and Herford from the town,
Do issue forth upon the other side:
The one assailes, the other munified.
Englands Red cross upon both sides does fly,
Saint George the King, Saint George the Barrons cry.
Even as a bustling tempests rouzing blasts,
Upon a Forest of old-branched Oaks,
Down upon heaps their climing bodies casts,
And with his fury teyrs their mossy loaks,
The neighbor groves resounding with the strokes,
With such a clamor and confused woe,
To get the Bridge these desperate Armies go.
Now must our famous and victorious bows,
With which our Nation Kingdoms did subdue,
First send their darting arrows against those
Whose sinewed arms against their foes them drew;
These winged weapons, mourning as they flew,
Cleave to the strings, with very terror slack,
As to the Archers they would feign turn back.
The battered Caskes, with Battel-Axes strokes,
Besnow the soil with drifts of scattered plumes,
The trampling press stir up such duskie smokes
Which choke the air with reekie smothering fumes,
Which rising up, into a cloud consumes;
As though the heaven had muffled her in black,
Lothing to see this lamentable sack.
Behold the remnant of Troyes famous stock,
Laying on blows as Smithes on Anuiles strike,
Grappling together in this fearful shock,
The like press forth, t'incounter with the like,
And then reculing to the push of pyke:
Yet not a foot does either give to either,
Now one the ods, then both alike, then neither.
Even as you see a field of standing Corn,
When in fair June some easy gale does blow,
How up and down the spyring ears are borne,
And with the blasts like Billows come and go,
As golden streamers wauing to and fro,
Thus on the sudden run they on amain,
Then straight by force are driven back again.
Here lies a heap, half slain, half chok'd, half drowned,
Gasping for breath amongst the slymie seggs,
And there a sort fallen in a deadly swound,
Scrawling in blood upon the muddy dreggs:
Here in the stream, swim bowels, arms and legs*
One kills his foe, his brain another cuts,
Ones feet entangled in another guts.
One his own hands in his own blood defiles,
Another from the Bridges height does fall,
Some dashed to death upon the stony pyles,
Some in their gore upon the pauement sprall,
The carcasses lie heaped like a wall:
Such hideous shreeks the bedlam Soldiers breath,
As though the Spirits had howled from beneath.
The mangled bodies diuing in the stream,
Now up, now down, like tumbling Porpose swim,
The water covered with a bloody cream,
To the beholder horrible and grim:
Here lies a head, and there does lie a lym;
Which in the sands the swelling waters souse,
That all the shores seem like a slaughterhouse.
It seemed the very wounds for grief did weep,
To feel the temper of the slicing blade,
The senseless steel in blood it self did steep,
To see the wounds his sharpe-ground edge had made,
Whilst kinsman, kinsman, friend, does friend invade,
Such is the horror of these civil broils,
When with our blood, we fat our native soyles.
This faction still defying Edwards might,
Edmond of Woodstock, famous Earl of Kent,
Charging the foe again renewes the fight,
Upon the Barrons forces almost spent,
Who now again supplying succors sent.
And now a second conflict does begin,
The English Lords like Tygars flying in.
Like as an exhalation hot and dry,
Amongst the ayre-bred moyftie vapors thrown,
Spetteth his lightning forth outragiously,
Renting the thick clouds with a thunder-stone,
As though the huge all-couering heaven did groan,
Such is the garboyle of this conflict then,
Brave Englishmen, encountering Englishmen.
Even as proud Pyrrhus entering Iltion,
Courageous Talbot with his shield him bare,
Clifford and Moubray, seconding anon,
Audley and Gifford thrunging for their share,
Elmbridge and Balsmer* in the thickest are:
Pell-mell together flies this furious power,
Like to the falling of some mighty Tower.
Mountfort and Teis, your worths feign would I speak,
But that your valor can but ill deserve,
Brave Denuile, here I from thy praise must break,
And from thy praises VVillington must swerve,
Great Damory, here must thy glory starve;
Concealing many, most deserving blame,
Because their acts do quench my sacred flame.
O that those Arms in conquests had been borne,
And that, that battered fame-engrauen shield,
Should in those civil massacres be torn
Which bare the marks of many a bloody field:
O that our arms had power their Arms to weeld.
That since that time, the stones for very dreed,
Against foul storms could teary moisture sheed.
O had you shaped your valures first by them
Who summoned Akon with an English drum,
Or marched on to fair Jerusalem,
T'inlarge the bounds of famous Christendom,
Or with Christ's warriors slept about his toombe,
Then ages had immortalized your fame,
Where now my song can be but of your shame.
Death following on, fear ever in their eyes,
Grieved with wounds, the conquered Barrons fled,
And now the King enriched with victories,
Has in the field his glorious Ensigns spread,
This in his thoughts again fresh courage bred,
And somewhat draws th'vnconstant peoples hearts,
Who equal peyz'd, yet way'd to neither parts.
And wanting ground, they unresolved are,
King Edwards friends, against the rebels cry,
The Barrons plead their Countries only care,
Exclayming on the Princes tyranny,
He urged obedience, they their liberty.
Both under color, careful of the state,
He right, and they their wrongs expostulate.
Some few them selves in Sanctuaries hide,
In mercy of the privileged place,
Yet are their bodies so vnsanctifide,
As scarce their souls can ever hope for grace,
A poor dead life, this draws out a space.
Hate stands without, and horror sits within,
Prolonging shame, yet pard'ning not their sin.
At fatal Pomfret gathering head at length,
When they of all extreamities had tasted,
Where yet before they could recover strength,
King Edward follows whilst his fortune lasted,
Unto whose aid the Earl of Carlell hasted.
With troops of bow-men and ranck-riding bands,
Of VVestmer, Cumber, and Northumberlands.
Mad and amazed, nor knowing what to do,
Surpised by this late mischievous event,
Seeing at hand their utter overthrow,
And in despite how crossely all things went,
Fortune her self to their destruction bent;
In all disorder headlong on they run,
To end with blood, what was with blood begun.
Like as a heard of silly hartlesse Dear,
Whom hote-spurd Huntsmen fiercely do pursue,
In brakes and bushes falling here and there,
Yet when no way the hounds they can eschew,
Now flying back from whence of late they flew,
Hemmed on each side with horns rechating blast,
Headlong them selves into the toils do cast.
To Borough bridge by fate appointed thus,
Where like false Raynard, falser Herckley lay,
Bridges to Barrons ever ominous,
There to renew this latest deadly fray,
O here begins the blackest dismal day,
The birth of horror, hour of wrath that yet,
The very soil seems to remember it.
Here is not Death contented with the dead,
Nor vengeance is with vengeance satisfied,
Bloodshed by bloodshed still is nourished,
And mischief means no more her store to hide,
Strange sorts of torments heaven does now provide,
That dead men should in misery remain,
And in living death should dye with pain.
Thus rules the world, a world why saw I so,
VVorst is the world, yet worser must I name it,
Nights vgli'st night, hells bitter'st hell of woe,
So ill as slander never can defame it,
That shame her self is shamed, seeking to shame it,
Could envy speak, what envy can express,
In saying most, that most should make it less.
Here noble Herford, Bohun breathes his last,
Crown of true Knighthood, Bohun stain at Borogh.
flower of Chivalry,
But Lancaster their torment lives to taste,
Who perrish now with endless obloquie,
O vanquished conquest, loosing victory,
That where the sword for pity leaves to spill,
There extreme justice should begin to kill.
O subject for some tragic Muse to sing,
Of five great Earledomes at one time possessed,
Son, Uncle, Brother, Grandchild to a King,
Thomas the great Earl of Lancaster.
With favors, friends, and earthly honors blessed,
But see on earth, here is no place of rest.
These Fortunes gyfts, and she to show her power,
Takes life, and these, and all within an hour.
The wretched Mother tearing of her hair,
Bewayles the time this fatal war begun,
Like graue-borne gosts, amazed and mad with fear,
To view the quartered carcass of her Son,
With hideous shreeks through streets and ways does run.
And seeing none to help, none hear her cry,
Some drowned, some stabd, some starud, some strangled die.
Like ghastly death the aged Father stands,
Weeping his Son, bemoning of his wife,
She murdered by her own blood-guiltie hands,
He flaughtered by the executioners knife,
Sadly sits down to end his hateful life;
Banning the earth, and cursing at the air*
Upon his poyniard falls in despair.
The woeful widdowe for her Lord distressed,
Whose breathless body cold death does benum,
Her little Infant leaning on her breast,
Rings in her ears, when will my Father come?
Does wish that she were deaf, or it were dombe.
Clipping each other, weeping both together,
She for her Lord, the poor babe for his Father.
The air is poysned with the dampie stinck,
Which most contagious pestilence does breed,
The glutted earth her fill of gore does drinck,
Which from unburied bodies does proceed,
Ravens and dogs on dead men only feed;
In every Coast thus do our eyes behold,
Our sins by judgment of the heavens controld.
Like as a Wolf returning from the foil,
Having full stuffed his flesh-engorged panch,
Tumbles him down to wallowe in the soil,
With cooling breath his boiling mawe to stanch,
Scarce able now to move his lustlesse hanch.
Thus after slaughter Edward breathless stood,
As though his sword had surfeted with blood.
Here ends life, yet here death cannot end,
And here begins, what Edwards woes begun,
Nor his pretense, falls as he does pretend,
Nor has he wone, what he by battle wone,
All is not done, though almost all undone,
Whilst power has reigned still policy did lurk,
Seldom does malice want a mean to work.
The King now by the conquering Lords consent,
Who by this happy victory grew strong,
Summons at York a present Parliament,
To plant his right, and help the Spensers wrong,
From whence again his minions greatness sprung,
Whose counsel still, in all their actions crossed,
The Enraged Queen whom all misfortunes tossed.
But miseries which seldom come alone,
Thick in the necks one of another fell,
Mean while the Scots here make invasion,
And Charles of France does thence our powers expel,
The grieved Commons more and more rebel.
Mischief on mischief, curse does follow curse,
Plague after plague, and worse ensues worse.
For Mortimer this wind yet rightly blewe,
Darckning their eyes which else perhaps might see,
Whilst Isabell who all advantage knew,
Is closely plotting his delivery,
Now fitly drawn by Torltons policy:
Thus by a Queen, a Bishop, and a Knight,
To check a King, in spite of all dispight.
A drowsy potion she by skill has made,
Whose secret working had such wondrous power,
As could the sense with heavy sleep invade,
And mortify the patient in one hour,
As though pale death the body did deuower;
Nor for two days might opened be his eyes,
By all means Art or Physic could devise.
Thus sits this great Enchauntresse in her Cell,
Environed with spyrit-commaunding charms,
Her body censed with most sacred smell,
With holy fires her liquors now she warmes,
Then her with sorcering instruments she arms.
And from her herbs the powerful juice she wrong,
To make the poison forcible and strong.
Reason might judge, doubts better might advise,
And as a woman, fear her hand have stayed,
VVaying the strangeness of the interprize,
The danger well might have her sex dismayed,
Fortune, distrust, suspect, to be betrayed;
But when they leave of virtue to esteem,
They greatly err which think them as they seem.
Their plighted faith, when as they list they leave,
Their love is cold, their lust, hot, hot their hate,
With smiles and tears these Serpents do deceive,
In their desires they be insatiate,
Their will no bound, and their revenge no date.
All fear exempt, where they at ruin aim,
Covering their sin with their discovered shame.
Medea pitiful in tender years,
Until with Jason she would take her flight,
Then merciless her Brothers lymmes she tears,
Betrays her Father, flies away by night,
Nor Nations, Seas, nor dangers could affright;
Who dyed with heat, nor could abide the wind,
Now like a Tigar falls unto her kind.
Now waits the Queen fitt'st time, as might behoue,
Their ghostly Father for their speed must pray,
Their servants seal these secrets up with love,
Their friends must be the mean, the guide, the way,
And he resolve on whom the burden lay;
This is the sum, the all, if this neglected,
Never again were mean to be expected.
Thus, while he lived a prisoner in the Tower,
The Keepers often with feasts he entertaind,
Which as a stale, serves fitly at this hour,
The tempting bayte wher-with his hooks were traind,
(...) banquet now he had ordaind,
And after cates when they their thirst should quench,
He sawc'd their wine with this approved drench.
And thus become the keeper of the kayes,
In steele-bound locks he safely lodged the Guard:
Then lurking forth by the most secret ways,
Not now to learn his compass by the Card,
With corded ladders which he had prepared,
Now up these proud aspyring walls does go,
Which seem to scorn they should be mastred so.
They soundly sleep, now must his wits awake,
A second Theseus through a hells extremes,
The son of Jove, new toils must undertake,
Of walls, of gates, of watches, woods, and stream.
And let them tell King Edward of their dreams:
For ere they waked out of this brainsick trance,
He hopes to tell this noble jest in France.
The sullen night in mistie rugge is wrapped,
Powting the day had tarryed up so long,
The Evening in her darksome dungion clapped,
And in that place the swarty clouds were hong,
Down from the West the half-fac'd Cynthia flong
As she had posted forth to tell the Son,
What in his absence in her Court was done.
The glymmering starr's like Sentinels in war,
Behind the Clouds as thieues do stand to pry,
And through false loope-holes looking out a far,
To see him skirmish with his destenie,
As they had held a counsel in the Sky,
And had before consulted with the night,
She should be dark, and they would hide their light.
In deadly silence all the shores are hushed,
Only the Shreechowle sounds to the assault,
And Isis with a troubled murmr rushed,
As she had done her best to hide the fault,
A little whispering moved within the vault,
Made with his tuching softly as he went,
Which seemed to say it furthered his intent.
This wondrous Queen, whom care from rest had kept,
Now for his speed to heaven holds up her hands,
A thousand thoughts within her bosom heaped,
Now in her Closset listening still she stands,
And though divided as in sundry strands,
Yet absent, present in desires they be,
For minds discern, where eyes could never see.
Lo now he thinks he vaulteth in her sight,
Still taking courage, strengthened by her words,
Imagining she sported with delight,
To see his strong arms stretch the tackling coards,
And often a smyle unto his toil affords:
And when she doubted danger, might her hear,
Call him her soul, her life, her Mortimer.
Now does she woo the walls, entreat and kiss,
And then protests to memorize the place,
And to adorn it with a Piramis,
Whose glory wrack of time should not deface.
Then to the cord she turns her self a space,
And promises, if that should set him free,
A sacred relic it should ever be.
She says, the small clouds issuing from his breath,
Seasond with sweet from whence they lately came,
Should clear the air from pestilence and death,
And like Promethian life-begetting flame,
Pure bodies in the element should frame;
And to what part of heaven they hapt to stray,
There should they make another milkie way.
Attaind the top his tired lymm's to breath,
Mounted in triumph on his miseries,
The gentle earth salutes him from beneath:
And covered with the comfortable skies,
Lightened with beams of Isabella's eyes,
Down from the Turret desperately does slide;
Now for a kingdom, Fortune be his guide.
As he descends, so do her eyes ascend,
As fear had fixed them to behold his fall;
Then from the sight, away her sight does bend,
When chilly coldness does her heart appall,
Then out for help she suddenly does call;
Silent again, watching if ought should hap,
Her self might be the ground, his grave her lap.
Now does she court the gentle calmie air,
And then again she does conjure the wind;
Now does she try to stop the night by prayer,
And then with spells the heavy sense to bind;
Then by the burning Tapers she diuinde;
Now she entreats fair Thames that he might pass
The Hellespont where her Leander was.
The brushing murmr stills her like a song,
Yet fearing least the stream should fall in love,
Enuies the drops which on his tresses hong,
Imagining the waves to stay him strove;
And when the billows with his breast he drove,
Grieved therewith, she turns away her face,
Jealous least he the billows should embrace.
She likneth him to the transformed Bull,
Which curll'd the fair flood with his Iuory flanck,
When on his back he bare the lovely trull,
Floting along unto the Cretan banck,
Comparing this to that lascivious pranck,
And swears then he, no other Jove there were,
If she Europa had been present there.
Thus seeks he life, encouraged by his love,
Yet for his love his life he does eschew,
Danger in him a deadly fear does move,
And fear enuits him danger to pursue,
Rage stirr's revenge, revenge does rage renew:
Danger and fear, rage and revenge at strife,
Life warr's with love, and love contends with life.
This angry Lion having slypp'd his chain,
Now like a Quartain, makes King Edward quake,
Who knew too well, ere he was caught again,
Some of his flock his bloody thirst must slake;
And unawares entangled in this brake,
Saw further vengeance hanging in the wind,
Knowing too well, the greatness of his mind.
This once again the world begins to work,
Their hopes (at length) unto this issue brought,
Whilst yet the Serpent in his Den does lurk,
Of whom God knows, the King full little thought,
The instrument which these devises wrought.
For there is no treason wounds half so deep,
As that which does in Princes bosoms sleep.
Now must the Clergy serve them for a cloak,
The Queen her state unto the time must fit,
But it is the Churchman which must strike the stroke,
Now must this Prelate show a statesmans wit,
They cast the plot, and March must manage it;
They both at home together lay on load,
And he the Agent to effect abroad.
Who sweetly tunes his well-perswading tongue,
In pleasing music to the French-kings ears,
The sad discourse of Isabellas wrong,
With tragic action forcing silent tears,
Moving to pity every one that hears,
That by discovery of this foul reproach,
Old mischiefs so, might new be set abroch.
Whilst they are tempring in these homebred iarres,
How for the Scot fit passage might be made,
To lay the ground of these succesfull wars,
That hope might give him courage to invade,
And from the King the Commons to persuade;
That whilst at home his peace he would assure,
His further plague in France he might procure.
By these reports, all circumstances known,
Sounds Charles of France into the lists again,
To ceaze on Guyen by Arms to claim his own,
Which Edward does unlawfully detain,
Homage for Pontieu, and for Aquitaine,
Reuoking this dishonorable truce,
Urged by his wrongs, and Isabels abuse.
The spirits thus rayz'd which haunt him day and night,
And on his fortune heaven does ever lower,
Danger at hand, and mischief still in sight,
Civil sedition weakening still his power,
No ease of pain one minute in the hour:
TO entreat of peace with Charles, he now must send,
Else all his hopes in France were at an end.
Here is the point wherein all points must end,
Which must be handled with no mean regard,
The prop whereon this building must depend,
Which must by level curiously be squard,
The cunningst descant that had yet been hard.
Here close conueyance must a mean provide,
Else might the ambush easily be discride.
Or this must help, or nothing serves the turn,
This way, or no way, all must come about,
To blow the fire which now began to burn,
Or tind the straw before the brand went out,
This is the lot which must resolve the doubt,
To walk the path where Edward bears the light,
And take their aim by level of his sight.
This must a counsel seriously debate,
In grauest judgments fit to be discust,
Being a thing so much consernes the state,
Edward in this, must to their wisdoms trust,
No whit suspecting but that all were just.
Especially the Church whose mouth shoud be,
The Oracle of truth and equity.
Torlton whose tongue, men's ears in chains could tie,
Whose words, even like a thunderbolt could pearce,
And were alowd of more authority,
Then was the Sibills old divining verse,
Which were of force a judgment to reuerse:
Now for the Queen, with all his power does stand,
To lay this charge on her well-guiding hand.
What helps her presence to the cause might bring,
First as a wife, a sister, and a mother,
A Queen to deal, betwixt a King, and King,
To right her son, her husband, and her brother,
And each to her indifferent as the other:
Which color serves to work in these extremes,
That which (God knows) King Edward never dreams.
Torlton is this thy spiritual pretense?
Would God thy thoughts were more spiritual,
Or less perswasiue were thy eloquence,
But o thy actions are too temporal,
Thy reasons subtle and sophistical:
Would all were true thy suposition says,
Thy arguments less force, or thou more faith.
Thus is the matter managed with skill,
To his desires, their means thus to devise,
To thrust him on, to draw them up the hill,
That by his strength, they might get power to rise,
This great Archmaster of all policies:
In the beginning wisely had forcast,
How ere things went, which way they must at last.
With sweetest honey, thus he baytes the snare,
And claws the beast till he be in the yoke,
In golden cups he poison does prepare,
And tickles where he means to strike the stroke,
Giving the bone whereas he meant to choke:
And by all helps of Art does smooth the way,
To send his foe, down headlong to decay.
She which thus fitly had both wind and tide,
And saw her passage serve the hour so right,
Whilst things thus fadge are quick dispatch applide,
To take her time whilst yet the day is light,
Who has been tyerd in travel fears the night:
And finding all too much to change inclind,
And every toy soon altering Edwards mind.
Her followers such as friendless else had stood,
Suppressed and trodden with the Spensers pride,
Whose howses Edward branded had with blood,
And but with blood could not be satisfied,
Who for revenge did but the hour abide;
And knew all helps, that mischief could invent,
To shake the state, and further her intent.
Thus on the wronged, she her wrongs does rest,
And unto poison, poison does apply,
Her self oprest, to harden the oprest,
And with a spy, to intercept a spy,
An Enemy, against an Enemy.
He that will gain what policy does heed,
By Mercury must deal, or never speed.
Now Mortimer, whose main was fully set,
Seeing by fortune all his hopes were crossed,
His struggling still how he again might get,
That which before his disadvantage lost,
Not once dismayed though in these tempests tossed:
Nor in affliction is he overthrown,
To Mortimer all Countries are his own.
Englands an I Will where all his youth he spent,
Enuiron'd valor in it self is drowned,
But now he lives within the continent,
Which being boundless, honor has no bound,
Here through the world, does endless glory sound:
To fames rich treasure Time unlocks the door,
Which angry Fortune had shut up before.
What ways he of his wealth, our VVigmore left, Wigmore the ancient house of
the Mortimers.

Let builded heaps, let Rocks and Mountains stand,
Goods often be held by wrong, first got by theft,
Birds have the air, Fish water, Men the land,
Alcides pitched his pillars in the sand.
Men look up to the stars thereby to know,
As they do progress heaven, he earth should do.
And to this end, did Nature part the ground,
Else had not man been King upon the Sea,
Nor in depths her secrets had been found,
If to all parts on firm had layne his way,
But she to show him where her wonders lay:
To pass the floods, this mean for him inuents,
To trample on these baser elements.
Never saw France, no never till this day,
A mind more great, more free, more resolute,
Let all our Edwards say, what Edwards may,
Our Henry's, Talbot, or our Mountacute,
To whom our royal conquests we impute:
That Charles him self, often to the Peers has sworn,
This man alone, the Destinies did scorn.
Virtue can bear, what can on Virtue fall,
Who cheapeneth honor, must not stand on price,
Who bears heaven (they say) can well bear all,
A yielding mind does argue cowardice,
Our haps do turn as chances on the dice.
Nor never let him from his hope remove,
That under him has mould, the stars above.
Let dull-braynd slaves contend for mud and earth,
Let blocks and stones, sweat but for blocks and stones,
Let peasants speak of plenty and of dearth,
Fame never looks so low as on these drones,
Let courage manage Empiers, sit on thrones.
And he that Fortune at command will keep,
He must be suer, he never let her sleep.
Who wins her grace, must with atchiuements woo her,
As she is blind, so never had she ears,
Nor must with puling eloquence go to her,
She understands not sighs, she hears not prayers,
Flatterd she flies, controld she ever fears;
And though a while she nicely do forsake it,
She is a woman, and at length will take it.
Nor never let him dream once of a Crown,
For one bad cast, that will give up his game,
And though by ill hap he be overthrown,
Yet let him manage her, till she be tame,
The path is set with danger leads to fame:
When Minos did the Graecians flight deny,
He made him wings, and mounted through the sky.
THE cheerful morning cleeres her cloudie brows,
The vaporie mists are all dispersed and spread,
Now sleepie Time his lazy lims does rouse,
And once begins to hold up his head,
Hope bloometh fair, whose root was well nere dead,
The clue of sorrow to the end is run,
The bow appears to tell the flood is done.
Nature looks back to see her own decay,
Commanding age to slack her speedy pace,
Occasion forth her golden loake does lay,
Whilst sorrow paynts her wrinckle-withered face,
Day lengthneth day, and joys do joys embrace.
Now is she coming yet till she be here,
My pen runs slow, each comma seems a year.
She Is now imbarck'd, slide billows for her sake,
Whose eyes can make your aged Neptune young,
Sweet Sirens from the chaulkie cleeus awake,
Ravish her ears with some inchaunting song,
Dance the Lauoltos all the sands along:
It is not Venus on your floods does pass,
But one more fair then ever Venus was.
You scaly Dolphins gaze upon her eyes,
And never after with your kind make war,
O steal the Music from her lips that flies,
Whose accents like the tunes of Angels are,
Compard with whom Arions did but jar.
Hug them sweet air, and when the Seas do rage,
Use them as charms thy tempests to aswage.
Sweet Sea-nymphs flock in sholes upon the shores,
France kiss those feet whose steps thou first did guide,
Present thy Queen with all thy gorgious store,
Now may thou revel in thy greatest pride:
Ship mount to heaven, and be thou stellified,
And next that starr-fix'd Argosie alone,
There take thou up thy constellation.
The exceeding joy conceued by the Queen,
Or his content, to them I leave to guess
Who but the subject of their thoughts have seen,
Who I am sure, if they the truth confess,
Will say that silence only can express:
And when with honor she fit time could take,
With sweet embraces thus she him bespake.
O Mortimer, great Mortimer quoth she,
What angry power such mischief could devise,
To separate thy dearest Queen and thee,
Whom loves eternal union strongly ties?
But seeing thee, unto my longing eyes
(Though guiltless they,) this penance is assignd,
To gaze upon thee until they be blind.
Sweet face, quoth she, how art thou changed thus,
Since beauty on this lovely front thou bor'st,
Like the young Hunter fresh Hipolitus,
When in these curles my favors first thou wor'st?
Now like great Jove thy Juno thou ador'st;
The Muses leave their double-topped throne,
And on thy temples make their Helicon.
Come tell me now what grief and danger is,
Of pain and pleasure in imprisonment,
At every breath the point shall be a kiss,
Which can restore consuming languishment,
A cordial to comfort banishment;
And thou shall find, that pleasures long restraind,
Be far more pleasant when they once be gaind.
Now sweeten all thy sorrows with delight,
Teach manhood courtshyp, turn these broils to love,
The day's nere ill that have a pleasing night,
There Is other wars in hand, which thou must prove,
Wars which no blood shall shed, nor sorrow move:
And that sweet foe of whom thou winn'st the day,
Shall crown thy tresses with tryumphant Bay.
And since that time our better ease assures,
Let solace sit and rock thee on her breast,
And let thy senses say like Epicures,
Lets eat and drink, and lay us down to rest,
Like belly-Gods, to surfeit at the feast;
Our day is clear, then never doubt a shower,
Prince Edward is my son, England my dower.
Possessing this inestimable Iem,
What is there wanting to maintain thy port?
Thy royal Mistress wears a Diadem,
Thy high-pitchd pyneons sore beyond report,
I am thy VVigmore, France shall be thy Court;
How can thou want millions of Pearl and gold,
When thou the Indies in thine arms do hold?
Thou art King Edward, or opinion fayles,
Longshanks begot thee when in youth he ranged,
Thou art Carnaruan, thou the Prince of Wales,
And in thy Cradle falsely thou were changed,
He Mortimer, and thou have been estranged:
Pardon me dear, what Mortimer said I,
Then should I love him, but my tongue does lie,
As Fortune has created him a King,
Had Nature made him valiant as thou art,
My soul had not been tuch'd with torments sting,
Nor had thou now been placed so near my heart;
But since by lot this falls to thy part,
If such have wealth as lewdly will abuse it,
Let those enjoy it who can better use it.
Except to heaven, my hopes can clime no hier;
Now in mine arms had I my little boy,
Then had I all on earth I could desire,
The King's as he would be, God send him joy,
Now with his mynions let him sport and toy:
His lemman Spenser, and himself alone,
May sit and talk of Mistress Gaueston.
When first I of that wanton King was wooed,
Why camst thou not unto the Court of France?
Thou then alone should in my grace have stood,
O Mortimer, how good had been thy chance?
Then had I been thine own inheritance;
Now entrest thou by force, and holds by might,
And so intrud'st upon another right.
Honor that Idol weomen so adore,
How many plagues have thou in store to grieve us,
When in our selves we find there yet is more
Then that bare word of majesty can give us?
When of that comfort so thou can deprive us,
Which with our selves often sett'st us at debate,
And make us beggars in our greatest state.
Even as a Trumpets liuely-sounding voice,
Tryps on the winds with many a dainty trick,
When as the speaking Echoes do rejoice,
So much delighted with the rethorick,
Seeming to make the heavy dull air quick;
With such rare music in a thousand kayes,
Upon his hart-strings she in consort plays.
On this foundation whilst they firmly stand,
And as they wish, so fitly all things went,
No worse their warrant, then King Edwards hand,
Who his own Bow to his destruction bent;
The course of things to fall in true consent,
Gives full assurance of the happy end,
On which their thoughts now carefully attend.
And since in payment all for current pass,
And their proceedings were allowed for such,
Although this peace against her stomach was,
And yet imports the Princes strength so much,
To carry all things clearly without tuch,
With seeming care does seemingly effect,
What love commands, and greatness should respect.
Charles waying well his lawful Nephews right,
So mighty an Ambassador as she,
This mean to win her grace in Edwards sight,
And so reclaim his vain inconstancy,
With kindness thus to conquer all these three,
What love the subjects to his Sister bore,
Heaps on desert, to make this much the more.
Her expedition, and this great success
Of after-good, still seeming to divine,
Carnaruan should by covenant release,
And to the Prince the Provinces resign,
Who doing homage, should reenter Guyne,
Safe Conduct sent the King, to come with speed,
To seal in person what the Queen decreed.
But whilst he stood yet doubtful what to do,
The Spensers who his counsels chiefly guide,
Nor with their Sovereign into France durst go,
Nor in his absence durst at home abide:
His listening ears with such persuasions plyde,
As he by them, to stay at home is won,
And with Commission to dispatch his Son.
Now till this hour all joys inwombed lay,
And in this hour now came they first to light,
Ad days to Months, and hours unto the day,
And as Jove did, so make a treble night,
And whilst delight is ravished with delight,
Swound in these sweets, in pleasures pleasing pain,
And as they die, so brought to life again.
Now Clowd-borne care, hence vanish for a time,
The Sun ascending, has the year renewed,
And as the Halkes in hotest Sotherne clime,
Their halfe-sick hopes their crazed flags have mewed,
A world of joys their breasts do now include,
The thoughts whereof, thoughts quicknes does benum,
In whose expression, pens and tongues be dumb.
In fair Lauinium, Troy is built again,
And on this shore her ruins are repard,
Nor Iunos hate such vigor does retain,
The Fates appeased who with their fortune squard,
The remnant of the shypwrackt navy spard,
Though torn with tempests, yet ariu'd at last,
May sit and sing, and tell of sorrows past.
If she do sit, he leanes on Cynthias throne,
If she do walk, he in the circle went,
If she do sport, he must be graced alone,
If she discourse, he is the argument,
If she devise, it is to his content:
From her proceeds the light he bears about him,
And yet she sets if once she be without him.
Still with his ears his sovereign Goddess hears,
And with his eyes she graciously does see,
Still in her breast his secret thoughts she bears,
Nor can her tongue pronounce an I, but we,
Thus two in one, and one in two they be:
And as his soul possesses head and heart,
She Is all in all, and all in every part.
Like as a well-tund Lute that's tucht with skill,
In Musicks language sweetly speaking plain,
When every string it self with sound does fill,
Taking their tones, and giving them again,
A diapazon heard in every strain:
So their affections set in kayes so like,
Still fall in consort, as their humors strike.
She must return, King Edwards will is so,
But soft a while, she means no such thing,
He Is not so swift, but she is twice as slow,
No have, but good, this message back to bring,
Another tune he must be taught to sing:
Which to his heart more deadly is by far,
Then cries of ghosts, or Mandrakes shreekings are.
Stapleton who had been of their counsel long,
Or woonne with gifts, or else of childish fear,
Or moved in conscience with King Edwards wrong,
Or pitying him, or hate to them did bear,
Or of the event that now he did despair:
This Bishop back from France to Edward flewe,
And knowing all discovered all he knew.
The platform of this enterprise disclosd,
And Torltons drift by circumstances found,
With what conueyance all things are disposd,
The cunning vsd in laying of the ground,
And with what Art, this curious trayle is woond:
Awakes the King, to see his own estate,
When to prevent, he comes a day too late.
Isabell the time does still and still reiorne,
Charles as a Brother with persuasions deals,
Edward with threats, does hasten her return,
Pope John, with Bulls and curses hard assailes,
Persuasions, curses, threats, no whit preuailes:
Chales, Edward, John, Pope, Princes, do your worst,
The Queen fares best, when she the most is cursed.
The Spensers, who the French-mens humors felt,
And with their Sovereign, had deuisd the draught,
With Prince, and Peers, now under hand had dealt,
In golden nets, who were already caught,
And now King Charles, they have so thoroughly wrought:
That he with sums, too slightly ouerwaid,
Poor Isabells hopes, now in the dust are laid.
Thou base desire, thou grave of all good hearts,
Corsiue to kindness, bawd to beastly will,
Monster of time, defrauder of deserts,
Thou plague, which do both love and virtue kill,
Honors abuser, friendships greatest ill:
If curse in hell, there worse then other be,
I pray that curse, may trebled light on thee.
Nor can all these amaze this mighty Queen,
Who with affliction, never was controld,
Never such courage in her sex was seen,
Nor was she cast in other women's mould,
But can endure vvarres, travel, want, and cold:
Struggling with Fortune, nere with grief oppressed,
Most cheerful still, when she was most distressed,
Thus she resolved, to leave ungrateful France,
And in the world her fortune yet to try,
Changing the air, hopes time will alter chance,
As one whose thoughts with honors wings do fly,
Her mighty mind, still scorning misery:
Yet ere she went, her grieved heart to heal,
She rings King Charles, this doleful parting peale.
Is this the trust I have reposed (quoth she)
And to this end to thee my griefs have told?
Is this the kindness that thou offerest me?
And in thy Country am I bought and sold?
In all this heat art thou become so cold?
Came I to France in hope to find a friend?
And now in thee have all my hopes their end?
Phillip (quoth she) thy Father never was,
But some base peasant, or some slavish hind,
Never did Kingly Lion get an Ass,
Nor came thou of that Princely Eagles kind:
But since thy hateful cowardice I find,
Sink thou, thy power, thy Country, aid and all,
Thou barbarous Moore, thou most unnatural.
Thou were not Son unto the Queen my mother,
Nor were conceived in her sacred woombe,
Some misbegotten changeling, not my Brother,
O that thy Nurses arms had been thy Toombe,
Or thy birthday had been the day of the doombe:
Never was Fortune with such error led,
As when she placed a Crown upon thy head.
And for my farewell this I prophecy,
That from my loins, that glorious fruit shall spring,
Which shall tread down that base posterity,
And lead in triumph thy succeeding King,
To fatal France, I as Sibilla sing:
Her Cities sackd, the ruin of her men,
When of the English, one shall conquer ten.
Beumount who had in France this shufling seen,
Whose soul with kindness Isabell had won,
To fly to Henault, now persuades the Queen, John of Henault.

Assuring her what good might there be done,
Offering his Niece, unto the Prince her Son:
The only mean, to bend his brothers might,
Against King Edward, and to back her right.
This worthy Lord, experienced long in arms,
Whom Isabell with many favors graced,
Whose Princely blood, the brute of conquest warmes,
In whose great thoughts, the Queen was highly placed,
Greeuing to see her succors thus defaced.
Has cast this plot, which managed with heed,
Since all do fail, should only help at need.
She who but lately had her Ankors wayd,
And saw the clouds on every side to rise,
Nor now can stay, until the stream be stayed,
Nor harbor till the clearing of the skies,
Who though she rou'd, the mark still in her eyes,
Accepts his offer thankfully as one,
Succouring the poor in such affliction.
This courteous Earl, moved with her sad report,
Whose ears were drawn to her enchanting tongue,
Traind up with her in Phillips royal Court,
And fully now confirmed in her wrong,
Her foes grow weak, her friends grow daily strong.
The Barrons oath, gagged in her cause to stand,
The Commons word, the Cleargies helping hand.
All Covenants signd with wedlocks sacred seal,
In friendships bonds eternally to bind,
And all proceeding from so perfect zeal,
And suting right, with Henalts mighty mind,
What ease hereby, the Queen does hope to find;
The sweet contentment of the lovely bride,
Young Edward pleased, and joy on every side.
NOw full seven times, the Sun his welked waine,
Had on the top of all the Tropic set,
And seven times descending down again,
His fiery wheels, had with the fishes wet,
Since malice first this mischief did beget:
In which so many courses has been run,
As he that time celestial signs has done.
From Henalt now this great Bellona comes,
Glyding along fair Belgias glassie maine,
Mazing the shores with noise of thundering drums,
With her young Edward, Duke of Aquitayne,
The fatal scourges of King Edwards reign:
Her Soldier Beumount, and the Earl of Kent,
And Mortimer that mighty Malcontent.
Three thousand Soldiers mustred men in pay,
Of Almaynes, Swisers, trusty Henawers,
Of native English fled beyond the Sea,
Of fat-braind Fleamings, fishie Zelanders,
Edwards decreasing power, augmenting hers:
Her friends at home expect her coming in,
And new commotions every day begin.
The Coasts be daily kept with watch and ward,
The Beacons burning, at thy foes discrie,
O had the love of Subjects been thy guard,
T'ad been to effect, what thou did fortify,
But it is thy household homebred Enemy:
Nor Fort, nor Castle, can thy Country keep,
When foes do wake, and dreamed friends do sleep.
In vain be arms, when heaven becomes a foe,
Kneel, weep, entreat, and speak thy Deaths-man fair,
The earth is armd unto thy overthrow,
Go pacify the angry powers by prayer,
Or if not pray, go Edward and despair:
Thy fatal end, why do thou this begin,
Locking Death out, thou keep'st destruction in.
A Southwest gale, for Harwich fitly blows,
Blow not so fast, to kindle such a fire:
Whilst under sail, she yet securely rows,
Turn gentle wind, and force her to retyer,
But o the winds, do Edwards wrack conspyre,
For when the heavens are unto justice bent,
All things be turned to our just punishment.
She is arrived in Orwells pleasant Road,
Orwell thy name, or ill, or never was:
Why art thou not ore-burthend with thy load?
Why sinck'st thou not under this monstrous mass?
But what heaven will, that needs must come to pass.
That grievous plague thou carriest on thy deep,
Shall give just cause for many, streams to weep.
Englands Earle-marshall, Lord of all that Coast,
With bells and bonfires welcoms her to shore,
Great Leicester next joins host to host,
The Cleargies power, in readiness before,
Which every day increases more and more:
Upon the Church a great taxation laid,
For Arms, munition, money, men, and aid.
Such as too long had looked for this hour,
And in their breasts imprisoned discontent,
Their wills thus made too powerful by their power
Whose spirits were factious, great, and turbulent,
Their hopes succesfull by this ill event,
Like to a thief that for his purpose lies,
Take knowledge now of Edwards injuries.
Young Prince of Wales, lo here thy virtue lies,
Soften thy Mothers flintie heart with tears,
Then woo thy Father with those blessed eyes,
Wherein the image of himself appears,
With thy soft hand softly uniting theirs:
With thy sweet kisses so them both beguile,
Until they smyling weep, and weeping smile.
Bid her behold that curled silken Down,
Thy fair smooth brow, in beauties fayrer pryme,
Not to be pressed with a care-bringing Crown,
Nor that with sorrows wrinckled ere the time,
Thy feet too feeble to his seat to clime;
Who gave thee life, a crown for thee did make,
Taking that Crown, thou life from him do take.
Look on these Babes, the seals of plighted troth,
Whose little arms about your bodies cling,
These pretty imps, so dear unto you both,
Beg on their knees, their little hands do wring,
Queens to a Queen, Kings kneel unto a King,
To see their comfort, and the crown defaced,
You fall to Arms, which have in arms embraced.
Subjects see these, and then look back on these,
Where hateful rage with kindly nature strives,
And judge by Edward of your own disease,
Children by children, by his wife your wives,
Your state by his, in his life your own lives,
And yield your swords, to take your deaths as due,
Then draw your swords, to spoil both him and you.
From Edmondsbury now comes this Lioness,
Under the Banner of young Aquitaine,
And down toward Oxford does herself adresse,
A world of vengeance waiting on her train,
Here is the period of Carnaruans reign;
Edward thou have, but King thou can not bear,
There Is now no King, but great King Mortimer.
Now friendles Edward followed by his foes,
Needs must he run, the devil has in chase,
Poor in his hopes, but wealthy in his woes,
Plenty of plagues, but scarcity of grace,
Who wearied all, now wearieth every place;
No home at home, no comfort seen abroad,
His mind small rest, his body small abode.
One scarce to him his sad discourse has done
Of Henalts power, and what the Queen intends,
But whilst he speaks, another has begun,
Another straight beginning where he ends,
Some of new foes, some of reuolting friends;
These ended once, again new rumors spread
Of many which rebel, of many fled.
Thus of the remnant of his hopes bereft,
She has the sum, and he the silly rest,
Toward Wales he flies, of England being left,
To raise an Army there himself adrest,
But of his power she fully is possessed;
She has the East, her rising there-withall,
And he the West, I there goes down his fall.
What plagues does Edward for himself prepare?
Alas poor Edward, whether do thou fly?
Men change the air, but seldom change their care,
Men fly from foes, but not from misery,
Griefs be long-liu'd, and sorrows seldom die;
And when thou feel'st thy conscience tuch'd with grief,
Thy self pursues thy self, both robbed and thief.
Toward Lundy, which in Sabryns mouth does stand,
Carried with hope, still hoping to find ease,
Imagining this were his native Land,
This England: and Seuerne the narrow seas,
With this conceit (poor soul) himself does please.
And since his rule is ouer-rul'd by men,
On byrds and beasts he will king it once again.
It Is treble death a freezing death to feel,
For him, on whom the sun has ever shone,
Who has been kneeled unto, can hardly kneel,
Nor hardly beg which once has been his own,
A fearful thing to tumble from a throne;
Feign would he be king of a little I Will,
All were his Empire bounded in a mile.
Aboard a Bark, now toward the I Will he sails,
Thinking to find some mercy in the flood:
But see, the weather with such power preuailes,
Not suffering him to rule this piece of vvood;
Who can attain, by heaven and earth with-stood?
Edward, thy hopes but vainly do delude,
By Gods and men incessantly pursued.
At length to land his careful Bark he hales,
Beaten with storms, ballast with misery,
This homebred exile, on the Coast of Wales,
Unlike himself, with such as like him be,
Spenser, Reading, Baldock, these hapless three,
They to him subject, he subject to care,
And he and they, to murder subject are.
To ancient Neyth, a Castle strongly built,
Thither repair this forlorn banished crew,
Which holds them, but not contaynes their guilt,
There hid from eyes, but not from enuies view,
Nor from their stars themselves they yet withdrew,
VValls may awhile keep out an enemy,
But never Castle kept out destenie.
Here Fortune has immured them in this hold,
VVilling their poor imprisoned liberty,
Living a death, in hunger, want, and cold,
Whilst murtherous treason enters secretly,
All lay on hands to punish cruelty;
And when even might is up unto the chin,
VVeake friends become strong foes to thrust him in.
MElpomine, thou doleful Muse be gone,
Thy sad complaints be matters far too light,
Here (now) come plagues beyond comparison.
You dreadful Furies, visions of the night,
With ghastly howling all approach my sight,
And let pale ghosts with sable Tapers stand,
To lend sad light to my more sadder hand.
Each line shall be a history of woe,
And every accent as a dead man's cry;
Now must my tears in such abundance flow,
As do the drops of fruitful Castaly,
Each letter must contain a tragedy:
Lo, now I come to tell this woeful rest,
The drerest tale that ever pen expressed.
You senseless stones, as all prodigious,
Or things which of like solid substance be,
Since thus in nature all grow monsterous,
And unto kind contrary disagree,
Consume, or burn, or weep, or sigh with me,
Unless the earth hard-harted, nor can moan,
Makes steel and stones, more hard then steel and stone.
All-guiding heaven, which so do still maintain
What ere thou moou'st in perfect unity,
And bynd'st all things in friendshyps sacred chain,
In spotles and perpetual amity,
Which is the bounds of thy great Emperie;
Why suffer thou the sacriligious rage,
Of this rebellious, hateful, iron age.
Now ruin reigns, God help the Land the while,
All prysons freed to make all mischiefs free,
Traitors and Rebels called from exile,
All things be lawful, but what lawful be,
Nothing our own, but our own infamy:
Death, which ends care, yet careless of our death,
Who steals our joys, but steals not our breath.
London which did this mischief first begin,
Lo, now I come thy tragedy to tell,
The Londeners set all the prisoners at liberty.
Thou art the first that's plagued for this sin,
Which first did make the entrance to this hell,
Now death and horror in thy walls must dwell,
Which should have care thy self in health to keep,
Thus turn'st the wolves amongst the careless sheep.
O had I eyes, another Thames to weep,
Or words expressing more, then words express,
O could my tears, thy great foundation steep,
To moan thy pride, thy wastfull vain excess,
Thy gluttony, thy youthful wantonness:
But it is thy sins, that to the heavens are fled,
Dissoluing clouds of vengeance on thy head.
The place profaned, where God should be adord,
The stone removed, whereon our faith is grounded,
Authority is scornd, counsel abhord,
Religion so by foolish sects confounded,
VVeake consciences by vain questions wounded:
The honor due, to Magistrates neglected,
What else but vengeance can there be expected?
When faith but faynd, a faith does only feign,
And Church-mens lives, give Laymen leave to fall,
The Ephod made a cloak to cover gain,
Cunning avoiding what is canonical,
Yet holiness the Badge to bear out all:
When sacred things be made a merchandise,
None talk of texts, then cease prophicies.
When as the laws, do once pervert the laws,
And weak opinion guides the common weal,
Where doubts should cease, doubts rise in every clawse,
The sword which wounds, should be a salve to heal,
Oppression works oppression to conceal:
Yet being used, when needful is the use,
Right clokes all wrongs, and couers all abuse,
Tempestious thunders, tear the fruitless earth,
The roaring Ocean past her bounds to rise,
Death-telling apparisions, monstrous birth,
The Affrighted heaven with comet-glaring eyes,
The ground, the air, all filled with prodigies:
Fearful eclipses, fiery vision,
And angry Planets in conjunction.
Thy channels serve for ink, for paper stones,
And on the ground, write murders, incests, rapes,
And for thy pens, a heap of dead-mens bones,
Thy letters, ugly forms, and monstrous shapes;
And when the earths great hollow concaue gapes,
Then sink them down, least she we live upon,
Do leave our use, and fly subjection.
Virgin, but Virgin only in thy name,
Now for thy sin what murderer shall be spent:
Black is my ink, but blacker is thy shame,
Who shall revenge? my Muse can but lament,
With hair disheueld, words and tears half spent:
Poor ravished Lucrece stands to end her life,
VVhlist cruel Tarquin whets the angry knyfe.
Thou wantst redress, and tyranny remorce,
And sad suspicion dies thy fault in grain,
Compeld by force, must be repeld by force,
Complaints no pardon, penance helps not pain,
But blood must vvash out a more bloody stayne:
To win thine honor with thy loss of breath,
Thy guiltless life with thy more guilty death,
Thou art benumd, thou can not feel at all,
Plagues be thy pleasures, fear has made past fear,
The deadly sound of sins nile-thundering fall,
Has tuned horror settled in thine ear,
Shreeks be the sweetest Music thou can hear:
Arms thy attyer, and weapons all thy good,
And all the wealth thou have, consist in blood.
See woeful City, on thy ruined wall,
The very Image of thy self here see,
Read on thy gates in charrecters thy fall,
In famished bodies, thine Anatomy,
How like to them thou art, they like to thee:
And if thy tears have dimmed thy hateful sight,
Thy buildings are one fire to give thee light.
For world that was, a woeful is, complain,
When men might have been buried when they dyed,
When Children might have in their cradels layne,
When as a man might have enjoyed his bride,
The Son kneeld by his Fathers deathbed side:
The living wronged, the dead no right (now) have,
The Father sees his Son to want a grave.
The poor Samarian almost starved for food,
Yet sawced her sweet Infants flesh with tears,
But thou in child with murder, long'st for blood,
Which thy womb wanting, casts the fruit it bears,
Thy viperous brood, their loathsome prison teyrs.
Thou drinkst thy gore out of a dead-mans scull,
Thy stomach hungry, though thy gorge be full.
Is all the world in senseless slaughter dround?
No pitying heart? no hand? no eye? no ear?
None holds his sword from ripping of the wound,
No spark of pity, nature, love, nor fear;
Be all so mad, that no man can forbear?
Will you incur the cruel Neros blame,
Thus to discover your own Mothers shame?
The man who of the plague yet rauing lies,
Hears yielding gosts to give their latest groan,
And from his careful window naught espyes,
But dead-mens bodies, others making moan,
No talk but Death, and execution.
Poor silly women from their houses fled,
Crying (o help) my husbands murdered;
Thames turn thee back to Belgias frothie main,
Fair Tame and Isis, hold back both your springs,
Nor on thy London spread thy silver train,
Nor let thy Ships lay forth their silken wings,
Thy shores with Swans late dying Dirgies rings,
Nor in thy arms let her embraced be,
Nor smile on her which sadly weeps on thee.
Time end thy self here, let it not be said,
That ever Death did first begin in thee,
Nor let this slander to thy fault be laid,
That ages charge thee with impiety,
Least fear what has been, argue what may be:
And fashioning so a habit of the mind.
Make men no men, and alter human kind.
But yet this outrage has but taken breath,
For pity past, she means to make amends,
And more enraged, she does return to death,
And next goes down King Edward and his friends,
What she has hoarded, now she franckly spends:
In such strange action as was never seen,
Clothing revenge in habit of a Queen.
Now Stapleton's thy turn, from France that fled,
The next the lot unto the Spensers fell,
Reding the Marshall, marshaled with the dead,
Next is thy turn great Earl of Arundell,
Then Mochelden and woeful Daniell:
Who followed him in his lascivious ways,
Must go before him to his blackest days,
Carnaruan by his Countrie-men betrayed,
And sent a Prisoner from his native Land,
To Knelworth poor King he is conuayd,
To The Earl of Leister with a mighty band;
And now a present Parliament in hand,
Fully concluding what they had begun,
T'vncrowne King Edward, and inuest his Son?
A scepter's like a pillar of great height,
VVhereon a mighty building does depend,
Which when the same is ouer-prest with weight,
And past his compass, forced thereby to bend,
His massy roof down to the ground does send:
Crushing the lesser props, and murdering all,
Which stand within the compass of his fall.
Where vice is countenanced with nobility,
Art clean excluded, ignorance held in,
Blinding the world, with mere hypocrisy,
Yet must be soothed in all their slavish sin,
Great malcontents to grow they then begin:
Nursing vile wits, to make them factious tools,
Thus mighty men often prove the mightiest fools.
The Senate wronged by the Senator,
And justice made injustice by delays,
Next innovation plays the Orator,
Counsels vncounseld, Death defers no days,
And plagues, but plagues, allow no other plays:
And when one life, makes hateful many lives,
Caesar though Caesar, dies with swords and knives,
Now for the Clergy, Peers, and Laietie,
Against the King must resignation make,
Th'elected Senate of the Emperie,
To Kenelworth are come, the Crown to take,
Sorrow has yet but slept, and now awake:
In solemn sort each one does take his place,
The partial Judges of poor Edwards case.
From his imprisoning chamber, clothed in black,
Before the great assembly he is brought,
A doleful hearse upon a dead-mans back,
Whose heavy looks, might tell his heavy thought,
Grief need no feigned action to be taught:
His Funeral solemnized in his cheer,
His eyes the Mourners, and his legs the Beer.
His fair red cheeks clad in pale sheets of shame,
And for a dumb show in a swound began,
Where passion does strange sort of passion frame,
And every sense a right Tragedian,
Exceeding far the compass of a man,
By use of sorrow learning nature art,
Teaching Despair to act a lively part.
Ah Pity, do thou live, or art thou not?
Some say such sights, men unto flints have turned,
Or Nature, else thy self have thou forgot?
Or is it but a tale, that men have mourned?
That water ever drowned, or fire burned?
Or have tears left to dwell in human eyes,
Or ever man to pity miseries?
He takes the Crown, and closely hugs it to him,
And smiling in his greese he leanes upon it;
Then does he frown because it would forgo him,
Then softly stealing, lays his vesture on it;
Then snatching at it, loath to have forgone it,
He put it from him, yet he will not so,
And yet retains what feign he would forgo.
Like as a Mother ouer-charg'd with woe,
Her only child now laboring in death,
Doing to help it, nothing yet can do,
Though with her breath, she feign would give it breath,
Still saying, yet forgetting what she says:
Even so with poor King Edward does it fare,
Leaving his Crown, the firstborn of his care.
In this confused conflict of the mind,
Tears drowning sighs, and sighs confounding tears,
Yet when as neither any ease could find,
And extreme grief does somewhat harden fears,
Sorrow grows senseless when too much she bears,
Whilst speech and silence, strives which place should take,
With words half spoke, he silently bespake.
I claim no Crown, quoth he, by vise oppression,
Nor by the law of Nations have you chose me,
My Fathers title groundeth my succession,
Nor in your power is cullor to depose me,
By heavens decree I stand, they must dispose me;
A lawles act, in an unlawful thing,
VVith-drawes allegiance, but vncrownes no King.
What God has said to one, is only due,
Can I usurp by tyrannizing might?
Or take what by your birthright falls to you?
Root out your houses? blot your honors light?
By public rule, to rob your public right?
Then can you take, what he could not that gave it,
Because the heavens commanded I should have it.
My Lords, quoth he, commend me to the King,
Here does he pause, fearing his tongue offended,
Even as in childbirth forth the word does bring,
Sighing a full point, as he there had ended,
Yet striving, as his speech he would have mended;
Things of small moment we can scarcely hold,
But griefs that tuch the heart, are hardly told.
Here does he weep, as he had spoke in tears,
Calming this tempest with a shower of rain,
Whispering, as he would keep it from his ears,
Do my alegiance to my Sovereign;
Yet at this word, here does he pause again:
Yes say even so, quoth he, to him you bear it,
If it be Edward that you mean shall wear it.
Keep he the Crown, with me remain the curse,
A hapless Father, have a happy Son,
Take he the better, I endure the worse,
The plague to end in me, in me begun,
And better may he thrive then I have done;
Let him be second Edward, and poor I,
For ever blotted out of memory.
Let him account his bondage from the day
That he is with the Diadem invested,
A glittering Crown does make the hair soon gray,
Within whose circle he is but arested,
In all his feasts, he is but with sorrow feasted;
And when his feet disdain to tuch the mold,
His head a prisoner, in a Iayle of gold.
In numbering of his subjects, numbering care,
And when the people do with shouts begin,
Then let him think their only prayers are,
That he may escape the danger he is in,
The multitude, be multitudes of sin;
And he which first does say, God save the King,
He is the first does news of sorrow bring.
His Commons ills shall be his private ill,
His private good is only public care,
His will must only be as others will:
Himself not as he is, as others are,
By Fortune dared to more then Fortune dare:
And he which may command an Empery,
Yet can he not entreat his liberty.
Appeasing tumults, hate cannot appease,
Soothed with deceits, and fed with flatteries,
Displeasing to himself, others to please,
Obeyed as much as he shall tyrannize,
Fear forcing friends, enforcing Enemies:
And when he sits under his estate,
His foote-stoole danger, and his chair is hate.
He King alone, no King that once was one,
A King that was, unto a King that is;
I am vnthron'd, and he enioyes my throne,
Nor should I suffer that, nor he do this,
He takes from me what yet is none of his;
Young Edward clymes, old Edward falls down;
King'd and vnking'd, he crowned, farewell my crown.
Princes be Fortunes children, and with them,
She deals, as Mothers use their babes to still,
Unto her darling gives a Diadem,
A pretty toy, his humor to fulfill;
And when a little they have had their will,
Look what she gave, she takes at her pleasure,
Using the rod when they are out of measure.
But policy, who still in hate did lurk,
And yet suspecteth Edward is not sure,
VVaying what blood with Leicester might work,
Or else what friends his name might yet procure,
A guilty conscience never is secure;
From Leisters keeping cause him to be taken;
Alas poor Edward, now of all forsaken.
To Gurney and Matrauers he is given;
O let their act be odious to all ears,
And being spoke, stir clouds to cover heaven,
And be the badge the wretched murderer bears,
The wicked oath whereby the damned swears:
But Edward, in thy hell thou must content thee,
These be the devils which must still torment thee.
He on a lean ilfauored beast is set,
Death upon Famine moralizing right;
His cheeks with tears, his head with reign bewet,
Nights very picture, wandering still by night;
When he would sleep, like dreams they him affright;
His food torment, his drink a poisoned bayne,
No other comfort but in deadly pain.
And yet because they fear to have him known,
They shave away his princely tressed hair,
And now become not worth a hair ofs own,
Body and fortune now be equal bare;
Thus void of wealth, o were he void of care.
But o, our joys are shadows, and deceive us,
But cares, even to our deaths do never leave us.
A silly Molehill is his kingly chair,
With puddle water must he now be dressed,
And his perfume, the loathsome fenny air,
An iron skull, a Basin sitting best,
A bloody workman, suting with the rest;
His lothed eyes, within this filthy glass,
Truly behold how much deformed he was.
The drops which from his eyes abundance fall,
A poole of tears still rising by this rain,
Even fighting with the water, and withal,
A circled compass makes it to retain,
Billow'd with sighs, like to a little maine;
Water with tears, contending whether should
Make water warm, or make the warm tears cold.
Vise Traitors, hold of your* unhallowed hands,
The cruelst beast the Lions presence fears:
And can you keep your Sovereign then in bands?
How can your eyes behold th'anoynteds tears?
Are not your hearts even pierced through the ears?
The mind is free, what ere afflict the man,
A King's a King, do Fortune what she can.
Who's he can take what God himself has given?
Or spill that life his holy spirit infused?
All powers be subject to the powers of heaven,
Nor wrongs pass unrevenged, although excused,
Weep Majesty to see thy self abused;
O whether shall authority be take,
When she herself, herself does so forsake?
A wreath of hay they on his temples bind,
Which when he felt, (tears would not let him see,)
Nature (quoth he) now art thou only kind,
Thou give, but Fortune takes all from me,
I now perceive, that were it not for thee:
I should want water, clothing for my brain,
But earth gives hay, and mine eyes give me rain.
My self deformed, like my deformed state,
My person made like to mine infamy,
Altring my favor, could you alter fate,
And blotting beauty, blot my memory,
You might fly slander, I indignity:
My golden Crown, took golden rule away,
A Crown of hay, well suits a King of hay.
Yet grieved again, on nature does complain,
Nature (says he) o thou art just in all,
Why should thou then, thus strengthen me again,
To suffer things so much unnatural?
Except thou be pertaker in my fall:
And when at once so many mischiefs meet,
Make poison nuterment, and bitter sweet.
And now he thinks he wrongeth Fortune much,
Who gives him this great pre-eminence,
For since by fate his myseries be such,
Her worser name has taught him patience,
For no offense, he takes as offense:
Crossed on his back, and crosses in the breast,
Thus is he crossed, who never yet was blessed.
To Berckley thus they lead this wretched King,
The place of horror which they had forethought,
O heavens why suffer you so vile a thing,
And can behold, this murder to be wrought,
But that your ways are all with judgment frought:
Now entrest thou, poor Edward to thy hell,
Thus take thy leave, and bid the world farewell.
O Berckley, thou which have been famous long,
Still let thy walls shreeke out a deadly sound,
And still complain thee of thy grievous wrong,
Preserve the figure of King Edwards wound,
And keep their wretched footsteps on the ground:
That yet some power again may give them breath,
And thou again may curse them both to death.
The croking Ravens hideous voice he hears,
Which through the Castle sounds with deadly yells,
Imprinting strange imaginary fears,
The heavy Echoes like to passing bells,
Chyming far off his doleful burying knells:
The iargging Casements which the fierce wind dryues,
Puts him in mind of fetters, chains, and gyues.
By silent night, the ugly shreeking Owls,
Like dreadful Spirits with terror do torment him,
The envious dog, angry with darcknes howles,
Like messengers from damned ghosts were sent him,
Or with hells noisome terror to present him:
Under his roof the buzzing night-Crow sings,
Clapping his window with her fatal wings.
Death still prefigur'd in his fearful dreams,
Of raging Feinds, and Goblins that he meets,
Of falling down from steepe-rocks into streams
Of Toombs, of Graves, of Pits, of winding sheets,
Of strange temptations and seducing sprits:
And with his cry awaked, calling for aid,
His hollow voice does make him self afraid.
Often in his sleep he sees the Queen to fly him,
Stern Mortimer pursue him with his sword,
His Son in sight, yet dares he not come nigh him,
To whom he calls, who answers not a word,
And like a monster wondered and abhord:
Widows and Orphans following him with cries,
Stabbing his heart, and scratching out his eyes.
Next comes the vision of his bloody reign,
Masking along with Lancasters stern ghost,
Of eight and twenty Barrons hanged and slain,
Attended with the rufull mangled host,
At Burton and at Borough battle lost:
Threatening with frowns, and trembling every lim,
With thousand thousand curses cursing him.
And if it chance that from the troubled skies,
Some little brightness through the chinks give light,
Straight ways on heaps the thrunging clouds do rise,
As though the heaven were angry with the night.
Deformed shadows glimpsing in his sight:
As though darcknes, for she more darcke would be,
Through these poor Crannells forced her self to see,
Within a deep vault under where he lay,
Under buried filthy carcasses they keep,
Because the thick walls hearing kept away,
His feeling feeble, seeing ceased in sleep;
This loathsome stinck comes from this dungeon deep,
As though before they fully did decree,
No one sense should from punishment be free.
He haps our English Chronicle to find,
On which to pass the hours he falls to reed,
For minutes yet to recreate his mind,
If any thought one vncar'd thought might feed,
But in his breast new conflicts this does breed:
For when sorrow, is seated in the eyes,
What ere we see, increases miseries.
Opening the Book, he chanced first of all
On conquering Williams glorious coming in,
The Normans rising, and the Bryttains fall,
Noting the plague ordyan'd for Harolds sin,
How much, in how short time this Duke did win;
Great Lord (quoth he) thy conquests placed thy throne,
I to mine own, have basely lost mine own.
Then comes to Rufus a lascivious King,
Whose lawless rule on that which he enjoyed,
A sudden end unto his days does bring,
Himself destroyed in that which he destroyed,
None moan his death, whose life had all anoy'd:
Rufus (quoth he) thy fault far less then mine,
Needs must my plague be far exceeding thine.
To famous Bewclarke studiously he turns.
Who from Duke Robert does the scepter wrest, Robert Short-thigh Duke of
Normandy

Whose eyes put out, in flintie Cardiffe mornes,
In Palestine who bare his conquering crest,
Who though of Realms, of same not dispossessed:
In all afflictions this may comfort thee,
Only my shame in death remains (quoth he.)
Then comes he next to Stephens troublous state,
Plagued with the Empress, in continual war,
Yet with what patience he could bear his hate,
And like a wiseman rule his angry star,
Stopping the wheel of Fortunes giddie carre:
O thus (quoth he) had graceless Edward done,
He had not now been Subject to his Son.
Then to Henry Plantagine he goes,
Two Kings at once, two Crowned at once does find,
The root from whence so many mischiefs rose,
The Fathers kindness makes the Son unkind,
The Ambitious Brothers to debate inclind:
Thou crown'st thy Son, yet living still do reign,
Mine vncrownes me (quoth he) yet am I slain.
Then of courageous Lyon-hart he reeds,
The Souldans terror, and the Pagans wrack,
The Eastern world filled with his glorious deeds,
Of Ioppas siege, of Cipres woeful sack,
Richard (quoth he) turning his dull eyes back:
Thou did in height of thy felicity,
I in the depth of all my misery.
Then by degrees to sacriligious John,
Murdering young Arthur, has usurped his right,
The Cleargies curse, the poors oppression,
The grievous crosses that on him did light,
To Rooms proud yoke yielding his awful might:
Even by thy end (he says) now John I see,
Gods judgments thus do justly fall on me.
Then, to long-raigning Winchester his Son,
With whom his people bloody war did wage,
And of the troubles in his time begun,
The headstrong Barrons wrath, the Commons rage.
And yet how he these tumults could aswage:
Thou live long, (quoth he) longer thy name,
And I dye soon, yet ouer-liue my fame,
Then to great Longshanks mighty victories,
Who in the Orcads fixed his Countries mears,
And dared in fight our fayths proud Enemies,
Which to his name eternal Trophies rears,
Whose graceful favors yet fair England wears:
Be It deadly sin (quoth he) once to defile,
This Fathers name with me a Son so vile.
Following the leaf, he finds unawares,
What day young Edward Prince of Wales was borne,
Which Letters seem like Magic Charrecters,
Or to dispight him they were made in scorn,
O let that name (quoth he) from Books be torn:
Least that in time, the very grieved earth,
Do curse my Mothers woombe, and ban my birth.
Say that King Edward never had such child,
Or was devoured as he in cradle lay,
Be all men from my place of birth exiled,
Let it be sunck, or swallowed with some sea,
Let course of years devour that dismal day,
Let all be done that power can bring to pass,
Only be it forgot that ere I was.
The globy tears impearled in his eyes,
Through which as glasses he is forced to look,
Make letters seem as circles which arise,
Forced by a stone within a standing Brook,
And at one time, so diverse forms they took,
Which like to ugly Monsters do affright,
And with their shapes do terrify his sight.
Thus on his careful Cabin falling down,
Enter the Actors of his tragedy,
Opening the doors, which made a hallow soune,
As they had howled against their cruelty,
Or of his pain as they would prophecy;
To whom as one which died before his death,
He yet complaynes, whilst pain might lend him breath.
O be not Authors of so vile an act,
To bring my blood on your posterity,
That Babes even yet unborn do curse the fact,
I am a King, though King of misery,
I am your King, though wanting Majesty:
But he who is the cause of all this teene,
Is cruel March the Champion of the Queen.
He has my Crown, he has my Son, my wife,
And in my throne tryumpheth in my fall,
Is It not enough but he will have my life?
But more, I fear that yet this is not all,
I think my soul to judgment he will call:
And in my death his rage yet shall not dye,
But persecute me so, immortallie.
And for you deadly hate me, let me live,
For that advantage angry heaven has left,
Fortune has taken all that she did give;
Yet that revenge should not be quite bereft,
She leaves behind this remnant of her theft:
That misery should find that only I,
Am far more wretched then is misery.
Betwixt two beds these devils straight enclosed him,
Thus done, uncovering of his secret part,
When for his death they fitly had disposd him,
With burning iron thrust him to the heart.
O pain beyond all pain, how much thou art!
Which words, as words, may verbally confess,
But never pen precisely could express.
O let his tears even freezing as they light,
By the impression of his monstrous pain,
Still keep this odious spectacle in sight,
And show the manner how the King was slain,
That it with ages may be new again;
That all may thither come that have been told it,
And in that mirror of his griefs behold it.
Still let the building sigh his bitter groans,
And with a hollow cry his woes repeat,
That senseless things even moving senseless stones,
With agonizing horror still may sweat;
And as consuming in their furious heat,
Like boiling Cauldrons be the drops that fall,
Even as that blood for vengeance still did call,
O let the woeful Genius of the place,
Still haunt the prison where his life was lost:
And with torn hair, and swollen ilfauored face,
Become the guide to his reuengefull ghost,
And night and day still let them walk the Coast:
And with incessant howling terrify,
Or move with pity all that travel by.
TRue virtuous Lady, now of mirth I sing,
To sharpen thy sweet spirit with some delight,
And somewhat slack this mellancholie string,
Whilst I of love and tryumphs must indite,
Too soon again of passion must I write.
Of Englands wonder, now I come to tell,
How Mortimer first rose, when Edward fell.
Down lesser lights, the glorious Sun does clime*
His joyful rising is the worlds proud morn;
Now is he got betwixt the wings of Time,
And with the tide of Fortune forwards borne,
Good stars assist his greatness to subborne;
Who have, decreed his reigning for a while,
All laugh on him, on whom the heavens do smile.
The pompous sinode of these earthly Gods,
At Salsbury, appointed by their King,
To set all even which had been at ods,
And into fashion, their dissignes to bring,
That peace might now from their proceedings spring,
And to establish what they had begun,
Under whose color mighty things were done.
Here Mortimer is Earl of March created,
This honor added to his Barronie,
And unto fame here is he consecrated,
That titles might his greatness dignifie,
As for the rest, he easily could supply*
Who knew a kingdom to her lap was thrown,
Which having all, would never starve her own.
A pleasing calm has smoothed the troubled sea,
The prime brought on with gentle falling showers,
The misty break yet proves a goodly day;
And on their heads since heaven her ^argesse powers,
That only ours, which we do use as ours:
Pleasures be poor, and our delights be dead,
When as a man does not enjoy the head.
Time wanting bounds, still wants certainty,
Of dangers past, in peace we love to hear,
Short is the date of all extremity,
Long wished things a sweet delight does bear,
Better forgo our joys then still to fear:
Fortune her gifts in vain to such does give,
As when they live, seem as they did not live.
Now stand they like the two starre-fixed Poles,
Betwixt the which the circling Spheres do move,
About whose Axeltree this fair Globe roules,
Which that great Moouer by his strength does shoue,
Yet every point still ending in their love;
For might is ever absolute alone,
When of two powers there is true conjunction.
The King must take, what by their power they give,
And they protect what serves for their protection,
They teach to rule, whilst he does learn to live,
TO whom all be subject, lives in their subjection,
Though borne to rule, yet crowned by their election,
Th'alegiance which to Edward does belong,
Does make their faction absolutely strong.
Twelve guide the King, his power their powers consist,
Peers guide the King, they guide both King and Peers,
Ill can the Brook his own selfe-streame resist,
Their aged counsel, to his younger years,
Young Edward vows, and all the while he steers;
Well might we think the man were more then blind,
Which wanted Sea roomth, and could rule the wind.
In lending strength, their strength they still retain,
Building his force, their own they so repare,
Under his reign, in safety they do reign,
They give a kingdom, and do keep the care,
They who adventure, must the booty share,
A Princes wealth in spending still does spread,
Like to a Poole with many fountains fed.
They sit at ease, though he sit in the throne,
He shadows them who his supporters be,
And in division they be two for one,
An Empire now must thus berul'd by three,
What they make free, they challenge to be free;
The King enjoys, but what they lately gave,
They priuiledg'd to spend, leave him to save.
sort inter ^se-score nights in reti^^e.
Nine-score brave Knights belonging to his Court
At Notingham, which all the Coast commands,
All parts pay trybute, honor to his port,
Much may he do which has so many hands,
This rocke-built Castle, ouer-looks the Lands:
Thus like a Giant, still toward heaven does rise,
And feign would cast the Rocks against the skies.
Where ere he goes there pomp in triumph goes,
Over his head Fame soring still does fly,
The Earth in his presence decks her self in shows,
And glory sits in greatest Majesty,
Abundance there does still in Childbed lie:
For where Fortune her bounty will bestow,
There heaven and earth must pay what she does owe.
In Notingham, the Norths great glorious eye,
Crown of the beauteous branch-embellish'd soil,
The throne imperial of his Emperie,
His resting place, releeuer of his ^oyle,
Here he enioyes his neuer-prized spoil:
There living in a world of all delight,
Beheld of all, and having all in sight.
Here all along the flower-enameld vales,
Clear Trent upon the pearly sand does slide,
And to the Meadows telling wanton tales,
Her crystal lims lasciuiously in pride,
With thousand turns she casts from side to side:
As loath she were the sweet soil to forsake,
And throw her self into the German lake.
Whence great hart-harboring Sherwood wildly roues,
Whose leauie Forests garlanding her Towers,
Shadowing the small Brooks with her Ecchoing groves,
whose thick-plashd sides repulse the Northern showers,
Where Nature sporting in her secret Bowers:
This strong built Castle hurketh in her shade,
As to this end she only had been made.
There must the glorious Parliament be held,
Earth must come in, when awful heaven does send,
For whether Jove his powerful self does weld,
Thither all powers them selves must wholly bend,
Whose hand holds thunder, who dare him offend?
And where proud conquest keeps all in awe,
Kings often are forced in servile yokes to draw.
Here sit they both under the rich estate,
Yet neither strive the upper hand to get,
In pomp and power both equal at a rate,
And as they came, so are they friendly set,
He enters first, which first in entering met;
A King at least the Earl of March must be,
Or else the maker of a King is he.
Perhaps, he with a smyle the King will grace,
His knees grow stiff, they have forgot to bow,
And if he once have taken up his place,
Edward must come, if he his will would know,
A foot out of his seat he cannot go;
This small word subject, pricks him like a sting,
My Empyres Colleage, or my fellow King.
O had felicity feeling of woe,
Or could on mean but moderatly seed,
Or would look down the way that he must go,
Or could abstain from what diseases breed,
To stop the wound before to death he bleed,
War should not fill Kings Palaces with moan,
Nor perrill come when it is least thought upon.
Ambition with the Eagle loves to build,
Nor on the Mountain dreads the winters blast,
But with selfe-soothing does the humor guild,
With arguments correcting what is past,
Fore-casting Kingdoms, dangers vnforecast:
Leaving this poor word of content to such,
Whose earthly spirits have not his fiery ^uch.
But pleasures never dine but on excess,
Whose diet made to draw on all delight,
And overcome in that sweet drunkenness,
His appetite maintained by his sight,
Strengthens desire, but ever weakneth might:
Until this ulcer ripening to a head,
Vomits the poison which it nourished.
Even as a flood swelling beyond his bounds,
Does ouer-presse the channel where he flowd,
And breaking forth, the neighbor Meadows drowns,
That of him self, him self does quite unload,
Dispearcing his own greatness all abroad:
Spending the store he was maintained by,
Empties his Brook, and leaves his Channel dry.
Upon this Subject, envy might devise,
Here might she prove her mischeese-working wings,
An object for her euer-waking eyes,
Wherein to stick a thousand deadly stings,
A ground whereon to build as many things:
For where our actions measure no regard,
Our lawless will is made his own reward.
Here vengeance calls destruction up from hell,
Coniuring mischeese to devise a curse,
Increasing that, which more and more did swell,
Adding to ill, to make this evil worse,
Whilst hateful pride becomes ambitions nurse:
It Is incedent to those whom many fear,
Many to them more grievous hate do bear.
And now those few which many tears had spent,
And long had wept on old King Edwards grave,
Find some begin to pity their lament,
VVishing the poor yet some redress might have,
Revenge cannot deny what death does crave:
Opening their cares what so abhord their eyes,
Ill will too soon regards enuies cries.
Time calls account of what before is past,
All thrust on malice pressing to be hard,
Unto misfortune all men go too fast,
Seldom, advantage is in wrongs debard,
Nor in revenge a mean is never spard:
For when once pride but poynteth toward his fall,
He bears a sword to wound him self with all.
Edward whose shoulders now were taught to peyze,
Briarius burden, which oppressed him so,
His current stopped with these outrageous Seas,
Whose gulf received the tide should make him flow,
This Rock cast in the way where he must go:
That honor brooks, no fellowship has tryde,
Nor never Crown Corriuall could abide.
Some urge that March, meaning by blood to rise,
First cut off Kent, fearing he might succeed,
Trayning the King to what he did devise,
Lymming in colors this unlawful deed,
And to his own, the royal blood to weed:
Thus every straw proves fuel to the fire,
When counsel does concur with our desire.
All fence the tree which serves for a shade,
Whose great grown body does repulse the wind,
Until his wastfull branches do invade,
The straighter plants, and them in prison bind,
Then like a foul deuower of his kind:
Unto his root all put their hands to hew,
Whose roomth but hinder other which would grow.
Greatness, like to the Suns reflecting powers,
The fen-bred vapors naturally exhales,
And is the cause that often the evening lowers,
When foggie mists enlarge their duskie fails,
That his own beams, he in the clouds impales:
And either must extinguish his own light,
Or by his virtue cause his propper night.
Of winter thus whilst they prognosticate,
He has the Summer, and a fruitful year,
And still is soothed by his flattering fate,
For still the star which guides him does appear;
He looks far off, yet sees not danger near:
For often we see before a sudden shower,
The sun shines hott'st, and has the greatest power.
Now spears with Music make a new worlds birth,
Bring on again old Saturns golden reign,
Renew this weary barren-wombed earth,
And raise aloft the suns declyning wayne,
And by your power make all things young again:
Orpheus, once more to Thebes old Forests bring,
Drink Nectar, whilst the Gods are banqueting.
Within this Castle had the Queen deuisd,
A stately Chamber with the pensill wrought,
Within whose compass was imparadizd,
What ever Art or rare invention taught,
As well might seem far to exceed all thought:
That were the thing on earth to move delight,
He should not want it to content his sight.
Here Phoebus clipping Hiacynthus stood,
Whose lives last drops, his snowie breast imbrewe,
Mixing his crystal tears with purple blood,
As were it blood or tears, none scarcely knew,
Yet blood and tears, one from the other drew:
The little wood-nimphs chasing him with balm,
To raise this sweet Boy from this deadly qualme.
Here lies his Lute, his Quiver, and his bow,
His golden mantle on the greene-spred ground,
That from the things themselves none could them know,
The sledge so shadowed, still seemed to rebound,
Th'wound being made, yet still to make a wound:
The purple flower with letters on the leaves,
Springing that Nature, often her self deceaues.
The milke-white Heifor, Io, Jove's fair rape,
Viewing her new-ta'en figure in a Brook,
The water seeming to retain the shape,
Which looks on her, as she on it does look,
That gazing eyes oft-times them selves mistook:
By prospectiue devised that looking now,
She seemed a Maiden, then again a Cow.
Then Mercury amidst his sweetest joys,
Sporting with Hebe by a Fountain brim,
Clipping each other with lascivious toys,
And each to other lapped lim to lim,
On tufts of flowers which loosely seem to swim:
Which flowers in sprinkled drops do still appear,
As all their bodies so embraudered were.
Here clyffy Cynthus, with a thousand byrds,
Whose checkerd plumes adorn his tufted crown,
Under whose shadow graze the straggling herds,
Out of whose top, the fresh springs trembling down,
Duly keep time with their harmonious sown.
The Rock so lively done in every part,
As art had so taught nature, nature art.
The naked Nymphs, some up, some down discending.
Small scattering flowers one at another flung,
With pretty turns their lymber bodies bending,
Cropping the blooming branches lately sprung,
Which on the Rocks grew here and there among.
Some comb their hair, some making garlands by,
As living, they had done it actually.
And for a trayle, Caisters silver Lake,
Whose herds of Swanns sit pruning on a row,
By their much whitenes, such reflection make,
As though in Summer had been fallen a snow,
Whose stream an easy breath does seem to blow;
Which on the sparkling gravel runns in purles,
As though the waves had been of silver curles.
Here falls proud Phaeton, tumbling through the clouds,
The sunny Palfreys have their traces broke,
And setting fire upon the welked shrowds,
Now through the heaven fly gadding from the yoke,
The Spears all reeking with a mistie smoke,
Drawn with such life, as some did much desire
To warm themselves, some frighted with the fire.
And Drencht in Po, the River seems to burn,
His woeful sisters, mourning there he sees,
Trees unto women seem themselves to turn,
Or rather women turned into trees,
Drops from their boughs, or tears fall from their eyes,
That fire seemed to be water, water flame,
Either or neither, and yet both the same.
A stately Bed under a golden tree,
Whose broad-leau'd branches covering over all,
Spread their large Arms like to a Canapy,
Dubbling themselves in their lascivious fall,
Upon whose top the flying Cupids spraule,
And some, at sundry cullored byrds do shute,
Some swaruing up to get the golden fruit.
A counterpoynt of Tyssue, rarely wrought,
Like to Arachnes web, of the Gods rape,
Which with his life's strange history is wrought,
The very manner of his hard escape,
From point to point, each thing in perfect shape,
As made the gazers think it there was done,
And yet time stayed in which it was begun.
During this calm, is gathered that black shower,
Whose ugly cloud the clyme had ouer-spred,
And now draws on that long death-dating hour,
His fatal star now hangs over his head,
His fortunes sun down toward the evening fled,
For when we think we most in safety stand,
Great'st dangers then are ever near'st at hand.
And Edward sees no means can ever boot,
Unless this headstrong course he may restrain,
And must pluck up these mischiefs by the root,
Else spread so far, might easily grow again,
And end their reign, if he do mean to reign;
The Commonweal to cure, brought to that pass,
Which like a many-headed Monster was.
But since he finds the danger to be such,
To bring this Bear once bayted to the slake,
And that he feels the forwardest to gruch,
To take in hand this sleeping dog to wake,
He must fore-think of some such course to take,
By which he might his purpose thus effect,
And hurt him most, where he might least suspect.
A trenched vault deep in the earth is found,
Whose hollownes, like to the Sleep-gods Cell,
With strange Meanders turns under ground,
Where pitchy darkness euer-more does dwell,
As well might be an entrance into hell.
Which Archyteckts, to serve the Castle made,
When as the Dane with wars did all invade.
Here silent night, as in a prison shrouded,
VVandreth about within this mazed room,
With filthy fogs, and earthly vapors clowded,
As she were buried in this cliffy toombe,
Or yet unborn within the earths great woombe.
A dampy breath comes from the moysted veins,
As she had sighed through trouble in her pains.
Now on a long this cranckling path does keep,
Then by a rock turns up another way,
Then rising up, she poynteth toward the deep,
As the ground level, or vnleuell lay,
Nor in his course keeps any certain stay,
Till in the Castle in a secret place,
He suddenly unmask his duskie face.
The King now with a strong selected crew,
Of such as he with his intent acquainted,
And well affected to this action knew,
Nor in revenge of Edward never fainted,
Whose loyal faith had never yet been tainted,
This Labyrinth dertermins to assay,
To rouse the beast which kept him thus at bay.
The blushing Sun, plucks in his smyling beams,
Making his steeds to mend their wonted pace,
Till plunging down into the Ocean streams,
There in the frothy waves he hides his face,
Then reins them in, more then his usual space,
And leaves foul darkness to possess the skies,
A time most fit for fouler tragedies.
With Torches now they enter on his Cave,
As night were day, and day were turned to night,
Damped with the soil one to the other gave,
Light hating darkness, darkness hating light,
As enemies, each with the other fight;
And each confounding other, both appear,
As darkness light, and light but darkness were.
The craggy cleeues, which cross them as they go,
Seem as their passage they would have denied,
And threatening them, their journey to for-slowe,
As angry with the path that was their guide,
Cursing the hand which did them first divide,
Their combrous falls and risings seemed to say,
This wicked action could not brook the day.
These gloomy Lamps, by which they on were led,
Making their shadows follow at their back,
Which like to Mourners, wait upon the dead,
And as the deed, so are they ugly black,
Like to the dreadful Images of wrack;
These poor dym-burning lights, as all amazed,
As those deformed shades whereon they gazed.
Their clattering Arms, their Masters seem to chyde,
As they would reason wherefore they should wound.
And striking with the points from side to side,
As they were angry with the hollow ground,
Whose stony roof locked in their doleful found:
And hanging in the creeks, draw back again,
As vvilling them from murder to refrain.
Now, after masks and gallant reuelings,
The Queen unto the Chamber is with-drawne,
To whom a cleer-voyc'd Eunuch plays and sings;
And underneath a Canapy of Lawne,
Sparkling with pearl, like to the cheerful dawne,
Leaning upon the breast of Mortimer,
Whose voice more then the music pleased her ear.
A smock wrought with the purest Afric silk,
A work so fine, as might all work refine,
Her breast like strains of violets in milk,
O be thou henceforth Beauties living shrine,
And teach things mortal to be most divine.
Enclose Love in this Labyrinth about,
Where let him wander still, yet never get out.
Her golden hair, ah gold, thou art too base,
Were it not sin but once to name it hair,
Fal^ing as it would kiss her fairer face,
But no word fair enough for thing so fair,
Invention is too bare, to paynt her bare;
But where the pen fayles, Pensill cannot show it,
Nor can be known, unless the mind do know it.
She lays those fingers on his manly cheek,
The Gods pure scepters, and the darts of love,
Which with one tuch might make a Tiger meek,
Or might an Atlas easily remove:
That lilly hand, rich Natures wedding glove,
Which might beget life where was never none,
And put a spirit into the hardest stone.
The fire of precious wood, the lights perfume,
Whose perfect cleernes, on the painting shone,
As every thing with sweetness would consume,
And every thing had sweetness of his own,
The smell wherewith they lived, and always grown,
That light gave color on each thing it fell,
And to that color, the perfume gave smell.
Upon the sundry pictures they devise,
And from one thing they to an other run,
Now they commend that body, then those eyes,
How well that byrd, how well that flower was done,
The lively counterfetting of that sun:
The colors, the conceits, the shadowings,
And in that Art a thousand sundry things.
Looking upon proud Phaeton wrapd in fire,
The gentle Queen does much bewail his fall,
But Mortimer more praising his desire,
To loose his life or else to govern all:
And though (quoth he) he now be Fortunes thrall,
This must be said of him when all is done,
He perrish'd in the Chariot of the Sun.
Glaunsing upon Ixion, she does smile,
Who for his Juno took the cloud amiss;
Madam (quoth he) thus women can beguile,
And often we find in love, this error is,
Why friend (quoth she) thy hap is like to his:
That booteth not (quoth he) were he as I,
Jove would have been in monstrous jealousy.
(She says) Phoebus is too much forced by Art,
Nor can she find how his embraces be:
But Mortimer now takes the Paynters part,
It Is even thus great Empress, so (quoth he)
Thus twyne their arms, and thus their lips you see:
You Phoebus are, poor Hiacinthus I,
Kiss me till I revive, and now I die.
By this into the uttermost stately hall,
Is rudely entered this disordred rout,
And they within suspecting least of all,
Provide no guard to watch on them without,
Thus danger falls oft-times, when least we doubt:
In perrill thus we think our selves most sure,
And often in death fond men are most secure.
His trusty Neuill, and young Turrington,
Courting the Ladies, frolic void of fear,
Staying delights whilst time away does run,
What rare Emprezas he and he did bear,
Thus in the Lobby whilst they sporting wear:
Assayld on sudaine by this hellish train,
Both in the entrance miserably slain.
Even as from snow-topd Skidos frostie cleeues,
Some Norway Haggard, to her pitch does tower,
And down amongst the moore-bred Mallard drives,
And through the air, right down the wind does scower,
Commanding all that lie within her power:
Even such a skreame is hard within the vault,
Made by the Ladies at the first assault.
March has no arms, but the Queen in his arms,
To fair a sheeld to bear their fouler blows,
Enchayning his strong arms, in her sweet arms,
Enclosing them which often did her enclose,
O had he had but weapons like his woes:
Her presence had redoubled then his might,
To live and dye both in his soueraigns sight.
Villians (quoth he) I do protect the King,
Why Centaure-lyke do you disturb me this,
And interrupt the Gods at banqueting,
Where sacred Himen ever present is,
And pleasures are imparadizd in blis:
Where all they powers, their earthly heaven would take,
If here on earth they their abode should make.
Her presence pardons the offenders ill,
And makes the basest earthly thing divine,
There Is no decree can countermaund her will,
She like the Sun, does bless where she does shine,
Her Chamber is the most unspotted shrine:
How sacriligiously dare you despise,
And thus profane these hallowed liberties.
But Edward, if this enterprise be thine,
And thou an Actor here do play thy part,
I tell thee then base King thy Crown was mine,
And thou a King but of my making art.
And now poor worm since thou have taken heart,
Thou would hew down that pillar unto wrack,
Which has sustaynd Olimpus on his back.
What can he do, that is so hard beset?
The heauen-threatning Giants, heaven could tame,
Proud Mars is bound within an yron-net,
Alcides burnt in Nessus poysned flame,
Great Jove can shake the universal frame:
He that was wont to call his sword to aid,
It Is hard with him, when he must stand to plead.
O had thou in thy glory thus been slain,
All thy delights had been of easy rate,
But now thy fame yet never tuch'd with stayne,
Must thus be branded with thy hapless fate,
No man is happy till his lyfes last date:
His pleasures must be of a dearer price,
Poor Adam driven out of Paradise.
Half drowned in tears, she follows him: o tears,
Elixar like, turn all to pearl you weet,
To weep with her, the building scarce forbears,
Stones Metamorphizd tuch'd but with her feet,
And make the air for everlasting sweet:
Wringing her hands with pittious shreeking cries,
Thus vtters she her hard extreamities.
Edward (quoth she) let not his blood beshed,
Each drop of it is more worth then thy Crown,
What Region is in Europe limited,
Where does not shine, the Sun of his renown?
His sword has set Kings up, and thrown them down:
Thou know that Empires never have confind,
The large-spred bounds of his unconquered mind.
And if thou feed'st upon thy Fathers wrongs,
Make not revenge, to bring revenge on thee,
What torture thou inflict'st, to me belongs,
And what is due to death, is due to me,
Imagine that his wounds fresh bleeding be:
Forget thy birth, thy crown, thy love, thy Mother,
And in this breast thy sword in vengeance smother.
O let my hands held up appease this strife,
O let these knees at which thou often have stood,
Now kneel to thee, to beg my lives true life,
This womb that bare thee, breast that gave thee food,
Or let my blood yet purchase his dear blood:
O let my tears which never thing could force,
Constraynd by this, yet move thee to remorce.
But all in vain, still Edwards ghost appears,
And cries revenge, revenge, unto his Son,
And now the voice of woeful Kent he hears,
And bids him follow what he had begun,
Nor will they rest till execution done:
The very sight of him he deadly hated,
Sharpens the edge, his Mothers tears rebated.
To London now a woeful prisoner led,
London where he had tryumph'd with the Queen,
He follows now, whom many followed,
And scarce a man, who many men had been,
Seeing with grief who had in pomp been seen:
Those eyes which often have at his greatness gazed,
Now at his fall must stand as all amazed.
Oh misery, where once thou art possessed,
How soon thy faint infection alters kind,
And like a Cyrce turnest man to beast,
And with the body do transform the mind,
That can in fetters our affections bind:
That he whose back once bare the Lions skin,
Whipped to his task, with Iole must spin.
Edward and March unite your angry spirits,
Become new friends of ancient Enemies,
He was thy death, and he thy death inherits,
How well you consort in your miseries,
And in true time tune your adversities:
Fortune gave him, what she to Edward gave,
Not so much as thy end but he will have.
At Westminster a Parliament decreed,
Under pretense of safety to the Crown,
Where to his fatal end they now proceed,
All working hard to dig this Mountain down,
With his own greatness that is ouer-growne:
The King, the Earl of Kent, the Spensers fall,
Upon his head with vengeance thundering all.
The five Articles whereupon Mortimer is condemned.
The death of Edward never is forgot,
The sign at Stanhope to the Enemies,
Ione of the Towers marriage to the Scot,
The Spensers coin seaz'd to his treasuries,
Th'assuming of the wards and Liveries:
These Articles they urge which might him grieve,
Which for his creed, he never did believe.
Oh dire revenge, when thou in time art raked
From out the ashes which preserve thee long,
And lightly from thy cinders art awaked,
Fuel to feed on, and revived with wrong,
How son from sparks the greatest flames are sprung:
Which does by Nature to his top aspire,
Whose massy greatness once kept down his fire.
Debarred from speech to answer in his case,
His judgment public, and his sentence past,
The day of death set down, the time, and place,
And thus the lot of all his fortune cast,
His hope so slow, his end draw on so fast:
With pen and ynke, his drooping spirit to wake,
Now of the Queen his leave he thus does take.
MOst mighty Empress, daine thou to peruse
These Swan-like Dirges of a dying man:
Not like those Sonnets of my youthful Muse,
In that sweet season when our love began,
When at the Tylt thy princely glove I wan:
Whereas my thundering Courser forward set,
Made fire to fly from Herfords Burgonet.
This King which thus makes have unto my death,
Madam, you know, I loved him as mine own,
And when I might have grasped out his breath,
I set him easily in his Fathers throne,
And forced the rough storms back when they have blown;
But these forgot, and all the rest forgiven,
Our thoughts must be continually on heaven.
And for the Crown whereon so much he stands,
Came bastard William but himself on shore?
Or had he not our Fathers conquering hands,
Which in the field our houses Ensign bore,
Which his proud Lions for their safety wore,
Which raged at Hastings like that furious Lake,
From whose stern waves our glorious name we take?
Oh had he charged me mounted on that horse
VVhereon I marched before the walls of Gaunt,
And with my Lance there showed an English force,
Or vanquished me, a valiant combattant,
Then of his conquest had he cause to vaunt;
But he whose eyes durst not behold my shield,
Perceived my Chamber fitter then the field.
I have not served Fortune like a slave,
My mind has suited with her mightines,
I have not hid her tallent in a grave,
Nor burying of her bounty made it less:
My fault to God and heaven I must confess;
He twice offends, who sin in flattery bears,
Yet every hour he dies, which ever fears.
I cannot quake at that which others fear,
Fortune and I have tugged together so;
What Fate imposes, we perforce must bear,
And I am grown familiar with my vvoe,
Used so often against the stream to row;
Yet my offense my conscience still does grieve,
Which God (I trust) in mercy will forgive.
I am shut up in silence, nor must speak,
Nor Kingdoms lease my life, but I must die,
I cannot weep and if my heart should break,
Nor am I senseless of my misery,
My heart so full, has made mine eyes so dry;
I need not cherrish griefs, too fast they grow,
VVoe be to him that dies of his own woe.
I pay my life, and then the debt is paid,
With the reward, the offense is purged and gone,
The storms will calm when once the spirit is laid;
Envy does cease, wanting to feed upon,
We have one life, and so our death is one,
Nor in the dust mine honor I inter,
Thus Caesar dyed, and thus dies Mortimer.
Live sacred Empress, and see happy days,
Be ever loved, with me die all our hate,
Let never ages sing but of thy praise,
My blood shall pacify the angry Fate,
And cancel thus our sorrows long-liu'd date:
And treble ten times longer last thy fame,
Then that strong Tower thou calledst by my name.
To Nottingham this Letter brought unto her,
Which is endorsed with her glorious style,
She thinks the title yet again does woo her,
And with that thought her sorrows does beguile.
Smyling on that, thinks that on her does smyle;
She kissing it, (to counteruaile her pain,)
Tuching her lip, it gives the kiss again.
Fair workmanship, quoth she, of that fair hand,
All-moouing organ, sweet spheare-tuning kay,
The Messenger of Jove's sleep-charming wand,
Pully which draw'st the curtain of the Day,
Pure Trophies, reard to guide on valurs way,
What paper-blessing Charrecters are you,
Whose lovely form, that louelier engine drew?
Turning the Letter, sealed she does it find,
With those rich Arms borne by his glorious name,
VVhere-with this dreadful evidence is signed:
O badge of honor, greatest mark of fame,
Brave shield, quoth she, which once from heaven came,
Fair robe of triumph, Jove's celestial state,
To all immortal praises consecrate.
Going about to rip the sacred seal,
Which cleaues, least clouds too soon should dim her eyes,
As loath it were her sorrows to reveal,
Quoth she, thy Master taught thee secrecies:
The soft wax, with her fingers tuch does rise,
She asks it, who taught thee thus to kiss?
I know, quoth she, thy Master taught thee this?
Opening the Letter, Empress she does reed,
At which a blush from her fair cheeks arose,
And with Ambrozia still, her thoughts does feed,
And with a seeming joy does paint her woes,
Then to subscribed Mortimer she goes;
March following it, o March, great March she cries,
Which speaking word, even seemingly replies.
Thus has she ended, yet she must begin,
Even as a fish playing with a bayted hook,
Now she begins to swallow sorrow in,
And Death does show himself at every look,
Now reads she in her lives accounting Book:
And finds the blood of her lost friend had paid,
The deep expenses which she forth had laid.
Now with an host of woeful words assayl'd,
As every letter wounded like a dart,
As every one would boast, which most preuayl'd,
And every one would pierce her to the heart,
Rethoricall in woe, and using Art:
Reasons of grief, each sentence does infer,
And euere line, a true remembrancer.
Grief makes her read, yet grief still bids her leave,
Ore-charg'd with grief, she neither sees nor hears,
Her sorrows do her senses quite deceive,
The words do blind her eyes, the sound her ears,
And now for vescues does she use her tears:
And when a line she loosely ouer-past,
The drops do tell her where she left the last.
O now she sees, was ever such a sight?
And seeing, cursed her sorrow-seeing eye,
And says, she is deluded by the light,
Or is abused by the Orthography:
Or poynted false, her schollershyp to try.
Thus when we fondly sooth our own desires,
Our best conceits do prove the greatest liars.
Her trembling hand, as in a Fever shakes,
VVherwith the paper does a little stir,
Which she imagins, at her sorrow quakes,
And pitties it who she thinks pitties her:
And moning it, bids it that grief refer;
Quoth she, I Will rain down showers of tears on thee,
When I am dead, weep them again on me.
Quoth she, with odors were thy body burned,
As is The Arabian byrd against the sun,
Again from cynders yet thou should be turned,
And so thy life another age should run,
Nature envying it so soon was done:
Amongst all byrds, one only of that strain,
Amongst all men, one Mortimer again.
I will preserve thy ashes in some Vrne,
Which as a relic, I will only save,
Which mixed with my tears as I do mourn,
Within my stomach shall their burial have,
Although deserving a far better grave;
Yet in that Temple shall they be preserved,
Where, as a Saint thou ever have been served.
Be thou trans-form'd unto some sacred tree,
Whose precious gum may cure the fainting heart,
Or to some herb yet turned may thou be,
Whose juice applied may ease the strongest smart,
Or flower, whose leaves thy virtues may impart,
Or stellified on Pegase lofty crest,
Or shyning on the Nemian Lions breast.
I think the Gods could take them mortal shapes,
As all the world may by thy greatness gather,
And Jove in some of his light wanton scapes,
Committed pretty cusnage with thy father,
Or else thou wholly art celestial rather:
Else never could it be, so great a mind,
Could seated be, in one of earthly kind.
And if, as some affirm, in every star,
There be a world, then must some world be thine,
Else shall thy ghost invade their bounds with war,
If such can manage arms as be divine,
That here thou had no world, the fault was mine:
And graceless Edward kinling all this fire,
Trod in the dust of his unhappy sier.
It was not Charles that made Charles what he was,
Whereby he quickly to that greatness grew,
Nor struck such terror which way he did pass,
Nor our old Grand-siers glory did renew,
But it thy valor was, which Charles well knew:
Which has repulst his Enemies with fear,
When they but heard the name of Mortimer.
In Books and Arms consisted thy delight,
And thy discourse of Camps, and grounds of state,
No Apish fan-bearing Hermophradite,
Coch-carried midwyfe, weak, effeminate,
Quilted and ruft, which manhood ever hate:
A Car^ when in counsel thou did sit,
A Hercules in executing it.
Now she begins to curse the King her Son,
The Earl of March then comes unto her mind,
Then she with blessing ends what she begun,
And leaves the last part of the curse behind,
Then with a vow she her revenge does bind:
Unto that vow she ads a little oath,
Thus blessing cursing, cursing blessing both.
For pen and ink she calls her mayds without,
And Edwards dealing will in grief discover,
But straight forgetting what she went about,
She now begins to write unto her lover,
Yet interlyning Edwards threatenings over:
Then turning back to read what she had writ,
She teyrs the paper, and condemns her wit.
Thus with the pangs out of this trance ar^ysed,
As water some-time wakeneth from a swound,
Comes to her self the agony apeysed,
As when the blood is cold, we feel the wound,
And more, and more, since she the cause had found,
Thus unto Edward with revenge she goes,
And he must bear the burden of her woes.
I would my lap had been some cruel Rack,
His Cradell Phalaris burning-bellyed Bull,
And Nessus shyrt been put upon his back,
His Blanket of some Nilus Serpents wool,
His Dug with juice of Acconite been full:
The song which luld him, when to sleep he fell,
Some Incantation or some Magique spell.
And thus King Edward since thou art my Child,
Some thing of force to thee I must bequeath,
March of my hearts true love has thee beguild,
My curse unto thy bosom do I breath,
And here inuoke the wretched spirits beneath:
To see all things performed to my intent,
Make them ore-seers of my Testament.
And thus within these mighty walls enclosed,
Even as the Owls so hateful of the light,
Unto repentance ever more disposed,
Here spend my days until my last days night;
And henceforth odious unto all men's sight,
Fly every small remembrance of delight,
A penitential mournful conuertite.
FINIS.

