THE SICKE-MANS Catechism, OR Pathway to felicity.

Wherein is contained great variety of sound directions and most s^^^^^e
cosolations Collected and con^ri^ed into Questions and Answers, out of the best
Divines of our time, BY THOMAS DRAXE Minister of Gods Word, Whereunto is
annexed two most comfortable and powrefull prayers.

LONDON. Imprinted for Henry Holland, and are to be sold by I. W. at Christ
Church door

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL LEARned, religious and Martial Gentleman, Sir
Richard Warbarton Knight, grace, peace, and plentiful increase of all
holiness and happiness.
AMongst all the temporary and ordinary penalties and punishments of ma^s
transgression: surely, sicknesses, diseases, malladies, aches, yea most of all,
death it self, together with all their several accidents, and temptations,
are most grievous, yrkesome, and unwelcome. For they are simply in themselves,
and in their own nature considered, plagues and curses, and they produce
fearful effects, in the unregenerate, namely impatiency, unquiet nesse,
horror, blasphemy, desperation, and the practice of unlawful cures and
remedies. Wherefore it is (right worshipful) a work of no mean art, skill and
experience, soundly to catechize the sick, to rectify their judgments, to
bring the^ to a true sense and confidence of sin, to begette faith in them, to
cause them in hope and patiency to wait upon God, and to prepare them to dye
well and blessedly; but it is opus and labor. It requires the tongue of the
learned, and a messenger (or interpreter) one of a thousand, such as have bin
of late times Mr Spineus, and Mr Perkins, two bright and glo rious stars in the
French and English Firmament, but now Saints in heaven, who have learnedly and
largely trauaild in this point.

Wherefore it may s^eme a needles matter for any man to write further of this
subject, and my self may be thought morebolde then wise, in presuming to put
forth any new matter, or to change or ad ought: yet because no man's work is
absolutely perfect, and for that variety of treatises is both delightsome and
desirable, and because the frail memory, and the simple capacity of very many
cannot comprehend large and profound discourses, but best profits by short
and easy instructions.

I have upon these grounds, drawn and contracted the large treatises of the
aboue-named Authors into plain and compendious questions and answers, with
diverse additions and illustrations of mine own, hoping that in the dilligent
reading hereof, the ignorant shall get knowledge, the wavering find
resolution, the distressed receive comfort, the presumptious be humbled, the
tempted armed against Satan's assaults, and all that are well affected, be
prepared for God, and directly guided to eternal glory. Wherefore upon this
expectation, and also induced by the earnest request of a much respected
friend, I have thought good to publish it, and upon due consideration, to
consecrate and commend it to your favorable protection and patronage. For
first, you are very learned, and will judge well, you are most kind and
courteous, and will take all in good part, and you are unfeignedly relligious, and
will give intertainment to any matter of godliness. Secondly you in an
heroical zeal and r^solution, have both in the time of Queen Elizabeth a
Princess of most renowned memory and of incomparable excellency, and sithence,
fought for Christ and his blessed Gospel, and therefore what thing more
pleasing unto you then matters of religion and conscience? Lastly having
received so manifold kindnesses from you, I can by none other means better
testify my thankful heart. Thus entreating your worship to read, accept off,
and make use of my Catechism, and yielding you many thanks for all your
favors, I hear most humbly take my leave.

God almighty who has given you recovery of health, and increase of spiritual
comfort in a religious City, perfect both the one and the other in you; bless
and protect you and your most godly and virtuous Lady, grant you both a long
and blessed life in this world, and consumation of holiness and happiness in
the world to come.

February. 12. 1609. Your Worships in the Lord at command THOMAS DRAXE.

A Table of the principal points contained in this Catechism.
The 1. Chapter.
Sickness described. The causes of it. Objections answered. The way to find out
secret sins. The ends why God ^mposeth sicknesses. The diverse effects of them
according to their subjects. Certain rules of comforting the sick. The first
rule what? The benefit of it.
The 2. Chapter.
Sin the cause of sickness. Sin to be confessed. Sin of omission. The
knowledge of the law a mean to find out sin. Gods judgments to be made
known to the sick To be senseless of Gods judgments how dangerous?
The 3. Chapter,
Persuasion of Gods love and presence in sickness, necessary. The greatest
sins pardonable, and pardoned in them that repent. Objections of other men's
unworthiness. Objections against want of feeling. Faith never wholly lost.
General calamities no prejudice to the salvation of the Godly. Objection of a
man's own unworthiness answered.
The 4. Chapter.
The sick to be prepared against death. What death is. How brought into the
world. Why were Adam and Eve spared. Why Enoch and Elias were translated alive
into heaven?
The 6. Chapter.
Bodily death what? Why the time is unknown? Why the Godly die? Q. What
spiritual death is. The several degrees of it. Sundry objections and
exceptions against death confuted. Q. Whether sudden death be simply evil? Q.
Whether all that kill themselves, be certainly damned?
The 7. Chapter.
The privative benefits of death, or the evil it freeth us from. The positive
benefit of it. The temporary death of the body no curse to the Godly. The body
shall rise and why. Whether it be lawful to mourn for the dead and how?
The 8. Chapter.
The way to happiness contained and declared in the scriptures. Preparation
against death what? The necessity of it. When to be performed? The example of
some that repented at their death is no rule for us to delay our repentance.
The 9. Chapter.
The meditation of death necessary. It is very profitable. The obiectes of it.
The 10. Chapter.
Wherein the sting of death lies? Quest. How known and taken away?
The 11. Chapter.
The first degree of entering into eternal life. The diverse kinds of it.
The 12. Chapter.
Why and how a man must enure himself to die well.
The 13. Chapter.
Preparation must be speedy and hearty and why?
The 14. Chapter.
Offalse preparation. Auricular confession superstitious, needeles, impossible.
For ^he sick man to receive the Sacrament it is not (simply) necessary.
Objections answered, Extreme unction not now necessary,
The 15. Chapter.
Reconciliation and the renewing of faith and repentance toward GOD,
necessary. Thanksgiving necessary.
The 16. Chapter.
The sick must have a care of his soul. Fear of death how good? How we are
to be armed against it? Practices and Meditations against it.
The 17. Chapter.
Phisike lawful and necessary. It is means of preservation of life. What
Physicians are to be chosen. Preparation of soul and body in the use of the
means, The end of Phisike.
The 18. Chapter.
The sick must sorgiue and desire forgiveness of others. The Magistrates, the
Ministers, and the masters of the familes duty. The making of a will necessary.
According to what rules it must be made.
The 19. Chapter.
To die in faith necessary and what it is. To die in obedience necessary and
what it is. The end of them that die well is blessed. Consolations against the
imagined calamities of our posterity, viz. wife and chilldren Consolations
against loss of honor, profit, and pleasure in this life. Death how far
forth to be feared. Q. How far forth not to be feared? Whether that a man may
lawfully, desire death. In what respects? The sum of the whole treatise.
The Sick-mans Pathway.
The first Chapter, concerning sickness.
Question. WHat is sickness?

Ans. It is, according to Philosophy and Physic, a privation of health, or
an ill disposition and passion in the body contrary to nature.

Qu. But how define you it according to divinity?

Ans. It is Gods rod and instrument to chastise us for our sins, and to put
us in mind of our mortality, it is the herbinger and messenger of death, and
by virtue of Christ's death, it is a narrow and speedy passage to everlasting
life.

Q. From whence, or from what causes do sicknesses and diseases proceed?

A. They proceed from God as the inflicter and imposer of them, for he is
Amos. 3. 6.
the author of the evil of punishment; Ioh. 5. 14.
but they arise from sin, as the de^eruing and procuring cause. Psalm. 39.
Leuit. 26. 16, Deuteronomy. 28. verse. 22. 23. 24.

Q. How can God, that is simplye good, yea goodness it self, be the cause of
evil, namely, sickness, diseases, pain, etc.

A. Gods goodness and justice does, and may, very well consort together in the
believers, for as God in his justice does correct his children for their
disobedience, so does he temper and qualify it with his mercy and goodness,
that these afflictions are finite, tolerable, and tend both to the temporal
and eternal good and profit of his children. Psalm. 25. v. 10 Romans 8. v. 28.

Q. What use are we to make of this point?

A. We must first descend into our selves, acknowledge our sin and
wickedness, yea and condemn our selves for it. 1. Cor. 11. 31.

Secondly, we must be so far of from fretting, murmuring and repining against
God, that we must justify God in all his chasticements, and not to require the
reason of them, for they are always good and holy, albeit we do not always
see the particular reason of them.

Thirdly, we committing our selves to Gods will, must earnestly entreat the
Lord to restore us to our former health; or else to receive us to his
everlasting kingdom.

Obi. But God has in his beloved Son Christ Jesus, forgiven, yea and taken
away the guilt, dominion and curse of sin, which is the cause of their
sicknesses, and why then does he not withal remove the effect, viz.
sickness, diseases, etc?

A. Albeit the guilt, curse, and dominion of sin be removed from the
believers, yet the relics and stumpes of sin remain, and inherent
corruption is but in part abolished, and therefore so long as we live in this
world; the 2. Sam. 12.
Lord must needs, (more or less) one way or other, fatherly chastise and
exercise us. 1. Cor. 11. 31. Heb. 12. v. 6. and 8.

Obi. 2. But Gods children cannot always find out the peculiar sins that
are the proper and immediate causes of their sicknesses and diseases?

A. Yet not withstanding, we must suspect, accuse and condemn our selves, and
withal justify and clear the Lord; for there is some secret and hidden sin
of pride, worldliness, lust, envy, vanity, oppression, etc. for which we
are corrected, albeit it be not presently made known unto us.

Q. What course must we take to find out this Achan or secret corruption?

A. We must (as I will in the next Chapter more fully show, examine our selves
by the strict rule of Gods law.

Secondly, we must entreat the Lord by prayer to reveal the sin unto us.
Thirdly and lastly, we must take notice of the checkes of our conscience, yea
and Psalm. 16. 7.
the taunts and reproaches of our enemies.

Q. What are the principal ends why God lays sicknesses, diseases, aches,
etc. upon his children?

A. They are principally these four, to wit, mortification and prevention of
sin; trial and exercise of Gods graces in us; manifestation of Gods glorr;
and lastly our salvation and eternal happiness.

Q. But to speak of each of these ends particularly (yet briefly) how does
God mortify and prevent sin by sickness?

A. First God does hereby declare his justice and anger against sin past, and
present, that his children might be more Job. 13. 26 Lam 3 41. Psalm. 30. v. 6.
effectually stirred up to search them out, consider of them, and be sorry for
them.

Secondly, God hereby does correct the pride of prosperity, and remove all
vain confidence in carnal wisdom, riches, beauty, friends; that we may
wait patiently and only upon his power, truth, and promises, and learn to
seek for heavenly things, so that by this his correction, he takes away the
mist of error from our eyes, purges our hearts from the dross of corruption,
and fanneth us from the chafe of sin, and hereby prepares us either for
health or heaven.

Q. Does God by sickness, and the like afflictions prevent sin to come?

A. Yes certainly: thus pride was prevented in blessed Paul. 2 Cor. 12. ver. 7.
and 8 Security in David Psalm. 30. 6. 7. and neglect of preparation in the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. v. 31.

Q. What is the second end of Gods chasticements?

A. To try and make known to themselves Deuteronomy. 8. 2. and 13. 3.
and to others their faith, hope, patience, repentance, constancy, yea to
exercise, quicken, and increase in them these and other graces, that they may,
be thankful to God for them, and may be as mirrours and lamps unto others.

Q. Are not also by this trial and exercise, decayed graces recovered?

A. It is most certain; for hereby, deadness and drowsinesse of heart is
Cant. 5. 5. 6 Hos. 5. 15.
cured; and men are moved more fervently to seek and pray unto God then they
did before, Psalm. 30. 6.

Q. What is the third end?

A. The declaration and manifestation of Gods power, glory and goodness in
their deliverance, either by life or death. John 9. verse. 3.

Q. What is the last end?

A. After that God has reformed, humbled and exercised them, and made them to
rely wholly upon him, and to wait and wish for their salvation, to bring them
by death into the heavenly Canaan, where they shall have immediate fellowship,
and reign with Christ for euer-more.

Q Seeing that sicknesses, diseases, and the like chasticements have such
comfortable and blessed effects and events in Gods children, what is the
reason, why they should not be the same in the wicked and ungodly?

A. The difference lies first in their persons, the elect are accepted of God,
and therefore like the good gold, they are made more pure and bright by
visitations and afflictions; but the persons of the wicked and unbelievers are
not accepted with God, and therefore like dross they are not purified but
consumed by the fire of affliction. Secondly, in his secret counsel he never
intended the amendment and salvation of the reprobate, neither do they
reprobate ever by pure means and in pure sort, ever intend the same, but the
case is far otherwise with Gods children, whom alone God has pre-ordained to
salvation Romans 8.
and to the means thereof, and whom he makes (outward) instruments of their
own salvation. 1. Ioh. 5. v. 18.

Q. Is there any certain form, rule, or way, to comfort and instruct the sick?

A. Yes, for God in wisdom and mercy, has ordained a mean and medicine for
every distress and temptation.

Q Where is this form and direction contained?

A. Generally and abundantly in the books of the old and new testament, for
these contain sufficient rules, examples ^say. 8. 20.
and directions of comforts and instructions, 2. Tim. 3. 16. and 17.

Q. What is our duty herein?

A. To collect and compare them together, or receive them so gathered and
compared by the godly learned, and then to apply them to our own uses and
occasions.

Q. What is the first general rule serving for consolation?

A. We in our sickness and the like visitations, must be persuaded, that all
sicknesses, diseases, and infirmities, yea, and all their particular
circumstances, whether we respect, time, place, person, (...). 33. 15
or the quality, manner, continuance, and remoouall of them: proceed and are
sent of God, and depend upon and are ordered by his only providence. Amos 3.
6. Lament. 3. 41. Psalm. 39. v. 10. and 11.

Q. What benefit shall we reap and receive by this persuasion?

A. We shall hereby be the better enabled to undergo our visitations with
patience and comfort, and shall learn the more obediently in all things to
submit our wills, to Gods divine will and pleasure.

The second Chapter. Sin the cause and original of all diseases and
sicknesses, must be found out confessed and bewailed.
Question. What is the second thing whereof the sick must be resolved of
before he can be capable, and so partaker of comfort.

A. He must be resolved that sin from whence all sicknesses and diseases,
both of soul and body have their beginning, and which is the malignant matter
of it, must be removed and taken away, before sickness the effect of it can
cease.

Q. By what means is sin abolished?

A. Only by Gods mercy in Christ Jesus. Romans 3. v. 24. 25. 26. Act. 4. 12


Qu. To whom are sins forgiven?

A. To all the elect and them only, for Christ with all his merits and saving
graces is proper to them, and they Isay 43. ve. 25.
alone in time believe and repent. Act. Ier. 31. 34
13. 48.

Q. When are the sins of Gods elect forgiven?

A. They are in the decree of God forgiven from everlasting; but then only
actually and in our sense and apprehension, when we truly believe and repent.
(...). Sam. 12, 12. 13.
Act. 3.

Q. That we may be partakers of remission of sin, what conditions are there
required on our part?

Answ. Two conditions principally. First freely and truly to confess our
sins unto God, with contrition of Psalm. 51, ve. 3, and 4.
heart, and to acknowledge that we are worthy of all, both temporal and
eternal plagues and punishments. Dan. 9, 6 Luke 18, 13 Job. 19. 25


Secondly we must firmly believe that Christ is our only and all sufficient
redeemer and mediator, and we must by the eye of faith behold, and by the hand
of faith apply the promises of the Gospel, particularly to our selves and
souls.

Que. Is confession of sin necessary for the obtaining of the pardon of sin?

A. It is simply necessary, for it is the very foundation and first degree of
repentance.

Secondly it is the way and mean of our justification before God, for he will
never pardon us until we accuse our selves, nor pronounce and accept us for
just until we condemn our selves. Pro. 28.

Lastly, without confession of sin no pardon can be procured. 1 Ioh. 1. (...).


Q Is the sick man to make confession of all his sins unto God in particular?

Answe. Yes, if he be convinced in conscience, and know them to be sins, and
especially having not repented of them before; whether they be sins of
commission, or of omission^: but for his unknown sins, which are the most in
number, he must only confess them generally, and it suffices, Psalm. 19, 11.

Q. But are sins of leaving good things, and duties unperformed to be
confessed, such as are neglect of prayer, want of zeal in Gods cause, defect
of charity and compassion: omitting of thanksgiving.

A. Yes verily, as we have examples in Daniel, Paul, and others, Dani. 9. v.
13. Romans 7. v. 15. Secondly, we offend as much in omitting of these, seeing
Gods law does require them, as in committing evil. Thirdly, the elect are
notably herein distinguished from the reprobate, for the reprobate do not
discern, much less do they confess their particular wants.

Q. But how shall we in our sickness make a true confession of our st^nes to
God, seeing that there are in us so many remainders of blindness, ignorance,
and self-love?

A. We must set before our eyes the law of God, and by it and every precept and
circumstance of it, try and examine all our thoughts, words, life, actions.

Q. Why so?

A. Because God has ordained it for that end. For it is a true and perfect
Psalm. 119. 59
glass wherein we may see and behold all our ways. It is a light to discover
Iam. 1. 23.
all our blindness and works of darkness.

Lastly, it is an exact and exquistte rule, according to which all our
opinions, purposes, and practices, are to be Isay. 8. 20
tried, examined and directed.

Q. But how come we to be so blind, erroneous, rebellious, sinful and
miserable, that we have need of, and are referred to the law and word of God,
to sound and try our selves by it?

A. Through the sin and fall of our first parents, Adam and Eve, who freely
assenting unto the persuasion of the devil, did eat the forbidden fruit, and
so corrupted and stained themselves and their posterity. In so much that their
posterity sinning in them, and also adding continual and innumerable
transgressions, lost and defaced Gods image, and so b^came mortal, miserable
and subject to et^rnall damnation.

Q. What shall we find by examining our selves according to Gods law?

Ans. That we have all sinned, that we are utterly by nature deprived of all
Romans 3, ver. 23.
goodness, and prone unto all evil continually, and by consequence, Children
Genesis 6, (...). 5 Ephesians. 2, 3
of wrath, and heirs of condemnation.

Ques. Is it sufficient to examine our selves, life and actions, according to
the letter of the law?

An. No, except withal the spiritual nature, intent and meaning of the law be
considered and observed, for it requires purity of heart and thoughts, and
perfect obedience both in omitting evil, and in doing good. Romans 7. 15, and 16.

Q. But is the bare inspection and considering of our selves in the law, a
sufficient means to bring us to the true knowledge of our selves and a due
confession of sinn^?

Ans. It is sufficient in it self, but not in respect of our corrupt
disposition: for we are to favorable and partial in ^udging our selves, but
especially in prosperity: and therefore God does, and must, sometimes, by his
rod of correction, remove the mist of error from our eyes: round us in the
ear: and bring Job. 33. ve. 16. 17, 18.
our sins to our rem^mbrance. Ho^ea 5, ver 15.

Q But why is man more punished with sickness and other afflictions, then all
other creatures besides?

A. Because, all other creatures retain (for the most part) the order wherein
they were first created, but only man is become degenerate, rebellious, and an
heteroclite: ^o that man may justly say of himself that which David did when
he had numbered the people, it is I that have sinned and committed evil, but
these creatures what have they 2 Chr. 21, 17.
done?

Secondly, the brute and dumb creatures are (in their kind) more sensitius of
the bondage and corruption that Romans 8. ve^. 20, and 22.
our sins have brought upon them, and more (in expectation and desire of
deliverance) groan under them, then we our selves are, or do. For where are
our groans tears, sackcloth, ashes, shame, compunction of heart and
repentance?

Q. What further helps have we to direct us in this duty?

A. Not only to pray unto God, to reveal our sins unto us, and to mark the
checkes of our consciences, and the reuilings of our enemies (as we have before
showed:) but also to frequent those that be sick, and to behold Gods
chasticements upon others, and especially lazars and vleerous persons, that
hereby we may take notice of the ugliness of sin, and our own deformity in
Gods sight, that we may the more pity the distressed, and be stirred up to
be more thankful to God for his benefits received.

The second Section.
Q. When all these means and helps of confession have been used, what further
course is to be taken with the sick man?

A. He must by doctrine, admonition, and by laying open unto him Gods
judgments, be made to see the guilt and desert of sin, the curse of the law,
the torment of an ill conscience, the unspeakable wrath of God, and the
fearful and most accursed state of the damned.

Q. But is it not a most blessed state for a man to be always merry and
frolike, to follow his pleasures, and to feel no sin, or pain of sin at
all?

A. No certainly: for of all plagues it Iere. 5. v. 3.
is the greatest to be pricked and not to feel it, and to be smitten and not
to be humbled. And therefore as he that goes blind-folded to execution is not
happy, but most miserable: so neither the senseless and regenerate sinner is
at Hell mouth, and discerns it not.

Secondly, as those maladies and diseases, (especially which are certain
forerunners of death at hand) are most dangerous that are least felt: so those
sins, whereof we have no touch, remorse, nor repentance, are most to be
feared, for they send men unawares, posting and packing to hell.

The third Chapter.
1. The doctrine of faith. 2. The infinite and unmeasurable mercies of God.
Ques. When the sick person has thus applied Gods law to himself, arraigned
himself before the bar of Gods judgment, and made a true confession of his
sins, and has been brought to true contrition, what is in the second place
required of him?

An. He must by a firm faith be persivaded of Gods gracious presence and
everlasting love toward him, that his sins are pardonable, and that Christ
has by his sufferings, freed and delivered us from the power of satan, slavery
of sin, fear of death and condemnation, and that he also has by his actual
obedience, imputed unto us and apprehended by faith purchased unto us and
prepared for us everlasting glory and happiness.

Object. But how can the sicke-man be persuaded of Gods favor and mercy, seeing
that his sins are so great and so innumerable?

Ans. Albeit his and our sins quoad nos, in regard of our selves be heinous
yea and vncountable: yet compared with GODS endless and unmeasurable mercies
in Christ they are but few and finite.

For his mercies are infinite his compassions fail not, and with him Lam. 3.
ver. 22.
is ple^teous redemption, in so much (as we may see in Manasses, the lost Psalm.
130. 6.
son, Paul, Mary Magda^ene and diverse others) ^here sin has abounded, Romans
5. ve. 20.
grace has a ^ounded more.

Questi. What further reasons have you to euince and demonstrate the ^nitenesse
of Gods mercy?

Answ. First, Gods purpose in giving and sending his Son to cure and redeem
the world; and in giving his Apostles commission and commandment to preach
repentance and forgiveness of sins to all nations, can never his void and
fru^rate.

Secondly, the nativity: life, doctrine, miracles, obedience, death,
resurrection and ascension and intercession of Christ, yea and the sacraments,
of baptism and the Lords supper, which are only in^nded and effectual for
the calling, conversion and salvation of GODS elect, can never want their scope
and proper end.

Q. What conclude you hence?

A. Though one man had committed all the sins that be in the world (the sin
only committed against the holy Ghost, whereof no man can possibly repent, and
which no elect can possibly commit, being excepted) he must not despair of
Gods mercy, but repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, and
turn to the Lord, and then (...). (...). v. 18
though they were as Crimson, they shall be made as whit^ as Snow: and though
they were red like Scarlet, they shall be as wool.

Q. But not-with-standing all that has been said, many doubts, difficulties,
imperfections and transgressions so trouble my mind, that I cannot be
persuaded of the infinite extent of Gods mercies.

A. Propound your doubts and scruples, and I will do my best endeavor to
remove them.

The Sick-man. I fear, that the world being so wicked, and men (generally) so
ungodly, profane, and irreligious, that I shall fare the worse for their sake.

Minister.

Thou have no cause to fear, for the Genesis 7. (...). etc.
impenitencie of the whole world, could not prejudice the salvation of Noah and
Genesis 8. v. 1
his family, nor the horrible sins of the Sodomites deprive Lot of Gods
favor and protection.

Secondly, the godly are to answer for their own sins only, which are all
pardoned in Christ, and they live by their own faith. Gal. 2. 20. Romans 1. 17.

Thirdly, as h^e that wilfully closes his eyes, that he may not behold the
Simile.
sunne-light, cannot deprive him of the light of the sun who opens his
eyes: so another man's unworthiness and wilfulness, cannot hinder thee (if
thou be prepared by the spirit of God) from beholding and enjoying Gods
bottomless mercies.

2. Objection. But I find and feel in my self many wants, errors,
imperfections, ye^ and gross offenses.

Minister:

A. Dear brother, be not discouraged, thou have more cause of triumph then of
terror. For first thou committest not that shine (namely of desperate malice
against God) and the known principles of Christian faith) unto death.

Secondly, thou feel, yea and art grieved for thy sin, which is no work
of nature, but of grace and regeneration.

Thirdly, the seed and root of grace in Gods elect, is never wholly taken away,
for Gods gifts are without repentance, and Christ's int^rcession, for their
increase and preservation in grace, is always effectual Ioh. 11. v. 42.

The Sick-man. But my faith is oftentimes dead, and without all life and
motion, how (...) can I be assured of Gods mercy?

The Minister.

Thy faith is not extinct, but only for the time ouer-clowded with the mist of
^sal. 30. v. 7. 8. and 9,
sin, and covered under the ashes of infirmity: it is like to a tree, which
in (...) winter season, albeit it bring forth neither (...), flower, nor
fruit, yet it has life and s^ppe at the root, which (...) the spring time
will ascend up and appear.

Secondly, God respects rather the quality of faith then the quantity; if
it be a true faith though as little as a grain of Mustard seed, God accepts
of it: for one drop and dram of faith, 1. Ioh. (...).
is of m^e force to save then an Ocean sea of sin and corruption to condemn.

Thirdly and lastly, faith without present joy and feeling, is more forcible
and prevailing then faith with it, for it only relyeth upon Gods power, truth
and promises, yea, when God shows himself an enemy to us, and seems to
kill us, we by it believe in God, and by faith wait on him, whereas it is an
easy matter for a man in the apprehension Job. 13, 1^ Mat. 15, v. 23. ad 29.
of sensible comfort and joy, to believe.

The fourth objection, The sick-man. But the fearful judgments of God, such as
of late years have bin that most inf^tious and destroying pestilence, the
horrible and vn-matchable Gunnepowder treason: the unheard of breach of the
sea, and inundation of waters, the late extreme and killing frost, this
present pinching and unexpected dearth; unseasonable wether, and many other
public and private judgments upon Church and commonwealth, which I see and
hear of, do much dismay me, and cause me to doubt of Gods mercy.

Minister.

A. True it is, that these and diverse other punishments have been executed
upon us, for the neglect, yea contempt of the blessed word of God, and the
powerful ministry of it, for our want of zeal against the enemies of the
truth, for profanation of the Sabbath, for oppression of the poor, for
blasphemy, for hypocrisy, and for licentious living, etc. But
notwithstanding, if there Genesis 7. 1,
be but one good man in a generation, he shall not for the multitude of
transgressors be deprived of Gods mercies, but find comfort in the greatest
plagues and punishments whatsoever.

Secondly, though being once by faith ingrafted and incorporated into Christ,
yea and married unto Christ the author and fountain of life and happiness,
thou can never miscarry nor perish. For even as the Disciples in the ship,
Mat. (...). (...) and 28.
when a mighty storm for their trial and demonstration of Christ's power, was
raised up, could not possibly perish, the Lord of glory being there present in
the ship: so having Christ the Lord of glory dwelling in thine heart by his
spirit, how can thou do amiss? or why should thou doubt of Gods merciful
providence, who orders all things for thy good?

The fifth Objection The sick man. But my great unworthiness and
unthankfulness, makes me to suspect and fear that God will not perform that
he has promised, nor finish the good work that he has begun in me.

Minister.

A. This is indeed a grievous temptation, Romans 3. v. 3
yea the sorest of all others, but this cannot hinder God from performing his
promises. For as the making of his covenant of grace with us, and the offer of
his saving promises unto us, proceeded only from his free goodness and mere
mercy, without any respect to our works, or worthiness: so the accomplishing
of his promises is to be only ascribed to the same grace and goodness.

Thirdly (as has before bin particularized) not the greatest ^rmers and
offenders in the old and new Testament, have ever, by reason of their own
unworthiness, bin denied or deprived of Gods mercies: but upon confession of
their sins, desire of pardon, and the purpose and beginning of amendment of
life, were pardoned and received into Gods everlasting favor.

Q. Is it necessarily then required of us, that we confess and acknowledge our
own unworthiness?

A. Yes without question, for hereby we are made capable of Gods mercies and
blessings. God does depresse the proud, and exalt the humble, and he fills
the hungry soul with goodness, but the rich (in their own conceit only) he
sends away empty, Luke. 1. 52. and 15. and Christ was sent not to call the
righteous, (in their own opinion) but sinners Luke 5, 31.
(in their own sense and confession) to repentance.

Q. Seeing that God does not simply forsake or cast off any for his
unworthiness, what use make you of this point?

A. We must learn hence never to call Gods mercy, truth, and goodness into
question: but we must make it the Use.
foundation of our confidence and hope, for it is unchangeable, infinite, and
everlasting: and thus doing we shall have no cause to fear evil, but to
look to find all good things in Christ our treasure, husband, and head.

The fourth Chapter. Of Death, and the cause of it.
Question. When the sick person is once persuaded of the pardon of his sins,
for the time past and present, what further duty remains to be performed?

A. He is to be prepared and armed, against the fear of death, the assaults of
Satan, and the ^errour of the last judgment, (...).

Q. Now that he may be prepared and armed against death, what points are to
be considered?

A. Seven points specially. I. what death is: II. The certainty of it. III.
The causes and kinds of it. IV. The exceptions that are taken against it. V.
The benefits of it. VI. The preparation and furniture against it. And VII. what
disposition and behavior is required in death it self. Of these in order.

Chapter the fifth, Of death, his causes and kinds.
Question. What is death?

A. It is the taking away of life, or the dissolution and separation of the
soul from the body, ordained of God, and for the punishment of sin imposed
upon Adam and all his posterity. Romans 6. 23. 1. Cor. 15. 21. and Col. 2. 13.
Phil. 1, 23 Gen 2, 17 Heb. 9, 27 Romans 5, 12


Q Does God yet impose death as a punishment?

A. Yes, for every man sins and the very infant is not without original
corruption, and therefore all must of necessity, (no persons, order, or degree
excepted,) at length die the temporal death. Eccle. 3. ve. 3. Psalm. 49. v. 10.
Heb 9. 27.

Q. What is the procuring and deserving cause of death?

Ans. Sin, whereby man brake Gods commandment.

Q. How was sin first brought into the world?

A. Satan in the form of a serpent persuaded Eve to eat of the forbidden Romans
5, 1^ Psa. 96, v. (...) et 10 (...) 1. Ioh. 3. (...) Genesis 3. v. 6 Romans 8. 1^ 1 Timothy 2. 14.
aple, Eve assenting to satan, did eat of it and gave it to Adam who harkned
to her,: and thus they both of them sinned and brought death upon themselves
and all their posterity.

Q Why then were not Adam and Eve, immediately after their fall, put to death?

An. First, because the threatening of death was not absolute, but included a
condition of faith in Christ, that was to be borne, and that should break the
serpents head.

Secondly, Adam and Eve incontinently upon their fall became mortal in their
bodies, and accursed in their souls.

Thirdly, God by his clemency and indulgence toward them, would make a way to
make known his mercy.

Quest. If all men by reason of sin must needs die, why did not Enoch and
Elias in the time of the old Testament die the death of all, but were rapt
alive into heaven?

Ans. First, their translation was extraordinary, and proper to themselves
only.

Secondly they were figures and tipes of the general resurrection.

Thirdly, their translation was nothing else but an extraordinary death, for
they were changed in a moment from mortality to immortality.

Object. But at the day of judgment many shall be found alive, how then can all
men be said to die?

Answ. All the elect at the sound of the trumpet, shall in a moment, be 1
These. 4, 14.
changed from corruption to incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 51.
and from mortality to immortality which is a kind of death.

Qu. Now seeing that sin is the cause of death, what use are we to make of it?

Ans. We must be moved hereby, to take notice of, and acknowledge Gods
severe wr^th against sin, and (by consequence) we must learn to hate and
shun all kind of sin.

The sixth Chapter. Of the diverse sorts of death, and of the degrees of
spiritual death.
Question. OF how many sorts is death?

A. Of two sorts, ^mely ^ily, or spiritual.

Q. What is bodily death?

An. It is the first death, or the separation Phil. 1. 23
of the soul from the body.

Q. Is the particular time of bodily death made known to any directly before
hand?

Ans. No, for that time in respect of us, is most uncertain, and God has
reserved it in his own power and disposition only.

Q. Why so?

Ans. That we should not defer and put off our repentance from day to day, but
labor to be in a readiness and waking, yea and waiting for our Lords Luke 12.
v. 40.
coming every day. Mark. 13. v. 37.

Q. What then may this present life in consideration of his short continuance
and uncertainty, be compared unto?

Ans. To a vapor, to smoke, to a shadow, to a weauers shutle, to grass and
to the flower of the field, which are of short and uncertain continuance.

Qu. But why do the children of God die this temporal death, seeing that
their sins which are the cause thereof, are forgiven?

A. First, because their sins (howsoever forgiven) are not wholly in regard
of the corruption and remainders of them, taken away and abolished before death.

Secondly, this corruptible flesh and blood, cannot inherit the kingdom of
God, 1. Cor. 15. 50.

Thirdly, that they may be (in some Romans 8. v. 29
sort) made conformable to Christ his death.

Lastly, that the godly may learn and find by experience, the difference
between this mortal life, and that immortal glory, in the world to come, and
that they may have experience of Gods power in raising up the dead.

Q. What is spiritual death?

A. It is a separation of the whole man both in body and soul, from the favor
and gracious fellowship of God, and a subiecting of him to eternal
condemnation and hell fire, begun in this world, and accomplished in the world
to come,

Q. What is the cause of the spiritual death?

Ans. Sin, so far forth as it is joined with unbelief and impenitencie,
Luke 13. v. 3. and 15.
for not sin simply, but sin not repented of, damneth.

Que. Are there degrees of spiritual death?

Ans. Yes, there are three in number.

Q. What is the first degree of spiritual death?

A. It is, when a man by reason that his soul is deprived of spiritual life,
faith and repentance, and for that his Romans 6. 2
body is a fit instrument to put any sin in execution, is subject to Gods
wrath, and appointed to punishment.

Quest. What is the second degree of it?

An. Condemnation, or everlasting forment, whereby* the soul immediately Luke
12. 20. and 21. Luke 16. 23
after the departure of it out of the body, is carried by the devils into hell?

Quest. What is the third and last degree of it?

An. When in the nay of judgment the soul and body being reunited and joined
together, shall for euer-more feel Gods intolerable indignation, and endure
the vengeance of eternal death.

Quest. How can this last kind of death, be so called properly* seeing that
both the bodies and souls of the reprobate shall always survive and remain
a^ue?

Answ. That life is no true life, for such an unhappy condition deserves
rather to be called death then life, for the damned are universal*
excommunicated from the favor and glory of GOD, and are utterly and for ever
2 Thessalonians. 1. verse. 9.
bereaved of all holiness and happiness.

Qu. Are Gods children freed and exempted from these kinds of spiritual death?

An. Yea, for they are delivered from the first degree of spiritual death by
regeneration, whereby they are renewed in all the part of their souls and
affections. They are delivered from the second kind, when their souls
(forthwith after their departure out of the body) are carried up into heaven.
Apoc. 14. 13.

The third degree they are freed from, at the day of judgment, when both body
and soul shall be glorified together, and live together for ever in heaven.

Q. Is it not good, yea and the entrance into eternal bliss, for the godly to
dye?

A. Yes certainly, for it is better to dwell with God then with men.

Secondly, they hereby forthwith enter into the possession of everlasting
happiness.

The sick-man. Q But there are many fearful accidents and occurrences, to
which the godly themselves are subject in their sicknesses and deaths, and
therefore how can it be good for Gods children to dye?

A. Propound and impart them unto me, and I will give thee the best
satisfaction that I can.

The sick-man. 1. Obi. Death is the wages of sin, the curse of the law, and
the enemy of Christ and his children: how then can Romans 6. v. 23 Gal. 3. 10.
it be good?

A. It is not such by it own nature, and in it self, but it is changed, and
the property thereof is altered by Christ his death; in so much that of a curse
and punishment it is turned into a gentle and fatherly correction, and is made
a narrow entrance and a short cut into everlasting life. And in this last
respect it may be aptly compared to the red sea, which drowning the
AEgiptians, A similitude.
gave a miraculous passage to Gods people into the blessed land of promise: and
even so death which sends the reprobate speedily to hell, does in a moment
let in the godly into the kingdom of heaven.

Q. In what respects and considerations may death be said to be an enemy?

A. First, in respect of the original of it (for the envy of the devil
brought it into the world) namely as an outward and remote cause. Secondly,
because it is opposite to Gods promise touching man's immortality in Paradise.
Thirdly, because by means hereof Satan seeks to remove good men out of the
world, that they may not cross and hinder his purposed designs.

Lastly, because he through fear of (violent) death, labors to keep men
from the practice of holy duties, Math. 13. verse 21.

Que. Have you any more objections against death, that I may do mine utmost
endeavor to resolve you herein?

Ans. Yes truly, and they are five in number.

Q. What is the first of them?

Obiecti n.

Ob. Ch^st Jesus, David, Ezechias, pray^ against death, therefore it is evil.

A. (...) ar^ment foll^weth not: For first, Christ praye^ not against death
simply, for ^o died willingly, and otherwise he could not have merited ought,
but he prayed for the remoouall of the curse of it, and destred his heavenly
father to take away the cup of his wrath, Math. 26, v. ^9.
which was the beginning and part of the second death; and of this judgment
are master Calvin, Beza, Whitaker, Perkins Fulke, Master Doctor Willet; and
in a word, all sincere divines, etc. And as for David, when David prayed
against death, it was only in time of some grievous temptation, in distress
of mind, and as it was joined with the sense of Gods wrathful indignation.
Thirdly, touching Ezechias that good King, he prayed against death, that he
might be more reconciled unto GOD before his death, and that he might
establish and farther the true worship of God in his kingdom, which by his
death was like to be defaced. And lastly, that according to Gods promise made
to godly Kings, he might have an heir and successor out of his own loins,
which prayer God heard, otherwise he was willing enou^h to dye.

Quest. What is your second doubt or objection?

Ob. Gods children often seem to dye in desperation, how then can death be
good and desirable?

A. This is not to be imputed to want of love toward God, but to weakness of
nature, and tenderness of conscience for sin, and therefore they may,
notwithstanding all this, be saved. For God in the matter of salvation,
works by contraries, and by the gates of hell brings his servants to
heaven, 1. Sam. 2. verse 6. 7.

Que. What is the third exception or objection against death? Gods children do
sometimes in their sickness, rave, blaspheme, and behave themselves like
frantic men.

A. These, and the like effects, are not to be assigned to any deliberate
purpose of the godly, but only to be imputed, to melancholy, burning fevers,
the cholick and other violent diseases, and (in a word) to their infirmity
only.

Q. What conclude you hence?

A. We are not upon these occurrences, rashly to judge them, much less to
condemn them. For first, if they ever recover the use of reason, they repent
of those infirmities, and if it fall out otherwise, these with all other
unknown sins, are pardoned, yea and buried in Christ his death.

Secondly, we must not like arrogant Critikes condemn them of impiety and
hypocrisy, but we must judge charitably of them, as we would be dealt
with-all in the like case.

Lastly, we must not so much give judgment of a man by his death, as by the
former course and conversation of his life.

Object. 4. What is your fourth exception?

Ans. The Saints and servants of God, when death approaches, are most of all
and more then other people, tempted assaulted, and molested by satan how then
can death be good?

An. First, it is no good argument, hence to conclude that they are none of
Gods servants but rather the contrary: they are Gods dear children, ergo satan
must now or never seek to sift them, whereas the wicked are his own and refist
him not.

Secondly, I answer that it is not generally true that the Godly are thus in
death assaulted for many with Simeon die as a torch or firebrand without Luke
2. ve. 29.
sense of pain. Isay. 57.

Lastly in the very agony of death, God does so assist and strengthen them by
his spirit in so much that when satan looks for the greatest victory, he
receives the greatest foil.

Q. How must we behave our selves in this temptation?

A. We must fly unto Jesus Christ, commit the managing of our cause to him,
for he absol^ing us what need we we fear satan's assaults. ^om. 8. v. ^3. and
34.


Lastly we must hold our selves to Gods promises, and not depart an hairs
breadth from them.

Object. But satan is mighty, subtle, diligent, bold, cruel, malicious, and I
am weak simple, remiss, fearful, and how then can I resist and overcome him?

Ans. Thou must not yield to him, but by prayer, faith and Gods word resist
Math. 4. ve. ^4 et 7.
him, and he like a Crocodile pursued will flee from thee. James 4. verse 7.
1. Pet. 5. 9.

Secondly, thou must make God thy strong hold, and firmly believe and trust in
him, and then the gates of hell shall not prevail against thee.

Qu. What is the fifth and last exception against death?

Answ. Sudden death is an evil, but many men die suddenly, ergo death is
evil.

Ques. How answer you this argument?

Answ. I answer to the first proposition, that death is not evil, because it
is sudden (for the last judgment shall come suddenly, and yet it is not
evil) but good to GODS children; but because it finds only the wicked
unrepentant and unprepared. Luke 12. v. 20. and 21.

Secondly, CHRIST by his death and suffering has taken away the course of the
law and the fear of condemnation which is the very sting of death, therefore
death though never so sudden, is not accursed to the true believers, but a
speedy conueyance of them into the haven of eternal rest and happiness.

Lastly seeing that with Ezechias we have no lease of our life, if any of GODS
servants, with good Mephibosheth, and Jobs Godly children and the young
infantes that Herod caused to be massacred, die suddenly and violently, we
must judge charitably and the best of them; for the manner and time of the
ending our life is only in Gods power and not in our own will. Psalm. 31. 15


Questi. But what if a professor of true religion and formerly of an
unblameable behavior, be brought through the extremity of temptation, kill
himself, is not he certainly damned and so death evil to him?

A. Although this be a ticklish point, and albeit Saul, Achitophell and Judas
that killed themselves be noted in scripture for reprobates, and albeit they
that late violent hands on themselves never for the instant may be judged to
think on hell torments, yet seeing that God never finally forsakes his
chosen, seeing that his mercy is bottomless, and that he may give them
repentance (for ought we know to the contrary) at the last point of time, let
us if they have been formerly good professors, judge the best of them, and
pray unto God that he would give us grace never to yield to the like
temptations.

Q. But why must not a man kill himself?

Ans. First because he shall not hereby escape misery but run into it.
Secondly, it is not lawful to kill another to ease him of his pain, muchlesse
to kill a man's self.

Thirdly it is commonly a note of a reprobate. And thus much touching the
objections.

The seventh Chapter. The benefits and privileges of death.
Question. Have the Godly any profit and advantage by death?

A. Much, and many ways.

Q. What benefits and priueledges have they by death?

A. Two sorts of benefits, privative, that remove evil, and positive, that ad
good.

Q. What are the privative benefits of death?

An. Four: first it perfectly freeth Gods children from all temptations, and
from all sins both original and actual, and herein consists a maine part
of our blessedness for if he be blessed whose sins are not imputed, much
Romans 7. ^4.
more he whose sins are wholly taken away. Secondly it eases us of all the
Isay 57 ve. 1. and 2.
miseries afflictions, pains and adversities of this present life.

Thirdly, it delivers from the evil world, and from all sinful company,
and from all the tiran^e of Gods and our enemies, in so much that our eyes
shall never see, nor our ears ever hear the abominable practices of the
wicked much less can they hurt or infect us; and what an unspeakable blessing
is this?

Lastly, it preuenteth sin and misery to come, for the Godly are taken away 2
Kings 22. 20.
that their souls should not be infected with sin; and that they should ^ot
with their e^es behold evil, nor the inordinate confusions in church or
commonwealth. Isa. 57, 1.


Q. What use is to be made of th^se privative blessings?

An. We must first learn patience and suffer temporary afflictions without
fainting, because shortly our evil shall determine. Secondly, let us pray and
s^ke for, and wish and wait that blessed time, ^hether of ^eath, or the last
judgment, that shall f^ee us from all the evils whereof in this world we
labor.

Section 1.
Question What are the positive benefits that we receive and enjoy in death?

An. First death brings our souls into the immediate, the glorious, and
everlasting fellowshippe, with GOD the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost, where we shall have perfection of knowledge, absolute purity of will
and affections, and fullness of joy for evermore. Psalm 16. verse. 11.

Secondly, we shall with all the Saints and Angels, behold and have communion
with Christ in glory, world without end.

Lastly, death puts us into actual and perfect possession of all the good
things that Christ has purchased for us, which should we^ and withdraw us
from the love and liking of this vain world, and inflame us with an earnest
desire of enjoying the heavenly Canaan so long ago purchased and provided for
us.

Section. 2.
Q How can death make the faithful and the Godly perfectly blessed, seeing
that their dead corpse lie and rot in their loathsome grave?

An. It may very well be, for first he that has redeemed both body and soul,
and given us two excellent sacraments namely baptism and the Lords supper to
signify and seal the same, has by his death embaulmed, yea buried our death.

Secondly it being mistically spiritually and unseparably united unto Christ
the fountain of life, and so remaining in the covenant of grace and favor of
God, free from all sin and pain cannot be but in part blessed and in a sort
partaker of life.

Lastly, it rests sweetly in the earth as in a bed of down until the last
judgment, in a blessed expectation of the general and glorious resurrection.

Que. Shall the body then certainly arise again?

An. It shall undoubtedly be raised up again at the last day. For first the
sacred scriptures, the almighty power and promise of God, and the effects Math.
22. 32.
of Christ's death do sufficiently prove it. 1. Cor. 15. ve. 13. and 14.

Secondly the bodies of the saints raised up in the time of the old and new
Testament, explane the same.

Thirdly, Gods mercy cannot perfectly appear in the glorious resurrection of
the Godly, nor his justice in the perfect punishment of the wicked unless
there be a resurrection both to glory, and confusion.

Lastly the death of the righteous, is but a sweet sleep, wherein they rest
from the labors of this life, and out of which they shall in a moment, be
raised at the sound of the last trumpet.

Quest. The bodies of the reprobate, shall as well be raised up again as the
bodies of the elect, and how then can it be any such singular benefit?

An. Yet notwithstanding it is a rare benefise, for the resurrection of the
just and unjust is distinguished the one from the other by the causes and
ends. For the Godly arise by virtue of CHRIST their head and by virtue of his
resurrection, but the bodies of the wicked by the power of Christ as their
judge only, who shall arraigne and condemn them.

Secondly, they differ in their ends; the bodies of the Saints arise in
glory to eternal glory: but the bodies of the wicked shall rise in shame to
eternal shame and confusion.

Qu. If the Godly be thus blessed as soon as they are dead, is it then
lawful to mourn for the dead?

Ans. It is lawful, so that our mourning be moderate and joined with hope,
for we have many holy practices in the scriptures of this mourning. 1. These.
4. 14. I^h. 11. Phi. 2. 27.

Questi. What shall we think of them that bewade the dead immoderately?

Ans. It is contrary to the hope of a blessed life and resurrection, and calle^
Gods wisdom and just decree into question.

Qu. For what ends and in what considerations are we to mourn for those that
are dead in the Lord?

Ans. First, because our sins and unthankfulness have bereaved us of their
confortable fellowship.

Secondly, we must here by be more effectually stirred up to entreat the
Lord to be good unto us and to turn away from us those evils that their
untimely deaths many times prognosticate.

The eight Chapter. Touching the way whereby we may attain to blessedness.
Question. Where is the way to attain true blessedness to be found?

Answer Only in the word of GOD, that is the mean, seed, and instrument of
eternal happiness. Isay. 30. 21.

Q. How many things are by Gods word required, that a man may die well?

Answ. Two things. First a preparation before death. Secondly a right behauior
and disposition in death.

Q What is the preparation against death?

Answer. It is the ac^on of a repentant sinner, whereby he prepares himself
for the Lord.

Q. Is this duty necessary?

Answ. Yes, for f^t GOD so commands in many places of scripture. Mark. 13.
37. Luke 12. v. 40.

Secondly this present life is the only time of getting the wedding garment,
and of reconciling and preparing our selves for GOD and his kingdom. Titus 2.
verse 11. 12. Luke 13. ver. 25.

Thirdly, we shall never (lightly) die the death of the righteous, unless we
live their life, and as death has left us so shall the last judgment find
(...).

Quest. May we not defer this duty unto death?

An. No in any wise, for the longer that we delay our preparation the more
unfit and unwilling shall we be to perform it, for it is an hard thing for an
old man to enter into his mothers womb, and consuetudo fit altera natura.

Secondly, the time and manner o^ death is many times so sudden and
uncertain, that we may be so overtaken, that we shall have neither time nor
grace to repent and to prepare our selves.

Lastly, late preparation is seldom true preparation, being rather enforced
then voluntary, and rather in form of words then sincerity of heart. Math. 7.
verse 22. et 29.

Qu. Of how many sorts is this preparation?

An. Two fold, general and particullar.

Qu. What is general preparation?

A. It is that whereby a man, through the whole course of his life, prepares
himself to die.

Ques. Is it not sufficent to prepare our selves when we begin to be sick?

Answ. No, for first (as has been before showed) late repentance is seldom
true repentance.

Secondly, the time of sickness, both in regard of the sharpness of the
disease, decay of memory, senses, understanding, consultation of worldly
goods, and satan's subtle and malicious practices, is the most unfit and
unseasonable time to begin a preparation.

Object. But the theife upon the cross repented at the eleventh hour, Lu^.
23. ve. 1^, 32 a^ 44.
and why may not we do so likewise?

Answ. There is a great difference between him and those that purposely delay
their repentance, for first he was never so much as outwardly called by the
ministry of the word.

Secondly, the thieves conversion was extraordinary, yea and miracu^us, that
Christ thereby might show forth some effect of his Godhead, but mirackles are
altogether, and extraordinary courses (for the most part) ceased.

Lastly that theife condemned himself, and his fellow, justified Christ in
Luke 23. (...) 40.
the open sight of the world, and prayed for salvation etc. but where shall we
find such singular effects in them which post and put of their repentance?

Object But it is in our power and will to repent when we will?

Answ. No, repentance is the only 2. Tim. 2^ 25.
gift of God, and from himd alone proceeds bath the will and the deed. Phil.
2. 12.

Secondly, many late repenters and ^ack-graces shall seek to enter into
heaven, and shall not be able because Luke 13. (...) 24.
their hearts are become insensible, and the time of grace is past.

And thus much of the matter of preparation.

The ninth Chapter. Of the manner of preparation.
Question. IN the manner of preparation how many duties are required?

An. Five special duties.

Q. Which are they?

An. I. the meditation of death. II. the les^ing and abating of the sting and
power of death. III. The beginning of eternal life here in this world* IIII.
The enuiring of our selves to die daily.

Lastly the manner how these several duties are to be performed.

Quest. Is the meditation of death necessary?

Answer. Yes truly, for a Christian man's life is, and should be nothing but a
meditation of death, therefore we must look for it always and in every
place, and herewith accords that excellent saying of Seneca incertum est, quo
loco te mors expectat: Senec. lib. 3 Epist. 26.
^u vero eam in omni loco expecta. That is, it is a matter unrevealed in what
place death waits for thee, but wait thou for it in every place.

Q. What benefit, profit and comfort does the meditation of death yield unto
us?

Ans. Manifold. For first it causes us Job. 42. 6.
to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God.

Secondly, the fear and meditation of it, does remove all security, and
further our repentance, as we may see verified in the example of the
Ninevites, Jonah 4. (...). 4. and 5.
it cutteth of delays, and brings our promises and purposes into
performances and practices.

Thirdly, it makes us content with any condition of life, be it never so
miserable, for if we live in affliction and adversity we shall after death
never be more subject to it, and if we live in prosperity, we rest not in it,
because we shall carry away nothing with us. 1. Tim. 6. 7.

Fourthly, it encourages us in Gods service, and in all well doing, for as
much as we known, that our labor 1. Cor. 15. v. vl^.
is not in vain, in the Lord, and that in serving of God, there is great
reward.

Lastly, it ^oth sequester and withdraw our delights and desires from earthly
and perishable things, and canseth us earnestly to desire and seek for Hebr.
11. v. 9. and 10.
everlasting life.

Q Of what things must we meditate?

Ans. Of three things. First we must ^hinke and consider of the cause of death,
namely our sins.

Secondly, we must meditate of the remedy of it, viz. the cursed and bitter
death of Christ.

Thirdly we must think of every day and night, as if it were the very day and
night of our death.

Q. What must we do that we may be the better enabled to perform this duty?

A. We must not vainly dream of long life, and so (...) our selves, but mourn
against this corruption of our nature. Secondly, we must pray unto God that he
would give us grace and knowledge, whereby we may be ^nabled to resolve our
selves of death at hand.

The tenth Chapter.
Question. Wherein does the sting and power of death lie and consist?

Answ. In sin, for that is the sting thereof. 1 Cor. 15. 56.

Q. How shall we know this?

Ans. By the law which is a glass wherein we may see our sins and the Iam.
1. (...) Romans 3. v. (...) and Romans 7^ v. 7.
effects and punishment of them, for hereby comes the knowledge of sin.

Q. How shall we deprive sin of his strength and sting?

A. By believing and relying upon Christ, who has by death destroyed him that
had the power of death, that is Hebr. 2. 1^
the Devil, 1. Cor. 15. 25, and 26.

Q. What distinct and particular duties and fruits of faith are we to perform
and show forth, that we may remove our sins, and take out the sting of the
serpent death, that it may ^euer hurt us?

A. We must first, (for the time past and present) confess our sins, humble
our selves for them, and cry earnestly unto heaven for pardon.

Secondly, we must for the time to come, with a resolute mind, beware of every
known sin, and in all things to reform and conform our selves according to
Gods word. For every sin unrepented of, is a sting to wound our souls unto
destruction. Luke 13. verse 3. and 4.

Lastly if we would live for ever, we must dye here, and that da^ly, for he
seldom or never dies well, who lives evil, Et qualis vita, finis ita, like
life, like end.

The xi, Chapter. Of entering into the first degree of eternal life.
Question. HOw shall a man in this world enter into the first degree of life
everlasting?

A. When a man by the testimony of a sanctified conscience, and by experience
Gal. 2. 20.
can say that Christ lives in him.

Quest. When does Christ live in a man.

A. When he does by his holy spirit, direct, guide, and govern his thoughts,
Romans 8. 13.
will and affections.

Q. How shall a man discern this?

A. When he does frame and confirm all the powers and abilities of his soul
and body, according to the rule of Gods word. For the spirit and the word never
^arre, but the holy spirit breaths in it, and works by it. Acts. 10. verse.
44. and 45.

Qu^. In how many things does this first degree of eternal life consist?

A. It consists in three (...) or graces of God. First, in the (...) and
saving knowledge of God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost.

Secondly, in the sweet peace of conscience, which flowing from the death of
Christ, is life and peace, for this is the way to, and the beginning of
everlasting happiness.

Thir^ly, in the government of the spirit, when we assent unto the directions
of it, and in act approve and obey them.

Q. But what need all this pain and trouble: Is it not enough when a man is
dying, to say, Lord have mercy upon me?

Ans. No, for first, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
Math. 7. 2^
heaven but he that does the will of God.

Secondly he that prorogeth and puts of his repentance unto death, is (for
the most part) so be-sotted with the custom of sin, and with-all so forsaken
of God, that he (as experience teaches) can utter no good word.

The xii. Chapter. Of accustoming and enuring a man's self to dye well.
Question. HOw shall a man bring himself in fashion, and accustom himself
to dye well?

Answ. By the performance of three things. First seeing that Gods corrections
and chastisements are the instruments and forerunners of death, he must
humble himself under them.

Secondly, he must begin to mortify little sins, that so he may mortify the
greater afterward.

Thirdly, he must not let go the fruit of the least cross, but learn to
bear and endure smaller crosses and afflictions, that he may be the better
enabled to undergo the torments of death it self.

The xiii. Chapter. Of the speediness and carfulness of Preparation.
Question. When and how must a man prepare himself?

A. With all expedition and utmost diligence.

Qu. Wherein must this expedition and diligence chiefly appear?

An. In doing all possible service to Church and commonwealth. Psalm. 122.
verse. 8. and 9.

Q. Why must he take this course?

A. Otherwise, does, (for it gives no man warning) will ouer-take him, and he
will wish that he had done it, Luke 13.
when it is too late. verse. 25.


And thus much of general preparation.

The xiiii. Chapter. Of Particular preparation.
Question. OF how many sorts is particular preparation?

A. It is twofold, either false and imperfect, as is that which the Synagoge
of Rome prescribes, or true and perfect, as is that which all Protestant
Churches teach and practice.

Q. Wherein does the false and imperfect preparation of the Church of Rome
consist,

A. In three things.

Q. What are those three things or members?

A. First auricular or eare-confession made to a Priest.

Secondly, the receiving of the Eucharist or host.

Thirdly, extreme unction, or anointing with oil.

Q Is not auricular confession, or the secret enumeration of all a man's
particular sins, necessary?

Ans. No; certainly.

Q. Why is it not necessary?

A. First, because the word of God requires no such matter.

Secondly no man can possibly sound every corner of his heart, and find out
all his sins. Ierem. 10. 23.

Thirdly, there was no such practice neither in the Apostles times, nor in the
primitive Church for the space of five hundred years.

Forthly, David, and the prodigal or lost Child had their sins forgiven them
upon a general confession. 1. Sam. 12. ver. 12. Luke 15. ver. 18. 19.

Lastly, God has not made men absolute judges of reconciliation, but has
(...). C^. 5. (...).
only given them the ministry of reconciliation.

Ques. Wherein does this ministry of reconciliation consist?

Ans. When the ministers of Gods word do in the name of the Lord according to
his word, preach, declare and pronounce a man's sins to be forgiven or not
forgiven.

The second Section.
Que. Is it necessary for the sick to receive the Eucharist or the Lords
Supper?

Answ. There is no such (extreme) necessity, for first not the want but the
continual contempt of the Sacrament formerly in faith received, does extend it
self to the whole course of a man's life.

Lastly, the Lord supper is an Ecclesiastical or public action and therefore
according to Christ his institution, is to be administered and received in the
greatest concourse and assembly of the Church.

Object. As the paschall Lamb was eaten, so may the Lords Supper be eaten, but
the paschall Lamb was eaten privately in particular houses, therefore may the
Lords Supper ^ee likewise eaten in the same form.

Ans. I answer to the first proposition that the argument is not good and the
consequence follows not. For first they Jews then could not obtain leave
nor be permitted to assemble themselves togeither, as we do and may Gods
name be blessed for it.

Secondly I answer to the seco^ proposition, that the Pascall Lamb though it
was eaten in particular houses, yet it was by Gods commandment, and eaten at
one and the same time in all places: which is all one as if the action had
been public.

The 3 Section.
Q. Is extreme unction and especially the anointing of the instruments of the
senses in spiritual respects now necessary for the sick?

Ans. No truly, for it concerns not us at all; the miracle is ceased long
since, and then what use of the ceremony.

Obie. But in Saint James days they anointed the sick with oil, and why may
they not do so now?

Ans. First, because (as I formerly noted) all miracles are ceased, but that
anointing was miraculous.

Secondly, the sick the^ anointed with oil by virtue of Gods promises,
recovered out of their sickness, but those whom the Papists anoint, commonly
die and so never recover.

Lasty, the ancient anointing was appointed and used for the recovery of bodily
health, but the Papists abuse and prevent it to false ends, namely to obtain
forgiveness of sins, and to procure strength and comfort against all the
temptations of death; and to obtain salvation it self.

And of the false preparation hitherto.

The fifteenth Chapter. Of the several duties and branches of particular
preparation.
Question. IN what and in how many things does particular preparation consist?

Ans. According to their threefold object they are thus distinguished, they
concern either God himself, or our own person, or our neighbor.

Q. When we are sick what duty are we to perform toward God?

Ans. We must daily seek to be reconciled to God in Christ, other-wise all
other duties are of small or nons effect.

Quest. How must this reconciliation be sought and obtained?

Ans. By renewing our former faith and repentance, and by repayring the de^s of
it.

Quest. What moving cause have we to (...) us up to perform this duty?

An. Because ordinarily, and for the most part, sickenesses and diseases are
sent of God in his justice for the punishment and chasti^ment of sin. Lam, 3.
39. Math. 9. 2. Ioh. 5. 74.

Quest. In renewing our faith and repentance what particular duties must we
perform?

An. Three especially, first we must make a new examination of our hearts and
lives. Lam. 3. 40. Psa. 119. 11,

Secondly when God sends new corrections we must make new confessions of our
particular sins. Psa. 32. 10.

Thirdly we must make new and earnest prayers to God for pardon of sin, and
for reconciliation with GOD in Christ. Psa. 6. 4. 5, 2. Chr. 34, 12, 13.

Que. What use is to be made hereof?

Ans. First, hereby are iusily taxed and checked those that spend the whole
space of their life in the Church, and that many years, and at lenght when
their best and most days are spent, begin to enquire what faith and repentance
should be, and how their souls should be sau^, as though it were so easy a
matter to know and obtain it.

Secondly we must in sickness especially practice and put in ure these duties
of examination, confession, prayer and of renewing our faith and repentance;
other-wise, qui minus est hodi^ eras minus aptus erit.

Que. But what if the sick person, is not able of himself to renew his faith
and repentance?

Ans. He must seek for help and direction Luke 5* 19.
of his fellow members, who must like them that bare the man sick of the
palsy to Christ help and assist him by their counsel, advice and prayers.

Que. What are the particul^ ^uties that are herein to be performed?

Ans. They be of two sorts according to their objects, for they concern
either the sick themselves, or their help^rs.

Q. What is the duty that concerns ^e si^ke man?

Ans. To send for helpers, namely the elders and ancients of the Church, who in
Saint James time and after-wards were endewed with the gifts of healing and of
miracles.

Q. Does not this duty of comforting the sick be long to the minister only?

Obi. If a man sick of the plague or p^stilence send for his pastor, is he
bound in conscience to go to him in his own person.

Ans. No except it may so be ordered that the Minister be in no danger of
infection.

Secondly, the Pastor or Minister may and must not for the comfort of one
particular person ^ndanger his own life, and so bercaue the whole congregation
of their guide and teacher; more regard is to be had of the good of the whole
then of one part of it.

Thirdly, as the leprous person by Leu. 13. 45 46.
reason of the contagion of the disease might not be resorted unto, so it
fares with him that is visited with the plague.

Fourthly if the pastor and preache^ should in person visit every man thus
visited, he must separate himself from his own family and neglect them, and
his people and congregation would shun his company.

Lastly, the visited persons friends and kinsfolk, are to supply this duty.

Object. But Isaias visited Ezechias who was thought verily to have the
pestilence. ergo ministers must now do the like?

Answ. The argument follows no^ For first Isaias had an express commandment
from God so to do, and therefore could not be infected.

Secondly, he might for ought any man can object to the contrary, stand aloof
off in some convenient place.

Object. But the plague comes now by Gods immediate hand, as it did in David's
time, and therefore a man may be as secure with infected persons and infected
places, as any where else.

An. The plague in these days (as experience verifieth) comes not immediately
by the immediate striking of Gods elect Angel, as in David's days. For then no
man might avoid the infected, and the reason is, they that are hundred of miles
off from any place of infection might be as soon tainted as any other, which
to affirm is most absurd and crosses all experience.

Secondly, none is now infected but he that is in company with the infected, or
receives their clothes, or some thing about them.

Lastly, albeeit the pestilence infecteth not every man that is outwardly in
dangers, yet this proves not that it is not in it own nature contagious, but
that all persons were not capable of it, and that God in his mercy preserves
some from infect^, whom it pleases him, as is to be seen in all other
infectious places whatsoever.

Ques. But why are the elders who are no Pastors and Ministers of the Word, to
visit the sick?

An. First, because they are fitted hereunto, being endued with the gift of
knowledge and prayer.

Secondly, it is a duty of charity, and therefore not proper to any one man.

Thirdly, and principally, that they may hereby ease the Pastors or Ministers
heavy and difficult burden and charge.

Q What use is to be made hereof?

An. It condemns the silence and ignorance of most friends and neighbors,
who either speak never a word, or to small or no purpose, being not able to
instruct and comfort him, and yet they promise to pray for him, when GOD
knows they cannot pray for themselves.

Ques. When must the sick send for the Elders to instruct and pray for him?

Ans. In the first place, before any physic, medicine, or restoratiue For
where the divine leaves, there must the physician begin.

Qu. What use is to be made of this point?

Answ. It reprooueth their madness and folly, who never send for the Minister
until he be half dead, or lies gasping as though the presence of the
minister before that time were not necessary, or as though Ministers could
work mirackles.

The second section.
Qu. What is the second duty of the sick?

Ans. To confess his sins, those especially which disquiet and trouble the
conscience, either to the Minister, or to any other Christian brother that is
both able and willing to inform and comfort the sick. James 5. ver. 16.

Qu. Is this duty simply necessary to salvation?

Answ. No, but only conveniently profitable.

Que. What is the duty of the helpers?

Answ. To pray over him, that is with him and for him, and in their prayers, to
commend his whole person and state to God. 2. Kings, Act. 32. Act. 20. 4.

Q. Why must the visiters thus pray for the sick?

A. The better hereby to stir up their affection in prayer, and to declare
their charity and compassion to the sick person.

Q. What if those that visit the sick person find him impatient and full of
grief and wrath, what must they then do?

A. They must bear with human infirmities, for being themselves quiet with
God, they must learn to be quiet with men. Secondly they must show unto them
how all things fall out by Gods providence, and exhort him to wait upon God by
faith, until he either take away or diminish the pain, or at least a^e to his
strength and patience.

Qu. What other duty besides the seeking of reconciliation, owes the sick to
God?

An. He must praise God for his former mercies, and declare this
thankfulness* even for crosses and corrections, for the Lord according to the
proportion of our thankfulness will show mercy upon us, more or less.

And thus much of the duties which the sick person owes unto God.

The xvi. Chapter.
Question. What are those duties that a man is to perform to him self or his
own person?

An. They are twofold, for they belong, either to the soul or to the body.

Qu. What is the duty which he owes to his own soul?

An. He must arm and strengthen himself agninst the fear of Satan's
assaults, against the immoderate fear of death, and against the Terror of the
last judgment.

Qu. How is a man to be armed and strengthened against Satan's assaults?

Ans. By considering and believing that Christ has overcome and bound for us
the strong man Satan, that had the power over death.

Qu. What is the second duty that he owes to his soul?

Ans. To arm himself against the immoderate fear of death.

Qu. Is it not good then that men should in some moderat sort fear death?

Ans. Yes, for it puts us in mind of the greeuousnesse of our sins, and
what we deserve if God should deal strictly with us.

Secondly, it holds men back in their extremities from laying violent hands
on themselves; for they that are thus desperately minded do not so much as once
think of Hell and the torments of it.

Ques. Seeing the fear of death is thus profitable, why must the sick be
armed against the fear of it?

An. Because death approaching, natural fear does most of all show forth it
self, astonish the sick man's senses, and causes despair.

Qu. What are the means to comfort him against the fear of death.

An. They are of two sorts namely practices and meditations.

Q. What are the practices?

A. They are two. First the sick parties must not so much fear death, as cast
their eyes upon everlasting life.

Secondly, they must consider death not in the bright coullor of the law, for
then our weak eyes cannot endure to behold it, for then it is a cruel
sergeant armed with the anger and curse of God; nor in it self, for then it is
(to men unregenerate) the very entrance into hell, yea hell mouth it self.

But we must take from it the fearful mask and visard of the law, and behold
it as it is set forth in the mixed and tempered coullor of the Gospel, and as
it is changed by Christ his death, who has not only deaded it by his own
death, but also quickened it, so that it is to the believers body a temporary,
and a sweet sleep, and to their souls, the gate of salvation, whereby they
enter into ye possession of life everlasting.

Q. Why must not a Christian man vnmeasurably fear death?

A. First, because it is to the godly the end of all evils, all sin, error
and misery.

Secondly, because after death he passes presently to a better state.

Thirdly, because he has immediate fellowship and communion with the holy
Trinity, with the elect Angels and the glorified Saints.

And thus much of practices.

The 2 Section.
Qu. What are the Meditations which serve for this purpose.

An. They are principally four, which are the foundation of all the rest.

Qu. What is the first meditation?

A. That every man's death (as has bi^ before proved) procured by his own
sins, is foreseen and appointed in Gods eternal decree together with all the
circumstances thereof. Psalm. 139. 15. 16.

Q. What benefit will hereby redound unto us?

Ans. It will arm us against all fear, distrust and impatiency in the hour
of Psa. 39. 1^
death. Psa. 39. 10. Genesis 42.

Q What is the second meditation?

A. The consideration and contemplation of the in^stimable glory laid up for
us, and of the eternal and unspeakable blessedness provided for us.

Q. What profit shall we receive hereby?

Answ. It does withdraw us from the resting in this temporal and miserable
life and lifts up our minds and affections unto God, yea and makes us with
Job, Moses and others, cherefully and willingly to endure afflictions.

Q. What is the third meditation?

Answ. The spiritual and inseperable conjunction and fellowship, which the
believers both in their souls and bodies in life and death have with Christ.

For, for their bodies and souls are in the favor and covenant of God, and
they both shall be reunited together in the last day, and be both eternally
glorified.

Que. What is the fourth meditation?

Ans. The special promise of Gods presence and assistance in death and in all
other distresses, for we have Christ our companion in affliction. 1. Pete. 4.
13.

Qu. What use are we to make hereof.

Ans. We must live by faith and not (...). 2.
by sense, believing the things (promised) which we see not, and hoping for
things that seem desperate.

Que. How, or how many ways does God manifest his presence in sickness?

Ans. Three manner of ways; first by, lessning and moderating the pains of
sickness and death, and by giving them strength and patience. Secondly by 2.
Cor. ^
refreshing and comforting the spirit after a wonderful manner. Thirdly, by
the guard and ministry of the good Angels which defend the Godly against the
Devil and his Angels. Psa. 34. for Apoc. 12
they are present with and attend upon Gods servants in their sickness, and are
Psa 6. 1.
ready to carry the^r souls into heaven. Luke 16.


The 3 Section.
Quest. How are the sick to be armed and strengthened against the strictness
and terror of the last judgment, where in the devil, the law and our own
conscience shall accuse us of infinite faults?

Ans. First we must acknowledge our sins, for that is the way of
justification Ioh. 1. 9. Psa. 32. 5.

In matters of felony as we say, confess and be hanged, but in matter of
divinity, confess and be saved. Secondly we must fly and appeal to Jesus
Christ and content our selves with his righteousness only, and then he
absoluing us who shall condemn us and he making intercession for us, who can
prevail against us. Romans 8. verse. 34.

And thus much of the duty that the sick man is to perform in respe^ of his
soul.

The xvii. Chapter. Of Physic, and preservation of bodily health.
Question. WHat is the duty that the sick are to perform to their bodies?

Ans. They ought to be careful to preserve health and life until God take it
wholly away.

Que. Then it is lawful for any man to kill himself?

Ans. No, for we must in no wise depart out of our standing until God out
heavenly general command us.

Secondly every man is bound to cherish and nourish his own body and (...). 5.
29.
therefore he must not destroy it.

Thirdly all murder is forbiden and interdicted, and therefore much more the
killing of a man's self.

Fourthly if a man kill himself he does not escape misery but run into it.

Fifthly if it be a wickedness to kill another man for to ease him of present
paiae, then it is a more horrible wickedness to kill himself.

Lastly the killing of a man's self is commonly and generally noted for a mark
of a reprobate and faithless man.

Que. Why must we preserve life and health?

A. For two reasons, first that we may have time and place to prepare out
selves for eternal life.

Quest. Then long life is good?

Answ. It is a great blessing, for herein Ioh. 9.
men have time to repent, whereas after death there is no time and place for
repentance and reconciliation.

Quest. What is the second reason?

Answ. That we may refer and reserve the whole disposition of our lives to
GOD, for whose glory we ought as well to line as to die.

Q. In preservation of life what things are to be considered?

Ans. The means, and the right use of them.

Que. What are the means?

Ans. Good and wholesome Physic, for it to an ordinance of God, and whereof
^in. 20. 7
we have sufficient warrant and practice in holy Scripture, and therefore we
must esteem and use it, as a blessing of God. Isai. 1. 6, 7.

Obie. But Physic cannot change Gods eternal decree, or save us from his
anger, why then should it be used?

An. Because the and and the means are not to be divided, for God has
ordained the one as well as the other. Wherefore as in war, f^ine, pestilence,
which are Gods rods and chasticements, we may lawfully use the means to
lessen or auert them, so we may and must in Physic, but we must commit the
issue and event to GOD alone.

Quest. Whom must we entertain for Physicians

A. Not Sorcerers, Wisards, Enchanters, or any that use and practice any
superstitious means, for this is the ready and nearest way both to temporal
and eternal misery, but only men appointed for their sincerity of religion,
learning conscience and experience.

Ob. But by charms, enchantments, and the s^ell of Wisards; many recover out
of their sickness, therefore we may lawfully use them.

Answ. The consequent is not good, namely the effect is good, Ergo the means
are good, for Satan is very expert in Physic, and God many times, partly for
the trial of his servants and partly the more to harden and blind the wicked,
permits c^res to be done by the ministry of Satan. 2. The. (...). 10. And
thus much of the means of health.

The second section. Of the manner of using the means.
Que. In what things does the right use of means consist?

Ans, In three.

Quest. What are those three means?

Ans. First, the body is not only to be prepared by Physic, but the soul
also by true humiliation, prayer, and repentance.

Q. Why must the soul be thus prepared?

Ans. Because sickness) otherwise curable) is by reason of the impenitency of
the sick, many times, made incurable.

Q. What is the second means?

Ans. We must be assured by Gods word, that the Physic prescribed is
lawful, and we must not depend upon the Physician (as some do) but by prayer
crave Gods blessing.

Q. What is the third means?

An. The right and perculiar end of Physic, which is to continue man's life
unto his natural period, namely until the radical heat and moisture be wholly
consumed.

Qu. What is the Physicians duty?

An. First he must in the absence of Ministers exhort the sick to prayer and
repentance.

Secondly, when he perceives maninifest signs of death in the sick, admonish
the sick of death, that casting of all confidence in outward helps he may
wholly rely upon Gods mercy.

And thus much of the duties which the sick man owes to himself.

The xviii. Chapter. Of the duty that the sick person is to perform to his
neighbor.
Question. What duty does the sick man owe to his neighbor?

An. He must freely forgive all that have offended him, and desire
forgiveness Act. 7. ve^. 60.
of all, for if he do not so, he cannot dye in peace of conscience. Math. 5.
v. 25.


Q. What if the person offended cannot Math. 10.
be met withal, or will not be reconciled?

A. In this case the very desire of reconciliation, is accepted with God, as if
it were reconciliation it self. 2. Cor. 8. verse. 12.

Q. Is there no other duty that the sick is to perform to his neighbor?

An. Yes, and that he is to perform, is he is a Magistrate, a Minister, or the
Master of a family.

Qu. What is the duty of these three sorts in general?

Ans. They must do their utmost endeavor, that (what in them lies) the people
committed to their charge, may be left in a good condition, and state after
death.

Q. What must the Magistrate be careful of before he dies?

A. he must by the procuring, defense, and Joshua. 24. v. 14. 13.
execution of true religion, virtue, ^l justice and outward concord, provide
for the godly and happy estate of town, city and common wealth. Deu. 31. 23. 1
king. 2. 23.

Qu. What is the Ministers duty?

A. he must after the Apostles example, (...). 1. 15. Act. 20. 28.
be careful, and labor (what in him lies) to provide and take order for the
good estate of ye church, whereof he is made ouerseer.

Qu. What good will come here of?

An. By this means, Sh^ismes errors, heresies, and other inconveniences will
be prevented.

Qu. What is the master of the family his duty?

Ans. He must set his family in order before his death.

Qu. What must he do that good order may be preserved and observed in his
family after his death?

A. Two things. First he must dispose of lands, livings and goods. Secondly, he
must command those that be under his charge to believe and obey sound doctrine.

Qu. What must he do that he may rightly dispose of all his goods.

An He must (following the examples of holy men in scripture) make his will and
Testament, if it be not already made.

Qu. Is not the making of a will a thing indifferent?

An. No, but a matter of great weight, for hereby much hatred, contention and
suites in law are cut off.

Qu. What rules are to be observed in making of a will?

An. First, it must be made according to the order of nature, the written word
of God, and the politic laws and statutes of his country,

Secondly his unjust gotten goods are to be restored to the just owners if they
be known.

Qu. UUhat if they be unknown?

An. The^ they must be restored to their Executors, Assigns, kinsfolks,
friends, and if none of these can be known, then in way of civil
satisfaction, they are to be restored to the church or poor people.

Que. What is the second rule to be observed in making of a will?

Ans. A man must bequeath the chiefest and greatest part of his goodness to
his sons, daughters and kinsfolk. 1. Tim 5. 8.

An. Who must have the greatest portion?

An. His eldest son or his heir. Romans 8. 17.


Qu. Why so?

An. First, that he may preserve the stock and family.

Secondly, that he may perform some special service to the church or common
wealth.

Qu. Must the younger brother be neglected?

An. No, but they must be in some equal proportion provided for; otherwise
many times for want of maintenance they fall to be thieves, or take very ill
ways.

Qu. What is the last rule?

Ans. The Testament is of no force until Heb. 9. v. 16.
the Testator be dead.

Qu. What is the second duty of the master of a family?

An. He must (as I before noted) command his people that they learn, Genesis
18. 19.
believe and practice the doctrine of salvation contained in the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles. 1. King. v. 2. 3. and 4.

Quest. What fruit and comfort shall the sick receive, who rightly perform
these duties?

An. God will honor them as well in 1 Samuel 2. 30.
life as death, and make the memory of them precious after death. Psalm. 112.
ver. 6.

And of the twofold preparation before death hitherto.

The xix Chapter. Of the second maine proposition, to wit the right
disposition of a man in death.
Qu. What is the right disposition of a man in death?

An. A religious and an holy behavior of a man's self, specially toward God.

Qu. What are the parts of it?

An. Three especially: First, to dye in faith. Secondly, to dye in obedience.
Thirdly, ^o resign our souls into the hands of God.

Qu. What is it to dye in faith?

An. When a man being ready to die, does wholly depend upon Gods favor and
mercy in Christ, as it is revealed in how Scripture.

Qu. UUhy must this duty be now performed?

An. Because all other helps and comforts failing, it is the very time to
practice faith.

Qu. How is faith to be expressed?

An. By pra^er and thanks giving. Job. 2. 9. Hebr. 11. 22. James. 5. v. 15.

Qu. What if sense, understanding and utterance be wanting?

An. Prayer consists rather and more in the affection of the heart, then in
the voice Pro^. 15. 16.
which is only the outward instrument and messenger of the heart, and God Io^.
4. 24.
most of all looks unto the heart.

Secondly, the very sighs and gron^s of a repentant sinner, are prayers, as
much accepted with God, as if they had Romans 8. ver. 26.
been uttered by the voice. Exodus 14. verse, 15.

Qu. How is faith else to be expressed?

Ans. By the last words, which commonly in the true servants of God, are
excellent and full of comfort, as many examples out of Scripture, and the
experience of all ages proves.

Qu. To what principal and ordinary heads may all that the godly speak in
death be referred?

An. To omit extraordinary gifts and revelations many hundred years ago
ceased: They either wonderfully recount Gods benef^s in their life past, or do
greatly rejoice in that they are shortly to be translated into a better
condition, or do discourse of the vanities of the world, the comforts of death,
and the beginning of everlasting life, and the presence and assistance of the
holy Ghost, or in a word, they all desire, wait, and pray for eternal li^.

Ques. What if GODS children in their sickness utter no such Apothegmes or
heavenly speeches, but rather speak foolish and unsavory speeches?

An. It may be that the nature of the disease is violent, and therefore
accompanied with fren^es, and unseemly gestures, and then no divine matter is
to be expected from them, but al are to be constru^d charitably and in good
part.

Qu. Why so?

An. Because we also are subject to the like extremities.

Qu. How must we then judge of them?.

An. Rather by the godly course of their life past then by their death.

And thus much of the first du^y which is to dye in faith.

The 2. Section.
Qu. What i^ ^he second duty in the right disposition to dye well?

An. To dye in obedience?

Que. Why must we dye in obedience?

An. Because otherwise our death cannot be pleasing and acceptable unto God.

Ques. What reason moves you to say so?

An. Because they that do not die in obedience, seem like slaves to come unto
God, rather of fear and compulsion, as though the Lord were come to torment us
before the time, then of love and duty like sons and childen, Hence it is that
by reason of their impatiency, they wish that they never had been borne,
resting more in these outward deceitful and ^ransitory things then in the
life to come.

Ques. What is it to die in obedience?

Ans. When a ^an ^s willing at Gods command to leave ^he world without
murmuring or coffeehouse. Ph. 1. 23

And therefore we are to make a conscience of this duty as well as of any other.

Qu What ought to make us willing to die?

An. Because the Godly are respected of GOD in their death, and their death is
precious in his sight.

The third Section.
Ques. What is the third duty?

Answ. To commend our souls into Psa. 31. 5.
GODS hands as unto a faithful creator.

Que. Is it not an easy matter to perform these three duties?

Ans. No verily, for ordinarily these duties cannot be performed in death,
unless much preparation has gone before in our life, for otherwise we shall
come unto Christ our indge no otherwise then a malefactor to the executioner.

Secondly, for a man to be resolved that both God can and will save his soul,
proceeds only from the holy Ghost and is no easy matter to be persuaded of.

Quest. What is the end of those men that die in faith, obedience, and that
commend their souls into GODS hands.

Ans. Their end is most blessed, for death is to them a sweet sleep only, and
it is no enemy but a friend to soul and body, it accomplisheth our
mortification, it fully ends the battle between the flesh and the spirit,
and it is the ladder of heaven and the gate of Paradise.

The 4 Section.
Obie. But I shall leave my wife a poor widow and succorlesse, how then can I
die in faith, and obedience?

Ans. God will provide for the widows that fear him.

Secondly Christ will never forsake them.

Thirdly they shall shortly meet together in heaven.

Lastly as a man for his wives sake willingly left and departed from his
parents, so they must without grief, or coffeehouse go unto God, that is
more to be beloved then all creatures whatsoever.

Quest. But my poor children shall be left to the wide world, destitute and
unprovided for.

A. First God, according to his covenant is the God as well of the children, as
Genesis 12. 1^
he was of the parents and therefore he will alike provide for them.

Secondly, if they seek the kingdom of God first and make the Lord their
sheapheard they shall want no good things and they shall be fed in the time of
famine. Psa. 34.

Qu. What use is to be made of this last point.

Ans. First let the parents commend their children unto the providence and 1.
23. 1.
protection of Almighty God. Secondly, the children, if only they fear and
serve GOD, must not doubt hereof.

Obi. Oh, but I must forgo all the honors, pleasures and profits of this
life: how then can I with comfort perform the three above named duties?

Ans. First these things are but vain deceitful, temporary and they cannot
make us blessed.

Secondly we are strangers and pilgrims in this world, and therefore we must
not set our hearts and affections upon these things, but mind and (...). 18.
meditate upon heavenly and eternal thing.

Thirdly Christ his kingdom is not of this world, but is heavenly, and the
goods* wherewith he enricheth his are spiritual, Ergo we must not look to
have our rest and heaven here.

Fourthly they that dote and surfeit upon these earthly and out-ward things, are
void of faith, hope and repentance, and so perish, and therefore it is better
willingly to forgo these things then to be undone by them.

Lastly, we must look for true and everlasting honor the precious and proper
riches: sincere and never discontenting pleasure in the paradise of heaven
only, and bid auant to these earthly matters, when they hinder us in the
course of Godliness, and most destrously forsake them, when the Lord by death
calls us to the kingdom of glory and the felicity thereof.

Que. Ought a man to fear death?

Ans. He ought partly to fear it, and partly not to fear it.

Questi. Why must a man fear death?

An. First because it is the destruction of nature, and a paineful correction.

Ques. What use is to be made hereof.

Ans. We must fear sin that is the cause thereof, and acknowledge Christ an
enemy to it and offended with sin.

Que. What is the second reason why we must fear death.

An. Because by the death of the Godly, the Church or common wealth suffers
loss and we are bereeued of the saffe and stay of our comfort. 2. Reg. 2.

Qu. What if a man in death see no way how to escape Satan's temptation?

Ans, He must close his eyes, commit his cause to God, and put on the
spiritual armor of faith, hope and the word of God.

Que. What if a Godly man doubt, and his flesh tremble to enter into another
life?

Ans. We must not yield to these temtations but resist them, and our spirit is
to be commended into Gods hand and then Christ with all his Angels will come
and be our guide to eternal life.

Secondly we must stoutly undergo it and meditate upon Christ's sufferings, and
the issue and end will be happy deliverance.

Que. What if Satan contrariwise labors to expel all fear, to make a man
careless, and labors to persuade him as he did master Knoxe, to rest in an
opinion of his own merits, and so would puff him up with pride and arrogance?

Ans. He must consider and confess that his own righteousness is foul and
deformed, he must resist and withstand that temptation, and attribute all the
glory of his salvation to God alone.

Que. In what and for what causes must we not fear death 1. Cor. 4. 7.
?

Ans. For five causes, first because we have hence a cause and an occasion to
show our subjection and obedience to God. Secondly, because we are freed from
sin which is a principal part of our glorification. Thirdly, because the very
body lying in the grave is refreshed against labors, and is delivered from
death and misery, and shall rise again in glory. Fourthly, it conueieth and
translateth the soul unto eternal life, where God is perfectly served, and it
has blessed fellowship with Christ and all the Angels and Saints of heaven.

Lastly, because by death GOD purges and disburdneth his Church of evil men.

Qu. Seeing that death is the cause of so great good to the godly, may a man
lawfully desire it?

An. Yes, so that it be not of impatiency or desperation. Secondly, Job and
many ^hil 1. 23. ^om. 7. (...). Cor. 5.
others have desired death again and again, and are not therefore reproved.

Qu. May a man simply desire death?

An. No truly, but a man must walk in his calling and standing, so long as it
shall please God: For the godly had rather live to set forth Gods glory, the^
for their own temporal commodity.

Qu. In what respects is death to be desired?

An. So far forth as it is a mean to free and deliver us from the burden and
contagion of sin, and from the miseryes and troubles of this life.

Secondly, as it is a mean and instrument to the manifest vision of God, and
to the immediate fellowshippe ^oc. 14. (...).
of God and Christ.

Lastly, our desire must be moderate, and agreeable to Gods will and good
pleasure.

Quest. May a man contrariwise desire long life?

An. Yes, so the end and scope of his life be to do acceptable service to God,
and to further and maintain Gods religion Isay 38. 18.
and glory, and labor to help and forward other men's faith, etc. Phil, 1. 24.
25.

Quest. If the death of the godly be so blessed, what shall we think of the
death of the wicked?

An. It is altogether accursed and fearful.

Que. Why so?

Ans. First because it is the dissolution of nature, and the wages of sin.

Secondly, for that by reason of Gods justice pursuing the wicked in every
place, and because they have no peace of conscience, death is to them the
beginning of everlasting damnation. For they feel no mitttigation of their
grief in death, nor have so much as the least hope and expectation of ease and
deliverance.

Qu. What is the conclusion and sum of all that has bin said

An. We must strive and continually endeavor to live and dye well and godly,
that we may be blessed both in life and death: and that we when this earthly
life and pilgrimage is ended, may live and triumph for ever with our Lord Jesus
in heaven: which the Lord in mercy grant and effect

Amen.
A prayer to be used of a sick man.
O Lord GOD great and fearful, just in thy judgments, intolerable in thy
displeasure, and yet bottomless in thy mercies, and keeping covenant, and
mercy to them that love thee, and obey thy commandments. I poor wretched
sinner that am but dust, earth, and ashes, unworthy of the least of mercies,
and most justly deserving all temporal and eternal judgments, do here
present and prostrate my self before thy throane of grace. And I freely
confess unto thee that I am conceived and borne in original corruption, prone
unto al wickedness, untoward and backward to any goodness, full of
alimperfections, and that I have by mine actual transgressions (which are many
and mighty) broken all thy holy laws and Commandments, and that therefore
amongst many other evils, this present sickness, ache, pain, and weakness is
deservedly come (...)

thee my purposes and vows of obedience and thansgiuing: do better and
further service unto thy Majesty, and be the more prepared for thy Kingdom.

But if it be thy will, decree and pleasure, by this sickness, to finish my
days; I then entreat thy good Majesty to renew me in the inner man, as the
outward man decays, and grant that as the body dies, so thy grace may live
and grow in me; and open the eyes of my understanding, that I may know what the
hope is of my heavenly calling, and the riches of the glorious inheritance that
thou haste laid up in store for me, that by this means, I may dye in the true
faith of Christ, in willing obedience to thy Majesty, and in thy favor and
love of my neighbor, and so when this life ends, I may begin a better, and
dwell with thee: and with all the triumphant company of Saints and Angels
praise and magnify thy name for ever.

Bless and enlarge thy Sion and thy Jerusalem (even) after my death, build up
the walls of it, repair the decaies of thy Church and confound Antichrist and
the upon me, yet notwithstanding, I herein acknowledge thy infinite goodness
and compassion in Christ, that thou haste in slicted them upon me not as
plagues and curses (as they are in their own nature to the unbelieving and
unrepentant) but as fatherly corrections and chastisments and messengers of
death and immortallitie, and means to prepare me for, and convey me to thy
kingdom. For hereby thou (my most dear Father) intendest and workest mine
amendment, make trial of my faith, hope, patience, and thankfulness:
preuentest sin to come, and stirrest up in me a desire and longing
expectation of everlasting rest and happiness. UUherfore I most humbly beseech
thee to pardon and remove my sin the cause thereof, perfect my repentance for
the same, increase my faith and hope, grant me strength and patience, with
comfort to endure this thy visitation, sanctify it unto me, and convert it to
my salvation in the end.

Restore me (if it be thy good pleasure) in thy good time to my former and
perfect health, that I may perform unto (...)

Turk, and the rest of the obstinate enemies of it. Uouchsafe to be a father
unto my wife, children and family, supply their wa^ts whether spiritual or
boddily: plant thy fear in their hearts, and make them constant in all duties
of holiness and righteousness, that they may live and die in thy favor, and at
length be made partakers of eternal joy and glory.

Give (O my heavenly father) a blessed assent to these my petitions, and grant
me all other thing which thy wisdom seeeth good for me, for thy son Jesus
Christ his sake, mine only Redeemer and Mediator: to whom with thy Majesty,
and God the holy Ghost, be given al honor, praise, and glory now and for
evermore Amen.

A thansgiuing to be used of a sick man if he recover.
I Yield render and ascribe unto thee (O Lord my God) al honor praise, thanks,
and glory, for all thine infinite, unmeasurable, undeserved mercies in Christ,
whether they concern my body or soul, this life, or a better, and in
particular for his present benefit of redeeming my soul from death, and my
body from the grave, that I should yet live the longer in the land of the
living, to set forth thy glory, to do more good in my calling and standing, and
the more perfectly to prepare my self for my latter end and for thy kingdom.
O Lord my God, this is thy work, and it proceeds only from thy grace and
mercy, and not from any goodness or merit of mine. But seeing thy might and
mercy so meruailously appears in my recovery, and I of my self am more ready
to forget the^ remember, and to grow remiss and careless for the time to
come, then to serve thee in godly fear and grow up in grace and
sanctification: I beseech thee to write the memory of this thy mercy in my
heart with the Diamond of thy spirit, grant me grace yt denying mine own wit,
will and sense, I may follow ye direction of thine holy word, and: submit my
self to the blessed government of thy spirit. Make me a willing and happy
instrument of further good in my vocation and trade of life, and grant (dear
father) that, as I grow in years, so I may grow and increase in grace and
obedience, that I may live in thy fear and favor; and die in peace, and then
see thy glorious face, and enjoy the immediate and most blessed fellowship of
Christ my sweet Savior, and of all thy Saints and Angels, for evermore.

Uouchsafe me (loving and gracious father) these mercies and al other things
needful for me, for the merits, obedience and mediation of thy beloved Son,
Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and one al
sufficient God, be praise in the Church, throughout all generations for ever.

Amen.

