THE ROOT OF ROMISH RITES AND CEREMONIES;

Shevving That the Church of Rome has borrowed most part of her Ceremonies of
the Jews and ancient Pagans, and that from this spring proceeded the Iubile.

First written in French

By M. CHARLES DRELINCOURT, Minister of Gods Word in the Reformed Church of
Paris:

And now translated into English By M. T.

ANNO M.DC.XXX.

To the Reader.
THAT which thou see here translated, Christian Reader, is not a whole book,
but taken out of a little book, called, The Iubile of the reformed Churches,
with an Examination of the Iubile of the Church of Rome (written against the
great Iubile, cellebrated Anno 1625.) dedicated to the Duchess of Bouillon,
and published in the year 1627. The same is divided into three Treatises,
whereof this is only the eleventh chapter of the second Treatise. I confess
the whole work were very requisite to be translated, the rather because of
another great Iubile, celebrated this present year 1627. as well by the
English Catholics, as by all others in all the world, with prayers for the
extirpation of our Religion, which they call heresy, as also because many
others in England begin to look back to the fleshpots of this spiritual
Egypt, and think to reconcile some of the differences between Papists and the
Church of England, and to make the rest seem less then they are. But sure I
am that this chapter is more then I shall have thanks for of them; and that if
I had sent it over the Seas, to have it printed at London, it could never have
been licensed there, because of some things, which were like to offend the
Bishops: though it may be the Author in writing of it, did never so much as
think of them, but only of the Romanists. I have indeauoured to translate him
faithfully, without adding any thing to the text. And if then such a work as
this, so needful and proffitable, so full of learning and delight, written by
a Minister, so eminent religious and impartial, and so well approved in all
the Churches of France, be forced to seek corners in England, let it give thee
to understand that there is somewhat in that Hiarchie, which endures no Joan. 3
20.
light. Which for my part I should never have looked after, much less helped
to discover, if the noise of their late Arminian practices, to change
Religion, had not been heard on this side the Seas; and that they who let so
many Arminian and Popish books and projects pass unresisted, are ever
vigilant to suppress all that do but in the least measure cross their
Hiarchie and Ceremonies, wherein they use the art of the French Papists, who
being the Masters in power, and yet finding themselves unable to defend
their cause by the Scriptures, labor all they can to keep their Adversaries
books and arguments from the Princes and people; mocking them with the
fanaticall zeal, schism, heresy and innovation: which as it is their best
weapon, as one of theires confessed unto me, so it makes that many Papists, and
some of the more understanding sort, Psa. 58.5.
will not hearken to the voice of the charmer, but turn the deaf ear to all
arguments; mock and speak evil of the things they do not, will not, nor can
not know; being by such sleights made very babies, and kept from the proofs,
as men keep knives from infants: wherein suffering them selves to be thus made
sheep, the Matt. 7.14.
wolves devovre them. So the Bishops, who are also the Masters, unable, as it
seems, to defend their cause by the Scriptures (unles it be by shufling and
wresting of them, like the Papists) labor all they can to disgrace and
suppress such books as discover them, and study nothing more then to keep
them from the Princes and people; mocking and scorning them with fanaticall
zeal, schism, heresy and innovation; calling all such proofs Puritanicall,
Brownisticall and Anabaptisticall, though they be not such matter, but only
such as are used against the Papists, by the reformed churches of France,
Germany, etc. which yet makes many Protestants, and even some of the more
capable and ingenious Spirits, cast them all aside, mock and speak evil of
the things they do not, will not or can not know; being thus with like
cunning, kept from the sight of the proofs; and made to stop their ears to
all such charmings, beholding many molested, imprisoned and disgraced about
them; by them that would teach the Dolphin to swim, if he should come into
their seas, so much the Bishops think themselves wronged, if the Scriptures
or any thing else be alleged against them: yet whether they, or those they
suppress, may more truly say with the Church, All this is come upon us, yet
have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy covenant; Psa. 44.7
this they are no more willing to put to trial, no more then the Papists;
unless themselves may be judges; or rule a Synod in these and Arminian cases, as
the Court of Rome did the Council of Trent in the like: choosing rather to
desende their cause by power and terror. Wherein yet they do so little hurt
me, who by Gods grace am out of their reach, liueing in a more reformed
Church, that for my own particular, I find no need to publish such works. It
is the love of my country that constraines me: for though by reason of my
habit, and long abode in these parts, almost all men take me to be a Dutchman;
yet do I not deny but that I was borne in England, of English Parents, and
there had my education. All which were nothing, if I were not tied by greater
bonds to my Savior to seek his Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof. To the
which Readers are also equally obliged, and above all such as by their
neerenes to Princes have best means to further it. God once give them and us
all the grace, that denying our selves, our vain Policies and temporisings,
we may seek and follow the Lord Jesus in his Kingdom and ordinances, Amen.

THE ROOT OF ROMISH RITES AND CEREMONIES; Showing That the Church of Rome has
borrowed the most part of her Ceremonies of the Jews and ancient Pagans; and
that from this spring proceeded the Iubile.
WE read in the 17. chapter of the 2. book of the Kings, that the nations
which the King of Assyra sent into the country of the ten Tribes of Israel,
mingled their idollatries and superstitions with the ceromonies of the Law: so
that at one and the same time, they worshipped the Lord and did service to
their false Gods. The masters of the church of Rome have imitated this
mixture, which was an abomination unto the Lord, for they have brought, into
the Christian Religion, the Ceremonies of the Jews and Heathen. This truth is
so certain, that the most famous Doctors of the church of Rome are
constrained to acknowlegde it. But the mischeife is, that insteade of
condemning and correcting this corruption, they undertake to defend it. For
the Author of the Canon Consecrationem, In the 3. part of the Decree of Gratian
did. 1.
after he had represented the Ceremonies, which the Jews of old observed in
the consecration of the Tabernacle and all the vessels thereof, reasons on
this sort, If the Jews which served to the shadow of the Law did these
things, much more ought we to do them, we to whom the grace is manifested
which is given by Jesus Christ. The Gloss passes yet further, saying: If the
Pagans did this (note the good argument) how much more ought we to do it? To
be short, there you find this goodly maxim, That it is p^rmitted to reason
after the example of the Infidels. De inventoribus rerum lib. 5. c. 1.
Polydore Virgil also ingeniously acknowledges that many things in the Church
of Rome have descended from the Hebrews, and from the ancient Romans and other
Pagans. Breifely it seems that these people search their glory in their
shame: For one of their most renowned Cardinals, and a most zealous Defender
of the Papal throne, Baronius.
is not ashamed to write that the Ceremonies of the heathen have been
sanctified by the Christians. And G. de Choul Counselour to the King, In his
Discourse. of the Relig. of the ancient Romans p. 339. de l'impression de Lion
1581.
speaks in these terms, If we behold it curiously, we know that many
institutions of our Religion are taken and translated from the Ceremonies of
the Egyptians and Gentiles. Although these Masters should hold their peace,
the thing it self speaks. For the whole Papal hiarchie is founded on the
example of the Jews, who had their high Priest, their Sacrificers, their
Levites: and yet among them diverse orders and functions. That the Romish
church has founded her hiarchie and the diversity of her Orders on the
example of the Jews, In the 1. part of the Decree of Gratian did. 21.
besides that the thing is clear enough, the Author of the Canon Decret is
acknowledges it, and Polydore Virgil de inuentor. re^um lib. 4. cap. 5.

The Preistly habbits and ornaments, which we see in the church of Rome, have
also been frained after the pattern of the Jews: For consider the mist call
habits of the Priests, Bishops and Popes; and compare them with those of the
Sacrificers and high Priests of the Hebrews, and you shall find an admirable
resemblance. For therefore it is that Polydor Virgil neately confesses, that
the Romish Priests have borrowed of the Jewish Priests the most part of their
sacred habits; De invent. rerum l. 4. cap. 5. and 7.
and that it is evident enough that the institution is rather Hebraicall, then
Apostolic. And indeed the Apostles were never clothed in the habbits of
Bishops, nor in those of Popes. Read on this subject Pope Innocent the 3.
Mysteriorum Missae lib. 1. And the Bishop of Mande, Ration. diuinor. Officior.
lib. 3. The fasts of four times had also took their original of the Jews,
In the 1. part of the Decree of Gratian did. 76. fol. 84.
as is ingeinously acknowledged by the Author of the Canon, Iejunium quarti.
And the Bishop of Mande Ration. divin. Officior. lib. 6. cap. 6.

De Consecratioue did. 1.
It is from the Jews that the church of Rome have borrowed the manner of
building and consecrating their Temples: as is confessed by the Author of the
Canon Consecrationem. And the Bishop of Mande Ration. divin. Officior. lib. 1.
cap. 1.

Platina. Tit. Live. in his Decades Supplicationes, quis nos processiones
vocamus, fiebant circa delubra fanaqu^ and pulvinaria, in quibus honos dijs
dabatur, praece dentibus pueris ingenius ac Sacerdotibus coranatis, ac lauream
tenentibus manum, voce modulatae canentibus carmen, suosequent maximo Pontifice
vel curione: deinde sequentibus patritijs ac senatorihus cum confugibus and
liberis pleru^que coronatis.
It is from the Roman Heathens, which is attributed to Agapet the Roman Pope:
But this was Instituted above a thousand years before him; for the ancient
Roman Idolaters called it Supplication. A form Instituted by Numa to go on
Procession, either to appease the wrath of the gods, to obtain peace, or to
pray unto God for the fruits of the earth; the order was in this manor: First
before the Procession walked certain young children, then the sacrificing
Priests clad in white Surplesses, singing Hymns, Paeans, and Canticles to the
honor of their gods. Then marched the high Priest, or Curio: Then marched the
Roman Senators, with their wives and children: and sometimes the common people
assisted. There was commonly carried about in Procession, the Shrine or
Reliquarie of god Jupiter, or of Anubis, by some Priests clad in white
Surpleses, with shaven heads, and thereon wearing crowns. This Crown was of
such reverence and esteem, that the Emperor himself Commodus Antonius high
Pontifex, caused his head to be shaven and cut round, expressly to carry the
Cabinet of god Anubis. Before the Cabinet or Reliquarie, went a Cierger,
carrying a light taper in his hand. When the Processio^ went along through the
streets, there were seats erected, Apul. lib. 17. de Ast. aur. Blond lib. 2. de
Romans trium. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 27. In the Book of the discourse of the
ancient Romans Religion. Lamprid. Apri. l. 11. de Asin aur. Alex. ab Alex.
lib. 50. cap. 27. Herod in his Histories. Ierem. in his Epist. ad Indaeos in
Babylonem abducendes. Ne verticem de raditore, nove barbane vollitote. Levis.
19. Nec ingyru^ acrotur. dum attondebit is comam vestram, vestram, nec radetis
barbam, Ezech. 44.
to serve for stations or places, where the Priests, which carried the relics
were appointed to rest and take breath. When the Procession was ended, the
Temples were opened, the Altars and Images perfumed with Insence, and the
Reliquies of their gods showed. On those days, when the Processio^ wentabroad,
a Feast was celebrated, the shops were closedvp, the Hall of Justice shut in,
and the prisonners unshackled: who can better discipher the order of
Processions observed even at this day, by the Missalians Instructed from father
to son in the Pompilian Religion. What other Author can be alleged touching
the Ceremonies performed in Procession, except Numa Pompilius himself? If the
Missalians sought not out further, for their crowned shaven crowns, and white
Surplesses which the ancient Aegiptian Idolaters were wont to use: the Priests
of the Goddess Isis, or the Babilonian sacrificers, wearing their heads and
beards shaven. As for the Law of God, the contrary therein was observed, and
the sacrificing Priests were forbidden, to cut their heads or hair round, and
to shave their heads. And as for the Law of the Gospel, there is no such like
ceremony commanded by Jesus Christ, nor by his Apostles: thy must therefore
needs proceed from the ancient Pompilian Religion. For other things in the
Procession, they have added the carrying of the Cross or banner: this Banner
was termed by the ancient Roman Idolaters Labarum: which was reputed a sacred
ensign, so much revered by the Dictators and Emperors, as also by the
soldiers that went to the wars. Antenor first pictured in that Banner a Sow,
by reason of the name Troja, which in the vulgar Italian tongue signifies a
Sow: which ensign Antenor vowed and dedicated in the Temple of Juno, Ex libris
Messalae ad Octavianum Augustum: Apul. lib. 2 de Asm. aur.
Queen of the heavens: because the Sow, was the consecrated Victime to the same
Goddess. The old Roman afterward caused a Mercuries Caduce to be drawn upon
the Banner whereon was painted the picture of two Serpents coupled together:
then was an Eagle portrated for the Ensign of the Romain Empire.

See on this subject Philo in his Treat of Contempla. Joseph. de bello Iudaic.
lib. 10 cap. 7. Et Eusebius. lib. 8. praepar. Euang. cap. 4.
A little before the coming of Jesus Christ into the world' there arose up in
the Jewish church a certain sort of people whom they called Esseniens, that
is to say Saints, forasmuch as they affected a particular austeritie and
holiness of life. They lived a part by confraternities, they received no Infants
into their order, but only men of years and old men, and they were not
received but after certain years of probation, whosoever made himself of
their body, he ought to bring in all his goods, for they lived all in common,
and no man posessed any thing in propper, they had their repast common, and
their particular chambers, whereinto no man entered that was not of their
Sect. And there the most part voluntarily absteined from marriage. Deinvent
rerum lil. 7. Cap.
Polydore Virgil holds that this is the original and lively image of the
monastic life, saueing that he obseruet that the Monks of the church of Rome
come not near the holiness of the Esseniens: seeing that, says he, they have
for the most part their tables royally covered: they plunge themselves in
delights, purchase honors, and have an insatiable desire of the riches of the
world. He might have added that the Esseniens lived not in idleness as the
Monks, for every one of them had their trade, and got his liueing by the
labor of his hands. Before the rising of the Sun, they gave themselves to
meditation, but after the Sun began to show forth his beams, they appliced
themselves to labor. In stead of eating the goods of the poor, they
excercised themselves in alms giueing. Also they were true, and their word
was as good as an oath. Also they did not bind themselves by vow never to
marry, neither feared that m^riage was sacrileidge and a defiling, the
abstinence from it was volluntarie. But to prosecute these differences further
would be to depart from the subject.

The Judicial Church had a holy oil, with the which were anointed the
Tabernacle and all the vessels thereof, they also anointed their Kings and
their Priests. So the Church of Rome would also have diverse sorts of oils,
which she consecrateth with prayers and horrible coniurations. The same serves
her to anoint the Temples, the Alters and the Chalices; therewith she anointeth
the liueing and the dead, Princes, Popes, Bishops, Priests and Deacons etc. It
is a drugge which she uses in Baptism, Confirmation and Extreme Unction.
Whereon see Durand Ration. divin. offic. lib. 1. cap. 8. and Polydore Virgil.
de invent. rerum lib. 5. cap. 3.

The Judaicall Church had also certain waters for the Legal purification. So
the Church of Rome would have her holy water to put away venial sins, De
Consecrat. did. 3.
and drive away ill spirits. On which read the Canon Aqua. and the Bishop of
Mande Ration. divin. offic. lib. 4. cap. 4. and Polydore Virgil de invent.
rerum lib. 5. cap 8. And even as the Jewish Priests washed themselves before
they applied themselves to the Sacrifices: So the washing of Priests is one of
the Ceremonies, which goes before the Masle. See Polydor Virg. de invent.
rerum lib. 5. cap. 11. Out of the same spring proceeds the custom of
burning incense on the Altar, as the same Polydor observes, De invent. rerum
lib. 5. cap. 16.

If I did not fear that my pen would swell to high, I could represent an
infinite number of superstitions, which the church of Rome has borrowed of the
Jews. So because the Jews celebrated Easter with unleavened bread, the Church
of Rome will not celebrate the Eucharist with leauened bread. As the Jews had
their lamps which enlightened the night in the Tabernacle, so the Church of
Rome lights Candals and Torehes, which enlighten the night and the day. As in
the Judaicall Church there was a veil which covered the most holy place, where
was the Propitiotorie and the Cherubins: so the Church of Rome, in the time of
Lent, covers her Images with white linen. As the high Priest had his little
bells fastened to the hem of his garment, whereof he made the sound to be heard
when he entered before God into the holy place, and when he departed thence: so
the Priests have their little belles, which they cause to sound when they lift
up that which they call God: also when they carry it to sick persons, and as
they return.

To be short, by little and little they have surcharged the poor Church with the
yoke of Judicall Ceremonies, contrary to the express commandment of the
Apostle: Why tempt ye God to put a yoke on the neck of the Disciples, Act.
15.10
which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear. Our Savior Jesus Christ,
who is the body and truth of all the shadows and figures of the Mosaicall
Law, has put away by his own propper blood all those ordinances, and has
fixed them to his cross, according to the saying of the Apostle, Col. 2.14.
He has blotted out the handwriting of ordinances which was against us, and
took it away, nailing it to his cross. The Church of Rome has not been
content to repatch the veil of Ceremonies which Christ Jesus has torn by his
death: but which is more she has thereto sowed all sorts of pieces and
patches, which she has borrowed of ancient Paganism. And indeed it is of the
ancient Pagans that she has learned to join the spiritual power with the
temporal: for Jesus Christ did not exercise on earth any power or jurisdiction
temporal, insomuch as he refused to divide the inheritance between two
brothers. But the heathen Emperors did join both the powers together,
qualifying themselves, for the most part, Emperors and Sovereign Pontifes. So
the Popes boast of * both the swords, holding that Jesus Christ has given them
both the earthly and the heavenly Empire. * To manifest that this is the Beast
to which the Dragon viz. the Ethnic Empire gave his throone. Rev. 13.

It is of the ancient Pagans that the Popes have learned to make themselves to
be adored after their election, for when Cornelius prostrated himself at the
feet of S. Peter to worship him, that excelent Apostle lifted him up again,
saying, Act. 10.
Stand up I my self also am a man, Rev. 19.
the verrie Angels would not be worshipped. But amongst the Pagans when they
consecrated a sovereign Pontife, This adolation of the ancient pontifis is
represented by G. du choul. discourse of the Relig. of the ancien Romans page 266.
he was adored and worshipped of every one. As when the Pope is chosen they set
him on the Altar, and all the Cardinals go to the adoration.

It is of the ancient Pagans that the Popes have learned to suffer men to call
them GODS: For the Apostles said they were men of the like affections as
others. But the Emperor Domitian made himself to be called Dominus Deus
noster, that is, Act. 14. Suetonius in Domitiano.
Our Lord God. Which blasphemy is found in the same words in the Gloss of the
Extrana. Of John 22. where the Pope is also called Dominus Deus noster.

It is of the ancient Pagans that the Popes have learned to make men kiss
their feet. For Jesus Christ washed the feet of his Apostles Ioh. 13.14. but
the Sovereign Pontifes among the Pagans made their feet to be kissed. See un
this subject, Polyd. Virg. de inven. verum. lib. 4. cap.
Dioclesian ordained by a public Edict that all sorts of persons should
prostrate themselves before him and kiss his feet: and to make them the more
venerable, he adorned his Pantofle and enritched it with gold, pearls and
precious Stones. Another monster of nature to wit C. Caligula had before that
manifested the same pride. Seneca de benefic. lib. 2. cap. 12.
For it is reported of him, that after he had absolved Pompeius Pennus, whom
he pretended to have offended him, he stretched him out his left foot to make
him kiss it, all though this personage was of the Consular dignity. It is
also of the Pagans that the Bishop of Rome has learned to make himself to be
borne on the shoulders of men: For the Apostles went a foot: Polyd. virg. de
invent. verum lib. 4. cap. 10.
and Jesus Christ made his entry into Jerusalem, riding on the fool of an
ass. But the rich Pagans made themselves to be borne in litters on the
shoulders of their slaves. Thereof read the Satyrs of Juvenal, and the
Epigrammes of Martial.

Tertul. Apolog. advers. Gentes cap. 23.
The ancient Pagans acknowledged one God who had the universal Empire over all
creatures. But over and above, they worshipped an infinite number of Gods,
demie Gods and Godesses. So the Church of Rome does likewise confess that
there is one Sovereign God, Creator of all things, and that he has no
companion. But over and besides him there are many he Saints and she Saints,
which she inuoketh in her necessity, and to whom she yealdelth divine honors.
The number of these Saints increases day by day: and the new comers, finding
no place in the Calender, endeavor to thrust out the old: witness S. Ignatius,
who was seated into the place of S. Germain: where upon a suite was commenced
by the Chanons of S. Germain of Auxerrois, who prevailed in their cause
against the Jesuits. And just as the Pagans worshipped verrie many Godesses,
but they had a particular one, whom they called the Queen of heaven: So among
the she Saints, which the Church of Rome worshippeth, there is one to which
many give the title of Goddess, and which almost all acknowledge for the
Queen of heaven and Lady of the world. Among the Pagans one and the same God
was diversely named, according to the diversity of the places, where he was
worshipped, or the effects which were ascribed unto him. For so there is speech
of Iubiter Ammon, Inbiter Olympien, Iubiter Stator, Iubiter Ultor, Iubiter
Victor, Iubiter Conseruator, Iubiter Feretrien etc. In imitation whereof the
Church of Rome has diverse names for one and the same he Saint and she Saint:
so they celebrate our Lady of Laurette, our Lady of Montferrat, our Lady the
Egyptian, our Lady of Joy, our Lady of good news, our Lady of recovery,
our Lady of the Annontiation, our Lady of Snowes, our Lady of Fevers, our
Lady of deliver us from the pains of Hell etc. And even as the ancient Pagans
had their little Gods which never went alone as Castor and Pollux; so the
Church of Rome worshippeth certain little Saints, which go not but by two and
two, as S. Cosme and S. Damain, though they be not of the order of S. Francis.
Among the ancient Romans, no one could be publicly served and worshipped, who
was not placed in the rank of the Gods, by the Senats of Rome: Even so among
the new Romans, no man may be publicly served and inuoked, who has not been
canonised and put into the rank of the Saints by the Pope and Cardinals, who
are the Senators of new Rome. The Gods of the Pagans had their particular
offices and assignements. Neptune presided over the waters, Aeolus over the
winds, the Goddess Ceres co^serued the corn. And Bachus had the care of the
wine: The men of war followed the Standart of Mars. Men of learning addressed
themselves to Minerua. The Poets inuoked Apollo, and the Physicians
Aesculapius. The Mariners had their refuge to Nepture: the hunters implored
the favor of Diana. Vulcan was the God of Smiths. Pan was the God of
Shepherds, Mercury of Merchants etc. So the Church of Rome has distributed
to every Saint his office and charge: the idollatrie abides on the Theater of
the world: but she has changed the personnage and borrowed a new mask. Ianus
has left the keys and the gate of heaven to S. Peter. Lucina has resigned
the care of childbed women to S. Marguerite. Of old they addressed themselves
for rain to Iubiter Pluuius: but now the extraction is granted to Saint
Genivieve. Then those that would be preserved from or healed of the plauge
idolatrized a certain buckler, which fell from heaven, as they said, in the
time of Numa: at this day idollaters on the like occasion address themselves
unto Saint Roc. Saint George a horse back has supplanted Mars, and taken the
care and conduct of Bartailes. Saint Katherin presides over the Sciences
insteade of Minerva. The Physicians have renounced Aesculapius to receive S.
Cosme and S. Damien. Sea men inuoke S. Nicolas insteade of Neptune. Hunters
have abandoned Diana to follow S. Eustace and S. Hubert, etc. If I feared not
to estrange my self from my subject, I should make you see that the particular
devotions to this or that Saint are founded on childish reasons; and such as
expose the Christian Religion to scorn. For the sick absurdly affect the
Saints whose names have a kind of resemblance with their greifes. So those
that labor of the gout wait for their ease from S. Gotard: those who have
soar In French mammelles.
breasts hope to be healed by S. Mammard. For the evil of the eyes they have
recourse to S. Lucie: and for the Oreilles.
ears they cry to S. Ortilie. They recommend les Acariastres the mad men to
S. Acaire. And because in Italien matto signifies a fool, they recomend the
fools to S. Mathurin. I could set before you an infinite number of the like:
But behold here some that are noe less pleasant. Because the Printers print in
Latin, and of old in France all the public arts were done in Latin, the
Secretaries and the Printers have chosen for their Saint, Saint John port
Latin. Because the Tilers mount the horose tops, therefore they would have no
other patron then Jesus Christ, who is mounted above all the heavens, The
rosting cooks would have no other then the virgin Marie for their Goddess,
and they devoutly celebrate the feast of her assumption, because assum has a
signification of rosting. And forasmuch as, les Megissiers font amas de lain,
the Tanners heap up woolld, they have chosen the Magdelaine. The
looking-glass makers and the Spectacle-makers are also well met, for because
the looking-glasses clearly represent the images, and the spectacles make one
see clearly, they do hommage to Saint Claire. The best pauement is drawn
from the Rock, therefore Saint Roc is the pauiers Saint. Saint Eloy is the
patron of Smiths, because Eloy in the Greek sigbufies nails. Saint Crespin is
the fauourit of Shoemakers, because Crepide is a Latin word, signifyring a
pantoufle. The most nastie of all trades calls on S. Fiacre because of the
goodly correspondence of the name, but it is to much to stir these stinks,

Among the ancient Pagans, every country and every city, yea every family
had his tetular God, to whose keeping and protection it commended it self.
Dagon was the God of the Philistius, Astorot of the Sidonians, Molec of the
Ammonites, Kemos of the Moabites, etc. the Syrians had for their God Aftartes,
the Arabes Diaseres, etc. Romulus was the tetular God of Rome, and Apollo of
Delphos. Tertul. Apolog. c. 23.
Carthage put her self into the protection of Juno, Athens into that of
Minerua, and Cyprus into that of Venus, etc. In the place of these false Gods
and Goddesses, the Church of Rome has put he Saints and she Saints, which she
acknouwledgeth for patro^s and protectors. Saint Denis is the patron and as it
were the tetular God of France. Saint James has the protection of Spain.
England, Scotland and Ireland have chosen S. George, S. Andrew and S. Patrik.
Rome has cast her self into the arms of S. Peter and S. Paul. Venice calls
on Saint Mark. The city of Siennae is altogether vowed to the virgin Marie.
But the city of Paris reposeth her self in the bosom of Saint Geniuiena, to
beshort, there is not so poor a village which has not his patron, to whom it
ascribes the glory and yealdeth the praise of its conservation. What shall I
say more, for such opinion as the Pagans had of old of their Gods and
Goddesses, such opinion in these days have they of the Church of Rome of their
he Saints and she Saints, this spoken by a Minister seems a paradoxe: but in
the mean while it is such a manifest truth, that Ludovicus Vives, although a
Spaniard and of a contrary Religion, made no difficulty to write, Multi
Christiani in re bona peccant quod divos divasque non aliter venerantur quam
Deum. Commentar. in S. Aug. de civitate Dei ad Marcel lib. 8. c. 28.
Nec video in multis quod sit discrimen inter little opinionem de sanctis, and
id quod Gentiles putabant de suis Dijs. Indeed many Christians offend much in
this that they do not otherwise worship he Saints and she Saints then as God:
Neither do I see in many what is the difference between the opinion they have
of Saints, and that which the Gentiles had of their Gods.

The Pagans believing that their Gods dwelt in an heavenly palace,
represented them on earth by an infinite company of images; which they had in
great honor. They placed them in the Temples, set them upon the Altars,
fastened them in cross ways; even the Images which they clothed in
magnificent habbits, and crouwned with flowers; and the which they carried in
processions on the shoulders of their shaven Priests. So the Church of Rome
believes that her Saints are in heaven: but she worshippeth their Images,
places them in the Temples, sets them up on their Altars, fastens them in
cross Ways, and on the Gates of the Cities, lights candelles to them, vows
Pilgrimages to them, clothes them, paints and crowns them with flowers. The
Priests carry them in procession on their shoulders: the people fall on
their knees before them etc. Briefly all the idollatries which of old the
Pagans committed in the place of the Images of their false Gods, the Church of
Rome now practices the same in the place of the Images of her Saints. The
ancient Pagans consecrated Temples and Altars to their Gods; as the Church of
Rome does dedicate and consecrate to the Saints. And as we have before
observed, that the Pagan Gods have quitted unto the Saints the protection of
cities and Kingdoms, and yealded to them the care of trades, and the cure of
all sicknesses: so have they also resigned to them their magnificent Temples
and stately adorned Altars: for Platina, the Secretairie of the Popes, assures
us that the murderer Phocus gave leave to Boniface the 4. to consecrate unto
the Virgin Marie, and to all the Saints in Paradise. Pantheon, In the life of
Boniface 4.
which was a Temple dedicated to all the Gods, and to their mother Cibella.
They have taken away the Images of the pretended Gods and Godesses to place
there the Images of the Virgin Marie and the Saints. The same has been
practiced concerning the other Temples: For in place where they were
consecrated to Saturn, to Iubiter, to Mars, to Apollo, to Juno, to Minerua, to
Venus etc. they dedicate them to S. Adrian, to S. Marie of pains of hell, to
S. Marie of fevers, to S. Petronilla, to S. Laurence, to S. Marie of Minerua,
to S. Barba etc. 2. Book of his Dialog. chap. 8.
It is so as in the report of Pope Gregory, S. Benedict has chased Apollo
from mount Cassin; and has placed in his room S. Martin; and has demolished
the Altar of the false God to build another to saint John. Idem lib. 3. cap. 7.
So under the same caution an Italien Bishop made war against the same Apollo,
and took from him his Temples to give to S. Adrian.

Out of the same spring have issued the feasts of the Church of Rome; Polyd.
Virg. de rerum invent. lib. 6 c. 7. and 8.
for as the Pagans consecrated feast days to their Gods, so also would the
Church of Rome dedicate them to their Saints. And like as on the feast days
of the Pagans, the Priests were crowned with flowers, Idem lib. 5. cap. 1.
and the Gates of the Temples were adorned with Laurel and the like: such is
the ornament of the Feasts of the Church of Rome, and namely of the Iubile. For
all the Gates and Stations are inuironned with green bushes, and a sign
hanging out, where are painted the Arms of the Pope, with this inscription in
great letters, TO THE GREAT JUBILEE. Such are the bushes and signs of
drinking howses, where they sell the Best, Wine and the good double beer. Note
Reader that it is not without a mystery: For it is in these places that the
Woman clothed in scarlet, exposes unto Sale the wine of her abominations.

Add hereunto that in the Pagan Feasts it was expressly forbidden to labor,
and those that wrought were punished. Idem.
But it was permitted to play, to dance, and to commit all sorts of
insolences. This is the true Image of the Popish Feasts: For a poor man that
works in his shop to releive his languishing family is sure to be severely
punished, though the Law of God say, six days shall thou labor. But they
enter unpunished into Tauernes brothels and other shameless places. They believe
not that the Feast day of a Saint is well celebrated, unless they make good
cheer. It is then that the Priests and people make merry; and that they
commit the greatest excess of gluttony and drunkenness. There is not a man so
misserable that will not spare somewhat to feast his friends on the feast day of
his parish. It is about the same time and the same insolences. And Polyd.
Virg. confesses it, de rer. inv. l. 5. c. 2.
Polydor Virgil acknowledges that this custom is come from the ancient
Romans, de rerum invent. lib. 5. c. 1.

Moreover if here they look nearer, they shall find a great conformity
between the Feasts of the ancient Pagans, and them which at this day are
celebrated by our adversaries. For the folies and masks of shroftide have
succeeded to the Bacchanales, or at least to that idle Feast which the Pagans
celebrated to their great Goddess: The folies of this Feast are represented
by G. du Choul in his discourse of the Relig. of the ancient Romans p. 271
For on that day they gave leave to every one to pass the time in all sort of
insolences, to go in masque, and in what accoutrement one would. And there
was neither Magistrate, nor dignity so great, nor so honorable, to whom it
was not permitted to change habbits. So the Feast of the three Kings has
succeeded to the Saturnales, whereon read Baptista Mantuan Fastorum lib. 8.
And the feast of Innocents has succeeded the Lupercales, during the which the
young people went stark naked through the city, beating those they met with
certain whips, that were made of the skin of a Buck or goat. See Plutare. in
the life of Romulus, and G. du Choul p. 175
The young women were contented to be beaten, esteeming, that this served to
make them conceive and be blessedly delivered. And indeed those whips had then
the same virtue, that the girdle of Saint Margret may have at this day. The
Feast of the Chair of S. Peter (according to the testimony of the Bishop of
Mande) was anciently called the Feast of the banquet of S. Peter, Durandus
Ration. div. offic. l. 7. cap. 8.
because it succeeded to a Pagan Feast, in the which the poor idollaters
offered to God of their wine and meat on the tomb of their Parents. So the
Feast of the bonds of S. Peter has succeeded to a feast of the chain of gold
of the Emperor Augustus, as the same Doctor confesses Ration. divin. offic.
l. 7. c. 19. But the most remarkable of all is the Feast of Candlemas, or the
purification of our Lady; for the ancient Romans celebrated in the beginning
of February, Thence comes the word Feurier, that is to say purifying.
the Feast of the purification of Febra, mother of God Mars. And in the honor
of this Goddess they lighted torches and lamps. But when Pope Sergius
ordained that this Feast of the Purification should be celebrated in honor of
the Virgin Marie (whether he knew that this holy and blessed Virgin takes
pleasure to be served after the Pagan manner, is a great question) and that
the people should go through the churches holding torches and candels in
their hands. You may read this in Dura^d, Rat. diu. offic. l. 7. c. 7.

De rerum invent. l. 5. cap. 1.
When the Pagan Priests were consecrated, they made a solemn banquet: as it may
be seen in Apulee in his golden Ass. Polydor Virgil holds that thence
comes the custom that the Priests when they singe their first mass make a
feast, and inuit their fellow Priests and friends to drink of the
Theological wines. See the description of the Feast of the heathen Pontifes in
G. du Choul: and that of the Popes in the book of the Sacred Ceremon.
And here I may not omit that there was nothing more dilicious, nor more
curiously sought then the supper which was made after the consecration of the
chief. Pagan Pontife. It is after this model that the solemn banquet is set
out, which is made after the coronation of the Pope. But there is somewhat
peculiar in this Papal banquet, that Emperors should hold the water to the
Pope while he washes, and that Kings ought to be placed below the Cardinals,
the Pagan antiquity never sauw such a monster of pride.

This description of the Vestals may be read in the Discourse of G. du Choul p.
236. 237.
It is after the imitation of the ancient Paganism, that the Church of Rome
has builded her Couents of Religious Women and Nuns: For there was of old at
Rome Virgins, which were called Vestals, forasmuch as they were consecrated to
the Goddess Vesta, and dwelt in her Temple. These Virgins were held in great
honor among the Romans; and they esteemed them most holy, when they came to
render themselves Vestales, they were shaued, as the Nuns at this day, they
took a veil and were reinuested with long white robes. The entry of their
howses was forbidden to men, as that of the reformed monastaries of the Nuns.
They had public rents and revenues; and wealthy persons on their deathbeds
bequeathed them great riches. And as the Religious Nuns have an Abbess, who
commands them; so the Vestals had also their Gouernesse, who was called
Maxima. In the Covent of the Vestal Virgins there were certain little Nuns,
who were there from their infancy. So the Couents of the Church of Rome are
full of Infants and young maids. But behold one notable difference. That
during the space of ten years, the Vestales learned the manner of their
Service: during other ten years, they applied themselves to the service and
sacrifice: and other ten years following they taught the young Nuns newly
received. But at the end of thirty years they were permitted to marry.
Wherefore the Pagans will rise in judgment with the Church of Rome, and will
condemn her of the tyranny, which she excerciseth toward poor maids, who
being rashly cast into a Covent, or being trained there by force and
constraint, can never go out again, no more then the fish which is folishly
catched in the net.

It is after the Pagan immitation that the Monks Discipline themselves, and
that there are confraternities of Whippers, for God has forbidden his servants
to make incision in their flesh: Lev. 19. 1. King. 18.
but the Priests of Bahal cut themselves with knives till the blood came. And
the Priests of the Goddess Cybell whipped and lacerated themselves till the
blood run down: and after haueing heaped up Gold and silver, which good people
gave them, they made good cheer in secret, and loosed the bridle to all kind
of filth and dissolutnes, whereof read Apulee in his golden Ass.

It is out of the same shop that the Priests and Monks have learned to shave
themselves and wear crowns against Gods express commandment to his people.
See G. du Choul. page 299.
Levit. 19.

Polydor. l. 5 cap. 9. G. du Choul page 305. See the Hist. of Eusebius. continued
by Rufin. l. 12. cap. 26.
It is out of the same School that the Church of Rome has learned to build her
Altars to the East, and that their Priests turn themselves that way when they
offer their Sacrifices.

The goodly custom of carrying God in procession, and in a journey is also
derived of the ancient heathen, for the Romans carred in procession their
great God Jubiter. And the Chaldeans carried here and there the fire which they
adored for their God. Above all I find it wonderful that the Pagans have
given to their God Iubiter, the surname of Pistor, as appears by that verse
of Ovid. Apulee his Golden Ass lib. 3.
Candida Pistori ponitur ara Ioui, for nothing could better succeed to Jubiter
Pistor then a God of bread. The Pagans had also certain hosts which they
called hostias circumforaueas, and it seems this word was expressly invented
to represent the hosts, which the Church of Rome carries from place to place.
Look into the writings of the ancient Pagans, Lib. 11. and G. du Choul. page
271.
and namely into Apulee in the description of the feasts of their great Gods,
and see the Priests crowned with flowers carrying them in solemn pomp on
their shoulders, with vessels of gold and silver; the men and women of what
sort and condition soevergoeing in procession, the streets were adorned and
strewed with flowers; the air resounded with the wise of the trompets; and
they sunge the music before the idol. Breifely, they observed almost all the
same ceremonies, which are now observed on the day which they call the feast of
God. As to this that the Pope, Or Corpus Christi day.
on the day of the most solemn procession, makes his God to be carried on a
white Hackney, while he is proudly carried on the shoulders of the most
honourablemen in the city: and as to that also, that he makes the same God to
be carried amongst his baggage, This is found in the book of the Ceremonies of
the Romish church.
when he takes a journey with his Cardinals, this has noe example in all
antiquity, for there never was so wretiched a Pagan, that did not render more
honor to his God, them the Pope yaeldeth to that, which he makes show to
acknowledge for his God and Savior.

The Church of Rome worshippeth certain little Jmages of waxt, which they
commonly call the Agnus Dei. The Pope does consecrate and baptize them, This
also is found in the same book.
and gives them power against hail, lightenings and tempests, and that which
is most horrible, he persuades them that this will do away their sines, noe
less them the blood of Christ it self. This abominable idollatrie has his
foundation in the ancient paganism, for the great Pontife did likewise
consecrate certain figures of the lightening of Iubiter. The poor Idollaters
worshipped these little Images; and believed that there was in them a certain
virtue against lightenings and tempests. But it is better to set out this
comparison by the words of the Lord of Choul. In his Discourse of the Relig. of
the ancient Romans p. 285.
As we adore, (mark the words we adore: for these men are offended when we
accuse them of adoring Images) the figure of the little Lamb of God, because it
represents Jesus Christ: and in like manner the figure of the Dove, because it
denotes the holy Ghost: just even so the Gentiles had in singular reverence the
lightening of Iubiter: by the which they declared the figure of their great
God, thinking that it guarded them from Tempest, and that it had a certain
virtue after it was consecrated by their great Pontife. And that which the
Gentiles did in their rediculous superstitions, we have transferred into our
Christian Religion, causing our little Agnus Dei, and our bells to be
consecrated and blessed, which by this means take a virtue to chase away
Tempest and foul wether. And just so the salt and the water by their
benidictions and exorcismes take a force and virtue to drive away devils.

Plato l. 24. and Plutarc. touching the face which appeared in the round of the
Moon.
The ancient Pagans thought that the Souls of all good and verteous persons
departed out of the body to a place of repose and felicity: that those who were
altogether wicked and ungodly were cast headlong into eternal fires and
torments: But that those who being good and honest were nevertheless defiled
with remediable sins (such as at this day they call venial sins) were
purged in a fire; and tormented for a time in the air or in prisons under the
earth; whence they were delivered after they had by their own propper torment
expiated their sins. De purgato. l. 1. c. 11.
They are these doting Pagans, who have kindled the fire of the Roman
Purgatoire. And indeed Cardinal Bellarmine proves that there is a Purgatoire
by the testimony of Plato, Cicero and Virgil. Moreover there are in the Church
of Rome famous Doctors, Bellar. de purgatorio l. 2. cap. 7.
who teach that besides Hell, Purgatory Limbus Patruum, and the Limbus of the
young Infants who die without baptism, there is a fifth place, which is as an
odiferous meadow and sprinkled with flowers, where the Souls rejoice themselves
before they enter into Paradis. Compare but this with those Elisian feilds
taught by Plato, and you shall see that one and the same spirit of error has
invented both the one and the other fables.

The ancient Pagans prayed for their dead, and offered sacrifices, and by many
other ceremonies thought to lighten their torments. Thence is come the prayers
for the dead in the Church of Rome; and that by singing of Masses, ringing of
Bells etc. they believe to lessen the time and quality of their peines. And
even so as on the ninth day after the death, the Pagans used a solemn service,
Polyd. Virgil de invent. rerum l. 6. ca. 10.
during the which they magnificently enterteined the Priests of the false Gods:
So in the Church of Rome, seven days after the decease, they do the service
of the dead; and while the friends of the defunct are weeping, the Priests sing
and make merry. Thence came the Canon by which it is forbidden to Priests to
be in heaviness when they are called to celebrate the service of the dead: In
the Decree of Gratian. did. 44. can. nullus.
but whether they observe the rule of this Canon, that is a question by it
self.

And to the end that the Pagan superstition might here have noe preeminence,
Polidor Virgil de invent. rerum lib. 6. cap. 9
just so as besides the service which they did in particular for every dead
person, the Pagans had also their annual Feasts, destinated to celebrate the
memory of the dead, visit their Sepulchers and pray for their salvation: So
the Church of Rome does every year celebrate the Feast of the dead. The people
run to oppress the church yards, striueing who shall mumble out most prayers,
he that will not take pains to write them gets another to do it for money;
the Bells ring of all sides, and this music of the dead lasts all night.

The ancient Pagans did greatly boast and btag of their miracles. Read
their histories, and you shall see of their Images falling from heaven of
others that removed themselves, that did sweat, speak, etc. so the Church of
Rome boasts of her miracles (they ought also to accompaine the Son of
perdition.) Read the Legends of Saints, and you shall see Chambers transported
by Angels, and Images falling from Heaven; you may also see that they bend
themselves, speak, kiss, etc. And even as the Pagans fastened Tables in the
Temple of their God, Polyd. Virgil de invent. rerum lib. 5. cap. 1.
by whom they thought they had received help, and therein writ the disseases
whereof they had been healed, the Church of Rome follows the same custom;
for they ascribe to the Saints all the cures and miraculous healings which are
done: and for a memorial to posterity she consecrates inscriptions of them in
the Churches and Chapels. This may be seen in our Lady of Ardilliers, and in
such other places of idollatrie. Ibidem.
Out of the same Spring has proceeded the custom of offering in the Churches
Images of wax and Candels. And as the Pagans offered to their Gods Images of
earth made after the resemblance of the parts of their bodies: Ibidem, these
Images were called Oscilia.
So the superstitious of the Church of Rome, who have some part of their bodies
afflicted make vows to God and the Saints; and then when they have recovered
their health, they offer an Image of wax of the fashion of the hand, the
foot or the breast which has been healed. And as superstition has no
bounds, the custom has passed from men to beasts: so that at this day they
set in the Churches the like Images of their Oxen, De invent. rerum lib. 5.
cap. 1.
their horses and sheep. Polydor Virgil approues this superstition, and holds
that to fear to imitate in this point the Pagans is scrupulous Or bashfulnet.
puritanisme.

I could preduce an infinite number of such superstitions and Ceremonies, which
the Church of Rome has borrowed of Paganism: but this would deserve a
Treatise by it self. In the mean while I can not omit this note, that it is
by an harmonious concordance that the Church of Rome has founded many of her
Ceremonies on Iudaisme, and on Paganism. For example, we have seen that the
Church of Rome authoriseth her hiarchie on the example of the Jews, but she
auoueth this also to be a Pagan invention: See the 1. part of the Decree of
Gratian did. 21. Can. Decret.
For the Decre of Gracian, after it had represented the diversity of the Roman
Clergy, composed of simple Priests, Archpreists, Bishops, Archbishops,
Primates, Metropolitans, Patriarchs, Popes, adds that this diversity did
principally proceed from the ancient Pagans, who had their Priests, their
Archpreists etc. a confession which is drawn from the master of the
Sentences, lib. 4. did. 24. litt. M. the Bishop of Manda acknowledges the
same truth, Ration. divine. offic. lib. 2. cap. 1. n. 22. But there is none more
propper formal on this matter then G. du Choul, In his Discourse of the Religion
of the ancient Romans p. 337
whose own words are these: The Romans had another fashion of ordaining their
Preistly dignities, as their great Pontifes, the little Pontifes, Flamins,
Archflamins and Proflamins: just so as we have the Pope, the Cardinals,
Bishops, Archbishops and Patriarchs: Colleges, as the Canons: and men of the
guard, as are the knights of S. John of Jerusalem.

We have seen that the Church of Rome forms the habbits of her Priests after
the pattern of the Jews, but she has also borrowed the fashion of the Pagans,
as G. du Choul acknowledges in these words: And if we here observe it
curiously, Of the Reli. of the ancient Romans p. 337.
we know that verrie many institutions of our Religion are taken and
translated from the Ceremonies of the Egyptians and Gentiles, as are the coats
and surplesses, the crowns which make the Priests, the bowings of the head
toward the Altar, the sacrifical pomp, the music of the Temples, adorations,
prayers, and supplications, processions and Letanies: and many other things
which our Priests usurp in our mysteries.

We have learned that the Feasts of four times have took their original
from the Jews; De invent. rerum. l. 6. cap. 3.
but it is also an institution descended from the Pagan antiquity. Polydor
Virgil acknowledges it, and proves it by the testimony of Ovid. The Church of
Rome confesses that she has learned of the Jews to dedicate Churches: but
she acknowledges also that it has the praise of Paganism: For she forms
her self after the example of Nebuchadnesar, who invited all the great ones
of his Kingdom to the dedication of his Image of gold, Durand Ration. divine.
offic. lib. 1. cap. 6. n. 2.

The Church of Rome has learned of the Jews to go in processions; but she
ought also to give thanks to the Pagans, De invent. rerum l. 6. c. 11. and 12
as Polyd. Virgil acknowledges. Consider the Processions of Babylon, written
in the 6. chapter of Baruc: their Gods carried on shoulders; the shorn
Priests, who cried in carrying them; the people who went before and behind,
and which worshipped, and you shall see that it is a lively image of the
processions of the time.

The holy water descended from the Jews, but it also sprunge from Pagan
superstition: For the Pagans purified themselves with consecrated water, which
also they called lustrate, that is to say purifying. They also sprinkled the
dead: Virg. Aeneides l. 6.
and noe otherwise then is practiced at this day, they had an aspergile, As you
may see in G. du Choul page 289. 290. 291.
and a benestier at the entry of their Temples, where the Priests and the
people took of the water, as they entered into their Temples. And in this
point the conformity is so great, that the figures, which were made to
represent the aspergile and the benestier of the Pagans, seem to have been
drawn to represent the outils of the Church of Rome; and to the end that every
one might point to it with his finger. G. du Choul has set this superscription
on one of the Pagan benestiers, A little benestier portatife like that which we
use in our Religion.

We have said that burning of incense on the Alter, and washing before the
beginning of service is a Iudical ceremony: but Polydor Virgil holds that it
has been borrowed of the Fagans de invent. rerum lib. 5. cap. 11. etc. Above
all I find it admirable that the Jews, the Pagans and the Papists serve
themselves of the same weapons, and employe the same reasons to defend and
strenghten themselves in their abuse: for they all allege for their
ceremonies their antiquity and the prosperity that has accompanied the
observation. The Prophet Jeremy exhorts the children of Israel in the name of
God to turn from the idollatrie of their fathers, who had burnt incense to
the Queen of heaven, and the rebellious people answered him, As concerning the
word of the Lord which thou have spoken to us, Ierem. 44.
we will not hear it. But for certain we will do all that which is gonne
out of our mouth, burning incense to the Queen of heaven, and making aspersion
to her, as we have done, we and our fathers, the Kings and the Princes
amongst us in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, and have
had our fill of bread, and have been at our ease, and have seen noe evil.
But from the time that we have ceased to burn incense to the Queen of
heaven, and to make aspersions to her, we have had want of all, and have been
consumed by the sword and by foemiue. And the Pharisees said to Jesus Christ:
Matthew. 15. and Marc. 7.
Why do thy Disciples transgress the traditions of the Elders? And behold an
accusation framed against S. Steven the first Martyr of Jesus: This man here
cease not to speak blasphemies against this holy place and the Law: Act. 6.
For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this holy
place and shall change the ordinances which Moses has given us.

The Senate of Rome for many ages opposed themselves to Christianity, namely
long after the Emperors had submitted themselves to the Son of God, the
Senators were given to the defense of the Pagan superstitions and ceremonies:
they alleged the same reasons that the idollatrous Jews did. Epistolarum l.
10. Epist. 54.
Read the Epistles of Simmachus, namely those that were written on this
subject to the Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius and Arcadius. That which he
presses in all his Epistles is the antiquity of their Ceremonies; and the
good luck that the Roman Empire had during the time that she observed the
Religion of her ancestors. He brings in the City of Rome prostrate at the
feet of the Emperors, and making this Oration to them: Right good Princes
fathers of the Country, have respect unto my years, whereunto J am come by
the means of my holy customs. Permit me to observe the Ceremonies which were
taught me by my ancesters; and whereof I have noe cause to repent me; that I
live according to my custom, seeing, I am free. It is this divine service that
has subjected all the world to my Laws. It is this Religion which has chased
Hannibal from my Walls, and the Gauls from the Capitol. Is this that then for
which J have been conserved, to the end that they should come to reprove me
in my so great age? Of what kind soever the Ordinances may be which they
would establish, the reformation of my old age can not but be late and
injurious.

These are the same reasons which they of the Church of Rome allege against
us: For when they can not by reason establish, and much less by holy Scripture
authorize their frivolous and vain Ceremonies, Bellarm. de Eccles. l. 4. cap.
18.
they make a Buckler of antiquity: And are not ashamed to put temporal
prosperity among the marks of the Church.

Moreover there are many superstitions and particular ceremonies whith the old
and new Rome defend by the same reasons and cover with the same protexts, for
example those, that would excuse Caligula for putting forth his feet to have
them kissed, Seneca de beneficijs lib. 2, cap. 12.
say that it was not done through insolence, but only to let them see his
pantoufle enriched with gold and pearls, and even see they excuse the Pope;
for his flatterers will make us believe that it is not through pride that he
makes Princes and Kings kiss his feere, but to honor the cross of gold which
is embrodered on his pantoufle. Augustine. de civit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 18.
Ambros. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 1.
The ancient Christians reproached the Pagans with the multitude of their
Gods, and deified men which they adored the Pagans answered that in honoring
these personages, which were the friends of God, they honored God himself.
That these blessed Spirits carried the prayers of men unto God. That by the
creatures they went to the Creator, no otherwise then as one goes to the King
by his officers. There is not a child so little that knows not that these are
the excuses of the Church of Rome, when we reproach them that she worshippeth a
million of Saints, though in the whole Scripture we have neither commandment,
nor promise nor example.

G. du Choul discourse of the Relig. of the ancient Romans page 285.
They reproched the Pagans with the worshipping of Jmages, but they have
protested, that they honored not the Images because of themselves, but for the
representation of them, by benefit of whom they had received so many good
things, It is even so that the Church of Rome excuses her idollatrie, for the
greater part say that they worship not the Jmages, but the thing represented
by them, nevertheless one of their Cardinals, Bellarmin de imaginn. lib. 2.
cap. 22.
raising the price of their idollatrie in this resect above that of the
Pagans, is so hardy as to write that Images ought to be worshipped in a
twofold respect, to wit because of their prototype, and because of
themselves; and that there is a veneration terminated in the Image.

But to return to my purpose, J think it well founded to put the Iubile
among the Ceremonies which the Church of Rome has borrowed of Iudaisme and
Paganism. As for Indaisme it appears; Platina in the ^ife of Bonifac. 8.
for according to Platina Register of the Popes, Boniface the 8. instituted the
Iubile in imitation of that which is practiced in the old Testament. And to
this it is that Clement the 6. had espetial regard when he calls this
ceremoni by the name of Iubile, and ordains that it should be celebrated from
fifty years to fifty years. There is none more admirable in my opinion on
this subject then the Archbishop Antonin. for he thinks that the Jubilee was
figured in the ancient law: Summa sacrae Theol. part. ^. tit. 10. cap. 3. de
indulgentijs.
And that it had his beginning in Abraham, because Lot was fifty year old when
Abraham rescued him out of the hands of the four Kings that carried him
captive. Also because he was fifty year old when God spoke to him, and drew
him out of the place of his nativitie. Where because Abraham, who was
excercised in the knowledge of the Stars, knew that the Intemperature of the
air, which comes of the diverse aspects of the Planets, purges it self at
the end of fifty years, would imitate on earth that which the Stars do in
heaven, ordaining that fiftith year should be called Iubile. Judge Reader if
these reasons be not pleasant.

To the end that the truth may more clearly appear to the Reader, I will
represent as in a running table the Pagan ceremony, and then I will compare it
with that of the Roman Jubilee. The secular plays were instituted by the Consul
Valerius Publicola, about the year of the world 3434. before the birth of our
Savior Christ 866. after the building of Rome 188. years. This is the opinion
of Valerius Maximus, Polydor Virgil. and many others Authors ancient and
modern. But others hold that these plays were not instituted till 298. years
after the foundation of Rome under the Consulship of M. Valerius and Sp.
Virginius. When the time of these plays approached a lyerault went through all
Italy to make publication: and invited the people thither, crying, Come see
things which ye have never seen and which you shall never see again.

Read the ceremonies of these places en Sozime histor. lib. 2. and Onuphrius
Ponuin. de ludis saecularibus.
A little before the Spectacle began to be seen, the Emperor or the Consuls
with fifteen personages deputed to sacrifice in the Capitol and palace,
being set in chaires before the Temples of Apollo Palatin, and Iubiter
Capitolin, distributed of certain things among the people, which they thought
served to expiate their sins, as Torches, Sulphur, etc. The people from all
parts ran to these places: as also to the Temple of Diana, which was on mount
Auentin, where the custom was to distribute, among free person, of the
barley, wheat and beans to offer to Parques. The feast dured continually for
the space of three days and three nights, during which time they who had
charge of the service, were bound to remove themselves into the field of Mars,
there to offer sacrifices to Iubiter, Juno, Neptune, Minerua, Venus, Apollo,
Mercure. Ceres, Vulcan, Mars, Diana, Vesta, Hercules, Laton, to the Gods of the
fountains, to Parques, Pluto and Peoserpiue. By the commandment of the
Consuls, therein following the Emperors and the fifteen personages, that had
the care of the plays, they built three Altars by the river of Tibre, on the
which they offered lambs in sacrifice, they also kindled lamps, and fire,
etc. but the principal idollatrie of all was committed in the place of a
certain relick, to wit an Altar which was builded twenty foot above the
earth and consecrated to Pluto and the Goddess Proserpine, Tullius Hostililius
reigning in Rome; and after discovered by Volusius Valesius, in the reign of
Seruius Tullius. They prepared the Theaters and cellebrated the plays in
honor of Apollo and Diana. Men, women and children went to visit the Temples
and Altars, and to offer prayers and supplications to the Gods, in singing the
bymnes composed to that purpose. So for the plays which were celebrated under
the Empire of Augustus, the Poet Horace composed his so renowned verses,
beginning, Phoebe, sylvarumque potens Diana. But as the opinions are diverse
touching the durance of the ages, so the Authors, which have written of the
secular plays, do but little agree in the time of the celebratio^ of these
plays. Some think that they were not celebrated but from a hundred and ten
years to a hundred and ten years, Onuphrius Pauuin. is of this opinion,
which he gathers from the Edict of Augustus, the verses of Horace, of the
commentaire of the fifteen personages, etc. but the more common and probable
opinion is that these plays were celebrated from 100. years to 100. years,
which is that which has been held by Marcus Varo lib. 1. de senicis
originibus Sextus Pompeius Festus de verborum significatione lib. 17. Zosimus
histor. lib. 2. and Saint Augustine de civitate Dei ad Marcel. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Onuphrius Panuin. confesses also that this is the opinion of Valerias Antias,
Titus Livius, and the most of the ancients. Among the modern, Polyd. Virgil.
embraseth and defends this opinion, de invent. rerum lib. 8. cap. 1. But
after the Emperors, willing to have the glory and pleasure of the secular
plays, shortened the time of a hundred years, for Augustus Caesar haueing
celebrated them during the Consulship of C. Furnius and C. Silanus, Claudius
Caesar celebrated them again about sixty or sixty three years after. In so
much as by the report of Pliny, In his natural Hist. book 7. cha. 47.
one and the same man served for Rimer in the secular plays under Augustus,
and under Claudius Caesar. Whereupon Suetonius observes that when the lyerauld
solemnly invited the people, in saying after the ancient manner. Come to the
plays which no man has seens, nor ever shall again, this moved the people to
a public laughter: forty years after were scarce passed when the Emperor
Domitian would also make the magnificence of his Empire remarbable by these
plays, hereof read Suetonius in the life of the Caesar's.

Now that the Popes have instituted their Iubile in imitation of the secular
plays, the most famous Doctors among our Adversaries do freely confess, for
behold how Polydor Virgil speaks thereof. De invent. rerum lib. 8. cap. 1.
The same Pope (to wit Boniface 8.) ordained that a Iubiles should be
celebrated from a hundred years to a hundred years: the which seems to have
been done to divert the people, and perticularly the people of Rome from the
vain spectacle of their secular plays, and to lead them to the true sacred
solemnity. Onuphrius Panuinius speaks yet more precisely. The secular
plays, says he, De ludis saecularibus.
were of old amongst the Pagans that which at this day is our Jubilee, which is
celebrated from twenty five years to twenty five years, wherein men obtain
pardon for all their finnes as appears by the Bulls of the Souueraigne
Pontifes.

And indeed one can not sufficiently admire the correspondence that is
between the secular plays and the Roman Iubile. 1. The secular plays were
celebrated in the city of Rome: It is the same place where the Ceremonies of
the great Iubi^e are performed. 2. The secular plays were performed from a
hundred years to a hundred years. It is the same time that Boniface 8. took
for the Jubilee. An evident testimony that in the institution of this vain
Ceremony called the Jubilee, he had not so much respect to the Iubile of the
Jews, as to the Iubile of the Pagans. 3. A little before the Pagan Iubile, the
heraults went through all Italy to inuit the people thither: So when the time
of the Iubile approaches they inuit all the world by the sound of the Papal
trumpet, falsely called Apostolic. 4. To encourage every one to come to the
sport of the secular plays, they promised to let them see things they had
never seen, nor never should again: So the Popes amplify by their bulls the
pretended graces of there Iubile, and representing the shortness of life, inuit
all the world not to let pass so favorable an occasion. 5. The Emperors
Claudius and Dominitian, willing to have the glory and pleasure of the secular
plays, shortened the term of 100. years observed by their Ancestors. So
Clement VI. and Sixtus IV. willing to have part of the glory and proffit of
the Jubilee, have shortened the term of the hundred years ordained by Boniface.
6. In the time of the Pagan Jubilee they promised the poor Idollaters the
expiation and abolition of their sins: So during the new Roman Iubile, the
Pope distributeth the grand pardons and plenarie indulgentes, taking away both
the fault and the punishment. There is noe wickedness so enormious, which the
Iubile will not put away. 7. Before the solemnity of the secular plays, the
Emperor went in great pomp and with great affluence of people, to the
Temples dedicated to false Gods: Read Santarellus, and those that have written
the ceremonies of the Iubile, and you shall find that the Pope and his go in
like solemn processio^s to the opening of the Iubile. 8. Behold yet one
resemblance admirable above all the rest. In the beginning of the Pagan Iubile
at Rome, they discovered a certain Altar dedicated to Pluto and the Goddess
Proserpin, and so scone as the plays were ended they covered the Altar again
with earth. So at Rome that calls it self Christian, there is a gate which
is called holy which is opened at the beginning of the Iubile, and shut again
as soon as it is ended. And it is verrie remarkable that the Pope opens it
with a silver hammer, and before it is shut again, he does there put pieces of
gold and silver: as if he would yet at this day do honor to the God of
riches. 9. The feast of the ancient Pagans dured three days and three nights:
So the Pope has ordained a certain number of days to gain the Iubile. 10.
During the secular plays, men women and children visited the Temples, the
Altars, the Relics: the like thing is practiced during the Roman Iubile. 11.
During the plays they offered Sacrifices and presented prayers to diverse Gods
and Goddesses: So during the Iubile they address diverse prayers to he Saints
and she Saints. 12. At every solemnity of the plays, they composed new
hymns: So at every Iubile new prayers and orations. Witness that which they
cry through the city for the gaining of the present Iubile. 13. Note yet that
they graued on an Altar of brass under what Consuls or Emperors it was that
these secular plays were celebrated. De ludis saecularibus.
Onuphrius panuinius teaches us that they graued them in the same of manner,
as they do the Popes under whom the Iubile is celebrated. 14. To comfort and
raise up the courages of good people, I finish this comparison, that as the
Emperors, being made Christians, abolished these secular plays: So we hope
that the Christian Kings and Princes will holy abolish the Roman Iubile, when
God shall give them the grace to take into consideration the superstition and
impiety. For those who have given their power and authority to the Beast,
are those which shall eat her flesh and leave her desolate and naked. Reu. 17.
Amen.

If any desiere to see further, let him loock the forsayed Authers or a Boock,
Imprinted this year in Inglisch, called the Origenall of Popisch Idollatry or
Birth of Heresies.

FINIS.
Gentel Reader pasby litterall faults.


