A PAEAN TR^VMPHALL. COMPOSED FOR THE SOCIETY O^ the Goldsmiths of London:
congratulating his Highness magnificent entering the City.

To the Majesty of the King.

By MICHAEL DRAYTON.

Dicite io paean, io bis dicite paean.

LONDON

Printed for JOHN FLASKET, and are to be sold at his shop

Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the black Bear. 1604.

A Paean Triumphall.
TO the vaste skies whilst shoutes and cries rebound,
And buildings echo with reuerberate sound,
Struggling to thrust out of the peopled throng,
Panting for breath flies our elaborate song.
That time the day brake from her wonted guise,
The Sun in haste before his hour did rise,
And drove the fleet-foote posting hours so fast,
Which were afeard young Phaeton that was cast
From his Siers Chariot, reobtain'd the Carre,
To set the neighboring Elements at war.
But whilst sweet Zephyre gently spreads his wings,
Curles the sleeke bosoms of th'enamoured springs.
With Baulmie spices so perfumes each place,
Breathing such odors in the mornings face,
That the day seemed all former days to scorn,
And (to compare it) ever should be borne.
Saturn whose grim face clad in Icie hair,
Thrust his bleake visage through the Northern air,
That long had low'rd upon the drouping spring,
With Frosts, Hailes, Snowes and Tempests minacing,
Suddenly calmed, and his harsh rage resignes
To smooth Fauonius and mild Libick winds, The south and southwest wind.

Whilst Temples stand even trembling as afeard,
To see proud Pageants on their Arches reard
Above their Turrets, whilst the concourse meet,
Like boisterous tides in every public street.
Windows of eyes, the houses scorned their glass,
On every side their Majesty's should pass:
Rooms with rich beauties furnished about,
Arras but serves to hang the walls without.
Who loved in works of ancient times to pry,
Hangings complete with curious Imagrie,
Glutting his eyes here lively might behold,
Faces whose numbers figures never told,
Walling the houses, in whose several eyes
Joy shows it self in more varieties,
Then be their minds, the objects that they see,
Which are as various as their features be.
The hie-reard spires shake with the peoples cry,
Bending their tops seem wondering to epsy
Streets pau'd with heads, for such the numbers be,
The loftiest Tower no ground at all can see.
Banners, Flags, Streamers, in such numbers borne,
And stood so thick that one might soon have sworn,
Nature of late some novelty had brought,
Groaues leau'd with silk in curious manner wrought,
Bearing such fruit the Atlantides did keep, The daughters of Atlas.

By that fierce Dragon that did never sleep.
When now approached glorious Majesty,
Under a gold-wrought sumptuous Canopie.
Before him went his goodly glittering train,
Which though as late washed in a golden rain.
All so embraudered that to those behold,
Horses as men, seemed to be made of Gold:
With the fair Prince, in whom appeared in glory,
As in th'abridgement of some famous story,
Every rare virtue of each famous King
Since Norman Williams happy conquering:
Where might be seen in his fresh blooming hopes,
Henry the fifth leading his warlike troops,
When the proud French fell on that conquered land,
As the full Corn before the laborers hand.
Vshering so bright and Angellike a Queen,
Whose gallant carridge had but Cynthia seen,
She might have learnd her silver brow to bear,
And to have shined and sparckl'd in her sphere,
Leading her Ladies on their milkie Steedes,
With such aspect that each beholder feeds,
As though the lights and beauties of the skies,
Transcending dwelt and twinckled in their eyes.
Here might you see what passion wonder wrought,
As it inuades the temper of the thought:
One weeps for joy, he laughs and claps his hands,
Another still and looking sadly stands:
Others that seemed to be moved less,
Showed more then these in action could express.
None there is could judge a witness of this sight,
Whether of two did take the more delight,
They that in triumph rode or they that stand,
To view the pomp and glory of the land,
Each unto other such reflection sent,
Either so sumptuous, so magnificent:
Nor are the duties that thy subjects owe,
Only comprised in this external show.
For hearts are heaped with those innumered hoords,
That tongues by vttrance cannot vent in words:
Nor is it all Invention here devises,
That thy hie worth and Majesty comprizes,
And we not last of those glad hearts that prove,
To show our Sovereign our unspotted love.
The first a Majors name worthily did grace, John Stow Suruay.

Marrying that title and Pretorian place,
Was of our freedom, purchasing thereby
That primate honor to our Livery.
Native our love as needful is our trade,
By which no kingdom ever was decaide,
To bring slight gauds and womanish devices,
Of little use and of excessive prices,
Good home-made things with trifles to suppress,
To feed luxurious riot, and excess,
Sound-Bullion is our subject, whose sure rate
Scaled by his selfeworth, such the Goldsmiths state,
Which peace and happy government does nourish,
And with a kingdom does both fade and flourish.
Natures perfection, that great wonder Gold,
Of which the first note of our name we hold,
Phoebus his God that triply does implie,
To medicen, Music, and sweet Poesy,
To us his hie divinity imparts,
As he is known and glorified in Arts:
For that invention study does befit,
That is the crown and purity of wit,
What does belong and's proper to the muse,
We of all other mysteries do use,
Moulds and insculpturs framing by the head,
Forms and proportions strangely varied.
The lump as likes the workman best to frame,
To wedge, to ingot, or what other name,
That by the sight and knowledge of our trade,
Into rich Plate, and Vtensils is made
Within thy land, for ornament does stay,
Angels have wings and fleeting still away,
And by eschanging virtuously does fly
That cankerd, base, and idle Usury:
For when the banck once subtilie is placed,
Th'exacted use comes hourly in so fast,
That whilst the lender on the borrower prays,
Good and industrious faculty decaies.
Foul Avarice that triple Dog of Hell,
That when Jove's son emperiously did quell,
And from his hand received that fatal wound,
His poisoned foame he driu'ld on the ground,
From which they say as in the earths despite,
Did spring that black and poisoned Aconite:
For they by fire that metals use to try,
And find wise Natures secresies thereby,
When they prepare industriously to shed
Silver, disposed adulteratly with lead,
Prove this base Courser from the other fine,
Being so clear and aptly femenine,
Steals from her pureness in his boystrous fixure,
By the corruption of his earthly mixure,
Which if Gold helping her infeebled might,
As a kind brother in his sisters right,
By him her spirit is perfect and compacted,
Which that gross body enuiously detracted.
Conscience like Gold which Hell cannot entice,
Nor win from weak man by his avarice:
Which if infused such virtue does impart,
As does conform and rectify the heart.
For as the Indians by experience know,
That like a Tree it in the ground does grow,
And as it still approaches to the day,
His curled branches bravely does display,
Then in the bulk and body of the mine,
More neat, contracted, rarifi'd, and fine:
So truth from darkness spreading does appear,
And shows it self more luculent and clear.
Dunstan our Patron that religious man, In Cate^^ Episcop^^

(That great and famous Metropolitan,
That in his time ascended by degrees,
To VVorster, London, Canturburies Sees,
That was in ancient Glastenbury bred,
Four Saxons reigns that living flourished,
Whose deeds the world unto this time contains,
And sainted in our Kalenders remains
Gave) what not time our Brotherhood denies,
Ancient endowments and immunities:
And for our station and our general heap,
Recides in Lombard or in goodly Cheap.
We have an Adage which though very old,
It Is not the worse that it has often been told,
(Though the despising ancient things and holy,
Too much betraies our ignorance and folly)
That England yields to goodly London this,
That she her chief and sovereign City is:
^ondon will grant her goodly Cheap the grace,
^o be her first and and absolutest place:
^are I proclaim then with a constant hand,
^heape is the Star and Jewel of thy land.
The Trophie that we rear unto thy praise,
This gold-drop'd Laurel, this life-giuing bays,
No power lends immortality to men,
^ike the hie spirit of an industrious pen,
Which stems times tumults with a full-spread sail,
When proud reard piles and monuments do fail,
And in their cinders when great Courts do lie,
That shall confront and iustle with the sky:
Live ever mighty, happily, and long,
Living admired, and dead be highly song.
FINIS.

