THE Tragical Legend of Robert, Duke of Normandy, surnamed Short-thigh, eldest
son to William Conqueror.

With the Legend of Matilda the chaste, daughter to the Lord Robert Fitzwater,
poisoned by King John.

And the Legend of Piers Gaueston, the great Earl of Cornwall: and mighty
favorite of king Edward the second.

By Michaell Drayton.

The latter two, by him newly corrected and augmented.

AT LONDON, Printed by Ia. Roberts for N. L. and are to be sold at his shop at
the West door of Paul's. 1596.

To the noble and excellent Lady, Lucie, Countess of Bedford.
MOst noble Lady, I leave my Poems as a monument of the Zeal I bear to your
virtues, though the greatest part of my labor, be but the least part of my
love: And if any thought of worth live in me, that only has been nourished
by your mild favors and former graces to my unworthy self, and the admiration
of your more then excellent parts shyning to the world. What nature and
industry began, your honor and bounty has thus far continued. The light I
have, is borrowed from your beams, which Envy shall not eclipse, so long as
you shall fanourablie shine. Under the stamp of your glorious Name my Poems
shall pass for current, being not altogether unworthy of so great a
superscription: I live only dedicated to your service, and rest your Honors
humbly devoted.

Michaell Drayton.
To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne Harrington: wise to the Honorable
Gentleman, Sir John Harrington, Knight.
MAdam: my words cannot express my mind,
My Zealers duty to make known to you,
When your deserts all severally I find,
In this attempt, of me do claim their due:
Your gracious kindness (Madam) claims my heart,
Your bounty bids my hand to make it known,
Of me your virtues each do claim a part;
And leave me thus the least part of mine own,
What should commend your modesty, your wit,
Is by your wit and modesty commended,
And stands dumb in most admiring it,
And where it should begin, it there is ended.
And thus return, to your praise only due,
And to your self say, you, are only you.
Michaell Drayton.
To the Reader.
GEntlemen, since my first publishing of these tragical complaints of Piers
Gaswton and Matilda it is not unknown to any which traffic with Poetry, how
by the sinister dealing of some unskillful Printer, Prers Gawston has been
lately put sorth contrary to my will, with as many faults as there be lines in
the same, being in deed at the suit no perfect Copy, but left unformed and
undigested, like a Bear vvhelpe before it is lick by the Dam. But now of late
understanding by the Stationers, that they meant the third time to bring it to
the Press, for which purpose as it seemed, they kept Matilda from printing,
only because they meant to join the^ together in one little volume, I have
taken some pain in them both to augment and polish them, since I see they must
go to the public view of the world: and with the old conceit of Apelles,
(hearing the opinion of all that passed by) amended so much as the latchet. To
these complaints written by me two years since, I have added this third, of
Robert Duke of Normandy: A subject in my poor opinion, as worthy as any, how
soever I have hanled it in the writing. Thus submitting my labors to your
discreet censure, I end.

M. D.
The Argument of Robert Duke of Normandy.
AFter the conquest of England, by William Duke of Normandy, his eldest son
Robert, surnamed Short-thigh, much more then either of his brethren, William
Rufus, or Henry Bauclarke, beloved of the Commons, yet brought in disgrace with
his Father, by means of Lanfranck Bishop of Canterbury, who greatly affected
the said William Rufus, as a man rightly of his own disposition. Robert
being a man of a mighty spirit, finding himself disgraced, and grown
hateful to his Father, and the Crown of England assured to his Brother:
whilst his Father makes wars in France, he with a troop of resolute
Germains, inuadeth Normandy. In the height of all these troubles, William
Conqueror dies, leaving the kingdom of England to Rufus. Whilst Robert
prepares to make war upon his brother, by the policies of Lanfrancke and
his accomplices, they are friends, Robert peaceably enjoys Normandy, and if
he ouer-hued his brother William, to succeed him in the kingdom of England.
Now, the brute of the holy wars called Robert to Palestine, with Peter the
Hermit, and Godfrey of Bulloyne, for which, to pay his soldiers, he engages
Normandy to his youngest brother Henry for sums of money. In his absence
William dies, Henry usurps the Crown, and Duke Robert returning from the
wars with great honor, yet in his wars at home most unfortunate, he is taken
by Henry in a battle in Normandy, brought a captive into England, and
imprisoned in Cardisse Castle in Wales, where Henry as a Tyrant, still
searing his escape, put out his eyes.

The Tragical Legend of Robert Duke of Normandy.
1
WHat time Sleeps Nurse the silent night begun
To steal by minutes on the long-liu'd days,
The furious Dog Star chasing of the Sun,
Whose scorching breath ads flame unto his rays,
At whose approach the angry Lion braies,
The earth now warmed in this celestial fire,
To cool her heat, puts off her rich attire.
2
The deawy-tressed Morning newly wake,
With golden tinsell scarce had crowned her brows,
Ryding in triumph on the Ocean lake,
Embellishing the honny-fringed bows,
Deep mellancholly from my brain to rouse,
To Isis banck my Genius guides the way,
Amongst whose Reeds soft murmuring winds do play.
3
Zephyre, which courts fair Thames, his gentle love,
On whose smooth breast the swelling billows flow,
Which on a long the wanton tide does shoue,
And to keep back he easily does blow,
Still meets her coming, follows if she go;
She, forcing waves to cool his hot embrace,
He, fanning breath upon her crystal face.
4
Still dallying in her osten-turning source,
She streaks a long the shores with her proud strain,
And here, and there, she wantons in her course,
And in her gate often turns back again,
Smiling to look upon her silver train,
With pretty Anticks she the fair soil greets,
Till Medoas stream from famous Kent she meets.
5
Thus careless wandering with this gliding stream,
Whose fleeting told me of times flying hours,
Delighted thus as in a pleasing dream,
Cropping small branches of the sweetest flowers:
And looking back on Londons stately towers,
So Troy (thought I) her stately head did bear,
Whose crazed ribs ye furrowing plough does air.
6
Weary, at length a Willow tree I found,
Which on the brim of this great current stood,
Whose root was matted with the arrasd ground,
Deaw'd with the small drops of this surging flood,
Ordained it seemed to sport her Nymphish brood
Whose curled top, enuy'd the heavens great eye
Should view the stock she was maintained by.
7
The towering Lark which carrols to the Sun,
With trebling descant quauers in the air,
And on the rivers marmuring base does run,
The Marble-skyes, with checkered varnish fair,
My branch-embossed bed, of natures care;
The flowers my smell, the slood my thirst to steep,
Thus like a King, with pleasure rocked a sleep.
8
When in a dream it seemed unto me
A noise of trumpets from the flood arose,
As when great BETA in her pomp we see,
When she by London on the water goes,
The dancing Barge with silent music rows:
The people thronging on the wharfes and shores,
The air with shouts, the water filled with oars.
9
A troop of Nymphs came suddenly on land,
When thus was ended this tryumphant sound,
Encompassing me, lying on the strand,
Taking their places on the grassy ground,
Their ory tresses all with Laurel crowned,
Casting their sober modest eyes a space,
Upon my swarty mellancholly face.
10
Betwixt two Ladies came a goodly Knight,
As newly brought from some distresfull place,
It seemed to me he was some noble wight,
Though his attire were miserable and base,
And care made furrows in his manly face:
And though cold age had frosted his fair hairs,
It rather seemed for sorrow then for years.
11
The one a princely Lady did support
This feeble Image which could sarcly stand:
The other, fleering in disdainful sort,
With scornful iesture drew him by the hand,
Who being blind, yet bound with many a band.
At length, I found this proud disdainefull Dame
Was FORTUNE, and the other, glorious FAME.
12
FAME on his right hand, in a robe of gold,
Whose stately train, Time as her Page did bear,
On which, for rich embrawdery was enrold,
The deeds of all the Worthies ever were,
So strongly wrought, as wrong could not empeire,
Whose large memorialls she did still rehearse,
In Poets man-immortalizing verse.
13
Two Tables on her goodly breast she bore,
The one of Crystal, the other Ebony,
Engrau'd with names of all that lived before
That; the fair book of heavenly memory,
The Other, the black scrowle of infamy:
One stuffd with Poets, Saints, and Conquerers,
The Other with Atheists, Tyrants, Usurers.
14
And in her words appeared as a wonder,
Her during force, and neuer-failing might,
Which softly spoke, far of were as a thunder,
And round about the world would take their flight,
And bring the most obscurest things to light;
That still the farther of, the greater still
Did ever sound our good, or make our ill.
15
Fortune, as blind as he whom she does lead,
Her feature changed each minute of the hour,
Her riggish feet fantastickly would tread,
Now would she smile, and suddenly would lower,
And with one breath, her words were sweet and sower.
Upon her foes, she amorously would glaunce,
And on her followers, coylie look a scaunce.
16
About her neck, (it seemed as for a chain)
Some Princes crowns and broken scepters hong,
Upon her arm a lazy youth did lean,
Which scornfully unto the ground she flong;
And with a wanton grace passing along,
Great bags of gold from out her bosom drew,
And to base Pesants and fond Idiots threw.
17
A dusky veil which hid her sightles eyes,
Like clouds, which cover our uncertain lives,
Painted about with bloody Tragedies,
Fools wearing crowns, and wisemen clogd in gives,
Now, how she gives, again, how she depriues;
In this black Map thus she her might discouers,
In Camps, and Courts, on soldiers, kings, and lovers.
18
An easy rising little banck there was,
The seat fair FLORA sometime sat upon,
Curling her locks in lovely Isis glass,
To revel in the Springs pauilion,
Here was her court, and this her princly throne;
Here set they down this poor distressed man,
And in this sort proud Fortune first began.
19
BEhold (quoth she) this Duke of Normandy,
The heir of William, Conqueror of this I Will,
Which thou poor Fame have vowed to glorify,
Whose history this Poet must compile;
My slave, my scorn, my prisoner, an exile,
Whose life I marked with my black dismal brand,
And thou would now eternize with thy hand.
20
Thou art an Echo, a byword, a wind,
Thine ayrie body is composd of breath,
A wandering blast, within no place confined,
Which often of nothing, silly something says,
Yet never can speak well till after death;
And from imagination have thy birth,
Unknown in heaven, and vnperceiu'd on earth.
21
First, in opinion had thou thy creation,
Formed with conceit, the needy Poets friend,
And like opinion, keep'st no certain fashion,
Yet in a circle still thy course does end:
And but a Post which all base rumors send,
An needles burden of an idle song,
The profane accent of each witles tongue.
22
Slanders vile spy, a runnagate, a thief,
Which day and night in every chinck does peep,
A blab, a wanton, lightest of belief,
Nor in thy gate a mean do ever keep,
But now hie in the air, now in the deep;
Reporting that which thou do but suppose,
And telling that thou never should disclose.
23
With extreme toil and labor thou art sought,
Danger the way that leads to thy Cell,
Only with death thy favors must be bought,
And who obtaines thee, fetches thee from hell,
Where thou ensconst with fiery swords do dwell.
And when thou art with all this perrill found,
Thou art a sudden voice, a tinckling sound.
24
My outcast abiects, such as I disgrace,
And euer-more have held in hateful scorn,
And in the world have set in servile place,
These be thy fauorits, these thou do subborne,
These wait on Fame, whose weeds be nearly worn
Yet cannot these poor wretches come to thee,
Unless before they be preferred by me.
25
That trump thou say, wakes dead men from their trance
Is not of precious gold as some^ do deem,
A brazen pipe, by which vain fools do dance,
And but to sound so loud does only seem,
Since points of virtue no man does esteem,
And with this toy the idle brain abusest,
And so their folly and thy fault excusest.
26
Except in perrill, thou do not appear,
And yet in perrill ebbing still and flowing,
Flying from him that sees succor near,
Diminished at hand, augmented going,
On fertile stocks decayed, on barraine growing.
Lost life with rumors thou do but repair,
And what thou promisest, thou payest with air.
27
In balefull Hearses, sad and sable grounds,
On gory letters thy memorialls lie,
Thy lines are deep immedicable wounds,
And toward the dust thou point'st thy tearful eye,
Never discovered but in Tragedy:
Thy stony heart is pitiful to none,
But Syren-like, to their destruction.
28
This orbs great revolution knows my power,
And how I reign with the eternal Fates,
With whom I sit in counsel every hour,
On change of times, subversion of states,
On their beginnings, on their several dates,
In destining haps past, on things to come,
In judgment till the everlasting dome.
29
The stars my Table-bookes wherein I write,
My Register the spacious circling Sky,
On heavens great brow I carefully endite
Unhappy man's long birth-markt desteny,
And by my power, my laws I ratefy,
And his frail will imperiously control,
With such quaint clauses as I there enroule.
30
To me the heavens have their Commission given,
And in my Charter all their right compiled,
That I alone should bless as beauteous heaven,
And honor those on whom I mean to smile,
To gain them tytles of immortal style,
That all should worthy be which I bestow,
Nor reason urged, but for I think it so.
31
In great predestination is my being,
Whose depth yet wisdom never could discern,
And in her secrets, more then secrets seeing,
Where learning still may learn how still to learn,
Those points with do the deepest points conscerne,
Where sacred texts unlock the way to me,
To lighten those which will my glory see.
32
What names old Poets to their gods did give,
Were only figures to express my might,
To show the virtues that in me do live,
My only power on this all-moouing wight,
And all their Alters unto me were dight:
Whose wondrous working, still to times did bring
Matter whereon they euer-more might sing.
33
Still most uncertain varying in my course,
Yet in these changes hold one certain end,
Crossing man's forecast, weakening wisdoms force,
To none still foe, to none a perfect friend,
Amazing thought to think what I pretend.
Depressing virtue sometime, that thereby
She taking wing again may sore on hie.
34
Forth of my lap I pour abundant bliss,
All good proceeds from my all-giuing hand,
By me man happy, or unhappy is,
Blessed if I bless, repulsed if I with-stand,
And I alone am friendships only band;
Upon whose Lincks all greedely take hold,
Which being broke, our zealous faith grows cold.
35
Pawsing she strownes, when sudainly again,
A roaring noise arises from the flood,
As when a tempest with a shower of rain
Is heard far off within some mighty wood,
At which me thought all things amazed stood:
As though her words such power with them did bear
As Sea and Land did quake her voice to hear.
36
When Fame yet smiling mildly thus replies,
Alas (quoth she) what labor thou have lost,
What wondrous mists thou casts before our eyes,
Yet will the gain not counteruaile the cost.
What could you say if thou had cause to boast:
Which thus can paint such wonders of thy worth,
Yet art far less, then nothing can set forth.
37
A hap, a chance, a casual event,
The vulgars I doll, and a childish terror,
A what men will, a silly accedent,
The mask of blindness, and disguise of error,
Natures vile nickname, sollies foolish mirror;
A term, a byword, by tradition learned,
A hearesay, nothing, not to be discerned.
38
A wanton fear, a silly Infants dream,
A vain illusion, a mere fantasy,
A seeming shade, a lunatic man's theme:
A fond Aenigma, a flat heresy,
Imaginations doting trumperie;
A folly in it self, it one self lothing,
A thing that would be, and yet can be nothing.
39
Disease of time, Ambitions Concubine,
A minde-entrauncing snare, a slippery Ice,
The bait of death, destructions heady wine,
Vaine-glories Patron, the fools paradise,
Fond hope, wherewith confusion does entice;
A vile seducing fiend, which haunts men still,
To loose them in the errors of their will.
40
A reason, which no reason can discuss,
And have the ground of all thy strength from hence,
VValking in shadow of man's Genius,
In humane birth pretending residence;
A riddle, made of the stars influence,
Which good and evil do thy title frame,
Yet neither good nor evil, but in name.
41
Those ignorant which made a God of Nature,
And Natures God divinely never knew,
Were those which first erected Fortunes stature,
From whence this vile idolatry first grew,
Which times defect into men's ears still blew:
Grounding their usurpations foolish laws,
On the opinion of so poor a cause.
42
Sloth first did hatch thee in her sleepie Cell,
And with base thoughts, in idleness wast bred,
With cowardice thou euer-more do dwell,
And with dishonorable ease art fed,
In superstitious humors brought to bed:
A gossips tale thy greatest proof does lend,
On old-sayd sawes thy title does depend.
43
Thy habit loosenes, and thy measure wast,
Deceitful, vain, inhumane, sickle, light,
Thou poysonest him to whom thou give to taste,
Against virtue still thou bendest all thy might,
With honorable thoughts thou wagest fight,
The yielding man, in fetters thou do bind,
But weak and slavish to the constant mind.
44
Who leanes to thee, who^ thou have not deceived?
Who slattrest thou, whom thou abusest not?
Who hopes of thee, and not of hope bereaved?
whose secrets known, with shame do thou not blot?
Who not devoured, thou in thy paws have got?
Who's he, or where yet ever was he found,
That thou might hurt, and did not deadly wound?
45
The slavish peasant is thy favorite,
In change and chances all thy glory is,
In vile and basest things thou take delight,
In earthly mud consists all thy bliss,
What can thou be which art bewitched with this?
For weart thou heavenly, thou in love would be,
With that which nearest does resemble thee.
46
I am the powerful messenger of heaven,
My wings the lightning spreading far and wide,
To every coast I with a thought am driven,
And on the gorgeous sunbeams do I ride,
To heaven I mount, down to the earth I slide:
I regester the worlds eternal hours,
The Secretary of the immortal powers.
47
Refuge of hope, the harbinger of truth,
Handmaide of heaven, virtues skillful guide,
The life of life, the ages of springing youth,
Triumph of joy, eternities fair bride,
The Virgins glory, and the Martirs pride:
The courages immortal raising fire,
The very height to which great thoughts aspire.
48
The staire by which men to the Stars do clime,
The minds first moouer, greatness to express,
Fayths armor, and the vanquisher of time,
A pleasant sweet against deaths bitterness,
The high reward which does all labors bless;
The study which does heavenly things impart,
The joy amidst the tedious ways of Art.
49
Learnings green Laurel, Justice glorious throne,
The Muses chariot, Memories true food,
The Poets life, the Gods companion,
The fire-reuiuing Phaenix Sun-nurst brood,
The spirits eternal Image, honors good;
The Balsamum which cures the Soldiers scarre,
The world-discouering Sea-mans happy Star.
50
My dwelling place betwixt the earth and skies,
My Turret unto heaven her top vpreares,
The windows made of Lynceus piercing eyes,
And all the walls be made of daintiest ears,
Where every thing that's done in earth appears;
No word is whispered in this vaulty round,
But in my Palace straightwayes it does sound.
51
The pauement is of rattling brazen drums,
The Rafters trumpets which do rend the air,
Sounding aloud each name that thither comes,
The chinks like tongues of all things talking there,
And all things past, in memory do bear:
The doors unlock with every word man faith,
And open wide with every little breath.
52
It Is hong about with Arms and conquering spoils,
The pillars which support the roof of this,
Are tropheis, graven with Herculean toiles,
The roof of garlands, crowns, and ensigns is,
In midst of which a crystal Pyramid:
All over carved with men of most renown,
Whose base is my fair chair, the spire my crown.
53
Here in the bodies likeness whilst it lives,
Appear the thoughts, proceeding from the mind,
To which the place a form more glorious gives,
And there they be immortally deuin'd,
By virtue there more heavenly refined;
And when the earthly body once does perrish,
There does this place the minds true Image cherish.
54
My beauty never fades, but as newborn,
As years increase, so ever waxing young,
My strength is not diminished nor worn,
What weakneth all things, ever makes me strong:
Nor from my hand, my Scepter can be wroong:
Times sacriligious rapine I defy,
A tributarie to eternity.
55
The face of heaven my chronicles contain,
Where I erect the Tropheis of my fame,
Which there in glorious characters remain,
The gorgeous feeling of the immortal frame,
The constellations letters of my name,
Where my memorialls evermore abide,
In those pure bodies highly glorified.
56
FAme ending thus, Fortune again began
Further to urge what she before had said,
And lo (quoth she) Duke Robert is the man
Who by my might and pollicie's betrayed,
Then let us see how thou can lend him aid:
I took from him his liberty and crown,
Raise thou him up, who^ I have thus thrown down.
57
Quoth Fame a fitter instance is there none
Then Robert is, then Fortune do thy worst:
Here may thy weakness, and my power be shown,
Here shall I bless, whom thou before have cursed,
Begin thou then, since thus thy turn comes first,
And thou shall see how great a power I have
Over the world, proud Fortune, and the grave.
58
(Quoth Fortune) then, my hand did point the Star,
The seal wherewith heaven signed his utmost date,
Which marked his birth with brands of bloody war,
Rash mutinys, rude garboiles, harsh debate,
His foreign plagues, home wrongs, and private hate:
And on the height of his great Fathers glory,
First laid the ground work of his Sons sad story.
59
Nature, which did her best at Roberts birth,
I most undid in his nativity,
This friend I made his greatest foe on earth,
Her gifts I made his greatest enemy,
Framing such mildnes in Nobility:
Differing so far from haughty Williams strain,
That thus he judged his Son unfit to reign.
60
And yet that courage which he did inherit,
And from the greatness of his blood had taken,
Stird up with grief, awakes this greater spirit,
Which more and more did Williams hate awaken,
He thus forsaken, as he had forsaken:
Yet to his will so partiallie inclind,
As now his rage, his reason quite does blind.
61
Now do I lean to him whom all have left,
Laughiug on him, on whom despair does lowre,
Lending him hope, of former hope berest,
Giving his youth large wings wherewith to tower,
Ayding his power, to cross great Williams power:
That so his might, in countermaunding might
By his own wrong, might hinder his own right.
62
That whilst his Fathers sierie tempered sword
Through Albions cleeues, that fatal entrance made,
With German power, returns this youthful Lord,
With others Arms, his own bounds to invade,
And Normandy lies coucht under his blade,
Thinking to make a present mean of this,
To make his own yet doubtful to be his.
63
Toward Williams end, now Williams hate begun,
Whom he begot, does now beget his woe,
He scarce a Father, Robert scarce a Son,
His Son the Father fo his overthrow,
Youth old in will, age young in hate does grow:
He nursing that which does all mischief nurse,
He by his blessing, causing his own curse.
64
And yet least age might cool Duke Williams blood,
With wars in France I still the heat supplied,
That whilst young Robert yet disgrace stood
Justly condemned of insolence and pride,
In this confirmed, the famous Conqueror di'd:
Setting proud Rufus on his regal throne,
Whilst Norman Robert strives but for his own.
65
Much trust in him, a carelesnes first bred,
His courage makes him ouer-confident,
Blinding revenge, besides his course him led,
When lost his wits, in errors darkness went,
Rashness sees all, but nothing can prevent:
What his mind loathed, disgrace did urge him to,
Making his will the cause of his own woe.
69
This buried trunck of William is the root
From which these two world-shadowing branches spread,
This factious body standing on this foot,
These two cross currents springing from one head,
And both with one self nutriment are fed,
Upon themselves their own force so should spend.
Till in themselves, they both themselves should end.
67
Thus the old conquest has new conquests made,
And Norman Ensigns shadow English fields,
The brother now, the brother must muade,
The conquerors shield, against ye conquerors shield,
Right wounding right, nor wrong to wrong will yield:
One arm bear off the others furious stroke,
Scepter with Scepter, sword with sword be broke.
68
The hateful soiles where death was sown in blood,
Increasing vengeance one against the other,
And now the seed of wrath began to bud,
Which in their bosoms they so long did smother,
These but as bastards, England their step mother;
Weakening her self, by malice gives them strength
With murdring hands to spoil themselves at length.
69
This Williams death, gives Roberts troubls life,
Whose life in death made lucklesse Robert live,
This end of strife, begins greater strife,
Giving to take, what it did take to give,
Living deprived, which dead does him deprive;
Evil brought good, that good conuerts to ill,
Thus life and death breed Roberts mischief still.
70
When first King William entered on this I Will,
Harrold had friends, but then the Norman none,
But Rufus lived here as an exile,
And Robert hoped to reign of many a one,
Only my hand held up his slyding throne:
William but weak, beats Harold down by wrong,
William supplanting Robert, Robert strong.
71
Odo the prop which Rufus power vpheld,
Reuolting then, enraged with Lansrancks spite,
And on this hope grounding his faith, rebelled, might:
In bloody letters writing Roberts right,
Great Mortayns power, and strong Mountgomeres
Mangling this I Will with new deformed scars;
Ere peace had cured the wounds of former wars.
72
The Normans glory in the conquest won,
The English bruzed with their battred Arms,
The Normans followed what they had begun,
The English fearful of their former harms,
What cooles the English, Norman courage warms:
The Normans entered to new victory,
The English for their fight already fly,
73
Whilst Rufus hopes thus freshly bleeding lay,
And now with ruin all things went to wrack,
Destruction having found the perfect way,
Were not proud Robert by some means kept back
By fond delays, I forced him time to slack:
And stopped the mischief newly thus begun,
To undo all what he before had done.
74
Thus first by counsel spurred I on the rage,
Forcing the stream of their distempred blood,
Then by my counsel, did again aswage,
When this great Duke secure of conquest stood,
Pyning his force, giving advantage food;
That first by taking Arms, he strength might loose,
And making peace, give strength unto his foes.
75
A peace concluded to destroy their peace,
A sudden truce to breed a lingering war,
That Arms might cease, while mischief might increase,
To bring death near, by sending safety far,
In making that, which made, all quite might mar:
Treason crept in by this adulterate kay,
Into the closset where his counsels lay.
76
Thus made a friend, to rob him of his friend,
The means a foe, might weaken so his foe,
To frame this strange beginning to his end,
The well-cast plot or utter overthrow,
In this fair vizard, masking in this show:
That since hate thus in wearing would not prove,
He brings him now in habit of his love.
77
Thus reconciled by me, one to the other,
Joined in this poor divided union,
These brothers now make war upon their brother,
As loath from them he should go free alone,
To shape his mischief truly by their own;
To draw on grief, and urge it to be more,
Because it came not fast enough before.
78
This by foresight still wisely provident
To spur them on beyond degrees of ill,
To make their fury far more violent,
And ground their ruin on their peevish will,
That mischief should be getting mischief still:
That injury so far should pity chase,
As reconcilement never should take place.
79
And here to show my power on thee poor Fame,
I made thee now my greatest instrument,
That in the fury of this raging flame,
Even in the height of Henryes discontent,
To Roberts ears the brute of war I sent:
Of Palaestine that leaving all with them,
He might away to great Jerusalem.
80
With that sweet fume of honors shortest breath,
Feeding the humor which possessed his heart,
When now drew on the time of Williams death,
That in this fatal hour he should depart,
Herein to show my very depth of Art:
That Henry now in England left alone,
Might seat himself in Roberts rightful throne.
81
The warlick Music of these clattring Arms,
Does stop his ears like a tempestious wind
That now he finds no presage of his harms,
Beyond all course so lifted is his mind,
Declaring well the greatness of his kind;
Mounted so high within the spacious air,
As out of sight of ground, he dreads no snare.
82
His Father died when first his cares took breath,
His Brother dies, now when his woes should die,
His sorrows thus are strangely borne in death,
All-ending death, brings forth his misery,
Such is my power in human destenie:
That where an utter ruin I pretend,
Destruction does begin, where hate should end.
83
Thus laid the complot in the course of all,
I make his safety unto him more dear,
Seated, from whence he never thought to fall,
Assured of good, if any good there were,
That now each thought a Scepter seems to bear:
Which such a hold in his great spirit does win,
As after, made his error prove his sin.
84
With grace young Henry to his throne I bring
Making great friends of mighty enemies,
She wing my power in this new reigning King,
As by my hand inuisibly to rise,
Decking his crown with worldly dignities:
Forging his tongue with such a sacred fire,
As could persuade, what ere he would desire.
85
In Palaestine with Robert, Fame does rest,
In England with young Beauclark, Fortune bides,
These mighty Ladies, of these Lords possessed,
Thus each of these, with each of these deuides,
Thus wear we factious then on either sides:
Fame sor brave Short-thigh, purchasing renown,
Fortune for Beauclark, for the English crown.
86
Thou wooest, I win, thou suest, and I obtain,
What I possess, that only thou do crave,
Thou layest out to gain, but what I gain
Thou do desire, I in possession have,
Thou hordst, I spend, I lavish, thou do save:
Thou scarsely art, yet that thou art to me,
Thou would, I can, thou servile, I am free.
87
Robert grown weak, Henry recovered strength,
What quenched the Normans glory, sir'd his will,
Robert is fallen, Henry got up at length,
Robert no guide, Henry is steerd with skill,
Grounding his good on lucklesse Roberts ill:
Their mutual courage, and unmoved hate,
Tells Henryes rise, decline of Roberts state.
88
From perrils safe, no place at home he sees,
Abroad he wins, at home he still does lose,
At home, wasted with civil enemies,
Whilst he abroad is conquering foreign foes,
Wasting at home, more then abroad he grows:
At home his danger unto many known,
Yet he abroad is careless of his own.
89
Now bring I Robert from these glorious wars,
Triumphing in the conquered Pagans flight,
From foreign broiles to toil in home-nurst iars,
From getting others Lands, for's own to fight,
Forced by wrong, by sword to claim his right:
And with that sword in Panyms blood imbrude,
To save himself, by his own friends pursude.
90
Thus he is enriched with that he cannot see,
With few vain titles swelling in his name,
And all his substance but mere shadows be,
Whilst he strange castles in the air does frame,
Lo such a mighty Monarchesse is Fame:
That, what she gives, so easy is to bear,
As of those gifts, none robbing need to fear.
91
This whets his spleen, but does his strength abate,
Much care for coin, makes care for kingdoms less
His feeblenes must hold up Henry's state,
These bear up him, which Roberts hopes suppress,
Whose brothers comfort is in his distress;
This is the mean he undertook to try,
With Roberts blood his safety first to buy.
92
With kind entreaty he does first begin,
Not fully yet established as he would,
By this advantage to get further in,
Till he had got a sure and faster hold,
Baiting unseen, deceit with sums of gold:
By yearly tribute from his crown to rise,
To stop the mouth of passed injuries.
93
This peace to which the mutenie must yield,
And English tribute paid to Normandy,
What Robert thinks his safegard's Henry's shield,
And Roberts self, does Robert injury,
This tribute wrongs his true Nobility;
And from this source from whence their peace should spring,
Proceeds the cause of Roberts ruining.
94
These sums, the sinews of Duke Roberts war,
Like howerly tides, his flowing current sed,
And to his fire the lively fuel are,
His will the stream, and this the Fountain head,
Having his humor fitly cherished:
Deceiptfull Henry, reobtaines at length,
Unto his Arm adding Duke Roberts strength.
95
This want his haughty courage soon does find,
Cutting the quils of his high flying wings,
That now he must commit him to the wind,
Driven which way the furious tempest flings;
Powerless of that, which gives power to Kings;
Which desperate grief, his mind enrageth so,
As makes him past all reason in his woe.
96
Honor gave entertainment to belief,
Under which color treason in was brought,
Which slew his strength before he selt the griese,
Pure innocence seldom suspecteth ought,
No base affection master of his thought,
Nor majesty inward deceit had learned,
More then to show, her outward eyes discerned.
97
Misery seemed nothing, yet to him unknown,
Not knowing evil, evil could not fly,
Not sauouring sorrow, having tasted none,
To find lurking deceit he looked too hie,
To honest minds, Fraud does the soonest pry!
Whose nature thus I chose to be the mould,
Therein to work what form of hap I would.
98
His own compassion, cause of his own care,
Upon his thought, his constant promise stood,
Virtue in him, most naturally rare,
No vile base humor tainted his pure blood,
His bounty still gave good desert her food;
His mind so great, and honorably free,
Made him too prone to loose credulity.
99
His counsels thus are combred by his care,
In nothing certain bnt uncertainty,
His friends resolved on nothing but despair,
Yet shows he greatness in most misery,
Each place become a stage for Tragedy;
By error, wandering far beyond his scope,
Strong in desire, but weakest in his hope.
100
In public shame, often counsel seems disgraced
No privilege can from the Fates protect:
In desperation, counsel has no taste,
Untamed rage does all advise reject,
Hiding the course which reason should direct;
Making himself the author of his harms,
Without experience, valor wants his arms.
101
Now I, whose power in Williams wars was seen,
When first on Williams conquest he begun,
To show my self the worlds imperious Queen,
Now turn my self against his warlike son,
To lose by me, by me his Father won:
On Englands part, against Normandy to stand,
Which Normandy had conquered by my hand.
102
The conquest William made upon this I Will,
With Norman blood be-peopling Brittany,
Even now as Brittons made within a while
Turn with revenge to conquer Normandy,
Thus victory goes back to victory:
That his own blood, wins what before he won,
His conquering son, subdued his conquering son.
103
Thus Norman towns begirt with English arms,
The furious brother dealing wrathful blows:
Both pressing in where deadly perrill swarms,
These English-Norman, Norman-English foes,
At last do get, what they at first did lose:
As Normandy did Englands fall provoke,
Now Norman necks must bear the English yoke.
104
The flood of mischief thus comes in again,
What Fortune works, not always seems preteded,
The wind thus turned, blows back the fire amain,
Where first mischance began, she will be ended,
And he defend him, from those he offended:
For this we find, the course of fatal things,
Is best discerned in states of Realms and Kings.
105
On whom of late in Palaestine I smild,
In civil wars now dreadfully I frown;
He called from exile, I from him exiled,
To leave his crown, who had refused a crown,
Who beat all down, now hear is beaten down,
Here to lose all, who there had gotten all,
To make his fall, more grievous in his fall.
106
To England now a prisoner they him bring,
Now is he hers, which claimed her for his own,
A Captive, where he should have been a King,
His du^geon made where should have been his throne
Now buried there, whereas he should have grown.
In one poor tower mewed up, within one place,
Whose Empires bounds the Ocean should embrace.
107
Could mortal sense contain immortal hate,
Or reason sound the depth of things divine,
Judgment might stand amazed at Roberts state,
And think no might to be compared with mine,
That all power may unto my power resign:
And that in Roberts fall, the world may see
Amongst the stars what power remains in me.
108
That sword which on his fortune has such power
Yet powerles is to end his wretched days:
Those days wc in their course all things devour,
To his swift grief, makes slow and lazy stays,
To Tyrannies long reign he thus obaies,
That he in life a thousand deaths might die,
Only in mercy rackt with cruelty.
109
He has no joy but in his miseries,
His greatest comfort is the blessed light,
For which, (as I were angry with his eyes)
I make the King deprive him of his sight,
To suit his days so justly with the night,
That sencles stones to moan he should not see,
Yet sencles stones behold his misery.
120
And this he felt, that Fortune made him blind,
Least his eyes objects yet might lighten care:
That ye light wanting, more might light his mind,
Whose eyes might see how great his sorrows are;
That every sense, that senses woe might share:
And so that sense deprived of joy alone,
Might more increase the grief of every one.
111
These griefs and horrors, enemies of rest,
Which murder life where they do harbor long,
Kill humors, which his body often oppressed,
Unnaturally, thus making nature strong,
As out of deaths dead stock new life still sprung,
As life with death had tempted him till now,
Yet death to life no ease would er'e allow.
112
Death he feared not, is taught his end to fear,
Life, once he loved, with him now fallen in love,
That foe, a friend, to hurt him does forbear,
That friend a foe, he cannot now remove,
Twixt them, he all extremities does prove:
Aged in youth, to pine his joy thereby,
Youthful in age, to suffer misery.
113
Courage forbids that he himself should kill,
His life too proud to be constrained to die,
His will permits not death now when he will,
What would despair, true valor does deny;
Thus life's life foe, death is deaths enemy:
VVilling to die, by life him double killing,
Urging to die, twice dying, he unwilling.
114
So many years as he has worn a crown,
So many years as he has hoped to rise,
So many years he lives thus quite thrown down,
So many years he lives without his eyes:
So many years in dying ere he dies;
So many years locked up in prison strong,
Though sorrow make the shortest time seem long.
115
Thus sway I in the course of earthly things,
That Time might work him everlasting spite,
To show, that power yet ever makes not kings,
Nor that conceit can compass my deceit,
In fined things such meruails infinite:
Nor any wonder is to be supposed,
In that wherein all wonders are enclosed.
116
AT Fortuns speech they stand as all amazed,
Whilst Fame herself does wonder at his woe,
And all upon this deadly Image gazed,
Whose misery she had discribed so;
But in revenge of this dispightfull foe,
Fame from a slumber (as it seemed) awake,
On his behalf, thus for herself be-spake.
117
What time I came from world-renowned Rome,
To waken Europe from her drouzie trance,
Summoning the Princes of great Christendom,
To Palaestine their Ensigns to advance,
Sou^ding my trump in England, Spain, and France
To move the Christians to religious war,
From Pagans hands to free CHRIST'S sepulchar.
118
That holy Hermit Peter, then as one
Which as a Saint bewaild so great a loss:
With Bulloigne Godfrey, Christ's strong champion,
Under the Banner of the bloody CROSS,
Now on the Alps the conquering colors toss,
Leading along the brauest Christian band,
To rear their Tropheys in the HOLY LAND.
119
Hither the flocks of gallant spirits do throng,
The place whence immortality does spring,
To whom the hope of conquest does belong,
Nor any thought, less, then to be a King;
Hither does Fame her dearest children bring:
And in this Camp she makes her treasury,
The rarest Iems of Europs Chiualry.
120
This conquering lord, the Conquerors eldest son,
Whose hand did then the Norman scepter weld,
In Arms to win what once his Father won,
To Englands conquest is again compeld,
Whose crown from him proud William Rufus held,
An exile thence, by's angry Father driven,
By Fortune robbed, of all by Nature given.
121
With fame of this, once Roberts ears possessed,
With heavenly wonder does his thoughts inspire,
Leaving no place for wrong in his fair breast,
Giving large wings unto his great desire,
VVarming his courage with more glorious fire,
As thus to fight for his dear Saviors sake,
Of Englands crown he no account does make.
122
Of kingdoms tytles he casts off the toil
Which by proud Rufus tyranny is kept:
Dear as his life to him that hallowed soil,
Wherein that God in lively manhood slept,
At whose dear death, the rocks for pity wept;
A crown of gold this Christian knight does scorn,
so much he loved those temples crowned with thorn
123
Those grievous wants whose burden weyed him down,
The sums wc he in Germany had spent,
In gathering power to gain the English crown,
Guarded with princly troops in his rich Tent,
Like William Conquerors son magnificent,
Now by his need, he grievously does find,
VVeakning his might, what never could his mind.
124
This brave high spirited Duke, this famous Lord,
Whose right of England Rufus held away,
To set an edge upon his conquering sword,
In gage to Henry, Normandy did lay,
Thus to maintain his valiant soldiers pay:
Rather of Realms himself to dispossess,
Then Christendom should be in such distress.
125
Eternal sparks of honors purest fire,
Virtue of virtues, Angels angeld mind,
Where admiration may it self admire,
Where man's diuinest thoughts are more diuin'd,
Saint sainted spirit, in heavens own shrine enshrind
Endeared dearest thing, for ever living,
Receiving most of Fame, to Fame more giving.
126
Such fervent zeal does from his soul proceed,
As those curled tresses which his brows adorn,
Until that time Jerusalem were freed,
He makes a vow they never should be shorn,
But for a witness of that vow be worn;
True vow, strong faith, great lord, most happy howr,
Performed, increasd, blessed by effecting power.
127
True vow, so true, as truth to it is vowed,
Vowing all power to help so pure a vow,
Allowing perfect zeal to be allowed,
If zeal of perfect truth might ere allow,
Then much admired, but to be wondered now;
Faith in it self, then wonder more concealing,
Faith to the world, then wonder more revealing.
128
Disheueld locks, what names might give you grace?
Worn thus disheueld for his dear Lords sake,
Sweet-flowring twists, valors engirdling lace,
Browe-decking fringe, fair golden curled flake,
Honors rich garland, beauties meshing brake,
Arbors of joy, which nature once did give,
Where virtue should in endless Summer live.
129
Fair Memory, awaken Death from sleep,
Call up Times spirit, of passed things to tell,
Unseal the secrets of th'vnsearched deep,
Let out the prisoners from Obliuisions Cell,
Inuoke the black inhabitants of hell:
Into the earths deep dungeon let the light,
And with fair day clear up his clowdy night.
130
Eternity, be prodigal a while,
With thine immortal arms embrace thy love,
Diuinest Powers, upon your image smile,
And from your star-encircled thrones above,
Earths misty vapors from his sight remove,
And in the Annals of the glorious fun,
Enrole his worth, in Times large course to run.
131
Truth in his life, bright Poesy uphold,
His life in truth adorning Poesy:
Which casting life in a more purer mold,
Preserues that life to immortality,
Both truly working, either glorify;
Truth by her power, Arts power to justify,
Truth in Arts roabs, adorned by Poesy.
132
To his victorious Ensign comes from far,
The Redshanck'd Orcads, touched with no remorse,
The light-foote Irish, which with darts make war,
Th'ranck-ryding Scot, on his swist running horse,
The English Archer, of a Lions force:
The valiant Norman all his troops among,
In bloody conquests tried, in Arms trained long.
133
Remote by nature in this colder Clyme,
Another nature he new birth does bring,
And by the locks he haleth aged Time,
As newly he created every thing;
Showing the place where heavens eternal King
Our dear blood-bought redemption first began,
Man covering God, earth heaven, and God in man.
134
Poor Ilanders, which in the Oceans chain,
Too long imprisoned from the cheerful day,
Your warlike Guide now brings you to the maine,
Which to your glory makes the open way:
And his victorious hand becomes the kay
To let you in to famous victories;
The honor of your brave posterities,
135
Be favorable fair heaven unto thine own,
And with that Bethelem birth-foretelling star
Still go before this Christian Champion;
In fiery pillars lead him out from far,
Let Angels martch with him unto this war,
With burning-bladed Cherubins still keep,
Encompasse him with clouds when he does sleep.
136
When heaven puts on her glittering veil of stars,
And with sweet sleep the soldiers senses charms,
Then are his thoughts working these holy wars,
Plotting assaults, watchful at all alarms,
Rounding the Camp in rich apparreld Arms;
His sleep their watch, his care their safeties kay,
Their day his night, his night he makes their day.
137
Valors true valor, honors living crown,
Inspired thoughts, desert above desert,
Greatness beyond imaginations bound,
Nature more sweet then is expressed by Art,
A heart declaring a true princly heart:
Courage uniting courage unto glory,
A subject fit for an immortal story.
138
Why should not heaven by night when forth he went
Convert the stars to Suns to give him light?
And at his prayers by day in his close Tent,
The Tapers unto stars, to help his sight?
That in his presence darkness might be bright;
That every thing more purer in his kind,
Might tell the pureness of his purer mind.
139
Yet Letters but like little Islands be,
And many words within this world of fame,
Whose Regions rise and fall in their degree,
Large volumes short descriptions of his name,
Like little Maps painting his Globes great fame:
Wit lost in wonder, seeking to express
His virtues sum, his praises universe.
140
In grievous toils consists all his rest,
In having most, of most enjoys none,
Most wanting that whereof he is possessed,
A King ordained, never to enjoy his throne,
That least his own, which richly is his own;
In this division from himself divided,
Himself a guide for others safety, guided.
141
His one poor life, divided is to many,
Dead to his comfort, does to others live,
Unto himself he is the least of any,
All from him taken, unto all does give,
Deprived of joy, of care his to deprive:
Who al controuleth, now that all controules,
Body of bodies, his soul of their souls.
142
Religious war, more holy pilgrimage,
Both Saint and soldier, Captain, Confessor,
A devout youth, a resolute old age,
A warlike Statesman, peaceful Conqueror,
Grave Consul, true autentique Senator;
Feare-chasing resolution, valiant fear,
Heart bearing naught, yet patient all to bear.
143
Skill, valor guides, and valor armeth skill,
Courage emboldneth wit, wit courage arms,
This is the thread which leads on his will,
This is the steer which guides him in these storms,
To see his good, and to foresee his harms:
Not flying life, in fortune so content,
Not fearing death, as truly valient.
144
He feasts desire with sweetest temperance,
Greatness he decks in modesties attire,
Honor he does by humblenes advance,
By sufferance he raises courage hier,
His holy thoughts by patience still aspire:
To fashion virtue strangely he does seek,
Making poor hope impatient, sorrow meek.
145
Then in his joy, he nothing less inioyes,
Still of him self the worser part he is,
What most should please him, him the most annoyes,
Of his, there is nothing can be called his,
And what he has, that does he ever miss;
His thought of conquest, so does rest invade,
Thus is he made, as unto others made.
146
All things to him be prosperous as he would,
Not trusting Fortune, nor distrusting Fate,
Resolved to hope, hap what soever could,
Ioying in woe, in joy disconsolate,
Joy lightneth woe, woe joy does moderate;
Careless of both, indifferent twixt either,
VVooed of both, yet yielding unto neither.
147
Endless his toil, a figure of his fame,
And his life ending gives his name no end,
Lasting that form where virtue builds the frame,
Those sums unnumbered glory gives to spend,
Our bodies buried, then our deeds ascend:
Those deeds in life, to worth cannot be rated,
In death with life, our fame even then is dated.
148
VVilling to do, he thinks what to do,
That what he did, exactly might be done,
That due foresight before the act might go,
Which wisely warning might all errors shun,
That care might finish what he had begun:
Justly directed in the course of things,
By that straight rule which sound experience brings.
149
From famous Godfrey and the Christian host,
Unto the migty Grecian Emperor,
Now is he sent, through many perrils tossed,
This Norman Duke, the brave Ambassador,
His royal spirit so much never seen before;
As with his princely train when he does come,
Before the town of fair Bizantium.
150
From forth the holy Region is he sent,
Bending his coure through Macedon and Thrace,
Yet never would he sleep but in his Tent,
Till he returned unto that hallowed place,
Till he beheld that famous Godfreis face;
Nor never rest his body in a bed,
Till Palaestine were free delivered.
151
Triumphall prowess, true disposed care,
Cleare-shining courage, honorable intent,
Vertuous-apparreld manhood, thoughts more rare,
Mind free as heaven, imperial government,
Numbers of virtues in one sweet consent:
Gyfts which the soul so highly beautify,
Humble valor, valiant humility,
152
Sweet air with Angels breath be thou refined,
And for his sake be made more pure then air,
And thither let some gentle breathing wind,
From Paradise bring sweets which be most rare,
Let Summer sit in his imperial chair;
And clothe sad Winter in the cheerful prime,
Keeping continual Summer in the clime.
153
Delight be present in thy best attire,
And court his eyes with thy delightful change,
Oh warm his spirit with thy soule-feasting fire,
To base delight-abusers, be thou strange,
Such as in vainest pleasures boundless range:
For pleasure he all pleasures quite forsook,
And armed with zeal these toiles first undertook.
154
O let Danubius in her watery room,
Where she the name of Ister first did take,
With threescore rivers swelling in her womb,
With seven large throats her greedy thirst to slake,
Does swallow in the great worlds vastie lake:
Unto all regions which do know her name,
In Roberts glory tell our countries fame.
155
And broad-brim'd Strymon as she vaulteth on,
Slyding along the fertile Thracian shore,
Kissing the stronds of famous Macedon,
Which once the name of old Aemathia wore,
Whose fame decayed, her drops do now deplore:
May raise another Orpheus with her mones,
To sing his praise unto her trees and stones.
156
Time on his life, thy gathered store disburse,
Which may enrich thee with eternal gain,
Which art a beldame, now become a nurse,
And in his end begin his glorious reign,
That yet truth may of truth be forced to feign:
That of his praise thy self a part may be,
Which praise remains the better part of thee.
157
O thou immortal Tasso, Aestes glory,
Which in thy golden book his name have left,
Enrold in thy great Godfreis living story,
Whose lines shall escape untouched of ruins thest,
Yet us of him thou have not quite bereft:
Though thy large Poems only boast his name,
Ours was his birth, and we will have his fame.
158
The curious state of greatness he does scorn,
Careless of pomp to be magnificent,
Deeming the noblest minded, noblest borne,
Him worthiest honor, which the furthest went,
His blood most pure, whose blood in wars most spent:
Esteeming all fond titles, toys of naught,
Most honoring those which were with peril bought
159
His richest roabes are his approved Arms,
His sports were deeds of peerless chivalry,
He flies all pleasures as the Sirens charms,
To his great mind, no pleasing harmony,
Not touched with childish imbecillitie:
As sacrilege to his religious mind,
To mix base thoughts with those of heavenly kind.
160
A mind which of it self could rightly deem,
Keeping a straight way in one certain course,
As a true witness of his own esteem,
Feeding it self from his own springing source,
And by himself increasing his own force;
Desirous still him daily to enure,
To endure that, men thought none could endure.
161
Deuinest touch, instinct of highest heaven,
Most graceful grace, purest of purity,
To mortal man, immortal virtue given,
Manhood adorned with powerful dietie,
Discreetfull pity, hallowed piety:
In secret working, by itself confessed,
In silent admiration best expressed.
162
Not spurred with honor, dearly loving peace,
Constant in any course to which he fell,
A spirit which no asffliction could oppress,
Never removed where once his thought did dwell,
Opynionate, that what he did was well;
Which working now upon so good a cause,
Approves his conceit the surest laws.
163
No braggarts boast nor ostentacious word
Out of his mouth is ever heard proceed,
But on his foe-mans curats with his sword,
In characters, records his valiant deed,
That there impartial eyes might plainly reed;
In modest silence by true virtue hid,
That though he dumb, his deeds told what he did.
164
He cheres his Soldiers with sweet honied words,
His princely hand embalmes the maimeds wound,
Unto the needy gold he still affords,
To brave attempts encouraging the sound,
Never dismayed in perrill is he found;
His Tent a seat of justice to the grieved,
A kingly court when need should be releeu'd,
165
His life each hour to danger he does give,
Yet still by valor he with perrill strives,
In all attempts as he did scorn to live,
Yet living, as his life were many lives,
Often times from death it seems that he reuiues:
Each hour in great attempts he seems to die,
Yet still he lives in spite of ieopardie.
166
Even by that town over which his Lord did weep,
Whose precious tears were shed for her own sin,
Even by that town this zealous Lord did weep,
To see her now defiled with others sin,
He wept, he weeps for sin, and he for sin,
He first shed tears, he lastly sheddeth tears,
Those sacred drops, the others drops endeares.
167
What prince was found within the Christian host
That carried mark of honor in his shield,
That with brave Roberts Lions once durst boast,
Raging with fury in the bloody field,
Whose mighty paws a pillar seemed to weild:
Which from their nostrhils breathed a seeming flame,
When he in pride amongst the Pagans came.
168
His life with blood how dearly did he prize,
And never did he brandish his bright sword,
But many Pagan souls did sacrifize,
And all the ground with liuelesse truncks he stored,
Such was his love unto his dearest Lord;
That were true love more purer then is love,
Here in this love his pureness he might prove,
169
Who from his fury lately fled away,
When in the field far off they him espied,
Pursued in his fair presence make a stay,
As of his hand they willing would have died,
His beauty, so his feircenes mollified;
As taking death by valiant Roberts name,
Should to their lives give everlasting fame.
170
The cruel Panyms thirsting after blood,
With his sweet beauty do their hates a slake,
Yet when by him in danger they have stood,
And that his valor did their rage awake,
And with their swords revenge would deeply take
The edges turn as seeming to relent,
To pity him, to whom the blows were sent.
171
At feirce assaults where thousand deaths might fall,
His cheerful smiles made death he could not kill,
Imperiously his sword commands the wall,
As stones should be obedient to his will,
The yielding blood, his blood did never spill:
His fury quenched with tears as with a flood,
And yet like fire consuming all that stood.
172
When in the morn his Courser he bestrid,
The trumpets sound unto his thoughts gave fire,
But from the field he ever dropping rid
As he were vanquished only in retire,
The nearer rest, farther from his desire:
In booty still, his Soldiers share the crowns,
They rich in gold, he only rich in wounds.
173
At this return now in this sad retreat,
From heathens slaughter, from the Christians fled,
This is not he which in that raging heat,
On mighty heaps laid Pagan bodies dead,
Whose plumed helm empaled in his head;
Mild as some Nimphlike ^^^gin now he seemed,
Which some in fight a fearful spirit deemed.
174
No tryumphs do his victories adorn,
But in his death who on the Cross had died,
No laurel nor victorious wreath is worn,
But that red Cross to tell him crucified,
This death, his life, this poverty, his pride:
His feast is fast, his pleasure pennaunce is,
His wishes prayers, his hope is all his bliss.
175
Great Caluary whose hollow vaulted womb,
In his dear Saviors death afunder riuen,
That rock-rent Cave, that man-god burying tomb
Which was unto his blessed body given,
Whose yielding Ghost did shake the power of heaven:
Here as a Hermit could he ever live,
Such wondrous thoughts unto his soul they give.
176
Thus a poor Pilgrim he returns again,
His sumptuous roabes be turned to Palmers gray,
Leaving his Lords to lead his warlick train,
Whilst he alone comes sadly on the way,
Dealing abroad his dear bloods purchased pray:
A hermits staff his caresull hand does hold,
Whose charged Lance the beathen foe controld.
177
Most loving zeal, borne of more zealous love,
Cares holy care, faiths might, joys food, hopes kay,
The groundwork worlds bewitching cannot move
Of true desires the never failing stay,
The cheerful light of heavens ne're-ending day:
Virtue which in thy self most virtuous art,
The fairest gift of the most fairest part.
178
But now to end this long continued strife,
Henceforth thy malice takes no further place,
Thy hate began and ended with his life,
His spirit by thee can suffer no disgrace,
Now in mine arms his virtues I embrace:
His body thine, his crosses witness be,
His mind is mine, and from thy power is free.
179
Thou gave up rule, when he gave up his breath,
And at his end, then did I first begin,
Thy hate was buried in his timelesse death,
Thou going out, first did I enter in,
Thou loosing him, thy loss then did I win:
And when the Fates did up their right resign,
Thy right, his wrong, thy hate, his hap was mine.
180
To the unworthy world then get thee back,
Stuffed with deceits and fawning flatteries,
There by thy power bring all things unto wrack,
And fill the times with fearful Tragedies:
And since thy joy consists in miseries,
Hear his complaint, who wanting eyes to see,
May give thee sight, which art as blind as he.
181
AT her great words whilst they in silence stand,
Poor hapless Robert now remembering him,
Holding one bloody eye in his pale hand,
With countenance all dead, and ghastly grim,
As in a fever shaking every lim;
Even with a pitteous lamentable groan,
Vailing his head, thus breaks into his moan.
182
Poor tear, dimmed taper which have lost thy brother
And thus art lest to twinkle here alone,
Ah might thou not have perrisht with the other,
And both together to your set have gone,
You both were one, one wanting, thou not one,
Poor twins which like true friends one watch did keep,
Why seuer'd thus yt so you should not sleep.
183
And thou pore eye, oh why sholdst thou have light,
The others black eclipse thus soon to see,
And yet thy fellow be deprived of sight,
For thy sad tears the while to pity thee,
Equal your griefs, your haps unequal be:
Take thou his darkness, and thy sorrow hide,
Or he thy light, his grief so well espied.
184
Let that small drop out of thy iuicie ball,
Canded like gum upon the moist'ned third,
There still be fixed that it never fall,
But as a sign hang on thine eyes staind lid,
A witness there what inward grief is hid:
Like burning glasses sired by the Son,
Light all men's eyes to see what there is done.
185
Now like to conduits draw my body dry,
By which is made the entrance to my blood,
Streame-gushing sluices placed in either eye,
Which shall be fed by this continual flood,
Whirlpooles of tears where pleasures city stood
Devouring gulfes within a vastie land,
Or like the dead Sea, ever hateful stand.
186
Where stood the watch-towers of my cheerful face,
Like Vestall Lamps lighted with holy flame,
Is now a dungeon and a lothed place,
The dark some prison of my hateful shame,
That they themselves do most abhor the same:
Through whose foul grates, grief full of misery,
Still begging vengeance, cease not to cry.
187
With dire-full seals, death has shut up the doors,
Where he has taken up his dreadful Inn,
In bloody letters showing those fell sores,
That now do reign, wherioy and mirth have been,
This mortal plague the just scourge of their sin:
From whose contagion comfort quite is fled,
And they themselves, in their selves buried.
188
Poor tears, since eyes your small drops cannot see,
And since the Fountains cease of my full eyes,
Tears get you eyes and help to pity me,
And water them which timelesse sorrow dryes,
Tears give me tears, lend eyes unto my eyes:
So may the blind yet make the blind to see,
Else no help is to them, nor hope to me,
189
Body and eyes usurping others right,
Both altring use contrary unto kind,
That eyes to eyes those dark which should give light
The blind both guide, and guided by the blind,
Yet both must be directed by the mind:
Yet that which both their trusty guide should be,
Blinded with care, like them can nothing see.
190
The day abhors thee, and from thee does sly,
Night follows after, yet behind does stay,
This never comes, though it be euernie,
This ere it comes is vanished away,
Nor night, nor day, though ever night and day:
Yet all is one, still day or ever night.
No rest in darkness, nor no joy in light.
191
Whilst light did give me comfort to my moan,
Tears sound a mean to sound my sorrows deep,
But now alas that comfort being gone,
Tears do want eyes which should give tears to weep
Whence I lost joy there care I ever keep:
What gave me woe from me does comfort take,
Delight a sleep, now sorrow still must wake.
192
I saw my ill, when ill could scarclie see,
I saw my good, when I my good scarce knew,
Now see not ill, when as my ill sees me,
Hasting to that which still does me pursue,
With my lost eyes, sorrow my state does view,
In blindness loosing hope of all delight,
And with my blindness, give my cares full light.
193
As man himself, so the most hateful beast,
The Worm enioyes the air as well as we,
The little Gnat, or thing that lives the least,
Of this by nature kindly is made free:
what thing has mouth to brethe, but eyes to see?
Though honor lost, yet might I humbly crave,
To have what beasts, or flies, or pore worms have.
194
Mine eyes hurt not the Sun, nor steal the day,
Except a candle, they see never light,
These monstrous walls do take that doubt away,
What? fear then yt they should harm ye night?
Needles is that, since tears have blotted sight.
I know not then from whence this hate should rise,
Except it only be, that they be eyes.
195
The man-betraying Basilisk has eyes,
Although by sight those eyes be made to kill,
Though her own works be made her enemies,
Though naturally ordained unto ill,
Yet in her self so just is nature still:
How monstrous then am I alone in nature,
Denide of that she gives the vilest creature?
196
Oh tyranny more cruel far then death,
Though death be but the end of tyranie,
Death lends us sight whilst she does give us breath,
Of all the senses that the last does dye,
In living death, how miserable am I,
In life, of this sense me thus to deprive,
To make the others dye, my self alive.
197
Eyes which with joy like Suns have risen often,
To view that holy Cities glorious Towers,
And seen the Christian Ensigns raisd aloft,
Crowning the walls like garlands of rare flowers,
Now lie you perrisht in your Iuory bowers,
Nor shall you henceforth boast what you have been
But leave the mind to think what you have seen.
198
You, which have seen fair Palestine ^estor'd,
And gorgeous Syon from the Paynims freed,
The Sepulcher of your most glorious Lord,
And yt fair Mount where his sweet wounds did bleed
And with these sights my hungry soul did feed.
Within you brincks be drowned in your own blood
Which often have viewed great Iordans sacred flood.
199
Rake up the sparks which nourished your fire,
Within the ashes of consumed eyes,
Those little brands which kindled youths desire,
The haples stars of passed miseries,
Wander no more within your circling skies;
Under the Globes great compass ever roll,
And in my minds great world, now light my soul.
200
Good night sweet Sunns, your lights are clean put out,
Your hollow pits be graves of all your joy,
With dreadful darkness compassed about,
Wherein is cast what murder can destroy,
That buried there, which did the world annoy,
Those holy Fanes where virtue hallowed stood,
Become a place of slaughter and of blood.
201
Pour down your last refreshing evening dew,
And bathe your selves in fountains of your tears,
The day no more shall ever break to you,
The joyful dawne no more at all appears,
No cheerful sight your sorrow ever cheers:
Shut up your windows ere constraint compel,
Be-take your selves to nights eternal Cell.
202
HIS passion ending, Fortune discontent,
Turning her back as she away would fly,
Playing with fools and babes incontinent,
As never touched with humane misery,
Even after death showing inconstancy,
As straight forgetting what she had to tell,
To other speech and girlish laughter fell.
203
When graceful Fame, conuaying thence her charge,
With all these troops attended royally,
Gave me this book, wherein was writ at large,
Great Norman Roberts famous history,
T'amaze the world with his sad Tragedy:
But Fortune angry with her foe therefore,
Gave me this gift, That I should still be poor.
FINIS.
THE ARGUMENT OF MATILDA.
MATILDA, for her beauty named the fair; A second Lucretia: the daughter of a
noble Barron, the Lord Robert Fitzwater, (a man of great wisdom and courage)
was long time followed of king John, who sought by all means possible to win
her to his unlawful desire; But finding that all he could devise took no
effect, (such was her wonderful chastity,) he sought by force to take her
from the Court, and to send her to some secret place, where he might fitly
accomplish his wicked intent, but his purpose was prevented by her Fathers
policy. The King hereat enraged through despite, subborned certain
malicious persons, subtly to accuse the Lord Fitzwater of rebellion,
whereupon he is banished. Matilda flies to Dunmowe in Essex, and there
became a Nun, in a Religious house there builded, by IVGA, a Virgin, one of
her Ancestors; to which place the King sends one to solicit his old suit,
with poison, either to yield to his desire, or to end her life. She, seeing
her Father banished, none left to succor her, and fearing to be taken out of
the Nunnary, took the poison, and ended her days.

THE LEGEND of Matilda the chaste.
1
IF to this some sacred Muse retain
Those choice regards by perfect virtue taught,
And in her chaste and virgin-humble vain,
Does kindly cherrish one pure May den thought,
In whom my death has but true pity wrought,
By her I crave my life be reueald,
Which black oblivion has too long concealed.
2
Or on the earth, if mercy may be found,
Or if remorce may touch the hearts of men,
Or eyes may lend me tears to wash my wound,
Or passion be expressed by mortal pen,
Yet may I hope of some compassion then:
Three hundredth years by all men ouer-past,
Now finding one to pity me at last.
3
You blessed Imps of heavenly chastity,
You sacred Vestalls, Angels only glory,
Right presidents of immortality,
Only to you I consecrate my story,
It shall suffice for me if you be sorry:
If you alone shall deigne to grace his verse,
Which serves for odours to perfume my hearse.
4
Let your delicious heauen-distilling tears,
Soften the earth, to send me from her womb,
With Conquerors Laurel crown my golden hairs,
With flowery garland beautify my tomb,
Be you the Heralds to proclaim me room,
With sable Cypress mask your lovely eyes,
Mourning my death with doleful Elegies.
5
Fair Rosamond, of all so highly graced,
Recorded in the lasting book of Fame,
And in our Sainted Legendarie placed,
By him who strives to stellifie her name:
Yet will some Matrons say, she was to blame;
Though all the world bewitched with his rhyme,
Yet all his skill cannot excuse her crime.
6
Lucrece, of whom proud Rome has bosted long,
Lately revived to live another age,
And here arrived to tell of Tarquins wrong,
Her chaste denial, and the Tyrants rage,
Acting her passions on our stately stage.
She is remembered, all forgetting me,
Yet I, as fair and chaste as ere was she.
7
Shores wife is in her wanton humor soothed,
And modern Poets, still applaud her praise,
Our famous Elstreds wrinckled brows are smoothed
Called from her grave to see these latter days,
And happy's he, their glory highest can raise.
Thus looser wantons still are praisd of many,
Vice often finds friends, but virtue seldom any.
8
O fairest Charities, Jove's dear delight,
O lend me now one heauen-inchaunting lay,
And you rare Nymphs which please Apollos sight,
Bring spreading Palm, and neuer-dying Bay,
With Olive branches strew the pleasant way:
And with you viols sound one pleasing strain,
To aid his Muse, and raise his humble vain.
9
And thou o BETA, sovereign of his thought,
Englands Diana, let him think on thee,
By thy perfections let his Muse be taught,
And in his breast so deep imprinted be,
That he may write of sacred chastity:
Though not like Collin in thy Britomart,
Yet loves as much, although he wants his Art.
10
O my dread Sovereign, rare and princly Maid,
From whose pure eyes the world deriues her light,
In Angels roabs with majesty arayd,
In whom true virtue is defined aright;
O let these lines be gracious in thy sight,
In whom alone, as in a perfect glass,
All may discern how chaste Matilda was.
11
To brag of birth, or noblesse, were but vain,
Although I might compare me with the best;
To challenge that our Ancestors did gain,
A royal mind such folly does detest,
Which I omit, and here set down my rest:
Of virtuous life I mean to boast alone,
Our birth is theirs, our virtues are our own.
12
A shame to fetch our long descent from Kings,
And from great Jove derive our pedigree,
The brave atchiuements of a hundred things,
Breathing vain boasts, the world to terrify,
If we our selves do blot with infamy,
And stain that blood and honor which is theirs,
Men cannot leave their virtues to their heyrs.
13
The Heaven became a Midwife at my birth,
A kind Lucina, gently helping Nature:
Some sacred power then present on the earth,
Foretelling rare perfection in a creature,
As all men judged by so divine a feature:
Yet as my beauty seemed to ravish all,
Virtue made beauty more angelical.
14
Upon my brow, sat Honor in her pride,
Tables containing heavens diuinest law,
Whose snowie margent quoted on each side,
With such delights as all men's hearts could draw,
My thoughts (as Tutors) kept mine eyes in awe,
From their rare sunbeams darting forth such rays,
As well ye work might show the Arts-mans praise.
15
These Cherubins, the Tree of life do keep,
These Dragons, watch the fair Hesperian fruit,
These fiery Serpents, guarde the golden Sheep,
These fixed stars, their rays like lightning shute,
At whose approach, the wise were stricken mute.
These eyes, wc only could true virtues measure,
Ordained by Nature to preserve her treasure.
16
My words were graceful, pleasing to the wise,
My speech retayning modest decency,
Not fondly vain, nor foolishly precise,
But sweetly tuned, with such a simphony,
Moving all hearers with the harmony,
Gracing my tale with such an Emphasis,
As never music could delight like this.
17
My face the sun, adorning beauties sky,
The book where heaven her wonders did enrole,
A stately Pharos to each wandering eye,
And like a Siren could enchaunt the soul,
Which had the power the proudest to control.
To whom this gift my Maker had assigned,
That there all eyes like Southsayers, diuined.
18
Natures fair Ensign royally displayed,
Map of Elisium, Eden without night,
Ermins, wherein rich Phoebus is arrai'd,
Right prospectiue, reflecting heavenly light,
Hart-wounding arrow, pearcing with the sight.
Bright mornings luster, Jove's high exaltation,
Load-starre of love, rare Card of admiration.
19
True type of honor, fine delicious varry,
The richest coat that ever beauty bare,
Pure colors, which the heavens do only carry,
O uncouth blazon, so exceeding rare,
O curious lymming, passing all compare,
First at my birth assigned unto me,
By that great King of heavenly Heraldry.
20
From hence my praise began to prove her wing,
Which to the heaven could carry up my fame,
Of all my glory now began the spring,
Through every Coast this still enlarged my name,
From hence the cause of all my sorrows came:
Thus to this Hydra are we subject still,
Who dares to speak, not caring good or ill.
21
This jealous Monster has a thousand eyes,
Her ayrie body has as many wings,
Now on the earth, then up to heaven she flies,
And here, and there, with every wind she flings,
From every Coast her rumors forth she brings;
Nothing so secret, but to her appears,
And apt to credit every thing she hears.
22
Foul blabbing tel-tale, secrets soon bewrayer,
Thou ayre-bred Echo, whisperer of lies:
Shril-sounding trumpet, Truths unkind betrayer,
False larum-bel, awaking dead men's eyes,
Uncertain rumor, wandering in the skies:
Fond prattling Parrat, telling all thou hear,
Ost furthest of when as thou shold'st be nearest.
23
The Princes ears are open to report,
There Is skill in blazing beauty to a King;
To censure, is the subject of the Court,
From thence Fame carries, thither Fame does bring,
There, to each word a thousand Ecchos ring:
A Lottery, where most loose, but few do win,
Few love Religion, many follow sin.
24
Lo, here at first my beauty played her prize,
Here where my virtues seldom prized be;
Yet that which most seemed wondered of the wise,
Confined by virtue, cleerlie made me see
What dangers were attending still on me:
Which most desired, for why esteemed most rare,
Guarded I kept with most especial care.
25
This, whole possessed the thoughts of princly John,
This, on his hart-strings Angels music made,
This, was the subject which he wrought upon,
That deep impression which could never fade,
Reason which might sufficiently persuade,
Hence sprung that grief, wc never gave him rest,
This was the spirit wher-with he was possessed.
26
This, had commission to command his crown,
In all his course, conducted by this star,
This, with a smile could clear each clowdy frown,
This, conquered him, which conquered al in war,
This, calmed his thoughts in many a bloody iar:
This, taught his eyes their due attendance still,
This, held the raines which ruled his princly will.
27
Controuling Love, proud Fortunes busy Factor,
The gaul of wit, sad Melancholies school,
Hart-killing corsiue, golden times detractor,
Life-fretting Canker, mischiefs poisoned tool,
The Idiots Idol, but the wisemans fool:
A foe to friendship, enemy to truth,
The wrong misleader of our pleasing youth.
28
MY virtuous Father, famous then in Court,
Who lived in pomp, and Lorded with the best,
Whose mind was trobled with this strange report,
As one enshrining honor in his breast,
And as a man who ever loved me best,
Foresaw the danger by such secret spies,
Who still attended on the Princes eyes.
29
And he, who in the Kings own bosom slept,
Experience taught his deepest thoughts to sound,
Yet in his breast, the same he secret kept,
Nor would disclose the thing which he had found,
Who being hurt, must needs conceal the wound.
For why, he knew it was a dangerous thing,
In rule, or love, but once to cross a King.
30
And finding lust had kindled all this fire,
And his affection in extremes consisted,
He greatly feared his youthful vain desire,
Might grow impatient, being once resisted:
Yet in his humor, since he still persisted,
With me his child, thought fittest to persuade,
Ere further he into the deep durst wade.
31
SWeet gyrle (quoth he) the glory of my life,
The blessed and sole object of mine eyes,
For whom the Heavens with Nature fell at strife,
On whom the hope of all my fortune lies,
Whose youth, my age with comfort still supplies,
Whose very sight, my drouping heart does raise,
And does prolong thy aged fathers days.
32
Thou see, a world upon thy youth awaite,
That Paradise, where all delights do grow,
Thy peerlesse Beauty made so fair a bait,
The Bursle where Nature sets her ware to show,
Where blushing Roses, sleep in beds of snow,
The heavens have fringed thy forehead with their gold;
That glass where heaven her-selfe may well behold.
33
All gaze at Comets, choysest things be best,
The rarest pearls are ever dearest prized,
Seldom wants guests, where Beauty bids the feast,
Men's eyes with wonders never are suffised,
At fairest signs, best welcome is surmised.
The shrine of Love, does seldom offerings want.
Nor with such counsel, Clyents never scant.
34
Honor is grounded on the tickle Ice,
The purest Lawne, most apt for every spot,
The path to hell, does seem a paradise,
Vices be noted, virtues often forgot,
Thy fame once foild, incurable the blot.
Thy name defaced, if touched with any stain,
And once supplanted, never grows again.
35
The Lechors tongue is never void of guile,
Nor Crocodile wants tears to win his pray,
The subtil'st Temptor has the sweetest style,
With rarest music Sirens soon'st betray
Affection, will like fire himself bewray.
Time offers still each hour to do amiss,
And greatest dangers, promise greatest bliss.
36
Deceit, still with a thousand sleights is fraught,
Art, has a world of secrets in her power,
Who hopes a Conquest, leaves no means unsought,
Soft golden drops once pierced the brazen tower,
Care and Suspicion is fair Beauties dower.
Guile, (like a Traitor) ever goes disguised,
Lust, often is filled, but never is sufficed.
37
This wanton Prince, whose soul does swim in vice,
Whose lawless youth time never has restrained,
He leaves no means vnprou'd, which may entice,
The rytes of wedlock wantonly profained;
His hands with blood of innocents distained.
This Lion, would thy chastity devour,
Which kept by Virtue, lies not in his power.
38
Laciuious will, the senses does abuse,
Birth is no shadow unto tyranny,
No scepter serves dishonor to excuse,
Nor kingly veil can cover villainy,
Fame is not subject to authority.
No plaster heales a deadly poisoned sore,
No secret hid, where slander keeps the door.
39
No subtle plea reuokes dishonors error,
No law can quite, where Fame is once endited,
No armor proof, against the conscience terror,
Against open shame, no Text can well be cyted,
The blow once given, cannot be euited.
If once the fire be to the powder got,
It Is then too late to seek to fly the shot.
40
His youthful love, is like a sudden fire,
Whose heat extreme, of force decay it must,
The cause, proceeding from his lewd desire,
Is quickly out, and sooner turned to dust,
Yet frets the life, as iron frets with rust.
Sin in a chain, leads on her sister Shame,
And both in Gives, fast fettered to Defame.
41
The stately Eagle on his pitch does stand,
And from the maine the fearful foul does smite,
Yet scorns to touch it lying on the land,
When he has felt the sweet of his delight,
But leaves the same a pray to every Kite.
With much we surfeit, plenty makes us poor,
The wretched Indian spurns the golden Ore.
42
Kings use their Loves, as garments they have worn
VVeake stomachs loath, if once but fully fed,
The Saint once stolen, who does the shrine adorn?
Or what is Nectar if it once be shed?
What Princes wealth can prize thy Maidenhead?
Which should be held as precious as thy breath,
Which once dissolved of force ensues death.
43
Lo, here he makes a period with his tears,
Which from his eyes now make a sudden breach,
By which the weight of all his speech appears,
In words so grave as seemed still to preach,
This Idioma with such power does teach.
Whose tuned cadence does such rules impart,
As deeply fixed each sentence in my heart.
44
O sacred counsel, true heart suppling balm,
Soule-curing plaster, time preserving bliss,
Water of life, in every sudden qualme,
The heavens rich storehouse, where all treasure is,
True guide, by whom foul Errors den we miss.
Night-burning Beacon, watch against mishaps,
Foresight, avoiding many after claps.
45
The King deluded in his love the while,
His soul tormented in this quenchlesse fire,
With flattering hope his senses does beguile,
Quickening the coals unto his fond desire;
Affection grown too headstrong to retire,
Controles his silence, hating to be mute,
And still does urge him to commence his suit.
46
Thus carried on by his unbridled thought,
He leaves no bait vnprou'd that might allure,
Deceit, a school of common fleights has taught,
Desire, has philters which desires procure,
Lust, puts most unlawful things in ure:
Nor yet in limmets ever could be bounded,
Till he himself, himself have quite consounded.
47
But still perceiving all devises fail,
His trains in Court yet never took effect,
Now with his tongue determined to assail,
And to this end does all his thoughts direct,
Too much abused by his vain suspect:
Too further days, no longer would be posted,
But finding time, me bravely thus accosted.
48
Goddess, quoth he, when Nature thee engrayned,
With colors fetched from heavens eternal spring,
Little thought she, herself she could have stained.
Or grae'd the world with so divine a thing.
But as a gift to gratify a King,
Sealed thee this Charter, dated at thy birth,
To be the fairest that ever lived on earth.
49
Lock not thy treasure, heaven does give the store,
A thousand Graces at thine eyes are fed,
Thy bosom, is the Angels secret door,
Thy breast, the pillowes of fair Venus bed:
Regards of honor on thy brows are red.
Thy cheeks, the banquet where sweet Love does feast,
The royal Pawn of Beauties interest.
50
Thy lips, ye Bath where sorrows wounds are healed,
Where abstinence keeps Virtue in a diet,
And in thy wit, all wonders are revealed,
Wisdoms grown welthy, lives there at quiet:
Thy modest eye controles Loves wanton riot.
Thine eye, that planet clearer then the seven,
Whose radient sple^dour lights ye world to heaven.
51
From thy sweet looks such streams of lightning glide,
As through the eyes do wound the very heart,
Killing, and curing, as they are applide,
Hurting, and healing, like Achilles Dart:
Which to the world do heavenly things impart.
And thou alone, the spirit of all delight,
Which like the sun, ioy'st all things with thy sight.
52
Could heaven allow wher-with to lim thee forth,
Or earth afford things of esteem to praise thee,
Were words sufficient to express thy worth,
Or could invention to thy glory raise thee,
Could art devise a weight whereby to peize thee:
But thy surpassing excellence is such,
As eyes may gaze, but nothing else can tuch.
53
He is thy King, who is become thy subject,
Thy sovereign Lord, who only seeks thy love,
Thy beauty is his eyes commanding object,
Who for thy sake, a thousand deaths would prove:
Sweet Maid let prayers some compassion move.
Let Wolves, and Bears, be cruel in their kinds,
But women meek, and have relenting minds.
54
Love forced the Gods, to things for Gods unmeet,
Behold a Monarch kneeling to a maid,
Apollo, prostrate at his Daphnes feet,
Great Atlas bows, on whom the heaven is staide;
Thy Jove his Scepter on thy lap has laid,
Thou in his throne do sit as Chancellor.
And he become thy daily Orator.
55
Look on these brows, the perfect Map of care,
The truest mirror of my misery,
In wrinkled lines where sorrows written are,
Where Time still reads on Loves Anotomy,
My bloodlesse veins with greefes Phlebotomy:
A stanchlesse heart, dead-wounded, ever bleeding,
On who^ that nere-fild vulture Love sits seeding.
56
Pity this soule-euaporating smoke,
The purest incense of most perfect zeal,
These deep-fetcht sighs, confounding words half spoke,
Where swoln-ey'd passion does her self reveal:
That ragefull fire, no reason can conceal.
Where torments last, and joys are still diluded,
Where all infernal torture is included.
57
Behold, the brim-full Cesterns of these eyes,
With surging Tides of brackist tears frequented,
Where foodlesse Hope, still hunger-staruen lies,
In burning Pooles eternally tormented:
Which to betray, my heart at first consented.
Where as the spirit of woe, has ever being,
Blinded in tears, yet in tears only seeing.
58
Shine thou, like Cynthia under mine estate,
Thy tresses decked with Ariadnes Crown,
In pomp redubling costly Iunos rate,
And cloud the world in sable with a frown:
Advance thy friends, and throw the mighty down.
Be thou admired through all this famous I Will,
Thy name enrol'd with neuer-dated style.
59
Great troops of Ladies shall attend my Gerle,
Thou on thy brave tryumphing Chariot borne,
Thy drink shall be dissolved orient Pearl,
Thy princely Cup of rarest Unicorn:
Then live at ease, and laugh the world to scorn.
And if our music cannot like thine ears,
Thy Jove shall fetch thee music from the Spheres.
60
Thy name, as my Empreza will I bear,
My well tuned rymes, shall glory in thy praise,
Upon my Crown, thy favors will I wear,
Figuring thy love a thousand sundry ways,
My power shall be thy shield at all assayes.
And thou my Saint, Kings offering to thy shrine.
Wondering thy beauty, as a thing divine.
61
What if my Queen, Detractor of our bliss,
Thee by her hundreth-eyed Heardsman keep,
I Will bring to pass, she shall her purpose miss,
My Mercury shall lull him till he sleep;
Love ever laughs, when I clousie does weep.
My providence, shall keep her stomach under,
She may raise storms, but Jove does rule ye thunder
62
Thus having broke the Ice from whence might spring
Sweet streams of love in calm and fairer time,
And afterward, might joyful tidings bring,
The staire begun by which he thought to clyme,
Hoping due hours, now he had sed the chyme;
Leaves me, not knowing now wc way to turn me
Warmed with ye fire, wc unawares might burn me.
57
Behold, the brim-full Cesterns of these eyes,
With surging Tides of brackist tears frequented,
Where foodlesse Hope, still hunger-staruen lies,
In burning Pooles eternally tormented:
Which to betray, my heart at first consented.
Where as the spirit of woe, has ever being,
Blinded in tears, yet in tears only seeing.
58
Shine thou, like Cynthia under mine estate,
Thy tresses decked with Ariadnes Crown,
In pomp redubling costly Iunos rate,
And cloud the world in sable with a frown:
Advance thy friends, and throw the mighty down.
Be thou admired through all this famous I Will,
Thy name enrol'd with neuer-dated style.
59
Great troops of Ladies shall attend my Gerle,
Thou on thy brave tryumphing Chariot borne,
Thy drink shall be dissolved orient Pearl,
Thy princely Cup of rarest Unicorn:
Then live at ease, and laugh the world to scorn.
And if our music cannot like thine ears,
Thy Jove shall fetch thee music from the Spheres.
60
Thy name, as my Empreza will I bear,
My well tuned rymes, shall glory in thy praise,
Upon my Crown, thy favors will I wear,
Figuring thy love a thousand sundry ways,
My power shall be thy shield at all assayes.
And thou my Saint, Kings offering to thy shrine,
Wondering thy beauty, as a thing divine.
61
What if my Queen, Detractor of our bliss,
Thee by her hundreth-eyed Heardsman keep,
I Will bring to pass, she shall her purpose miss,
My Mercury shall lull him till he sleep;
Love ever laughs, when Jealousy does weep.
My providence, shall keep her stomach under,
She may raise storms, but Jove does rule ye thunder
62
Thus having broke the Ice from whence might spring
Sweet streams of love in calm and fairer time,
And afterward, might joyful tidings bring,
The staire begun by which he thought to clyme,
Hoping due hours, now he had sed the chyme;
Leaves me, not knowing now wc way to turn me
Warmed with ye fire, wc unawares might burn me.
63
Forthwith began strange factions in my thought,
And in my soul a sudden mutiny,
Fear and Desire, a doubtful combat fought,
The title stands upon extremity:
My force was great, and strong mine enemy;
Till Resolution, seeing all begun,
Sent Succors in, by whom the field was won.
64
As thus mine honor in the Balance hung,
Betwixt the worlds preferment and my fame,
This in mine ears, like Sirens sweetly sung,
That wisely still forewarned me of shame:
Till Grace divine from highest heaven came.
Now must I loose the prize, or win the Crown,
Till Virtue (current) lastly way'd me down.
65
The time is come I must receive my trial,
His protestations subtly accuse me,
My Chastity sticks still to her denial,
His promises false witness do abuse me,
My Conscience called, yet clearly does excuse me.
And those pure thoughts, enshrined in my breast,
By verdict quit me, being on the Quest.
66
And Wisdom now forewarned me of treason,
That in the Court, I lived a Lions pray,
My tender youth in this contagious season,
Still feared infection, following day by day:
My Barck unsafe on this tempestious Sea.
My Chastity in danger every hour,
No succor near to shroud me from the shower.
67
What should I say? nay what should saying do?
Could wit say more then ever wit has said?
My hopes say yes, but Fortune still says no,
And thus my state is by the stars betrayed,
Such weight the heavens upon my birth have laid,
Yet Virtue never her own Virtue loses,
Though against her course ye that heaven it self opposes.
68
With Resolution, hap what might be-tide,
I leave the Court, the Spring of all my woe.
That Court, which gloried in my Beauties pride,
That Beauty, which my Fortune made my foe,
To Baynards-Castell secretly I go.
Where, with his train, my noble Father lay,
Whose gracious counsel was my only stay.
69
There, might my thoughts keep holy day a while,
And sing a farewell to my sorrows past,
With all delights I might the time beguile,
Attayn'd my wished liberty at last,
No fearful vision made me now aghast.
But like a Bird escapt her Keepers charge,
Glides through ye air with wings displayed at large.
70
And hoping health thus cured of these qualmes,
My heart in this fair harbor rides at ease,
The tempest past, expecting quiet calmes,
My Ship thus floting on these blisfull Seas,
A sudden storm my Ankor-hold does raise:
And from the shore does hoyse me to the maine,
Where I (pore soul) my shipwreck must sustain.
71
And lo, the Autumn of my joys approach,
Whilst yet my spring began so fair to flourish,
Black way-ward Winter, sets her storms abroch,
And kills the sap which all my hopes did nourish.
Fortune once kind, grows crabbed now and currish.
In my straight path, she lays a mighty beam.
And in my course, she thwarths me with ye stream.
72
The King who saw his love unkindly crossed,
And by effect the cause had fully found,
Since he the harvest of his hope had lost,
Now on the revenge his deepest thoughts does ground
Desperate to kill, receiving his deaths wound.
In reasons bonds strives but in vain to hold,
Headstrong desire, too proud to be controld.
73
Like the brave Courser struggling with the raines,
His foming mouth controld with Canons check,
With losty bounds his skillful Ryder strains,
Scorning to yield his stately crested neck:
Nor of the bloody pearcing spurs does reck,
The King now warmed in this glorious fire,
Thus roughly plungeth in his vain desire.
74
Mischief is light, and mounteth ouer-head,
Rage is of fire which naturally ascends,
Rashness of feathers, counsel trapd with lead,
And where the one begins, the other ends,
This all extends, the other all intends.
His will too free to force him unto ill,
His wit too slow to countercheck his will.
75
Henceforth devising to disperse the Cloud.
Which ever hung betwixt him and the light:
His love not current, nor to be allowed,
Whilst thus my Father held me in his sight,
Something amisle, his Watch went never right.
Of force he must this Sentinel remove,
If he in time would hope to win my love.
76
In going on, go back, forward, retire,
Fly that which follows, follow but to fly,
Keep thee far off, now thou approchest nier,
Stoop to the ground when mischief mounts on hie,
Foresight far off does danger soon epsy.
Ah love, if wounded once with thine own Dart,
Thou hate, hate love, transformd by your own art
77
Ten thousand mischiefs now he sets abroch,
Treasons, invasions, civil mutiny,
Black ignominy, slanderous reproach,
Rebellion, outrage, vile conspiracy,
Opening the intralls of all villainy.
Causing this Lord, thereof to be accused,
By Traitors, such as he with gyfts abused.
78
Foul Envy thou, the partial Judge of right,
Son of Deceit, borne of that harlot Hate,
Nursed in hell, a vile and ugly sprite,
Feeding on Slander, cherrish'd with Debate;
Never contented with thine own estate;
Deeming alike the wicked and the good,
Whose words be gal, whose actions end in blood
79
His service done to this ungrateful King,
His worth, his valor, his gentilitie:
What good so ever might from virtue spring,
Or could proceed from true Nobility,
All buried now in dark obscurity.
His virtuous life, in doubtful question brought,
Which euer-more for fame and honor sought.
80
Thou hateful Monster, base Ingratitude,
Souls mortal poison, deadly-killing wound,
Deceitful Serpent, seeking to delude,
Black loathsome ditch, where all desert is drowned,
Vile Pestilence, which all things do confound:
At first created to none other end,
But to grieve those who^ nothing could offend.
81
Such as too well perceived the Kings intent,
In whom remayn'd yet any spark of grace,
Pyttying a poor distressed innocent,
Their safety still depending on my case,
These in my wrongs participate a place.
These, bound in friendship, and alied in blood,
Fast to my Father in the quarrel stood.
82
But as a Lion in the wilds of Thrace,
With darts and arrows gauled at the bay,
Kills man and beast incountring in the chase,
And down on heaps the fearful Herds does lay,
His armed paws each where does make his way:
Thus by his power, the King does now surprise,
Such as in Arms resist his tyrannies.
83
Oh strange strange love, yet stop thy headstrong course,
Ere yt be quite transported into hate:
Too violent thus spurr'st thou on thy force,
To come unto thy fearful ruined date;
Let not thy frailty yet foretell thy fate:
That love with love, should fall to civil wars,
Wisdom, a star, which rules the angriest stars.
84
And given over to his vile desire,
The spectacle of loathsome sin and shame,
Our strong-built Castles now he sets on fire,
And (like proud Nero) warms him by the flame,
VVasting themselves, augmenting his defame:
Which like bright Beacons, blaze in every eye,
Warning all others of his tyranny.
85
Our friends and followers thus are beaten down,
Whom every slave and pesant dare revile,
And all reputed Traitors to the Crown,
Imprisoned some, some forced into exile;
Yet worst of all, (remediless the while,)
My Father sent a banished man to France,
And here perforce must leave me to my chance.
86
Be merciful (sweet Death) and come not thus
In Banishments black shape, so full of fear,
In thine own likeness gently comfort us,
As when to wretched men thou do appear,
Look not upon us with sad moody cheore:
Thou art not pale, grim, fearful, gaftly, dull,
But amorous, young, mild, lovely, beautiful.
87
Thou go to grief, and I must stay to woe,
Thy absence, brings horrors presence still,
Thou going, staiest, and staying, I do go,
Thou leau'st me, leau'st with me, leau'st me to ill,
Thy flight, my fight, thy safety me does kill:
Thou take my fall with thee, in me forsaking,
Forsake me then, away me with thee taking.
88
ON shyp-bord now, with hands reared to the skies
(All sighed and wept, could sigh nor weep no more,)
He turns his sad eclipsed teareful eyes,
As retrograde unto the blessed shore;
Rich I Will (quoth he) once Garner of my store,
Taken from me by yonder Tyrants theft,
And I as poor as ere was Irus left.
89
It Is not my wealth, that, I esteem as light,
Nor yet my Country, though so dear to me,
But thou alone Matilda, my delight,
My life, my soul, all my felicity,
Left as a pray, vile Monster unto thee.
Yet my laments are wasted all in vain,
And to these winds and billows must complain.
90
Pity, if in thy drop be-dewed eye
Thou have one tear of wonder to let fall,
That one drop spent, be ever after dry,
But keep that one to comfort me withal:
Sweet honny tear, sweeten my bitter gall;
But if thine eye, whith mine eyes be drawn dry,
Trans-forme me then, even all into an eye.
91
But now the Wolf is got into my fold,
God help the Lamb that is in the Lions power;
Alas poor Maid, thus art thou bought and sold,
Prepared for the slaughter every hour,
This Minataure must all my hopes devour.
Yet forced by Fortune to endure this woe,
And unrevenged unto my grave shall go.
92
Live in me Death, and I in thee will live,
Be thou my self, and I will still be thee,
Give thou to me, and I to thee will give,
And in perpetual union let us be:
Thou I, I thou, one undivided we.
Death give life strength, life, thou to death lend breath,
Death be my life, and life be thou my death.
93
Within the furrows of my aged brows,
My joys must their untimely burial have,
This fatal Tomb proud Fortune them allows,
Which thus withholds me from my wished grave,
The heavens are deaf although I justly crave,
My tears with griese are frozen in mine eyes,
Yet God, nor man, regards my miseries.
94
Immortal Hate, for pity sit and weep,
And VVoe, for woe seek from thy self to fly,
Dyre Passion, be thou drowned in passions deep,
And Death, for sorrow, in my sorrows dye,
He be my self, if thou will not be I:
In the attire of my pale Image dight thee,
If shape of my sad griefs do not affright thee.
95
Thrice famous Roman, (fortunate to me)
By whose own hands thy dearest child was slain,
Delivered so from slavish tyranny,
But living, mine dishonored shall remain,
Blotting my name with an immortal stain;
Whose black reproach, for ever shall endure,
Ah vile disease, that never time can cure.
96
The souls departure, gives the body rest,
My bodies parting, gives my soul new care,
My soul, of his abode is dispossessed,
My body, endless banished to despair,
My soul and body, soul nor body are:
My soul with hers, hers killing mine alone,
My body hers, hers mine, neither our own.
97
Even as the kind sleep-breaking Nightingale,
(The cruel Merlin ceaz'd her little one)
Unto the thickets tells a woeful tale,
VVearying the woods with her continual moan,
This pore bird chirpeth, he pore Lord does groan.
She weeps all night, by day complains he,
She for her young one, he laments for me.
98
Look how a Sea, the tide once being past,
Whose surges strove the Continent to clime,
And bounding back unto the Gulf at last,
Upon the Sands does leave a clammie slime,
Tears in his cheeks, such gutters worn in time.
VVash'd with the floods of his still-trobled brain,
His eyes brim full, as furrows after rain.
99
And thus my Father unawares betrayed,
A thousand sorrows me at once assail;
What might I do, a silly helpless Maid,
Tossed and turmoild in this tempestious gale?
These boisterous flaws have broken down my sail
My succors thus (like shadows) now are gone,
Not one remains to whom to make my moan.
100
Now, like a Roe, before the hounds imbost,
When ouer-toyl'd his swiftnes does aslake,
Forsakes the Plains, to which he trusted most,
And to the covert does himself betake,
Where doubling still, creeps on from brake to brake,
Thus do I fly before the Princes face,
Who day and night pursues me still in chase.
101
THE Coast is clear, suspicious eyes at rest,
And all things fadge which further his desire:
Now royal hope keeps revels in his breast,
The coals are quick, and Fancy blows the fire,
His love expects his long deserved hire.
No cloud discerned to hinder this his sun,
The watch discharged, he hopes ye town is won.
102
The Princes arms are stretched from shore to shore,
Kings sleeping, see with eyes of other men,
Craft finds a kay to open every door,
What might I do, or what auailes me then?
The silly Lamb lives in the Lions Den.
Loves wakeful eyes (too soon alas) discri'd me,
And found me, where I surest thought to hide me.
103
My Jove, like Jove, now seeks me to invade,
And roysting comes, in thunderbolts and rain,
A Beast, a Bird, a Satyr in the shade,
A flood, a fire, a Serpent, and a Swain,
Camelion-like, as fitt'st my love to gain.
Now like great Phoebus in his golden Carre,
And then like Mars, the fearful God of war.
104
He makes the air to woo me whilst I talk,
The wind to whistle many a pleasant Dittie,
The dainty Grass make music as I walk,
The pretty flowers to move me still to pity:
All senseless things with reason seeming witty:
Before mine eyes he ever does appear,
And if I call, still aunswers, I am here.
105
My steps are told, my paths by Spies are noted,
Mine eyes by Night-spells shut within the watch,
My words are way'd by jealous love that doted,
And at my thoughts, Ill-meaning still does catch,
Into my counsels Treason draws the latch:
And at my gates, Suspicion still does ward,
Sorrow my handmaid, Falsehood on my guard.
106
He weeps his words, but words could win no tears,
The rain does cease or ere the floods do rise,
His woeful words his tongue a while forbeares,
Then does he his hearts arrant with his eyes:
His eyes eclipz'd, he then with sighs supplies.
Sighs fail, with smiles he then bewraies his pain,
Smiling, he weeps, yet weeping, laughs again.
107
Look how the Peacock ruffs his flaunting tail,
And struts under his mooned Canapie,
And how he quiuers with his plumed sail,
Yet when his Lead-pale legs he haps to see,
With shame abates his painted iolitie.
The King, as proud as Peacock in my love,
yet droups again when words nor tears could move
108
My breast, of Flint, a rock impenitrable,
My heart, that stone which never tool could perce,
My thoughts, a Center, and unsearchable,
My words, judgment, wc law could not reuerse,
My frowns, such clouds, as no joy could disperse,
Tygars are tamed with patience and with skill,
All things made subject, but a woman's will.
109
The King like one sick of a strange disease,
Whose cruel pain no physic can assuage,
Nor plaster can his torments once appease,
Boiling his entrails with such hellish rage,
With his own knife his horror does engage.
Thus desperate, he, fore-thinks to end this strife,
Or else by poison take away my life.
110
But first, with lines he bravely sets on,
Words steeped in syrrop of Ambrosia,
Sweet method, sauoured with invention,
What can be said that Lovers cannot say?
Desire can make a Docter in a day:
Each sentence seemed a sweet inchau^ting charm,
A trumpet sounding gentle Loves alarm.
111
With rare hart-curing Phrigian harmony
He tunes his strings, as not a trebble iarrs,
His strains so pleasant and melodious be,
As might appease the heat of fearful wars,
Distilling Balm to cure the greatest scarrs:
His pen, dilates his hearts Apology,
And shows my sins, by loves Theology.
122
What curious thing did Nature ere bring forth,
What glistering star that yields his silver shine,
To which he does not now compare my worth?
Or what is there, that's mortal or divine,
What sublimation does he not refine?
Or what rare thing was ever yet devised,
That unto me he has not lightly prized?
113
Now mounts he up with lofty strains of love,
Then to sad veins his pliant Muse does bow,
His humors serving, as his passions move,
And as the Tides, the numbers ebb and flow;
His hopes now wither, then again they grow,
Painting his grief, in hope to quench desire,
But inck to love, like oil unto the fire.
114
And now, of one he had himself advised,
Both red and practiced in this wretched Art,
Within whose brain all mischiefs were co^pris'd,
Whose words were venom, and his tongue a Dart,
And this is he must act this damned part.
To him, the King my poisoning does commit,
Who had before made trial of his wit.
115
Another Dagon was this miscreant,
A devil, walking in a humane shape,
Foul Dagon, borne true virtue to supplant,
For whom the infernal pyt of hell does gape:
Image of pride, of villainy, and rape,
Be thou abhord of all posterity,
And let thy vile dishonor never die.
116
By him to Dunmow, he these lines conuayde,
A Monestary Iuga had begun,
Iuga, sometime a holy Vestall Maid,
At whose great charge this Monument was done,
Where I had vowed to live a holy Nun,
And in my Cloister, kept amongst the rest,
Which in this place virginity professed.
117
NOW, he which had this bloody act in charge,
Thither repairs, with Letters from the King,
Whose black Commission was but all too large
To execute so base and vile a thing:
This messenger, which now my death does bring,
To add fit matter to my tragic story,
Finds means to board me in my oratorie.
118
With courtly congies gently greeting me,
Gives me the packet which the King had sent me,
Receive fair Maid, these Letters here (quoth he)
The faithful earnest of that good is meant thee,
But craving that which never shall repent thee.
His lines be love, the letters writ in blood,
Then make no doubt, the warrant passing good.
119
Kindly accept a Princes kingly offer,
It Is more then folly if thou do refuse it:
Never has Fortune made a fairer profer,
The gift too great, if fondly thou abuse it,
Nor any reason sorueth to excuse it.
Be not a foe unto thine own good hap,
Refusing treasure thrown into thy lap.
120
Ears, eyes, hands, nostrils, tongue, the instruments
To hear, to see, to touch, to smell, to taste,
Sounds, pleasurs, softs, smells, meats, and every sense,
Even as a King, with his delight is placed,
Nature yet never framed thing in wast,
O to her power an horrible offense,
This profane use of froward continence.
121
If thou be wise, hold this as ominous,
The heavens not like disposed every hour,
The stars be still predominant in us,
Fortune not always forth her bags does pour,
Nor every cloud does rain a golden shower,
Occasion's winged, and ever flies fast,
Coming, she smiles, and frowns once being past.
122
VVrong not thy self, nor yet the world deprive,
Of that rare good which Nature freely lent,
Think thou by such base nygardize to thrive,
In sparing that which never will be spent?
And that is worst, in age shall thee repent:
Playing the Churl, to hoord up beauties pelf,
And live, and die, and all unto thy self.
123
Fie on this lyppish lisping fond forsooth,
This chyldish nicenes, and these pettish noes,
A graceful smyle, ye wrinkling brow does smooth,
Penance and Pleasure, still are mortal soes,
Let springing youth reiourne old ages woes,
Away with fasting, beggarly devotion,
This is no way to climb unto promotion.
124
Yet, were this all (quoth he) as would it were,
But there is more, which needs I must reveal,
Behold the poison he has sent thee here,
Which on my life I dare not to conceal,
Thus is the King determined to deal:
I, only wait upon thy resolution,
To win thy love, or see thy execution.
125
Leave of these humors, be not singular,
Make not an Idol of thine own perfection,
Prize not this word (Virginity) so dear,
Seem not so Saint-like, moved with no affection.
Beauty brings perrill, wanting safe protection,
Forswear this drouzie mellancholie Cell,
Was never Girl could grace a Court so well.
126
This fear first sprung from foolish superstition,
Which fond conceit into our ears has blown,
Which we receive from old folks by tradition,
And as a weed to choke our joys is grown:
Reason roots out what Error erst has sown.
A gentle jest to fright poor babes withal,
Like to a Bug-beare, painted on a wall.
127
Tush, these be triuiall toys of reputation,
Whose Ceremonies have the world infected,
Held in regard but only for a fashion,
Which frivolous, the wiser have neglected:
And but as Dreams of doting age respected.
Whose spleen-sick humors on their galls were fed
Thinking all true which they imagined.
128
Religion was devised by policy,
A subtle shadow covering all excess,
As Nature gives you seeming modesty,
To shadow that, you would too soon express,
O, cunning only is true holiness.
Blush, pray, be patient, most of all most chaste,
Thus by deceit, delights must be embraced.
129
Dispatch, (quoth he) lo, here is pen and ink,
Here make the Prince assurance of thy love,
Or else prepare thee to thy fatal drink,
Which is of force thy Fever to remove:
Which (ah pore fondling) thou too soon may prove.
And if thy will be so fast chayn'd to thee,
Let thine own hands the Executioners be.
130
And is (quoth I) the Princes pleasure thus?
You are deceived, he does but this to try me,
I know my Lord is kind and gracious,
He thinks my sex, and weakness will disery me;
I hope the King will deal more kindly by me.
Those blessed hands, which never did but good,
Will not be stained with virgins guiltless blood.
131
As he does reign, his mind should truly reign
In one consent their government agree,
His public rule his Subjects should restrain,
Affections, subject to his mind should be,
Then absolute is it, absolute he.
His mind commanding, kingly by abstaining,
As his command is absolute in reigning.
132
His thoughts be pure, as Crystal, without spot,
He is wisdom, honor, valor, chastity:
What excellence is there that he is not?
Or what may be, by him which cannot be?
He Is Virtues true superlatiue degree.
From his affections, never can proceed,
One little thought of this so vile a deed.
133
Kings be the Gods Vizgerents here on earth,
The Gods have power, Kings from that power have might,
Kings should excel in virtue as in birth,
Gods punish wrongs, and kings should maintain right,
They be the Suunes from which we borrow light.
And they as Kings, should still in justice strive,
With Gods, from who^ their beings they derive.
134
Empire even like the Sun does draw all eyes,
And his Eclipse the soonest does appear,
Small vapors seem great lights drawn to the skies
Things ouer-head though far, show ever near,
Small stains be great in things should be most clear,
Nothing so soon discernd by human sight,
As is the cloud which hides the cheerful light.
135
Enraged with this, (in greefes extremity,)
Minion, (quoth he,) it is now no time to prate,
Dispatch, or else I Will drench you presently,
Of this, nor that, I stand not to debate.
Expects thou love where thou reward'st with hate?
I pass not I, how ere thou like the motion,
Have done at once, and quickly take the Potion.
136
THis sudden terror makes me pause for breath,
Till sighing out, at length this sad reply:
If it be so, welcome to me my death,
This is the utmost of extremity,
And yet when all is done, I can but die.
His will be done, since he will have it so,
And welcome Death, the end of all my woe.
137
My love is his, whilst love to him is due,
Allegiance binds that love, that love ties truth,
Untrue to him, if to my self untrue,
Suspect is still a Page that waits on Youth,
Ensuing that which of it self ensu'th.
Plasters cure wounds, nothing a wounded name,
Kings pardon death, but cannot pardon shame.
138
And thou my Deaths-man, slave unto his lust,
The executioner of his lawless will,
In whom the Tyrant does repose such trust,
Detract no time, his murdering mind fulfill;
Do what thou dare, the worst thou can but kill.
And tell the Tyrant this when I am dead,
I loathed his beastly and adulterous bed.
139
Nor let the King thy Master ever think,
A virtuous Maid so cowardly and base,
As to be frighted with a poisoned drink,
And live an abject in the worlds disgrace:
All eyes with shame to gaze me in the face.
That ages which heer-after shall succeed,
Shall hold me hateful for so vile a deed.
140
Strange be effects, strange things in love to prove,
He would take from me, what he cannot take,
He loves my hate, and does but hate my love,
And would unmake what he does strive to make,
And thus must love, be punished for loves sake.
And would compel by force, so to be held,
Which is, nor was, nor can be, if compeld.
141
To make that his, which then cannot be his,
Which if once had, is perished being had,
Nor is not then the same that now it is,
Striving to get what he to loose is glad,
When pleasure with extreme excess is mad.
Poor in the riches which have spoiled me,
I rich in that, in which I poor should be.
142
Is this the greatest gift he could bestow?
Is this the Jewel, wher-with he does present me?
I am his friend, what gives he to his foe,
If this in token of his love be sent me?
Remediless I am, it must content me.
Yet afterward, a proverb this shall prove,
The gift King John bestowed upon his Love.
143
Then of this conquest let thy Sovereign boast,
And make report with shame what he has done:
A thing more easy then subdue an Host,
Or conquer Kingdoms, as his Father won;
O hapless Sire, of this unhappy Son.
And he more shame shall carry to his grave,
Then Fortune honors to his Father gave.
144
Thus spoke my mind, (as women use to do,)
Hoping thereby som-what to ease my heart,
But words I found, did but increase my woe,
Augment his rage, not mittigate my smart;
And now comes in the reckoning ere we part.
And now my valor must be tried, or never,
Or famous now, or infamous for ever.
145
Taking the poison from his deadly hand,
Unto the King caroust my latest draught;
Go wretch (quoth I) now let him understand,
He has obtayn'd what he so long has sought;
Though with my blood, my fame I deerly bought.
And though my youth he basely have betrayed,
Yet witness Heaven, I lived and dyed a Maid.
146
This cup the pen, this poison is the ink,
And in this untouched table of my breast,
To him I Will freely write what I do think,
Where he shall find it feelingly expressed.
And what I do omit, tell thou the rest.
Yet rather then in any thing we will vary,
We jointly will become one Secretary.
147
Then why repine I, since he thinks it meet,
He is my Sovereign, and my life is his,
Death is not bitter, spyc'd with such a sweet,
Which leads the way to everlasting blis;
He Is all my joy, he all my glory is.
He is the tuch by whom my gold is tried,
Only by him my death is glorified.
148
For could my life, have given life to me,
My youths fair flower, yet blooming, had not died,
Then how should this but meritorious be,
When by my death, my life is sanctified?
Could ever thing more fitly be applied?
In this is love, in this his care I find,
My Lord is just, my Lord is only kind.
149
Then let these tears, th'Elixars of my love,
Be to his soul a pure preservative,
And let my prayers be of such force to move,
That by my death, my Sovereign may survive:
And from his reign, let Fame herself derive
His glory, like the Suns translucent rays,
And as the heaven, eternal be his days.
150
And thou my careful kind Physician,
For physic now thy patients patient be,
Appeal to heaven with true contrition,
And in thy conscience glass thy foul sin see,
To thee I Will be, as thou have been to me.
This potion take, to rid thee from despair,
Even as thy potion, shall rid me of care.
151
Faith finds free passage to Gods mercy seat,
Repentance carries heavens eternal kayes,
The greater sins bewept, mercy more great,
A hearty will makes straight the offenders ways,
Heaven rings for joy when once a sinner prays.
Of these sweet simples is my drink compounded,
Which shall cure both our souls, both deeply wounded.
152
This mortal poison, now begins to rage,
And spreads his vigor thorough all my veins,
There is no physic can my grief aswage,
Such is the torment which my heart destraines,
Boiling my intrales in most hellish pains,
And Nature weakened of her wonted force,
Must yield to death, which now has no remorce.
153
And those pure thoughts, which once I choisly fed,
Now when pale death my senses does surprise,
I offer her upon my dying bed,
This precious, sweet, perfumed sacrifice:
Hallowed in my almighty Makers eyes.
Which from this Alter, lends me heavenly light,
Guiding my soul amid this darksome night.
154
My glorious life, my spotless Chastity.
Now at this hour be all the joys I have,
These be the wings by which my fame shall fly,
In memory, these shall my Name engraue;
These, from oblivion shall mine honor save.
With Laurel, these my brows shall coronize,
And make me live to all posterities.
155
Our fond preferments, are but childrens toys,
And as a shadow, all our pleasures pass,
As years increase, so wayning are our joys,
And beauty crazed, like a broken glass:
A pretty tale of that which never was,
All things decay, yet Virtue shall not dye,
This only gives us immortality.
156
My soul, thus from her prison set at large,
And gently freed from this poluted room,
This prize unladen from this loathsome Barge,
(Such is the Heavens inevitable doom:)
My body laid at Dunmow in my Toombe.
Thus Baynards-Castle boasts my blessed birth,
And Dunmow kindly wraps me in her earth.
157
NOW scarcely was my breathless body cold,
But every where my Tragedy was spread:
And Fame, abroad in every Coast had told,
My resolution, being lately dead:
The glorious wonder of all women-head.
And to my Father flies with this report,
Who lived an Exile in the French-Kings Court.
158
His grief, too great to be bewailed with tears,
Words insufficient, to express his woe,
His soul assaulted with a thousand fears,
As many sundry passions come and go;
His thoughts, uncertain, wandering too and froe.
At length, this fearful ecstasy ore-past,
Groans from his soul this passion at the last.
159
O Heavens (quoth he) why was I borne accursed?
This only comfort to mine age was left:
But to despite me, you have done your worst,
And me of all my worldly joys bereft:
I quite undone by your deceitful theft.
This was the Jewel I esteemed most,
And loosing this, now all my treasurs lost.
160
Ye powers Divine, if you be clean and chaste,
In whom alone consists eternity,
Why suffer you, your own to be disgras't,
Subject to death and black impuritie?
If in your shield be no security?
If so for Virtue these rewards be due?
Who shall adore, or who shall honor you?
161
What meant you, first to give her vital breath,
Or make the world proud by her blessed birth,
Predestinating this untimely death,
And of her presence to deprive the earth?
O fruitless age, now starved with Virtues dearth.
Or if you longed to have her company,
O why by poison would you let her die?
162
O Soil, with drops of mercy once bedewed,
When just men were instauled in thy throne,
But now with blood of Innocents imbrew'd,
Stayning the glory of fair Albion,
O lustful Monster, o accursed John.
O heavens, to whom should men for justice cry,
When Kings themselves thus reign by tyranny?
163
O give me wings Revenge, I will ascend
And fetch her soul again, out of their power;
From them proceeded this untimely end,
Who took her hence before her dying hour
And raised that clowd which rayn'd this bloody shower.
And from the grave I Will dig her body up,
Which had her bane by that vile poisoned cup
164
O pardon Heavens these sacriligious words,
This irreligious open blasphemy:
My wretched soul no better now affords,
Such is the passion of mine agony,
My desperate case in this extremity.
You harbor those which ever like you best,
With blessed Angels let her spirit rest.
165
No, no, I Will practice by some secret Art,
How to infect his pure life-breathing air,
Or else I Will sheath my poyniard in his heart,
Or with strong poison I Will annoint his Chair:
Or by inchauntment, will his days impair.
O no, revenge to God alone belongs,
And it is he which must revenge my wrongs.
166
Grief would thou wound a world of human hearts,
And yet not furnished with artillery,
Of my care-dryed bones then make thee darts,
And point them with my sorrow poisoned eye,
Which hitting right shall make even death to dye.
That thou thine Ebon bow shall never draw,
But black despair himself shall stand in awe.
167
O heavens, perforce we must attend your time,
Our succors must awaite upon you still,
In your just waights you balance every crime,
For us you know what is good, and what is ill;
Who understands your deep and secret skill?
In you alone our destenies consist,
Then who is he which can your power resist?
168
O, could my sighs again but give thee breath,
Or were my tears such balm as could restore thee,
Or could my life redeem thee from this death,
Or were my prayers, but inuocations worthy:
Sighs, tears, life, prayers, were all to little for thee.
But since the heaven, thus of my child disposes,
Ah me, thy Tomb now all my joys incloseth.
169
But Death is proud, and scorneth to be Death,
Her smiling beauty did his heat aswage,
And is so much enriched with her sweet breath,
As he does scorn mine o're-worne wrinkled age,
Though with contempt I move him still to rage.
But as thou love her death, for her sweet sake,
As thou took'st her from me, me to her take.
170
O what a wonder shall thy valor bring?
What admiration to posterity?
What rare examples from thy virtues spring:
O what a glory to thy Progeny,
To be engrau'd in lasting memory,
When as applauding Fame in every Coast,
Shall thus in honor of Fitzwaters boast?
171
England, when peace upon thy shores shall flourish,
And that pure Maiden sit upon thy Throne
Which in her bosom shall the Muses nourish,
Whose glorious fame shall through the world be blown,
(O blessed I Will, thrice happy Albion)
Then let thy Poets in their stately rimes,
Sing forth her praises to succeeding times.
182
Even like the root of some large branched Oak,
Whose body by some storm is ouer-borne,
Even with such horror be mine entrails broke,
As when that root out of the ground is torn:
And with such woeful horror let them mourn,
As with ye shreeks each living thing may wound,
Even as the Mandrake torn out of the ground.
183
BY this, the Kings vile bloody rage is past,
And gentle time his choler does digest,
The fire consumes his substance at the last,
The grief asswag'd which did his spirit molest,
That fiend cast out wherewith he was possessed:
And now he feels this horror in his soul,
When loathsome shame his actions does co^troule.
174
Black hell-bred-humor of revenging sin,
By whose inticements, murder we commit,
The end unthought of rashly we begin,
Letting our passion overrule our wit,
Missing the mark which most we aim to hit:
Clogging our souls with such a mass of care,
As casts us down often times to deep Despair.
175
Traitor to Virtue, Reprobate (quoth he)
As for a King, no more usurp the name:
Stain to all honor and gentilitie,
Marked in the face with th'yron of Defame:
The Picture of all infamy and shame.
Dispis'd of men, abhord in every place,
Hate to thy self, the very worlds disgrace.
176
When all thy race shall be in triumph set,
Their royal conquests and atchiuements done,
Henry thy Father, brave Plantaginet,
Thy conquering Brother, Lyon-hart his son,
The crowns and spoils, these famous Champions won
This still shall be in thy dishonor said,
Lo, this was John, the murderer of a Maid.
177
Look I to heaven, her pureness tells my sin,
Look I on man, he frowns with hateful sight,
Look I on earth, I see my fault therein,
The light to view my shame, does give me light,
The night puts me in mind of my fames night:
I read my shame in all things as a book,
And yet most grieved when on my self I look.
178
This act enrold in book of black Defame,
Where, men of death and tragic murders reed,
Recorded in the Register of shame,
In lines whose letters freshly ever bleed,
Where all the world shall wonder my misdeed,
And quote the place, (thus ever) passing by,
Note here King John's vile damned tyranny.
179
Her blood exhaled from earth unto the sky,
A fearful Meteor still hangs ore my head,
Stayning the heavens with her Vermilion dye,
Changing the Suns bright rays to gorie red,
Prognosticating death and fearful dread;
Her soul, with howling, and reuengfull steven,
Shreeking before the crystal gates of Heaven.
180
Whose sacred Counsel, now in judgment set,
And she, before them stands to plead her case,
Her drearie words in bloody tears are wet,
The evidence appears before my face,
And I condemned a catife wanting grace;
Justice cries out upon this sinful deed,
And to my death the fatal stars proceed.
181
Earth, swallow me, and hide me in thy womb,
O let my shame in thy deep Center dwell,
Wrap up this murder in my wretched tomb,
Let tender mercy stop the gates of hell,
And with sweet drops this furious heat expel:
O let repentance just revenge appease,
And let my soul, in torment find some ease.
182
O, no: her tears are now become a flood,
And as they rise, increasing mine offense;
And now the shedding of her guiltless blood,
Even like a Cankar, gnawes my conscience:
O, there is my grief, my pain proceeds from thence.
Yet never time wears out this filthy stain,
And I dishonored ever shall remain.
183
Fame in her death, shame in me took her birth,
That shame in dying, till her fame be dead,
My sin on earth, whilst she is in the earth,
And by her fall, my fault will still be fed,
My black more black, my red be made more red,
Her no, my I, her was, my wicked is,
Her good, my ill, my baseness be her bliss.
184
Then do I vow a solemn pylgrimage,
Before my wretched miserable end;
This done, betake me to some Hermitage,
Where I the remnant of my days will spend,
Where alms and prayer I ever will attend,
And on the Tomb at last, where thou do lie,
When all is done, I Will lay me down and die.
185
And for his penance, lastly he devised,
Monthly to Dunmow would he take his way,
And in a simple Palmers weed disguised,
With deep devotion kneel him down to pray:
Kissing the place whereas my body lay:
Washing my Tomb with his repentant tears,
And being wet, yet dried it with his hairs.
FINIS
THE ARGUMENT OF PEIRS GAVESTON.
PEIRS Gaueston, borne in Gascoyne, at a place of that name, his Father a
valiant Gentleman and a soldier, serving under Edward Longshancks in his
wars, in France, Scotland, and Wales: This Peirs Gaueston, then being a
child of singular beauty and no less towardness, was preferred to the place of
a Page, to Edward of Carnaruan, the young Prince of Wales: with whom he became
so highly in favor, as never any thing could remove his inviolable love.
Gaueston, as he grew in years, became most licentious, and by his inticments,
drew this toward young Prince, (following this his youthful Minion) into hate
with the Noblemen, and disgrace with the King his Father: who banished this
lascivious corrupter of his Son. But after the death of this good King,
Edward of Carnaruan coming to the Crown, calls him home, creating him Earl
of Cornwall, making him Lord Chamberlain, Treasurer and Secretary, Lord
Deputy of Ireland, and Lord Protector of the Land, in his absence in France:
giving him the I Will of MAN, with all Queen Elinors dowry. He thus established
by the King, becomes a hater of the Noble men, drowned in pride and ambition,
setting mortal debate betwixt the Barrons and the King, who subborned him in
all his actions, as a man bewithced by this wicked and vile man. He was twice
banished the Realm, by means of the Barrons who deadly hated him: and yet
still the King found means to restore him. At length, the Barrons seeing no
remedy, rise in Arms, taking Gaueston at Scarborough in the North, (thither
fled as to a refuge from their fury.) They bring him to Warwick, where by Guy
Beuchamp, the great Earl of Warwick, he was beheaded at Blacklow bill.

THE LEGENDE OF Piers Gaueston. Entitled To the vvorthie and Honorable
Gentleman, Ma. Henry Cauendish. Esquire.
1
FRom gloomy shadow of eternal night,
Where cole-black darkness keeps his lothsom cel,
And from those ghosts, whose eyes abhor ye light,
From thence I come, a wosull tale to tell:
Prepare the Stage, I mean to act my part,
Sighing the Scenes from my tormented heart.
2
From Stygian Lake, to graceless souls assigned,
And from the flood of burning Acheron,
Where sinful spirits, are by fire refined,
The fearful ghost of woeful Gaueston:
With black-fac'd Furies from the graves attended,
Until the tenor of my tale be ended.
3
Wing-footed Fame now summons me from death,
In Fortunes triumph to advance my glory,
The blessed Heavens again do lend me breath,
Whilst I report this doleful Tragic story:
That soul and body, which death once did sunder
Now meet together, to report a wonder.
4
O purple-buskind Pallas, most divine,
Let thy bright Fauchion lend me Cypress bows,
Be thou assisting to this Poet of mine,
And with thy tragic garland girt his brows,
Pitying my case, when none would hear me weep,
To tell my cares, has laid his own to sleep.
5
You mournful Maidens of the sacred nine,
You Destenies which haunt the shades beneath,
To you fair Muses I my plaints resign,
To you black spirits I my woes bequeath,
With sable penns of direful Ebonie,
To pen the process of my tragedy.
6
Draw on the lines which shall report my life,
With weeping words distilling from thy pen
Where woes abound, and joys are passing rife,
A very meteor in the eyes of men,
Wherein the world, a wonder-world may see
Of heauen-bred joy, and hell-nurst misery.
7
Declare my ebb, my often swelling tide,
Now tell my calmes, and then report my showers,
My Winters storms, and then my Summers pride,
False Fortunes smiles, then her dissembling lowres,
The height whereto my glory did ascend,
Then point the period where my joys did end.
8
When famous Edward wore the English crown,
Victorious Longshanks, flower of chivalry,
First of his name that reigned in Albion,
Through worlds renowned to all posterity:
My youth began, and then began my blis,
Even in his days, those blessed days of his.
9
O days, no days, but little worlds of mirth,
O years, no years, time slyding with a trice:
O world, no world, a very heaven on earth,
O earth, no earth, a very Paradise:
A King, a man, nay more then this was he,
If earthly man, more then a man might be.
10
Such a one he was, as Englands Beta is,
Such as she is, even such a one was he,
Betwixt her rarest excellence and his,
Was never yet so near a simpathy,
To tell your worth, and to give him his due,
I say my Sovereign, he was like to you.
11
His Court a school, where Arts were daily red,
And yet a Camp where Arms are exercised,
Virtue and learning here were nourished,
And stratagems by soldiers still devised:
Here skillful Schoolmen were his Counsailors,
Scholars his Captains, Captains Senators.
12
Here sprang the root of true gentilitie,
Virtue was clad in gold, and crowned with honor,
Honor entitled to Nobility,
Admired so of all that looked on her:
Wisdom, not wealth, possessed wisemens rooms
Unfitting base insinuating Grooms.
13
Then were vile worldlings loathed as filthy toades,
And good men as rare pearls were richly prized,
The learned were accounted little Gods,
The hateful Atheist, as the plague despised:
Desert then gaynd, what virtues merit craves,
And Artles Pesants scornd as basest slaves.
14
Pride was not then, which all things ouerwhelms,
Promotion was not purchased with gold,
Men hewed their honor out of steeled helms:
In those days fame with blood was bought and sold,
No petti-fogger pol'd the poor for pence,
These dolts, these dogs, as traitors banished hence.
15
Then was the Soldier prodigal of blood,
His deeds eternized by the Poets pen:
Who spared his life to do his Country good,
When after death his fame remained with men?
Then learning lived with liberality,
And men were crowned with immortality.
16
Grant pardon then unto my wandering ghost,
Although I seem lascivious in my praise,
And of perfection though I vainlie boast,
Whilst here on earth I troad this weary maze,
Whilst yet my soul in body did abide,
And whilst my flesh was pampred here in pride.
17
My valiant Father was in Gascoygne borne,
A man at Arms, and matchless with his lance,
A Soldier vowed, and to King Edward sworn,
With whom he served in all his wars in France,
His goods and lands he pawnd and laid to gage,
To follow him, the wonder of that age.
18
And thus himself he from his home exiled,
Who with his sword sought to advance his fame,
With me his joy, but then a little child,
Unto the Court of famous England came,
Whereas the King, for service he had done,
Made me a Page unto the Prince his son.
19
My tender youth yet scarce crept from the shell,
Unto the world brought such a wonderment,
That all perfection seemed in me to dwell,
And that the heavens me all their graces lent;
Some swear I was the quintessence of Nature,
And some an Angel, and no earthly creature.
20
The heavens had limm'd my face with such a die,
As made each curious eye on earth amazed,
Tempring my looks with love and majesty,
A miracle to all that ever gazed,
So that it seemed some power had in my birth,
Ordained me his Image here on earth.
21
O beauteous varnish of the heavens above,
Pure grain-dy'd color of a perfect birth,
O fairest tincture, Adamant of love,
Angell-hewd blush, the prospective of mirth,
O sparkling luster, ioying human sight,
Lives joy, hearts fire, loves nurse, ye souls delight.
22
As purple-tressed Titan with his beams,
The sable clouds of night in sunder cleaves,
Enameling the earth with golden streams,
When he his crimson Canapie vpheaueth,
Such where my beauties pure translucent rays,
Which cheered ye Sun, and cleerd ye drouping days.
23
My looks, persuading Orators of love,
My speech, divine infusing harmony,
And every word so well could passion move,
So were my icstures graced with modesty,
As where my thoughts intended to surprise,
I easly made a conquest with mine eyes.
24
A gracious mind, a passing lovely eye,
A hand that gave, a mouth ye never vaunted,
A chaste desire, a tongue that would not lie,
A Lions heart, a courage never daunted,
A sweet conceit, in such a carriage placed,
As with my iesture all my words were graced.
25
Such was the work which Nature had begun
As promised a Iem of wondrous price,
This little star, foretold a glorious Sun,
This curious plot, an earthly Paradise,
This Globe of beauty, wherein all might see
An after world of wonders here in me.
26
As in the Autumnall season of the year,
Some death-presaging Comet does arise,
Or some prodigious meteor does appear,
Or fearful Chasma unto human eyes:
Even such a wonder was I to behold,
Where heaven seemed all her secrets to unfold.
27
If cunnings't pensill-man that ever wrought,
By skillful Art of secret Sumetrie,
Or the divine Idea of the thought,
With rare descriptions of high Poesy,
Should all compose a body and a mind,
Such one was I, the wonder of my kind.
28
With this fair bayte I fisht for Edwards love,
My dainty youth so pleased his princlie eye:
Here grew the league, which time could not remove,
So deeply grasted in our infancy,
That friend, nor so, nor life, nor death could sunder
So seldom seen, and to the world a wonder.
29
O heavenly concord, music of the mind,
Touching the hart-strings with such harmony,
The ground of nature, and the law of kind,
Which in conjunction do so well agree,
Whose revolution by effect does prove,
That mortal men are made divine by love.
30
O strong combining chain of secrecy,
Sweet joy of heaven, the Angels oratorie,
The bond of faith, the seal of sanctity,
The souls true bliss, youths solace, ages glory,
And endless league, a bond that's never broken,
A thing divine, a word with wonder spoken.
31
With this fair bud of that same blessed Rose,
Edward surnamed Carnaruan by his birth,
Who in his youth it seemed that Nature chose,
To make the like, whose like was not on earth,
Had not his lust, and my lascivious will,
Made him and me the instruments of ill.
32
With this sweet Prince, the mirror of my bliss,
My souls delight, my joy, my fortunes pride,
My youth enjoyed such perfect happiness,
Whilst Tutors care his wandering years did guide,
As his affections on my thoughts attended,
And with my life, his joys began and ended.
33
Whether it were my beauties excellence,
Or rare perfections that so pleased his eye,
Or some divine and heavenly influence,
Or natural attracting simpathy:
My pleasing youth became his senses object,
Where all his passions wrought upon this subject.
34
Thou Arc of heaven, where wonders are inroled,
O depth of nature, who can look on thee?
O who is he that has thy doom controuled?
Or has the kay of reason to undo thee:
Thy works divine, wc powers alone do know,
Our shallow wits too short for things below.
35
The soul divine by her integrity,
And by the functious agents of the mind,
Cleere-sighted, so perceives through the eye,
That which is pure and pleasing to her kind,
And by her powrfull motions apprehends,
That wc beyond our humane sense extends.
36
This Edward in the April of his age,
Whilst yet the Crown sat on his Fathers head,
My Jove with me, his Ganimed, his Page,
Frolic as May, a lusty life we led:
He might command, he was my Soueraigns son,
And what I said, by him was ever done.
37
My words as laws, autentique he allowed,
My yea, by him was never crossed with no,
All my conceit as current he avowed,
And as my shadow still he served so,
My hand the racket, he the tennis-ball,
My voices echo, answering every call.
38
My youth the glass where he his youth beheld,
Roses his lips, my breath sweet Nectar showers,
For in my face was Natures fairest field,
Richly adorned with beauties rarest flowers,
My breast the pillow where he laid his head,
Mine eyes this brook, my bosom was his bed.
39
My smiles were life, and Heaven unto his sight,
All his delight concluding my desire,
From mine eyes beams he borrowed all his light,
And as a fly played with my beauties fire,
His loue-sick lips, at every kissing qualme,
Cling to my lips to cure their grief with blame.
40
Like as the wanton Iuie with his twine,
When as the Oak his rootlesse body warmes,
The straightest saplings strictly does combine,
Clipping the woods with his laciuious arms:
Such our embraces when our sport begins,
Lapt in our arms, like Ledas lovely twins.
41
Or as Loue-nursing Venus when she sports
With cherry-lipt Adonis in the shade,
Figuring her passions in a thousand sorts,
With sights, and tears, or what else might persuade,
Her dear, her sweet, her joy, her life, her love,
Kissing his brow, his cheek, his hand, and his glove.
42
My beauty was the Load-starre to his thought,
My looks the Pilot to his wandering eye,
By me his senses all sleep were brought,
When with sweet love I sang his lullaby;
Nature had taught my tongue her perfect time,
Which in his ear struck duly as a chime.
43
With sweetest speech, thus could I Syrenics,
Which as strong Philters youths desire could move,
And with such method could I rethorize,
My music played the measures to his love:
In his fair breast, such was my souls impression,
As to his eyes, my thoughts made intercession.
44
Thus like an Eagle seated in the Sun,
But yet a Phoenix in my Sovereigns eye,
We act with shame, our Revels are begun,
The wise could judge of our Catastrophe:
But we proceed to play our wanton prize,
Our mournful Chorus was a world of eyes.
45
The table now of all delight is laid,
Served with what banquets beauty could devise,
She Sirens sing, and false Calipso played,
Our feast is graced with youths sweet Comedies.
Our looks with smiles, are soothed of every eye,
Carrousing love in bowls of Iuorie.
46
Fraught with delight, and safely under sail,
Like flight-wing'd Faucons now we take our scope,
Our youth and fortune blow a merry gale,
We loose the Anchor of our virtues hope:
Blinded with pleasure in this lustful game,
By oversight discard our King with shame.
47
My youthful pranks are spurs to his desire,
I held the raynes which ruled the golden Sun,
My blandishments were fuel to his fire,
I had the garland who so ever won:
I waxt his wings and taught him art to fly,
Who on his back might bear me through ye sky.
48
Here first that Sun-bright temple is defild,
Which to fair Virtue first was consecrated,
This was the fruit wher-with I was beguild,
Here first the deed of all my fame was dated:
O me, even here from Paradise I fell,
From Angels state, from heaven, cast down to hell.
49
Lo here the very Image of perfection,
With the black pensell of defame is blotted,
And with the ulcers of my youths infection,
My innocence is besmeared and spotted,
Now comes my night, o now my day is done,
These sable clouds eclipse my rising sun.
50
Our innocence, our child-bred purity
Is now defild, and as our dreams forgot,
Drawn in the Coach of our security.
What act so vile that we attempted not;
Our sun-bright virtues fountain-cleer beginning,
Is now polluted by the filth of sinning.
51
O wit too wilful, first by heaven ordayn'd,
An Antidote by Virtue made to cherish,
By filthy vice, as with a mole art stayn'd,
A poison now, by which the senses perish:
That made of force, all vices to control,
Defames the life, and does confound the soul.
52
The Heaven too see my fall does knit her brows,
The valty ground under my burden groneth,
Unto mine eyes, the air no light allows,
The very wind my wickedness bemoneth:
The barren earth repineth at my food,
And Nature seems to curse her beastly brood.
53
And thus like slaves we sell our souls to sin,
Virtue forgot by worlds deceitful trust,
Alone by pleasure are we entered in,
Now wandering in the labyrinth of lust,
For when the soul is drowned once in vice,
The sweet of sin, makes hell paradise.
54
O pleasure thou, the very lure of sin,
The root of woe, our youths deceitful guide,
A shop where all confected poisons bin,
The bayre of lust, the instrument of pride,
Enchanting Circes, smoothing couer-guile,
Alluring Siren, flattering Crocodile.
55
Our Jove which saw this Phoebus youth betrayed,
And Phaeton guide the Sun-carre in the skies,
Knew well the course with danger hardly stayed,
For what is not perceived by wise-mens eyes;
He knew these pleasures, posts of our desire,
Might by misguiding set his throne on fire.
56
This was a corsiue to King Edwards days,
These iarring discords quite untuned his mirth,
This was the pain which never gave him ease,
If ever hell, this was his hell on earth:
This was the burden which he groned under,
This pincht his soul, and rent his heart in sunder.
57
This venom sucked the marrow from his bones,
This was the canker which consumed his years,
This fearful vision, filled his sleep with groans,
This winter snow'd down frost upon his hairs:
This was the moth, this was the fretting rust,
Which so consumed his glory unto dust.
58
The humor found, which fed this foul disease,
Most needs be stayed ere help could be devised,
The vain must breath the burning to appease,
Hardly a cure the wound not cauteriz'd:
That member now where in the botch was risen,
Infecteth all not cured by incision.
59
The cause coniectur'd by this Prodigy,
From whence this foul contagious sickness grue,
VVisdome alone must give a remedy,
Thus to prevent the danger to ensue:
The cause must end, ere the effect could cease,
Else might the danger daily more increase.
60
Now they, whose eyes to death enui'd my glory,
Whose safety still upon my downfall stood,
These, these, could comment on my youthful story,
These were ye Wolves which thirsted for my blood:
These all unlade their mischiefs at this bay,
And make the breach to enter my decay.
61
These currs which lived by carrion of the court,
These wide-mouthed helhounds long time kept at bay,
Finding the King to credit their report;
Like greedy Ravens follow for their pray:
Despightfull Langton fauorit to the King,
This was the Serpent stroke me with his sting.
62
Such as beheld this lightning from above,
My Princely Jove from out the air to thunder:
This Earthquake which did my foundation move,
This boystrous strome, this unexpected wonder.
They thought my Sun had been eclipsed quite,
And all my day now turned to Winters night.
63
My youth embowel'd by their curious eyes,
Whose true reports my life anotomis'd:
Who still pursued me like deceitful spies,
To cross that which I wantonly devised:
Perceive the train me to the trap had led,
And down they come like hailstones on my head
64
My Sun eclipsed, each star becomes a Sun,
When Phoebus fails, then Cynthia shines bright,
These furnish up the Stage, my act is done,
Which were but Glo-worms to my glorious light,
They erst condemned, by my perfections doom,
In Phoebus Chariot, now possess my room.
65
The Commons swore, I led the Prince to vice,
The Noblemen, said I abused the King,
Grave Matrons, such as lust could not entice,
Like women, whispred of another thing:
Such as could not aspire unto my place,
These were subborn'd to offer me disgrace.
66
The staff thus broke, whereon my youth did stay,
And like the shadow all my pleasures gone,
Now with the winds my joys fleet hence away,
The silent night makes music to my moan,
The tatling Echoes whispring with the air,
Unto my words sound nothing but despair.
67
The frowning Heavens are all in sable clad,
The Planet of my lives misfortune raineth:
No music serves a dying soul to glad,
My wrong to Tirants for redress complains:
To ease my pain there is no remedy,
So far despair exceeds extremity.
68
Why do I quake my downfall to report?
Tell on my Ghost, the story of my woe,
The King commands, I must depart the court,
I ask no question, he will have it so:
The Lions roaring, lesser Beasts does fear,
The greatest fly, when he approaches near.
69
My Prince is now appointed to his guard,
As from a Traitor he is kept from me,
My banishment already is prepared,
Away I must, there is no remedy:
On pain of death I may no longer stay,
Such is revenge which brooketh no delay.
70
The skies with clouds are all inuelloped,
The pitchy fogs eclipse my cheerful Sun,
The geatie night has all her curtains spread,
And all the air with vapors overrun.
Wanting those rays whose cleernes lent me light
My sunshine day is turned black-fac'd night.
71
Like to the bird of Leda's Lemmans die,
Beating his breast against the silver stream,
The fatal Prophet of his destenie,
With mourning chants, his death aproching theme
So now I sing the dirges of my fall,
The Anthemes of my fatal funeral.
72
Or as the faithful Turtle for her make,
Whose youth enjoyed her dear virginity,
Sits shrouded in some melancholy brake,
Chirping fotth accents of her misery.
Thus half distracted sitting all alone,
With speaking sighs to utter forth my moan.
73
My beauty sdayning to behold the light,
Now weather-beaten with a thousand storms,
My dainty lims must travail day and night,
Which often were luld in princely Edwards arms.
Those eyes where Beauty sat in all her pride,
With fearful objects filled on every side.
74
The Prince so much astonished with the blow,
So that it seemed as yet he felt no pain,
Until at length awakned by his woe,
He saw the wound by which his joys were slain,
His cares fresh bleeding fainting more and more,
No Cataplasma now to cure the sore.
75
Now weep mine eyes, and lend me tears at will,
You sad-musd sisters help me to indite,
And in your fair Castalia bathe my quill,
In bloody lines whilst I his woes recite,
Inspire my Muse, a Heavens, now from above,
To paint the passions of a princely love.
76
His eyes about their rolling Globes do east,
To find that Sun from whom they had their light,
His thoughts do labor for that sweet repast,
Which past the day, and pleased him all the night:
He counts the hours, so slolie how they run.
Reproues the day, and blames the loytring Sun.
77
As gorgious Phoebus in his first vprise,
Discovering now his Scarlet-colored head,
By troublous motions of the lowering skies,
His glorious beams with foggs are ouer-spread,
So are his cheerful brows eclipsed with sorrow,
with cloud yt shine of his youths-smiling morrow.
78
Now showring down a flood of brackish tears,
The Epithemas to his hart-swolne grief,
Then sighing out a vollue of despayres,
Which only is the afflicted man's relief:
Now wanting sighs, and all his tears were spent,
His tongue brake out into this sad lament.
79
O break my heart (quoth he) o break and dye,
Whose Infant thoughts were nursed with sweet delight;
But now the Inn of care and misery,
Whose pleasing hope is murdered by despite:
O end my days, for now my joys are done,
VVanting my Piers, my sweetest Gaueston.
80
Farewell my Love, companion of my youth,
My souls delight, the subject of my mirth,
My second self if I report the truth,
The rare and only Phoenix of the earth;
Farewell sweet friend, with thee my joys are gone,
Farewell my Piers, my lovely Gaueston.
81
What are the rest but painted Imagrie,
Domb Idols made to fill up idle rooms,
But gaudie Anticks, sports of foolerie,
But fleshly Coffins, goodly gilded toombs,
But Puppets which with others words reply,
Like prattling Echoes soothing every lie?
82
O damned world, I scorn thee and thy worth,
The very source of all iniquity:
An ougly dam that brings such monsters forth,
The maze of death, nurse of impiety,
A filthy sink where lothsomnes does dwell,
A Labyrinth, a Iayle, a very hell.
83
Deceitful Siren Traitor to my youth,
Bane to my bliss, false these that steal'st my joys,
Mother of lies, sworn enemy to truth,
The ship of fools fraught all with gauds and toys,
A vessel stuffed with foul hypocrisy,
The very temple of Idolatry,
84
O earth-pale Saturn most maleuolent,
Combustious Planet, tyrant in thy reign,
The sword of wrath, the root of discontent,
In whose ascendant all my joys are slain:
Thou executioner of foul bloody rage,
To act the will of lame decrepit age.
85
My life is but a very map of woes,
My joys the fruit of an untimely birth,
My youth in labor with unkindly throws,
My pleasures are like plagues that reign on earth,
All my delights like streams that swiftly run,
Or like the dew exhaled by the Sun.
86
O Heavens why are you deaf unto my moan?
Sdayne you my prayers, or scorn to hear my miss,
Cease you to move, or is your pity gone;
Or is it you which rob me of my bliss?
What are you blind, or wink and will not see?
Or do you sport at my calamity?
87
O happy climat what so ere thou be,
Cheerd with those suns the fairest that ever shon,
Which have those Stars which guide my destenie,
The brightest Lamps in all the Horizon.
O happy eyes that see what most I lack,
The pride and beauty of the Zodiac.
88
O blessed Fountain, source of all delight,
O sacred spark that kindlest Virtues fire?
The perfect object of the purest sight,
The superficies of true loves desire,
The very tuchstone of all sweet conceit,
On whom all graces euer-more awaite.
89
Thus whilst his youth in all these storms was tossed,
And whilst his joys lay speechless in a trance,
His sweet content with such unkindness crossed,
And lowering Fortune seemed to look a skance,
Too weak to swim against the streamfull time,
Foretold their fall wc now sought most to clime.
90
Camelion-like, the world thus turns her hue,
And like to Proteus puts on sundry shapes,
One hastes to clime, another does ensue,
One falls, another for promotion gapes:
Flockmell they swarm like flies about the brim,
Some drown, whilst others with great danger swim.
91
And some on whom, the Sun shone passing fair,
Yet of their Summer nothing seem to vaunt,
They saw their fall presaged by the air,
If once this Planet were predominant.
Thus in their gate they flew with wings of fear,
And still with care do purchase honor dear.
92
Thus restless Time that never turns again,
Whose winged sect are slyding with the Sun,
Brings Fortune in to act another Scene
By whom the Plot already is begun:
The argument of this black tragedy,
Is virtues fall to raise up infamy.
93
The brute is blown, the King does now pretend,
A long-look'd voyage to the Holy Land,
For which his Subjects mighty sums do lend,
And whilst the thing is hotly thus in hand,
Blind Fortune turns about her fickle wheel,
And breaks ye prop, which maks ye building reele.
94
I fear to speak, yet speak I must perforce,
My words be turned to tears even as I write,
Mine eyes do yet behold his dying course,
And on his Hearse me thinks I still indite:
My paper is hard sable Ebon wood,
My pen of Iron, and my Ink is blood.
95
Lo here, the time drew on of Edwards death,
Lo here the doleful period of his years,
O now he yields up that sacred breath,
For whom the Heavens do shower down floods of tears,
For whom the Sun, even mourning hides his face,
For whom the earth, was all too vile and base.
96
May I report his doleful obsequie,
When as my Ghost does tremble at his name,
Feign would I write, but as I write I die,
My joints apald with fear, my hand is lame,
I leave it to some sacred Muse to tell,
Upon whose life a Poets pen might dwell.
97
No sooner was his body vvrapt in lead,
And that his mournful Funerals were done,
But that the Crown was set on Edwards head,
Sing I-o now my Ghost, the storm is gone:
The wind blows right, lo yonder breaks my day
Caroll my Muse, and now sing care away.
98
Carnaruan now calls home within a while,
Whom worthy Long-shanks hated to the death,
Whom Edward swore should dye in his exile,
He was as dear to Edward as his breath.
This Edward loved, that Edward loved not,
Kings wills performed, and dead men's words forgot.
99
Now waft me wind unto the blessed I Will,
Rock me my joys, love sing me with delight,
Now sleep my thoughts, cease sorrow for a while,
Now end my care, come day, farewell my night,
Sweet senses now act every one his part,
Lo here the balm that has recur'd my heart.
100
Lo now my Jove in his ascendant is,
In the Aestiuall solstice of his glory,
Now all the Stars prognosticate my blis,
And in the Heaven all eyes may read my story,
My Comet now, worlds wonder thus appears,
Foretelling troubles of ensuing years.
101
Now am I mounted with Fames golden wings,
And in the tropic of my fortunes height,
My flood maintained with a thousand springs,
Now on my back supporting Atlas weight.
All tongues and pens attending on my praise,
Surnamed now, the wonder of our days.
102
Who ever saw the kindest Roman dame,
With extreme joy yield up her latest breath,
When from the wars her Son triumphing came,
And stately Rome had mourned for his death:
Her passion here might have expressed a right,
When once I came into the Princes sight.
103
Who ever had his Lady in his arms,
Which has of love but felt the misery,
Touching the fire that all his senses warms,
Now clips with joy her blushing Iuorie,
Feeling his soul in such delights to melt,
There Is none but he can tell the joys we felt.
104
Like as when Phoebus darting forth his rays,
Glydeth along the swelling Ocean streams,
And whilst one billow with another plays,
Reflecteth back his bright translucent beams,
Such was the conflict then betwixt our eyes,
Sending forth looks as tears do fall and rise.
105
It seemed the air deuisd to please my sight,
The whistling wind makes music to my tale,
All things on earth do feast me with delight,
The world to me sets all her wealth to sale;
Who now rules all in Court, but I alone,
Who highly graced, but only Gaueston?
106
Now, like to Mydas, all I touch is gold,
The clouds do shower down gold into my lap,
If I but winck, the mightiest are controld,
Placed on the turret of my highest hap;
My Cofers now, even like to Oceans are,
To whom all floods by course do still repare.
107
With bounty now he franckly seals his love,
And to my hands yields up the I Will of Man,
By such a gift his kingly mind to prove,
This was the earnest wherewith he began;
Then Wallingford, Queen Elnors stately bower,
With many a town, and many a goodly tower.
108
And all those sums his Father had prepared,
By way of taxes for the Holy Land,
He gave me franckly, as my due reward,
In bounty thus it seemed he pleased his hand,
Which made the world to wonder every hour,
To see me drowned in this golden shower.
109
Determined now to hoyse my sail amain,
The Earl of Cornwall he created me,
Of England then the Lord high Chamberlain,
Cheese Secretary to his Majesty:
What I deuisd, his treasure ever wrought,
His bounty still so answered to my thought.
110
Yet more to spice my joys with sweet delight,
Bound by his love apprentice to my pleasure,
Whose eyes still leueld how to please my sight,
Whose kindness ever so exceeded measure,
Deuisd to quench my thirst with such a drink,
As from my quill drops Nectar to my inck.
111
O sacred Bounty, mother of Content,
Prop of renown, the nourisher of Arts,
The Crown of hope, the root of good event,
The trump of Fame, the joy of noble hearts,
Grace of the heavens, divinity in nature,
Whose excellence does so adorn the creature.
112
He gives his Niece is marriage unto me,
Of royal blood, for beauty past compare,
Borne of his Sister was this Bellamie,
Daughter to Gilbert, thrice renowned Clare,
Chief of his house, the Earl of Gloucester,
For princly worth that never had his Peer.
113
Like heauen-dy'd Andromeda the fair,
In her embrodered Mantle richly dight,
With starrie train inthronis'd in the air,
Adorns the Welken with her glittering light,
Such one she was, who in my bosom rested,
with whose sweet love, my youthful years were fested
114
As when fair Ver, dight in her flowrie rail,
In her new-coloured liuerie decks the earth,
And glorious Tytan spreads his sunshine veil,
To bring to pass her tender infants birth,
Such was her beauty which I then possessed,
With whose imbracings all my youth was blessed.
115
Whose purest thoughts, and spotles chaste desire,
To my affections still so pleasing were,
Never yet touched with spark of Venus fire,
As but her breast, I thought no heaven but there,
To none more like then fair Idea, she,
The perfect Image of pure chastity.
116
O chastity, thou gift of blessed souls,
Comfort in death, a crown unto the life,
Which all the passions of the mind controuls,
Adorns the maid and beautifies the wife:
That grace, the wc nor death nor time attaints,
Of earthly creaturs making heavenly Saints.
117
O Virtue, which no Muse can poetize,
Fair Queen of England which with thee does rest,
Which thy pure thoughts do only exercize,
And is impressed in thy royal breast,
Which in thy life disciphred is alone,
Whose name shall want a fit Epitheron.
118
The Heavens now seem to frolic at my feast,
The Stars as hand-mayds serving my desiers,
Now love full fed with beauty, takes his rest,
To whom content, for safety thus retiers:
The ground was good, my footing passing sure,
My days delightsome, and my life secure.
119
Lo, thus ambition creeps into my breast,
Pleasing my thoughts with this emperious humor,
And with this devil being once possessed,
Mine ears are filled with such a buzzing rumor,
As only pride my glory does await,
My senses soothed with every self-conceit.
120
Self-love, Prides thirst, vnsatis-fied desire,
A flood that never yet had any bounds,
Times pestilence, thou state-consuming fire,
A mischief which all Common weals confounds,
O plague of plagues, how many kingdo^s rue thee?
Happy those Empires which yet never knew thee
121
And now revenge which had been smothred long,
Like piercing lightning flasheth from mine eyes,
This word could sound so sweetly on my tongue,
And with my thoughts such stratagems devise,
Tickling mine ears with many a pleasant story,
Which promise wonders, and a world of glory.
122
For now began the bloody-rayning broils
Between the Barrons of the Land and me:
Laboring the state with Ixion-endles toils,
Twixt my ambition, and their tyranny,
Such was the storm this deliuge first begun,
With which this I Will was after ouer-run.
123
O cruel discord, food of deadly hate,
O mortal corsiue to a common weal,
Death-lingring consumption to a state,
A poysned sore that never salve could heal,
O foul contagion, deadly killing fever,
Infecting often, but to be cured never.
124
By courage now imboldned in my sin,
Finding my King so surely linckt to me,
By circumstance I finely bring him in,
To be an actor in this Tragedy,
Persuading him the Barrons sought his blood,
And on what terms, these earth-bred giants stood
125
And so aduauncing to my Princes grace,
The baser sort, of factious quality,
As being raised unto such a place,
Might counterpoize the proud Nobility,
And as my Agents, on my part might stand,
Still to support what ere I took in hand.
126
Suborning Iesters still to make me mirth,
Vile Sycophants, at every word to sooth me,
Time-fawning Spaniels, Mermayds on the earth,
Trencher-fed fools, with flatteries to smooth me,
Base Parasits, these elbow-rubbing mates,
A plague to all lascivious wanton states.
127
O filthy Monkies, vile and beastly kind,
Foul prattling Parrats, byrds of Harpie brood,
A corasiue to every noble mind,
Vipers, that suck your mothers decrest blood,
Misshapen Monster, worst of any creature,
A foe to Art, an enemy to nature.
128
His presence graced what ere I went about,
Best pleased with that which most contented me,
What ere I did, his power still bare me out,
And where I was, there euer-more was he,
By birth my Sovereign, but by love my thrall,
King Edwards Idol all men did me call.
129
Often would he set his crown upon my head,
And in his chair sit down upon my knee,
And when his eyes with love were fully fed,
A thousand times he sweetly kissed me;
When did I laugh, and he not seen to smile?
If I but frownd, he silent all the while.
130
But Fortune now unto my ouer-throw,
Enticed me on with her alluring call:
And still devising how to work my woe,
One bait taken up, she let another fall,
Thus Syren-like, she brings me to the bay,
Where long before she plotted my decay.
131
For now the King to France does him prepare,
For marriage with the Princess Isabell,
Daughter to Phillip, then surnamed the fair,
And she, like him, in beauty did excel,
Of tylts and tryumphs every man reports,
And the uniting of these famous Courts.
132
To raise me now to honors highest stayre,
He makes me Lord-protector of the Land,
And placing me in his imperial chair,
Yields up his Scepter wholly to my hand,
Devising still how he to pass might bring,
That if he died, I might succeed as King.
133
His treasure now stood absolute to me,
I dranck my pleasurs in a golden cup,
I spent a world, I had abundantly,
As though the earth had thrown her bowels up.
My reckonings cast, my sums were soon enroled
I was by no man once to controled.
134
Now being got as high as I could clime,
And Fortune made my foot-cloth as I gest,
I paint me brave with Tagus golden slime,
Because I would enjoy what I possessed;
Alluding still, that he is mad, and worse,
Which plays the nyggard with a Princes purse.
135
And now the King returning with his train,
I summond all the chief Nobility,
And in my pomp went soorth to entertain
The Peers of France in all this ioylitie:
Where, in my carriage were such honors placed,
As with my presence, all the shows were graced.
136
Guarded with troops of gallants as I went,
The people crouching still with cap and knee,
My port and personage so magnificent,
That (as a God) the Commons honored me,
And in my pride, lo thus I could devise,
To seem a wonder unto all men's eyes.
137
In richest Purple rode I all alone,
With Diamonds imbrodered and bedight,
Which like the stars in Gallaxia shone,
Whose luster still reflecting with the light,
Presented heaven to all that ever gazed,
Of force to make a world of eyes amazed.
138
Upon a stately Iennet soorth I rode,
Caparizond with Pearle-enchased plumes,
Trotting, as though the Measures he had trod,
Breathing Arabian Ciuit-sweet perfumes:
Whose rarenes seemed to cast men in a trance,
Praised of England, but admired of France.
139
Like trident-maced Neptune in his pride,
Mounted upon a Dolphin in a storm,
Upon the tossing billows forth does ride,
About whose train a thousand Trytons swarm,
When Phoebus seems to set the waves on fire,
To show his glory, and the Gods desire.
140
Or like unto the fiery-faced Sun,
Upon his vvagon prauncing in the West,
Whose blushing cheeks with flames seem ouer-run,
Whilst sweating thus he gallops to his rest,
Such was the glory wherein now I stood,
Which makes ye Barons sweat their dearest blood
141
Foolish Narcissus, with thy self in love,
Yet but to be thy self thou can not see,
Remove thy sight, which shall that sight remove,
Which does but seem, and yet not seeming thee:
A shadow, shaddowed underneath a wave,
Which each thing can destroy, and nothing save.
142
Bridle ambition fretting in desire,
At least disguise her in humility,
This were a perfect method to aspire,
By certain rules of grounded policy:
The bending knee in safety still does go,
When others stumble, as too stiff to bow.
143
One evil still another does beget,
Pride draws on vengeance, vengeance, has no mean,
Envy let in, does in more mischiefs let,
Vainglory never temperance does retain,
Chance lives not long, time festeth and time morns
Solace and sorrow have their certain turns.
144
Coin modest temperance, veil thy sail of state,
Paint pale disdain, and make her lovely fair,
In meeknes mask the most distempred hate,
Ere sharpest physic come, mildly prepare,
Use instruments to draw thy purpose on,
The surest means, is surel'est built upon.
145
Virtue and vice, immortal enemies,
Both this and that, against this and that opposed,
Evil and good in contrarieties,
One by the other utterly transposed:
Now were the skill to make them both agree,
This seeming that, that seeming this to be.
146
Thus when the gallant companies were met,
The King here present with his lovely Queen,
The Noblemen in comely order set,
To hear and see, what could be heard and seen,
Lo here that kindness easly is discride,
That faithful love which he nor I could hide.
147
Even like as Castor when a calm begins,
Beholding then his starry-tressed brother,
With mirth and glee these Swan-begotten twins,
Presaging joy, the one embrace the other:
Thus one the other in our arms we fold,
Our breasts for joy our hearts could scarcly hold.
148
Or like the Nymph beholding in a Well,
Her dearest love, and wanting words to woo him,
About his neck with clipped arms she fell,
Where by her faith the Gods conioynd her to him.
Such was ye love which now by signs we break,
When joy had tied our tongs we could not speak.
149
Thus arm in arm toward London on we rid,
And like two Lambs, we sport in every place,
Where neither joy, nor love, could well be hid
That might be sealed with any sweet embrace:
So that his Queen might by our kindness prove,
Though she his wife, yet I alone his love.
150
The Barrons now ambitious at my reign,
As one which stood betwixt them and the Sun,
They underhand pursue me with disdain,
Playing the game which I before had won,
And malice now so hard the bellows blew,
That through mine ears the sparks of fire flewe.
151
Where, in revenge, the tryumphs they deuisd
To entertain the King with wondrous cost,
Were by my malice suddenly surprizd,
The charge, their summons, and their honors lost;
Which in their thoughts, revenge so deeply raised,
As with my blood they vowed should be appeased
152
As when within the soft and spungie soil,
The wind does pierce the intrals of the earth,
Where hurly burly with a restless coil,
Shakes all the Center, wanting issue sorth,
Till with the tumor towns and mountains tremble,
Even such a meteor does their rage resemble.
153
Or when the shapeles huge Leuiathan
Has thrust himself upon the sandy shore,
Where (Monster like) affrighting every man,
He belloweth out a fearful hidious rore,
Even such a clamor through the air does thu^der
The doleful presage of some fearful wonder.
154
Thus as a plague unto the government,
A very scourge to the Nobility,
The cause of all the Commons discontent,
The Image of all sensuality,
I was reproched openly of many,
Who pitied none, not pitied now of any.
155
And as a vile misleader of the King,
A wastfull spender of his coin and treasure,
A secret thief of many a sacred thing,
A Cormorant, in whom was never measure;
I seemed hateful now in all men's eyes,
Buzzing about me, like a swarm of flies.
156
Light-footed mischief, messenger of death,
Sharp spur of vengeance, piercing edge of hate,
Blood poisoning plague, repiner at our breath,
Thou foul infector of all human state,
Post to destruction running on with us,
Night-haunting ghost, our evil Genius.
157
O foul fore-teller of my fouler fall,
Still following fury, never pyttying fiend,
Of my destruction only principal,
Curse of our birth, and Curser of our end;
Our frailties scourge, our vices purgatory,
Thou fatal worker of our fatal story.
158
Like as a cloud, foul, dark, and ugly black,
Threatening the earth with tempest every hour,
Now broken with a fearful thunder-crack,
Straight pours down his deep earth-drenching shower,
Thus for their wrongs now rise they up in arms,
Or to revenge, or to amend their harms.
159
The King perceiving how the matter stood,
Himself, his crown in this extremety,
And still the Barrons thirsting for my blood,
And seeing now no other remedy,
But I some vile untimely death must die,
Or thus must be, exiled presently.
160
A thousand thoughts he hammereth in his head,
Thinking on this, and now again on that:
As one devise is come, another fled,
Some thing he would, and now he knows now what.
To help me now, a thousand means he forgeth,
Whilst still with sighs his sorrows he disgorgeth.
161
And for I was his very souls delight,
He thought on this, the only way at last,
In Ireland to hide me out of sight,
Until these storms were somewhat ouer-past,
And in mean time, to appease the Barrons hate,
And so reduce me to my former state.
162
As one whose house in danger to be burned,
Which he has builded with exceeding cost,
And all his wealth to earth-pale ashes turned,
Taking one Jewel which he loves most,
To some safe place does with the same retire,
Leaving the rest to the mercy of the fire.
163
Or as a Nurse within besieged walls,
Dreading each hour the soldiers slaughtring knife
Within some place as fittest there befalls,
Hides her sweet babe, in hope to save his life,
Lo, thus the King provides now for me,
The joy and pride of his felicity.
164
He wanted words to express what he sustaind,
Nor could I speak to utter half my wrong,
To show his grief, or where I most was paind,
The time too short, the tale were all too long:
Taking my leave with sighs, away I went,
He streams of tears unto my farewell sen^^
165
Dispatching looks (Ambassadors of love)
Which as our posts could go and soon retire,
By whose quick motion we alone might prove,
Our equal love, did equal like desire,
And that the fire in which we both did burn,
Was sooner quenched in hope of safe return.
166
O hope, how cunning with our cares to gloze,
Griefs breathing point, the truce man to desire,
The rest in sighs, the very thoughts repose,
As thou art mild, oh were thou not a liar,
Fair speaking flattry, subtle soothing guile,
Ah how in thee our sorrows sweetly smile.
167
Like to a vessel with a narrow vent,
Which is filled up with liquor to the top,
Although the mouth be after down-ward bent,
Yet is it seen not to distill a drop.
Even thus our breasts brim-full with pensive care,
Stopping our tongues, with grief we silent are.
168
But when my want gave breath unto his moan,
And that his tears had now untied his tongue,
With drery sighs dispersd and ouer-blowne,
Which erst (like Fountains) in abundance sprung,
Unto himself he thus complains his grief,
Since now the world could yield him no relief.
169
O cursed stars (quoth he) which guide my birth,
Infernal Torches, Comets of misfortune,
Or Genius here which haunts me on the earth,
Or hellish Fiend that do my woes importune;
Fate-guiding Heavens, in whose unlucky moving,
Stands the effect of my mishaps approving.
170
Sky-couering clouds, which thus do ouer-cast,
And at my noone-tide darken all my Sun,
Blood-drying sickness, which my life do wast,
When yet my glass is but a quarter run:
My joy but a phantasma and elusion,
And my delights intending my confusion.
171
What Planet raignd in the unlucky hour,
When first I was invested in the Crown?
Or has in my nativity such power,
Or what vile fury does attend my Throne?
Or else, what hellish hags be these that haunt me?
Yet if a King, why should misfortune daunt me?
172
Am I a Prince, yet to my people subject,
Which should be loved, yet thus am left forlorn,
Ordaynd to rule, respected as an abject,
Live I to see mine honor had in scorn?
Base dunghill mind, that do such slavery bring,
To live a Pesant, and be borne a King.
173
The purest steel does never turn at lead,
Nor Oak does bow at every wind that blows,
Nor Lion from a Lamb does turn his head,
Nor Eagle frighted with a flock of Crows:
And yet a King want courage in his breast,
Trembling for fear to see his woes redrest.
174
It rather fits a villain then a State,
To have his love on others lykings placed,
Or set his pleasures at so base a rate,
To see the same by every slave disgraced;
A King should ever privilege his pleasure,
And make his Peers esteem it as their treasure.
175
Then raise thy thoughts, and with thy thoughts thy love
Kings want no means t'acco^plish what they would,
If one do sail, yet other may thou prove.
It shames a King, to say, If that I could.
Let not thy love, such crosses then sustain,
But raise him up, and call him home again.
176
Sweet Gaueston, whose praise the Angels sing,
May thou assure thee of my love the while?
Or what may thou imagine of thy King,
To let thee live in yonder brutish I Will?
My dear, a space, this weary time prolong,
He lives, that can, and shall revenge thy wrong.
177
Thus like a man grown lunatic with pain,
Now in his torments casts him on his bed,
Then out he runs into the fields again,
And on the ground does rest his troubled head.
With such sharp passions is the King possessed.
Which day nor night does let him take his rest.
178
As Lyon-skind Alcides, when he lost
His lovely Hylas on his way from Thrace,
Follows ye quest through many an unknown Coast,
With plaints and outcries, wearying every place,
Thus lovely Edward fills each place with moan,
VVanting the sight of his sweet Gaueston.
179
Thus like a Barge that wants both steer and sails,
Forced with the wind against the streamfull tide,
From place to place with every billow hailes,
And (as it haps) from shore to shore does ride.
Thus does my case, thus does my fortune stand,
Betwixt the King, and Barrons of the Land.
180
Instruct thy dangers whilst they be but young,
And like a teacher train them to obey,
That growing cunning as they do grow strong,
They may guide thee with safety on the way.
Thus find out wisdoms true mortallitie,
Philosophies more deep Philosophy.
181
With sweetest mildnes guide thine humble eye,
Thy mind aloft, thy semblance carried down,
Vainglory fondly gazeth on the sky,
He on the ground that aymeth at a crown:
Thy thoughts and sight not leueld both together,
Where you woldst be, thine eye not bending thither.
182
With mind more clearer, then with eyes we see,
That followed best whose proof brings confidence,
Let words unto thy thoughts but watch-words be,
Thy speech no whit alyed to thy pretense;
Feed fools with toys, but wisemen with regard
The breath thou spar'st, for thy advantage spared.
183
The Fates far of foreseen, come gently near,
Doubt takes sure footing in the slipperest ways,
Sasetie, most safe, when she is kept with fear,
And quietness the only Nurse of ease:
Ambition frantic, stabbeth still atthrones,
Honor, and envy, be companions.
184
On this Dilemma stood my tickle state,
Thus Pro et contra all men do dispute,
Precisely balanc't twixt my love and hate,
Some do affirm, some other do confute:
Until my King, (sweet Edward now at last,
Thus strikes the stroke which makes the^ all aghast.
185
Now calling such of the Nobility,
As he supposed on his part would stand,
By their consent he makes me Deputy,
And being seated thus in Ireland,
Of gold and silver sends me such store,
As made the world to vvonder more and more.
186
Like great gold-coyning Crassus in his health,
Amidst his Legion long-maintayning store,
The glory of the Roman Commonwealth,
Feasting the rich, and gyuing to the poor.
Such was th'aboundance which I then possessed,
Blessed with gold, (if gold could make me blessed.)
187
Where, (like Lucullus,) I maintaind a port,
As great God Bacchus had been late come down,
And in all pomp, at Dublin kept my Court,
As I had had th'reuenewes of a Crown.
In train, in state, and every other thing.
Attended still, as I had been a King.
188
Of this my wondrous hospitality,
The Irish yet, until this day do boast,
Such was the bounty of my King to me,
His Chequer then could scarce defray the cost.
His gifts were great, I ioyd in what he sent,
He freely gave, and I as freely spend.
189
Few days there past, but some the channel crossed,
With kindest Letters enterlind with love,
VVheras I still received by every Post,
His Riug, his Bracelet, Garter, or his Glove:
Which I in hostage of his kindness kept,
Of this pure love, which lived and never slept.
190
With many a rich and stately Ornament,
Worn by great Kings, of high and wondrous price,
Or Jewel that my fancy might content,
With many a Robe of strange and rare device.
That all which saw and knew this wondrous wast,
Perceived his treasure long time could not last.
191
And thus whilst Fortune friendly cast my dice,
And took my hazard, and threw at the maine,
I saw it was but solly to be nice,
That chances once, which seldom haps again.
I knew such bounty had been seldom seen,
And since his time, I think has never been.
192
And now the Barrons which repynd before,
Because I was too lavish of the treasure,
And saw my wast consuming ten times more,
Which does so far exceed all bonds of measure,
This (as a knife) their very hart-strings cuts,
And gnawes them like the Colic in the guts.
193
Thus (all in vain) they seek to stop the source,
For presently it ouer-flowes the bounds,
Yet well perceive, if thus it held his course,
No question then, the Commonwealth it drowns;
And thus like men which tread an endless maze,
Whilst Fortune sports, ye world stands at a gaze.
194
Like Soldiers in a Town surpised by night,
Over their heads the houses set on fire,
Sure to be slain in issuing out to fight,
Or else be burned if they do retire:
Some curse ye time, some other blame their fortune,
whilst black despair their deths does still importune
195
This gracious King, (which seemd to sleep ye while)
Finding the iron thus fully had his heat,
With sweet persuasions fitly frames his style:
Which in their wits does such a temper beat,
With kindest looks, and sweetest vows of love,
As were of force a Rock of flint to move.
196
His cloudy frowns be turned to Sunshine smiles,
And those on whom he lowerd, he friendly graces,
Their moody cheer, with sporting he beguiles,
His Lions looks be turned to sweet embraces:
That with his will, their thoughts seem to accord,
Such is the love of Subjects to their Lord.
197
O Majesty, how thy desire commands,
How does thy presence humble every eye,
Thy words, have words, thy hand, has many hands
And thus with all things have community:
How thy great power of governing estate
Is still imperious over love and hate.
198
And having found his kindness took effect,
This agent fails not to prefer his suit,
Nor day, nor night, once does the same neglect,
Until his travel yields desired fruit:
And that the Barrons all with might and maine,
Now condescend to call me home again.
199
O frail and slyding state of earthly things,
Blind Fortune, chance, worlds mutabilitie,
Advancing Pesants, and debasing Kings,
Od hap, good luck, or star-bred destenie
Which still do fawn, and flatter me so often,
Now casts me down, then sett'st me up aloft.
200
In all post-hast, the King to Ireland sent
His Princely Letters for my safe return,
To England now I must incontinent,
It seems that time all malice has out-worne.
The Coast is clear, occasion calls away,
The gale stands right, and drives me from the Bay.
201
My whistling sails make music with the wind,
The boystrous waves do homage to mine eyes,
The brutish sort of Eols Imps seem kind,
And all the clouds abandoning the skies:
Now lovely Laedas Eg-born twins appeer,
Toward Albyons cliues fair Fortune guides my steer.
202
The King is come to Chester, where he lies,
The Court prepared to receive me there,
In all the pomp that wit could well devise:
As since that time was seldom seen elsewhere.
Where setting once my dainty foot on land,
He thought him blessed wc might but kiss my hand.
203
In pleasures there we spend the nights and days,
And with our Revels entertain the time,
With costly Banquets, Masks, and stately Plays,
Paynting our loves in many a pleasing rhyme.
With rarest Music, and sweet-tuned voices,
(In which the soul of man so much reioyces.)
204
Like as the famous brave Egyptian Queen,
Feasted the Roman great Mark Anthony,
With Pearl-dissolu'd carrouses, seldom seen,
Served all in vessel of rich Iuory:
Such was the sumptuous banquets he prepared,
In which no cost or curious thing was spard.
205
Or like the Troyan Priam, when as he
Beheld his long-lost Son return to Troy,
Tryumphing now in all his iolitie.
Proud Ilyon smokes with th'o^ges of his joy,
Such are our feasts and stately tryumphs here,
Which with applauses, found in every ear.
206
Nothing seen fearful, we the most might fear,
Great'st mists arise, before the greatest rain,
The water deep'st, where we least murmr hear,
In fairest Cups, men temper deadliest bayne.
The nearer night, the air more calm and still,
The nearer to our deaths, least fearing ill.
207
Short hours work long effects, minutes have change
Whilst pleasure withers, pain more ripe does groe,
Fortune in turning to her self is strange,
Joy is forgetful, weal thinks not of woe.
Prosperity a flatterer is found,
Delight is fearelesse, till it feel the wound.
208
The Beast and Bird can prophecy of storms,
The air of tempest, does foretell the eye,
And senseless things often Augurs of men's harms,
Stones sore-shew rain, by their humiditie.
They mourn for us, we not their mourning see,
To men without sense, all things senseless be.
209
Departing thence from Chesters pleasant side,
Toward London now we travel with delight,
Where every City likewise does provide
To entertain us, with some pleasing sight:
Till all our train at length to London comes,
Where naught is hard but trumpets, bells and drums.
210
As when Paulus Aemilius entered Room,
And like great Ione, in stan like triumph came,
Honored in Purple by the Senats doom,
Laden with gold, and crowned with his fame.
Such seems our glory now in all men's eyes,
Our friendship honored with applaudities.
211
Or when old Phillips still-vvondred Son,
In his worlds conquest surfeiting with spoils,
The scourge of Kings returns to Babylon,
To sport and banquet after all his toiles;
Such is our glory in our London Court,
Whereto all Nations daily make resort.
212
The trumpets sound but as in Tragedies,
When as the Actors on the Stage appear,
The drums strike Larums to our miseries,
The doleful bells but call us to our Beer:
They be not tryumphs which delight us so,
But noise, when men to execution go.
213
Be deaf, nor feel, nor taste, nor smell, nor see,
Senseless our bodies, senseless be our minds,
Lets frame our bodies, like our minds to be,
And rightly let them be in their own kinds:
Be senseless senses, and no pleasures feel,
Our minds as senseless, as is flint or steel.
214
And thus blind Fortune luls me in her lap,
And rocks me still, with many a Sirens song,
Thus placed me on the Atlas of my hap,
From which she means to cast me down ere long;
Black ugly Fiend, o foul misshapen evil,
In show an Angel, but in deed a devil.
215
Even as a Lion got into his paws
The silly Lamb, seems yet a while to play,
Till seeking to escape out of his jaws,
This beastly King now tares if for his pray.
Thus having got me in her arms so fast,
Determins now to feed on me at last.
216
Or as the slaughter-man does fat the beast,
Which afterward he means shall be slain,
Before provided to some solemn feast,
The more thereby he may increase his gain,
Lo, thus proud Fortune feeds me for the knife,
For which (it seems) she had prepared my life.
217
For thus ere long, between the King and me,
Even as before, our Revels thus begin,
And now the Barrons taste their misery,
Opening their eyes which makes them see their sin.
The plague once past, they never felt the sores,
Till now again it haps within their doors.
218
Times old transgression, light-beleeuing trust,
Too late repentance, follies fonds forecast,
Our minds foul surfeit, and our humors lust,
Our goods consumption, our good fortunes wast.
Even by my spirit, here let your griefs be shown
Who have been graceless to foresee mine own.
219
By patient sufferance, could we midly bear,
With Fortune yet we equally might share,
And ouer-comming that, which all do fear,
By present cure, prevent ensuing care.
Vain sounds of pleasure we delight to hear,
But counsel jar, as discords in our care.
220
The Horse has raines to rule him in his course,
The Ship an Ankor, to with-stand the flood,
The wrestler slight, which counterchecketh force,
The battering Engine is by strength with-stood.
The Hound a lease, whereby to hold him in,
But we no means, once to control our sin.
221
Like as a man made drunk with foul excess,
Drowning his soul in this vile lothlie vice,
Once being sober, sees his beastliness,
Buying repentance with so dear a price?
Thus they perceive the bondage they possessed,
In condiscending to the Kings request.
222
The damned Furies here vnbong the source,
From whence the Lethe of my virtues burst,
The black-borne Fates here labor in that course,
By which my life and fortune came accursed.
My death in that star-guiders doom conceled,
Now in the brows of heaven may be reveled.
223
My youth spurs on my frail untamed desire,
Yielding the raines to my lascivious will,
Upon the Ice I take my full careyre,
The place too slippery, and my manage ill:
Thus like a Colt, in danger to be cast,
Yet still run on, the devil drives so fast.
124
Now wandering in a Labyrinth of error,
Lost in my pride, no hope of my return,
Of sin and shame my life a perfect mirror,
No spark of virtue once is seen to burn.
Nothing there was could be discernd in me,
But beastly lust, and sensuality.
225
Black Hecate chaunts on her night-spell charms,
Which cast me first into this deadly sleep,
Whilst fier-eyd Ate clips me in his arms,
And hales me down to the infernal deep:
Foul sleep-god Morpheus, curtains up the light,
And shuts my fame in everlasting night.
226
The fixed stars in their repugnacie,
Had full concluded of these endless iarres,
And Nature by some strange Antipathie,
Had in our humors bred continual wars,
Or the star-ceeled heavens by fatal doom,
Ordaind my troubles in my Mothers woomb.
227
Some hellish hag in this inchaunted cup,
Out of the Tun of pride this poison drew,
And those hot cinders which were raked up,
Into the nostrils of the Nobles blew.
Who now carroused to my Funeral,
And (with a vengeance) I must pledge them all.
228
And now brake out that execrable rage,
Which long before had boiled in their blood,
Which neither time nor reason could aswage,
But like to men grown lunatic and vvood.
My name and fame, they seek to scandalize,
And root the same from all posterities.
229
They all affirm, my Mother was a Witch,
A filthy hag, and burnt for sorcerie:
And I her Son, and fitting with her pitch,
She had bequeathed her damned Art to me.
This rumor in the peoples ears they ring,
That (for my purpose) I bewitched the King.
230
They say, that I conuayd beyond the Sea,
The Table and the tressels of pure gold,
King Arthurs relics, kept full many a day,
The which to Windsor did belong of old.
In whose fair margent (as they did surmize,)
Merlin ingraued many prophecies.
231
Some slanderous tongues, in spightful manner said
That here I lived in filthy Sodomie,
And that I was King Edwards Ganimed,
And to this sin he was enticed by me;
And more, to wreck their spightfull deadly teene,
Report the same to Isabell the Queen.
232
A Catalogue of tytles they begun,
With which I had the Noble men abused,
Which they auoucht I never durst have done,
If by the King I had not been excused.
And urged, that he maintaind against the state,
A monster, which both God and man did hate.
233
They swore the King subbornd my villainy,
And that I was his instrument of vice,
The means whereby he wrought his tyranny,
That to his chance I ever cast the dice,
And with most bitter exerations ban,
The time in which, our friendship first began.
234
Lo, here draws on my drery dismal hour,
The doleful period of my destiny,
Here does approach the black and ugly shower,
Hence flows the Deluge of my misery.
Here comes the cloud yt shuts up all my light,
My lowering Winter, and eternal night.
235
The angry Barrons now assembled were,
And no man left that on my side durst stand,
Before the Popes pernicious Legate there
They forced me thus to abjure the Land:
Urging the King to further their intent,
By solemn oath upon the Sacrament.
236
Upon the holy Sacrament he swears,
Although (God knows) full much against his will,
So overcome with silence, sighs, and tears,
To make a sword, the which himself should kill,
And being done, (in doing then not long,)
He seems to curse his hand, his heart, his tongue.
237
Like to a man which walking in the grass,
Upon a Serpent suddenly does tread,
Plucks back his foot, and turns away his face,
His culler fading pale as he were dead:
Thus he the place, thus he the act does shun,
Lothing to see what he before had done.
238
Or as a man mistaking a receite,
Some death-strong poison happily does taste,
And every hour the vigor does await,
Appald with fear, now stands all aghast,
Thus stands he trembling in an ecstasy,
Too sick to live, and yet too strong to die.
239
He takes his Crown, and spurns it at his feet,
His princly roabs he does in pieces tear,
He straight co^maunds the Queen out of his sight,
He tuggs and rents his golden-tressed hair,
He beats his breast, and sighs out pittious groans,
Spending the day in tears, the night in mones.
240
Like as the furious Palidine of France,
Forsaken of Angelica the saire,
So like a Bedlam in the fields does dance,
With shouts and clamors filling all the air,
Tearing in pieces what so ere he caught,
With such a fury is the King distraught.
241
Or when the woeful Thrace-borne Hecuba,
Saw Troy on fire, and Pryams fatal doom,
Her sons all slain, her dear Polixina
There sacrifized on Achilles tomb,
Even like a Bore her angry tusks does where,
Scratching and biting all that ere she met.
242
With fearful visions frighted in his bed,
Which seems to him a very thornie brake,
With ugly shapes which way he turns his head:
And when from sleep he ever does awake,
He then again with weeping mournful cries,
In grief of soul complains his miseries.
243
He wants digestion, and refrains his rest,
His eyes ore-watched, like eclipsed suns,
With bitter passion is his soul oppressed,
And through his eyes, his brain disolued runs.
And after silence, when with pain he speaks,
A sudden sigh his speech in sunder breaks.
244
He starteth up, and Gaueston does call,
Then stands he still, and looks upon the ground,
Then like one in an Epileps does fall,
As in a Spasma, or a deadly swound;
Thus languishing in pain, and lingering ever,
In the Symptoma of this pyning fever.
245
Like to a flower that droupeth in a frost,
Or as a man in a Consumption pyning,
Staynd like a cloth that has his culler lost,
Or Poets-worne Laurel, when it is declyning,
Or like a Peacock washed in the rain,
Trayling adowne his starry-eyed train.
246
To Belgia I cross the narrow seas,
And in my breast a very sea of grief,
Whose tyde-full surges never give me ease,
For heaven and earth have shut up all relief,
The air does threaten vengeance for my crime,
Clotho draws out the thread of all my time.
247
Like as that wicked brother-killing Caine,
Flying the presence of his mighty God,
Accursed to die, forbidden to be slain,
A vagabond, and wandering still abroad.
In Flaunders thus I travel all alone,
Still seeking rest, yet restles finding none.
248
Or as the Monarch of great Babylon,
Whose monstrous pride the Lord did so detest,
As he outcast him from his princly throne,
And in the field he wandered like a beast:
Companion with the Ox and lothlie Ass,
Starved with the cold, and feeding on the grass.
249
Thus do I change my habit and my name,
From place to place I pass unknown of any,
But swift report so far had spread my fame,
I hear my life and youth contrould of many;
The bouzing Flemings in their boistrous tongue
Still talking on me as I pass along.
250
O wretched, vile, and miserable man,
Besotted so with worldy vanity,
When as thy life is but a very span,
Yet every hour full of calamities;
Begot in sin, and following still the game,
Living in lust, and dying often with shame.
251
Now working means to have intelligence,
By secret Letters from my Lord the King,
How matters stood since I departed thence,
And of the terms and state of every thing,
I cast about which way I might devise,
In spite of all, once more to play my prize.
252
And still relying on King Edwards love,
To whom before my life had been so dear,
Whose constancy my fortune made me prove,
And to my Brother, Earl of Glocoster,
And to my wife, who labored tooth and nail,
My abiuration how she might repeal.
253
I now embarck me in a Flemish Hoy,
Disguised in the habit of a Muffe,
Attended thus with neither man nor boy,
But on my back a little bag of stuff:
Like to a soldier, which in Camp of late
Had been imployd in service with the State.
254
And safely landed on this blessed shore,
Toward Windsor thus disguisd I took my way,
Whereas I had intelligence before,
My wife remaind, and there my Edward lay,
My dearest wife, to whom I sent my ring,
Who made my coming known unto the king.
255
As when old-youthfull Aeson in his glass,
Saw from his eyes the cheerful lightning sprung,
When as Art-spell Medea brought to pass,
By herbs and charms, again to make him young.
Thus stood King Edward, ravished in the place,
Fixing his eyes upon my lovely face.
256
Or as Muse-meruaile Hero, when she clips
Her dear Leanders byllow-beaten limms,
And with sweet kisses seazeth on his lips,
When for her sake, deep Hellespont she swimms,
Thus we, by tender dear imbracings prove,
Fair Heroes kindness, and Leanders love.
257
Or like the twifold-twyned Geminy,
In their star-gilded gyrdle strongly tied,
Chaynd by their Saffrond tresses in the sky,
Standing to guard the Sun-coch in his pride,
Like as the Vine, his love the Elm embracing,
With nimble arms our bodies interlacing.
258
O blinded Reason, reasonles in this,
Unruly will, of vnrul'd appetite,
Could our discretion moderate our bliss,
It might more easlie moderate their spite,
But we are carried with the winds away,
To violent the Gulf of our decay.
259
O wondrous love, were then a mean in thee,
Reason might understand what thou do mean,
But for thou would not comprehended be,
Our understanding thou do but disdain:
Thou mind-transforming monster, monstrous ill,
Which hating saues, but cherrishing does kill.
260
But all thy mean (fond love) is in extremes,
Thy heed is rashness, thy forecast thy fall,
Thy wit is folly, and thy hopes are dreams,
Thy counsel madness, and thy rule is thrall;
And only this, thou art not what thou art,
And of thy self, thou art not any part.
261
The Barrons hearing how I was arrived,
And that my late abiurement naught prevailed,
By my return, of all their hopes deprived,
Their bedlam rage no longer now concealed,
But as hot coals once puffed with the wind,
Into a flame out-breaking by their kind.
262
Like to a man, whose foot does hap to light
Into the nest where stinging Hornets lie,
Vexed with the spleen, and raging with despite,
About his head these winged spirits fly:
Thus rise they up with mortal discontent,
By death to end both life and banishment.
263
Or like to soldiers in a town of war,
When Sentinel the enemy discries,
Affrighted with this unexpected jar,
All with the fearful Larun-bell arise,
Thus muster they, (as Bees do in a hyue,
The idle Drone out of their combs to drive.)
264
It seemed the earth with heaven grew malcontent
Nothing is heard but wars and Armors ringing,
Now none but such as stratagems invent,
The whisling phife, the warlike trumpet singing,
Each soldier now, his crested plume aduaunces,
On barbed horses pressed, with swords and lances.
265
Thus whilst our hopes should thrive, they do diminish,
Our early rising, makes our set too soon,
Even as it does begin, it soon does finish,
Our night is come before it should be noone,
Our downfall haps as we should mount on hie,
So short and frail is our felicity.
266
Men's haps by heaven be framed preposterous,
Now with eternal good, now temporal ill,
And often again contrary unto us,
Our good but short, our evil during still,
To show, that heavens euer-waking powers,
Do rule as Lords, both over us and ours.
267
Like as the Ocean chafing with his bounds,
With raging billows flies against the Rocks,
And to the shore sends forth his hidious sounds,
Making the earth to tremble with his shocks,
Even thus the murmr flies from shore to shore
Like to the Cannons battering fearful rore.
268
By day and night attended still with Spies,
The Court become the cause of all our woes,
The Country now a Camp of enemies,
The Cities are be-peopled with our foes,
Our very beds, are snares made to enwrap us,
Our surest guard (as Traitors) do entrap us.
269
Like to a cry of roring-mouthed hounds,
Rouzing the long-liu'd Stagge out of his layre,
Pursue the chase through vastie forest grounds,
So like a thunder rattling in the air,
Thus do they hunt us still from Coast to Coast,
Most hated now, of those we favored most.
270
This gracious Prince lo thus becoms my guide,
And with a conuoy of some chosen friends,
Brings me to York, where being fortified,
To Balioll the King of Scots he sends,
And to the Welchmen, craving both their aid,
That by their help the Barrons might be staid.
271
But they, which in their business never slept,
And (as it seemed) had well foreseen this thing,
Cause all the Ports and Marches to be kept,
That none should enter to assist the King:
And by disswasiue Letters still devise,
To stay their neighbors from this enterprise.
272
Lo, in this sort the King and I betrayed,
And to their wills thus left as woeful thrals,
And finding now no further hope of aid,
We shut us up within Yorks aged walls,
Until we knew the Barrons full intent,
And what all this rude hurly burly meant.
273
This gracious King, wanting his wonted rest,
And toyling still in this perplexity,
With grievous sickness is so sore oppressed
And grown by this to such extremity,
As he is forced to depart away,
A while to purge this humor at the sea.
274
From Bedford now (the synod of their shame,
The counsell-house of all their villainy,)
These bloody Barrons with an Army came,
Down unto York, where they besieged me,
Where now not able to resist their might,
Am forced persorce, to fly away by night.
275
To Scarborough, with speed away I post,
With that small force the City then could lend me
The strongest Castle there in all the Coast,
And (as I thought) the surest to defend me,
Whereas I might with-stand the^ by my power,
Hoping the Kings returning every hour.
276
But now, like to a sousing sudden rain,
Forced by a strong and sturdie Eastern blast,
Or like a hayle storm, down they come amain,
And in the Castle girt me now so fast,
No way to escape, no hope for me to fly,
My choice was hard, or yield my self, or dye.
277
Away thus like a prisoner, am I led,
My costly roabs in pieces rent and torn,
Bound hand and foot, my hair disheuiled,
Naked and bare as ever I was borne:
Save but for shame, to stop the peoples cries,
Am basely clothed of mine enemies.
278
Along the Land toward Oxford they convey me,
Like bauling curres, they all about me houle,
With words of foul reproach they now repay me
Wondering my shame, as byrds do at an Owl,
Cursing my life, my manners and my birth,
A scourge of God, ordained to plague the earth.
279
The King now hearing how I was arested,
And knew my quarrel cause of all this strife,
He writes, he sends, he sues, he now requested,
Using all means he could to save my life,
With vows and oaths, that al should be amended
If that my death alone might be suspended.
280
And being brought to Dedington at last,
By Aymer Valence, Earl of Pembrooke then,
Who toward King Edward rode in all the haft,
And left me guarded safely by his men:
This gentle Earl with mere compassion moved,
For Edwards sake, whom he so dearly loved.
281
But now Guy Beuchamp, whom I feared still,
The Earl of Warwick, whom I called curre,
Having fit time to execute his will,
The Fox thus caught, he vows to tear my furre.
And he for whom so often he set the trap,
By good ill luck, is fallen into his lap.
282
This bloody Beuchamp, (I may term him so,)
For this was he which only sought my blood,
Now at the vp-cast of mine ouer-throw,
And on the chance whereon my fortune stood,
To Dedington by night came, where I lay,
And by his power conuay'd me thence away.
283
To Warwick thus fast bound he does me bring,
Imprisoning me within the Castle there,
And doubting now my succor from the King,
He raises up the power of Warwickshire,
By whom forthwith to Blacklow I was led,
And on a scaffold there, I lost my head.
284
Lo here the point and sentence of my time,
My lives full stop, my last Catastrophe,
The stipend of my death-deseruing crime,
The Scene that ends my woeful Tragedy,
My latest farewell, knitting my conclusion,
Mine utter ruin, and my fames confusion.
285
Like as Adonis wounded with the Bore,
From whose fresh hurt the life-warme blood does spin,
Now lies wallowing in his purple gore,
Stayning his fair and Allablaster skin,
My headles body in the blood is lest,
Here lying brethles, of all life bereft.
286
O now my Muse, put on thy Eagles wings,
O lend some comfort to my tired ghost,
And with Apollos dolefull-tuned strings,
Now help at need, for now I need thee most.
Sorrow possess my heart, mine eyes, mine ears,
My breath consume to sighs, my brain to tears.
287
My soul now in the heavens eternal glass,
Beholds the scarrs and botches of her sin,
How filthy, ugly and deformd she was,
The loathsome dunghill that she wallowed in,
Her pure Creator sitting in his glory,
With eyes of justice to peruse her story.
288
Like as a Stagge at bay amongst the hounds,
The bloody Moat sounding in his ears,
Feeling his breath diminish by his wounds,
Poures down his gummy life-preseruing tears:
Even thus my soul, now bayted by my sin,
Consuming, shows the sorrow she is in.
289
Thus comfortles, forsaken and alone,
All worldly things unstable, and unsure,
By true contrition flies unto his throne,
In whose compare, the heavens are most impure.
By whose just doom, to blessed souls revealed,
She gets her pasport to his mercy sealed.
290
And by repentance, finds a place of rest,
Where passing to the fair Elisian plain,
She is alow'd her room amongst the blessed,
In those Ambrosian shadows to remain:
Till summond thus by Fame, she is procured,
To tell my life, which has been long obscured.
291
This Monster now, this many-headed beast,
The people, more unconstant then the wind,
Who in my life, my life did so detest,
Now in my death, are of another mind,
And with the fountains from their tearfull eyes,
Do honor to my latest obsequies.
292
Star-holding heaven has shut up all her light,
Nature become a step-dame to her own,
The mantled truch-man of the Rauen-hu'd night,
In mournful sables clad the Horizon:
The sky-borne Plannets seeming to conspire,
Against the air, the water, earth and fire.
293
Pearle-paued Auon, in her streamfull course,
With heavy murmr floting on the stones,
Moved with lament to pity and remorse,
Attempering sad music to my mones,
Tuning her billows to sweet Zephyrs breath,
In watrie language does bewail my death.
294
Oke-shadowed Arden, filled with bellowing cries,
Resounding through her holts and hollow grounds,
To which the Echo euer-more replies,
And to the fields sends forth her hidious sounds,
And in her Siluan rude untuned songs,
Makes birds and beasts for to express my wrongs.
295
The heauen-dyed slowers in this happy clime,
Mantling the Meadows in their Summers pride,
As in the woeful frostie winter time,
Drouping with faintnes hold their heads aside.
The boistrous storms, dispoile ye greenest greues,
Stripping the Trees staik naked of their leaves.
296
Death called in liueries of my lovely cheeks,
Laid in those beds of Lillies and of Roses,
Amazed with marvel, here for wonders seeks,
Were he alone a Paradise supposes,
Grew male content, and with himself at strife,
Not knowing now if he were death or life.
297
And shutting up the casements of those lights,
Which like two suns, so sweetly went to rest,
In those fair Globes he saw those heavenly sights,
In which alone he thought him only blessed.
Cursing himself, who had deprived breath,
From that which thus, could give a life in death.
298
With palenes touching that fair rubied lip,
Now waxing purple, like Adonis flower,
Where Iuory walls those rocks of Currall keep,
From whence did slow yt Nectar streaming shower.
There earth-pale Death refresht his tired lims,
Where Cupid bathed him in those Crystal brims.
299
And entering now into that house of glory,
That Temple with sweet Odors long perfumed,
Where Nature had ingraued many a story,
In Letters, which by death were not consumed.
Accursed now, his cruelty he cursed,
That Fame should live, when death had done his worst.
300
Now when the King had notice of my death,
And that he saw his purpose thus prevented,
In grievous sighs he now consumes his breath,
And into tears his very eyes relented:
Cursing that vile and mercy-wanting age,
And breaks into this passion in his rage.
301
O heavens (quoth he) lock up the living day,
Cease Sun to lend the world thy glorious light,
Stars, fly your course, and wander all astray,
Moon, lend no more thy silver shine by night.
Heaven, Stars, Sun, Moon, co^ioyne you al in one,
Revenge the death of my sweet Gaueston.
302
Earth, be thou helpless in thy creatures birth,
Sea, break thou sorth from thy immured bound,
Air, with thy vapors poison thou the earth,
Wind, break thy Cave, and all the world confound.
Earth, Sea, Air, Wind, conioyne you all in one,
Revenge the death of my sweet Gaueston.
303
You Savage beasts, which haunt ye waylesse woods,
You Birds delighted in your Siluan sound,
You scaly Fish, which swim in pleasant floods,
You hartlesse Worms, which creep upon you ground,
Beasts, birds fish, worms, each in your kind alone,
Bewail the death of my sweet Gaueston.
304
Fair Meadows, be you withered in the prime,
Sunburned and bare, be all the goodly Mountains,
Groves, be you leauelesse in the Summer time,
Pitchy and black be all the Crystal Fountains:
All things on earth, each in your kind alone,
Bewail the death of my sweet Gaueston.
305
You damned Furies, break your Stigian Cell,
You wandering spirits, in water, earth, and air,
Lead boiled Ghosts which live in lowest hell,
Gods, devils, men, unto mine aid repair,
Come all at once, conioyne you all in one,
Revenge the death of my sweet Gaueston.
306
Eyes never sleep, until you see revenge,
Head, never rest, until thou plot revenge,
Heart, never think, but tending to revenge,
Hands, never act, but acting deep revenge.
Iust-dooming heavens, revenge me from above,
That men unborn may wonder at my Love.
307
You peerlesse Poets of ensuing times,
Chaunting Herioque Angell-tuned Notes,
Or humble Pastors Nectar-filled lines,
Driving your flocks with music to their Cotes.
Let your high-flying Muses still bemone,
The woeful end of my sweet Gaueston.
308
My earth-pale body now enbalmd with tears,
To famous Oxford solemnly conuaid,
There buried by the ceremonious Friars,
Where for my soul was many a Trentall said.
With all those rites my obsequies behooved,
Whose blind devotion, time and truth reproved.
309
But ere two years were out and fully dated,
This gracious King who still my fame respected,
My wasted bones to Langley thence translated,
And over me a stately Tomb erected.
Which world-deuouring Time, has now out-worne,
As but for Letters, were my name forlorn.
FINIS.
The vision of Matilda.
ME thought I saw upon Matildas Tomb,
Her woeful ghost, which Fame did now awake,
And cr^^^'d her passage from Earths hollow womb,
To view this Legend, written for her sake;
No sooner she her sacred Name had seen,
Whom her kind friend had chose to grace her story,
But wiping her chaste tears from her sad eyne,
She seemed to triumph, in her double glory.
Glory she might, that his admired Muse,
Had with such method framed her just complaint:
But proud she was, that reason made him choose,
To patronize the same to such a Saint:
In whom her rarest virtues may be shown,
Though Poets skill should fail to make the^ known.
H. G. Esquire.
Tears in your eyes, and passions in your hearts,
With mournful grace vouchsafe Matildas story:
The subject sad, a King to act the parts
Of his own shame, to others endless glory.
But such is sin, where lawless lust is reigning,
Sweet to the taste, till all turns to infection,
When count is cast, a reckoning is remaining,
Which must be paid, but not at our election.
Perrill and Grief, the interest of Pleasure,
Spending the stock that Danger long was gayning,
Makes soul and body banckrupt of that treasure,
Which vainly spent, what helps our fond co^plaining
O that my lines could so the Author grace,
As well his virtues merit praise and place,
R. L. Esquire.
To M. Drayton.
MIchaell which do great Roberts fame compile,
Thy subjects worth, thy wit, thy Ladies glory,
Cheer up thy Muse, add life unto thy style,
While thou assaist to write his worthy story.
Whose boundless spirit, whose high chivalry,
And virtuous deeds must needs have buried been
By ages envy, and times tirannie,
And never had with mortal eyes been seen,
Had not thy Muse restored his former fame,
The twice dead Norman to his speaking sight,
Even when his eyes had lost their shyning flame,
Like unto Lamps that wanting oil, want light.
By thee he sees, he lives, he speaks again,
The^ chere thee Michaell, Fame rewards thy pain.
Mirocinius.

