THE CHRISTIAN ARMORIE: WHEREIN IS CONTAINED ALL manner of spiritual munition,
fit for secure Christians to arm themselves withal against Satan's assaults,
and all other kind of crosses, temptations, troubles, and afflictions:
CONTRIVED IN TWO Books, and handled pithily and plainly by way of Questions
and Answers: BY THOMAS DRAXE, Bachelar in Divinity. Hereunto is adioined a
Table of all the principal heads and branches comprised in each Chapter of the
whole Treatise.

EPHESIANS. 6.13. Take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
resist in the evil day; and having finished all things, to stand fast.

Imprinted at London by William Hall, for John Stepneth, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of S. Paul, at the West end of Paul's Church. 1611.

(...) not perpetual, and they in the mea^^time, are not exempted from all
evils* And what if in the greatest danger: some Joseph's, some Daniels, and some
Hesters, are both favored and advanced? yet this is very rare and
extraordinary. Therefore it behooued every servant of God, while she hat^ time
and means, to prepare an^ arm himself against all future events and
temptations; and for the end to put on the girdle of constancy; and in the
truth, to be ready to confess the Gospel of peace; to take unto himself the
Shield of faith triumphant in Christ; to cover his head with the hope of
salvation instead of an helmet; and with the sword of the spirit.i. with
testimonies of the scriptures, to offend and foil these spiritual Amalekites:
and hereunto to adioyne fervent and continual prayers, without which all this
spiritual armor will little avail. Thus doing, he shall find light in
darkness, consolation in tribulation, power in weakness, and in all his
trials, he shall be more then a triumpher in Christ. And for his further
encouragement, let him remember, that in this warfare, the Lord Jesus is the
General; godly Kings and Princes the Coronels; the Nobles, Judges, and
Justices, are the Captains; the Ministers of the Church, the Trumpetters and
Sentinels; the Angels the assistants; God the Judge, and Rewarder; and eternal
glory, the monument and trophy of triumph. This preparation being so necessary,
and the comforts so needful, and so abundantly set forth in the sacred
scriptures; I have (according to my mediocrity) from thence chiefly, borrowed
my spiritual armorie, and have reduced and contrived the whole doctrine of it,
into certain chapters and pithy grounds and propositions. And to the intent,
that the Church of God should find comfort and profit by it, I thought good to
publish it. And because you (most excellent Lady) are the Phoenix o^ your sex,
a glorious star in our firmament, and so full of princely piety, virtue and
clemency; I have presumed to offer these my labors to your Graces view, and to
commend them to your Graces patronage. For wherein should so noble a Lady in
her young and flourishing years, more labor to excel, then to be a
conqueresse over sin and satan? For such holy beginnings, cannot but bring
forth blessed conclusions.

Vouchsafe therefore (most gracious Lady) to pardon my bold enterprise, and to
shelter these my meditations under the wings of your Graces favor. In humble
desire, and comfortable expectation whereof, I commit your Grace to the blessed
government of the highest Majesty. Couentry, March 30. 1611.

Your Graces ready to be commanded in all duty and service, THOMAS DRAXE.

THE CHRIstian Armorie.
CHAP. I. Of Man's offense and fall.
Question.

HOw came man, that was originally, and by his first creation, so honorable,
holy and happy, to be so sinful, vile, and miserable?

Answer.

By reason of sin and the transgression of Gods commandment, 1. Ioh. 3.4.
Romans 5.14.
whereby he fell away from God, and lost his, former dignity, holiness, and
happiness. Romans 3.23.

Q. What is sin?

A. It is (...), the breach of Gods law; or, it is a declination, revolt, and
apostasy from the love, 1. Ioh. 3.8.
nature, communion, and will of God. Ephesians. 4. v. 18.

Q. Who is the subject (or continent) of sin?

A. The reasonable creature, that is, many of the Angels, Iud. 6.
(for they kept not their first estate and purity) and mankind universally, 1.
Cor. 15.21.22.
no man excepted: for all men have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of
God. Romans 3.23.

Q. Who is the author, or committe^ of sin?

1. Io. 1. v. 5.
A. Not God; for he is holiness it self, and there is in him no darkness, nor
sin at all; for he does not command nor commend, much less, instill and
suggest sin, but condemn and punish it, as that which is most adverse and
contrary to his own will and word: but man only, who in mind, will, and
affections is wholly corrupted with sin, and by this means is become a
vassal of Satan, Ephesians. 2. v. 2.
and guilty of everlasting damnation.

Q. Jnto how many kinds is sin divided and distinguished?

A. Into two kinds principally, namely, that poisonfull corruption wherein man
is conceived, and borne, which we call, Original sin; and that offense of
action, which we term, Actual transgression.

Q. What is Original sin?

A. It is the leprous, Psalm. 51.5. Genesis 8.21. Ioh 5 2. Genesis 6. v. 5.
contagious, and pestilent infection of nature, or an hereditary and natural
corruption, which is successively by carnal generation derived and conveyed
from Adam the root and common beginning of all mankind, unto all his posterity.

Q By what names and epithetes is it called in the scriptures?

A. Amongst others, Romans 8.6.
these are special names of it. First, it is called sin (absolutely) because
it is the fountain of al sins.

Secondly, it is termed The body of Sin, c. 7. v. 13
because all sins are included in it, and (as it were) in league with it; for
upon occasion offered they break out.

Thirdly, it is named, The Law of the members, because of the dominion of it,
in, c. 7.
and over all our members: for all the parts and powers of our bodies, and
souls, before regeneration obey it as a law, and it is entitled Rebellion in
our members, because it does by a continual practice strive and rebel against
the law of God.

Lastly, it has the denomination of Flesh, Romans 6.6. Iam. 1. v. 15.
Genesis 6.3. of the old Adam, and of Concupiscence, which is an evil and
inordinate desire and inclination.

Q. What are the maine parts of original corruption?

A. Two: first loss and want of the first and original holiness in the whole
man: Secondly, the presence of evil; or, a contagion and distempered
disposition of all the parts and powers of soul and body.

Q. What are the causes of original sin?

A. Three; the one inward, and the other two outward.

Q. What is the inward cause of it?

A. The very law of nature, passing originally, and conveyed by carnal
generation from one person to another.

Q. What are the outward causes of it?

A. Two: First, the actual sin of Adam and Eve, the first instruments and
foundation of man's nature. Secondly, Gods justice, imputing the transgression
of our first parents to al their offspring and posterity.

Q. Does original sin, or concupiscence remain in the regenerate?

A. Yes: for though the guilt and dominion of it be taken away, (for Christ
through his bloody sufferings so hinders the force and power of it, that it
cannot condemn, and by his spirit so lesseneth and mortifieth it, Romans 7.17
that it cannot tyrannize, nor dominere over them,) yet the corruption does and
will remain in them until death, and hereupon it is called sin dwelling
(but not reigning) in the godly.

Q. Why will God have original concupiscence to dwell and remain in those that
are justified and sanctified?

A. First, that they should the better perceive and feel the efficacy of
grace, and of the spirit of Christ, who though he suffer this enemy to dwell
in them, yet he does so keep under, and captiuate him in them, that he cannot
reign in the^, nor destroy them.

Secondly, that they should find, and certainly know, that they can by no
other means be justified in Gods sight, then by Christ's perfect obedience
apprehended of them by faith alone. Romans 3. v. 24.


Lastly, God will have them (for their exercise) to have an enemy unto their
dying day, with whom they may always fight and combat, and whom by the grace
of Christ they might foil in fight, Apoc. 3.4. 1. Tim. 4.8.
and by foiling they might procure to themselves the greater Crown of glory.

Q. What use are we to make of Original sin?

Ans. First, we must diligently mark and observe the motions and suggestions of
it, whether arising from within us, or occasioned and caused from without us;
and then we must not be glad, but grieve at them; neither cherish, but rather
kill and crucify them. Let us therefore keep this enemy from virtuals, and
cherish and strengthen the spirit against him: and let us watch and warily
epsy in what part he assaieth to make a sallie and to assault us, and there
let us by the contrary weapons resist him. Lastly, let us always flee unto the
throne of grace, through Jesus Christ* and we shall be relieved and rescued,
and in the end gloriously delivered.

Q. What was Adams fall?

A. A voluntary transgression of the first law and order that God ordained,
whereby he fell always from God, lost his image, and betaine a slave to sin
and Satan, and so exposed himself and all (that were to be borne of him and
succeed him) to everlasting damnation.

Q. What was the matter or object of Adams sin?

A. The eating of the forbidden fruit or apple. Genesis 3.6. and 7.


Q. How could the eating of an apple (though never so much forbidden) deserve
so great misery and punishment?

A. We must not rate and esteem the offense by the baseness of the outward
object, but by the inconceivable dignity of Gods infinite majesty offended,
and by the high contempt of Gods strict prohibition. Lastly, this sin could
be by no other means satisfied, nor Gods wrath appeased, but by the
invaluable ransom of Jesus Christ his death and obedience.

Q. Who was the isntrumental cause of Adams fall?

A. The Devil, who by the beauty and bait of an apple, Gen 3. v. 4.5.6.
and by lying suggestions, entice and draw him to disobedience.

Q. What was the formal or inward cause of the fall of Adam?

A. The blinding and corrupting of his mind, will, and affections, whereupon
he believed not Gods threatenings, but willingly assented to Satan's temptation.

Q. Did not God forsake our first Parents before their fall?

A. Yes undoubtedly: for God by his power could have preserved them from fault
and fall.

Q. How did God leave and forsake the^?

A. First, by withdrawing from them (for he is bound and indebted to none) the
sunshine of his knowledge and grace. Secondly, by denying them strengthening and
confirming grace.

Q. Why did God permit their fall?

A That he might draw good out of evil, and might hereby make known the
glory of his power and justice in the damnation of the reprobate, Rom 9.22.
and the glory of his mercy in the salvation of the elect.

Q. What is the guilt of their sin?

A. A firm and strait binding over, and endangering of himself, and all his
posterity to eternal punishment.

Q. How can it stand with Gods justice so to impute Adams sin and fall to all
his posterity, that they must be punished and smart for it?

A. It may, and does stand with Gods justice very well: for first, when Adam
sinned, all his posterity and offspring was in his loins, from whom they were
by the course of nature to issue, Romans 5.16.
and therefore with him they received part of his guilt; for the sin of the
head (so far forth as it is the head) is deservedly imputed to the whole
body: as we may see the truth hereof in David, who, because he being a King, 2.
Chr. 21. v. 14.
and (in the pride of his heart) would needs number the people, threescore and
ten thousand of his good subjects perished by the pestilence for it. Secondly,
quia contrariorum contraria est ratio, we may evidently see and observe the
certainety of this point by the contrary. For even as whatsoever Christ, as the
head of all the elect, Ephesians. 2.6. Ephesians. 5. v. 26. and 27.
and Church, suffered and performed for the Church, is imputed to it: so
whatsoever Adam as the stockfather, and beginning of mankind lost, is imputed
to all his posterity: and no marvel, seeing that he represented all their
persons, and did by his offense, as a certain gate, convey all that was evil
in him to all that did, or ever should succeed him. Lastly, as Adam received
the Image of God, that is, illumination, holiness, righteousness, for himself,
and his posterity; so he lost it for himself and his offspring: and therefore
as they should have been heirs of his happiness, commodities, and rewards if
he had continued in his innocence; so since his fall, they must be partakers
of his guilt, burden and punishment.

Objection. But Adams sin was proper to his own person, how then could it be
imputed to his posterity?

A. Adam in this action is not to be considered as a private person (for then
he should have smarted for his own sin only,) but he must be esteemed as an
active, and common beginning, yea, and as the root, head, and first instrument
of mankind; and therefore what good he received from God, or what evil else
where, he received it as well for them that were to come of him, as for himself.

Q. Is sin derived from the parents to the children?

A. Yea verily, for the parents beget them, Psalm. 51.5.
and their mothers conceive them in sin.

Q. But how do parents convey, transfuse, and derive corruption into all their
children?

A. First by the law of generation, whereby one person begets another; or,
by the seed and generation of the parents: for this is the instrument by which
sin is derived: and therefore the seed of man being corrupted, so is, and
needs must be the children also. For (according to the principles of nature)
the begetter does communicate his nature to the thing begotten.

Secondly, this birth-infection inuadeth the mind and understanding, and so
stretches and extends it self to the whole body.

Objection. Heb. 12. v. 9. Zach. 12.1.
How can parents by carnal generation infuse into and derive original
corruption unto their children, seeing that by warrant of Scripture, and the
consent of the most excellent Divines, both ancient and latter, the Parents do
not beget, but God does daily create new souls in the bodies prepared and
fitted for them: but God is just, and cannot be the author of si^ne?

A. Albeit God continually create new souls, and that without sin, yet he
does create them in weakness, and in the very moment of creation he
forsakes them and leaves them, imputing Adams sin unto them.

Secondly, the soul receives contagion by the body in which it is seated: for
as a precious and costly ointment is soon marred and corrupted, Simile
(as daily experience teaches) by an unsweet and a fusty vessel: so is the
soul corrupted by the sinful body.

Lastly, the soul and body (by common consent and practice) bring forth sin;
for there is so near a familiarity between them, that the one does gratify the
other.

Q. But why does God suffer sin to dwell and remain in the most holy and
regenerate men that live in the earth?

A. First, to humble and afflict them. Secondly, that they may know what sin
brings them unto, and what grace affords. Lastly, that they may always
run unto God for help and pardon.

Q. What use are we to make of this deriuatiue pollution?

A. 1. Use. We must lay aside al pride and self-conceit, and with all
humbleness, acknowledge our uncleanness.

Secondly, we must not so curiously search how the fire of original sin came,
as to be careful how to quench it; nay we must labor betimes to quench and put
out the first sparkles of this fire, Ioh. 4.4.
lest if prevailing flame out and utterly consume us.

Lastly, we must in this life be regenerate and borne anew of water and the
holy Ghost, and therefore flee unto Christ our Savior for pardon of our
sins, and for further grace, or else we shall never enter into his kingdom.

Q. What is the actual sin?

A. Every thought, word, and deed, whether in committing evil, or in leaving
good undone, that is against the will and law of God.

Q. Whence flows or proceeds it?

A. From the fountain and root of original corruption; for it is a
deriuatiue from it, and a fruit of it.

Q. Does it any way aggrauate and increase original sin?

A. Yes; for it daiely increases the guilt and punishment of it, and (if faith
and repentance prevent not) deserves, and procures the greater torment in
hell, for as there are degrees of sin; Ma. 11.24. Luc. 12.47
so God in his justice has accordingly appointed and ordained semblable
degr^es of punishment.

Ephesians. 4. verse. 18.
Q What is the cause of Actual sin?

A. The next and immediate cause is man's corrupt mind, will, and affections:
for these are the working instruments and command the action, and therefore as
sparks proceed from the burning coals, as rust from the iron, and venim from
the Aspe; so does actual sin flow from our sinful and degenerate nature.

Q. What are the outward causes or occasions of Actual sin?

Luke 22. ver. 3.4.
A. Four specially: First, the suggestion and temptaton of the Devil,
provoking and enticing men thereunto.

Luke 7.1.
Secondly, the scandals and bad examples of wicked men offending them.

Matthew. 13. verse. 21.
Thirdly, troubles and persecutions, through which many men are drawn to unjust
practices, yea and to fall away from sound faith and true religion. Ibid. v.
22. 1. Tim. 6. ver. 17.


Lastly, profits and pleasures, which drown men in destruction, and cause them
to forget God and themselves.

Q. How is Original sin to be distinguished from Actual transgression?

A. Many ways: First original corruption is bred and borne in us and with us,
but Actual sin is borne afterward.

Secondly, Original sin is the root, but Actual sin the fruit: Original
sin the cause, but Actual the effect: Original sin is the mother, but
Actual the daughter.

Lastly, in Actual sin, the matter does not remain but passes away (for
when a man has committed blasphemy, adultery, murder, etc. the action
forthwith cease, though the offense of God, Romans 3.11
and the guilt still remain) but in original sin, the matter manifestly
remains; Romans 7.18.
hereupon we naturally, yea and daily run and rush into sin, and are
backward and untoward to the performance of any good thing that God requires.

CHAP. 2. Of the punishment of Sin.
Question.

WHat follows sin?

A. Temporal and eternal punishment. Romans 6.23


Q. Are the temporal punishments of sin inflicted upon mankind, curses,
satisfactions to Gods justice, and the forerunners of everlasting damnation?

A. They are such in their own nature and original, and such in all the
reprobates, yea they are no other then curses to the elect so long as they are
unregenerate and under the ministry of the Law. Gal. 3.10.
For cursed is he that does not continue in all things that are written in the
book of the Law to do them.

Q. But what are these temporal plagues, and punishments to the believing and
regenerate?

A. They are not (to speak properly) the punishment of their sins, nor part
of the eternal curse, and therefore no satisfactions to the rigor of Gods
justice: for Christ by his death and obedience has fully satisfied his fathers
justice, removed from them the curse of the law, Gal. 3.13.
yea and delivered them, Heb. 2. ver 15.
which for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage: Heb. 12.
ver. 11.
they are therefore not curses, but corrections, not punishments, but
preservatives unto them, and not the broad way that leads to destruction, 2.
Sam. 12.
but the narrow way that tends unto life. Act. 14.22.

Q. But seeing that Christ has made satisfaction for sin, Romans 3. v. 25.26.
2 Cor. 5.19.
and their sins are not imputed to them, but pardoned, why does not God as
well (and eodem instanti) take away the chasticement, as the Sin?

A. First, because certain seeds of corruption, certain sparkles of
concupiscence, and certain roots of sin, in part abide, and will abide in
them, so long as they live in this mortality, which Christ the Physician of our
souls must needs correct, yea and mortify by the bitter pills, and
purgations of affliction. Secondly, because the bitter memory of sin
committed, remains in the minds of them that love God, 2 Cor. 7. v. 11. Math.
14. v. 5. and 8.
which cannot but grieve and molest them.

Thirdly, the wicked who are Satan's impes, and Gods rods, do always seek, and
if they find, they take any occasion to vex and trouble Gods children. Apoc.
12.12.

Q. What instruction gather you hence?

A. That man's nature is vile and imperfect, and that the sin that arises out
of it, and from it, is very hateful, and horrible in Gods sight; for he will
not let it escape, and pass uncorrected in his dear Children, no, nor in the
sucking Infants that are free from the committing of actual sin; Romans 5. v.
14.
for they are subject to diseases, pains, and unto death, as well as men of
years.

CHAP. III. Of the Cross or Tribulation.
Question.

WHat is the Cross?

Psalm. 75.10. Math. 20.23. Luke 9.23.
Ans. It is that cup or measure of affliction that God does ordain and appoint
out unto every one of his children that lives in this world.

Q. Is then no child of God exempted and freed from the Cross?

A. No certainly, for every Christian has the procuring cause of the cross.
1. Sin in himself, whch cannot but much affect and afflict every child of
God, who is troubled at nothing so much as at the offense of God.

Secondly, Aug. ser. 45.
Vita nostra est bellum, non triumphus, our life is a warfare, and not a
triumph. Et (cuiuslibet) Christiani vi^^, qui secundum Euangelium vixerit, Max
in ser. de Martyr.
crux est atque Martyrium: that is, the life of a Christian, who lives
according to the Gospel, is a Cross and Martyrdom.

Q. What shall we judge of them that have experience of no Crosses, neither
inward nor outward?

A. They are Bastards, Heb. 12.8. Apoc. 13.19.
and no Sons of God, for God chastises every Son whom he loves.

Secondly, God does not in mercy spare, and exempt them, but distrust them;
neither does he favor them but refuse them, and cassiere them as unprofitable,
and unserviceable.

Q. What use are we to make of this point?

A. We must never vainly dream of the continuance of outward prosperity and
happiness; for this is one of the peculiarities and prerogatives of the Church
triumphant in heaven: but we must in our ease and prosperity, look for
trouble, trial, and adversity, and prepare our selves against it, that when it
comes, we may more holily and happily undergo, and overcome it.

Q. Then the Cross is good and profitable for Gods children, is it not?

A. Yes, for God in his love, mercy and wisdom does temper, Genesis 45. v. 4.
and 5.
order, and dispose it to their temporal and eternal profit, 2. Cor. 1.9.
peace and comfort. Hos. 5.15. Ier. 31.18. Heb. 12.11 Psalm. 50 5. Ioh. 15.2.
For it is the School of experience, the Field of Patience, the wrestling place
of glory, the life and reviving of Gods graces, and (in a word) the exercise of
a Conqueror.

Q. For what special ends does God exercise his children with the Cross?

A. First, if they have fallen, or committed some gross sin, (as did David
and others) God does correct and chastise them for their amendment, 1 Cor.
11.31.
and for the killing of pride, worldliness, licentiousnes, and other sins
sometime prevailing against them. For hereby the Lord remoueth the mist of
error from their eyes, that they may see their former follies and what is
acceptable in Gods sight: he hereby, as by a fire purifieth their hearts from
the dross of corruption, and by this wind fanneth them from the chafe of
vanity.

Secondly, Psalm. 119.67.
he snibbing and displing them for sins committed, does prevent sin to come,
and makes them better to look to themselves for the time to come, Ioh. 5.14.
lest a worse thing happen unto them; Hos. 5.15.
yea, and more to depend upon him for grace, and supportance. And herein God
may be compared to a skilful physician: for as the Physician sometime lets a
man blood, not that he should be sick, but to preserve him from sickness: so
God does now and then deprive and rid us of those delights, profits, and
pleasures, which would otherwise be the matter, tinder and nourishment of
sin in us.

Thirdly, God does hereby (as it were) bring them upon the stage and theater,
and make known to themselves and others, that they may be lights and guids of
godliness to the dark and blind world, that they may be mirrours of admiration,"
and patterns of constancy and patience to the people: Comparisons.
For as the Mariners skill is tried and made manifest in a tempest: the
captains valor and wisdom in the battle: and the Physicians experience
and cunning in the curing of a desperate disease; so are the graces and virtues
of the godly, and the sweet sent and perfume thereof made known in adversity.
Afflictions to them are like unto the spring-showers, which cause the buds and
blossoms of Gods graces to appear and show forth themselves.

Hos. 5.15. Psalm 30.8.
Fourthly, God by afflictions does exercise, cherish, revive, and increase his
graces in them. For Crosses are (by Gods gracious disposition) so many
whetstones to sharpen the dull and blunt edge of their affections, so many
bellowses to enkindle and increase in them the gifts and graces of God; and
they are so many A^arams of his judgments to awaken them out of the sleep of
security, and to prepare them against the spiritual battle. Ioh 9.3. Math. 8.
v. 26. 2. Cor. 4.10.


Fifthly, God by afflictions and crosses does seasonably make known the glory of
his power, truth, and goodness in their temporary and eternal help and
deliverance.

Lastly, God does bring all their troubles to a final, and to a most blessed
issue and conclusion: for he does bring them through the red sea of
affliction, Act. 14.23.
and through the wilderness of this worlds temptations, unto the heavenly
Canaan, where they have happy and everlasting rest.

Q. But seeing that the most wicked and reprobate do suffer the same evils and
troubles that Gods children do in every particular (grief for sin, and
persecution for Christ his sake, only excepted) why should not the ends,
effects and events be the same in them as in the godly and elect?

A. First, because the persons of the elect are accepted with God, they are the
gold that is not consumed, Exo. 3. v. 2.
but made more pure and bright by afflictions fire; but the very persons of the
reprobate are refused, being ordained to hatred, and they are as dross that is
wholly consumed by the sire of affliction.

Secondly, God did never in his everlasting counsel, purpose and intend to
refine and reform by afflictions the vessels of wrath (for who then could
resist his decree?) neither do the reprobates at any time, by pure means, and
in an holy manner, endeavor the same.

Thirdly, the reprobate being void of the spirit of grace and sanctification,
do never in right manner acknowledge Gods hand that strikes them; but with
the impenitent thief that reviled Christ, Ier. 5.3.
they fret and fume, they murmur and repine against God and his judgments.

Lastly, the reprobates are made worse by afflictions; and their corruptions
hereby more break out. For as the wind does not suppress but increase the
flaming fire, and as the oil (though a liquid matter) does not cool the
furnace, but the more heat it: so affliction and adversity does not amend the
unbelievers, but (through their own fault and corruption) make them the worse.
Contrarily Gods children by reason of grace prevailing in them, do in their
troubles comfortably call upon God, they patiently subject themselves to his
correction: Heb. 4.16.
finally, they find help in time of need and praise God for it.

Q. What motives have we unto patience?

Luke 21.19
A. First, we are commanded to possess our souls by our patience.

Secondly, we have the example of Gods Saints in all generations for our
imitation; and therefore as God armed the^ with patience, so we must not doubt
but he will us, if we beg it at his hand^.

Thirdly, hereby we frustrate the expectation of our enemies, and are more
then conquerours over them; Romans 8.37
for in the spirit of zeal and strength, we challenge and defy them.

Fourthly, we must remember that our sins have deserved far greater
crosses and corrections (for every sin, seeing it is committed against an
infinite Majesty, does in it own nature deserve death) and therefore we must
the more patiently endure smaller crosses.

Fifthly, we by impatiency highly offend our God, and cause him to handle us
more roughly, then he would otherwise do.

Lastly, if we constantly wait Gods leisure, and entreat his help, he will
either increase our strength or decrease our cross, Psalm. 37.
he will either amend us by it, or else end it.

Q. What heavenly nepenthes or doctrine have you against the Cross?

A. First, it proceeds from the special providence and heavenly disposition
of God, Isa. 45.7.
for he creates evil (namely, Lam. 3 37.
of punishment) who is he then that says, and it comes not to pass, Apoc.
3.19
and the Lord commands it not?

Secondly, the cross is the ensign and ornament of Gods children, Act. 14.22.
their cup, their part and portion, and the rode way to heaven.

Thirdly, the cross does dead and destroy sin in us, and mortifieth evil
affections. Similitudes.
It is like lightning and thunder to purge the corrupted air of our hearts and
minds. It is a file to scour away rust from our souls, a purgation to expel
ill humors, and like the gold smiths fire, to consume the dross of vanity in
us.

Fourthly, it does exercise and cause to grow and increase the fruits of the
spirit and the precious graces of faith, hope, love, A similitude.
repentance, patience: for as snow and frost by containing the inward heat in
the earth and increasing it, causes the seed cast into it to spring more
prosperously: so the gifts and graces of Gods children the more that by the
cross they seem to be smothered and suppressed, the more they break forth
and are increased.

Fifthly, God will hereby try the faith of his children toward his majesty,
their love toward their afflicted brethren, and their patience toward
themselves.

Sixthly, God is with his in trouble, in fire and water, Isa. 43.2.
he comfort and strengthens them, he perfecteth his power in their
infirmities, Psalm 30.11.12.
and at length turns their sighs into singing, their mourning into mirth,
and their trouble into triumph.

Lastly, Romans 8.17.
the afflictions of this present life are not worthy of the glory that is to be
revealed.

Q. What duties are we to perform under the Cross?

A. They either respect God, or our afflicted brethren.

Q. What duties must we perform toward God?

A. First, we must submit our selves patiently unto his discipline and
correction, Heb. 10.36.37.
otherwise if we strive and struggle against God, we offend him, and so
increase our pain and trouble, no otherwise then he that strugleth with a
burden on his shoulders, does the more afflict and disease himself.

Secondly, Psalm 37.7.8.9.
we must repose our whole confidence in him, and wait his leisure until he
have mercy on us.

Psa. 115.1.
Lastly, when God has delivered us, we must return unto him all the glory and
praise of it: for this is the tribute that we owe unto him, and the impo^^ that
he requires at our hands.

Q. What duties must we perform to our afflicted brethren?

A. First, we must neither judge wi^ked and ungodly men to be blessed and
happy, because they live (for the present) in pomp, pleasure, and prosperity,
nor falsely and foolishly censure and condemn the nation and generation of
Gods children (that sincerely serve him, and are dear unto him) by reason of
their present adversities, maladies and miseries: for ordinarily) the wicked,
in who^ God has no portion* receive all their pleasure and comfort in this
life, and the godly here feel all their pain and suffer all their miseries,
that the wicked in the world to come may inherit vengeance, and the godly
eternal joy and happiness.

Secondly, far be it from us to disdain, despite or despise Gods children
in tribulation, 1. Cor. 2.26.
much less let us aggraua^ their afflictions, but let it be our practice to
co^dole with them, to pity, pray for and refresh and relieve them. Heb. 13.3.
Am. 6.6

CHAP. IIII. Of common crosses, and particularly of war, foreign and
domestical.
Question.

HOw are crosses to be divided and distinguished?

A. They are either such public and private evils, which are common to Gods
children with the wicked, or such temptations, crosses and troubles that are
proper and peculiar to Gods servants.

Q. Which are those public evils to which good men and evil are
indifferently subject?

A. War, plague, famine, oppression, losses, poverty, cosenage, or deceit, it.

Q. With what comfortable persuasions shall we solace, and support our selves
in time of war?

A. Albeit hostility and war is a sore judgment, 1. Chr. 21.13.
and the sword be more grievous the^ either famine or pestilence, yet Gods
children want not their consolations. 1 Chr. 21.13. Ezec. 14. v. 21. 1 Kin.
8.35 36*
For first, the sword of the enemy comes not by chance, but by Gods direction
and appointment, and that not only for the trial and exercise of Gods
children, but for the punishment and destruction of his enemies.

Secondly, the enemies rage and fury is not of a boundless extent, but
limited, restrained, and ordered by the divine providence for our good.

Thirdly, though our enraged enemies do or may sometimes (yet not without Gods
permission) kill our bodies, Math. 10. v. 28.
yet they cannot kill our souls, nor deprive them of Gods favor, and his
kingdom.

Fourthly, neither sword, war, nor persecution can part the godly from their
indissoluble union with Christ, Romans 8. v. 38.
nor take them out of Gods hands and protection.

Fifthly, if our cause be good, if the defense of our selves be undertaken by
advise and counsel, and withal we call upon God for valor, 2 Chapter 20.15.
wisdom and victory, the success cannot be but good, neither need we fear
the great multitude against us; for the battle is not ours, but the Lords.

Sixthly, though God sometimes, (to show his justice, that he does not wink at
sin, but punish it) uses the enemies malice in the temporal overthrow of
his children, yet he does withal show his mercy in rescuing and saving many,
and in turning the punishment of sin in his children, into a medicine and
sovereign salve.

Lastly, God by the evils of war, will cause us more to desire peace and
quietness, and when we have obtained it, the more to esteem it, and to be
thankful to God for it. For as the nights darkness makes the light of the
Sun more desirable; as valleys set out the mountains, and the champion
country commends the woodland: so does war declare and make known the
excellency of peace.

Q. But what if in a lawful war and in a good quarrel, we now and then be
foiled and overthrown, how shall we comfort our selves? and what course shall
we take?

A. First, Ios. 7. v. 21.
we must know that (by reason of Achans sin that had stolen a Babylonish
garment, two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold,) the Israelites
were put to flight by the men of Ai: Iud. 20. v. 21. and 25.
and the Beniamites twice overcame the Israelites that had a good cause,
because they fought not in faith, nor repented them of their sins, as they did
afterward: wherefore we must repent us of our sins (before we go to war)
and undertake the just defense of our selves in humility, and not in
presumption of mind.

Secondly, though once, or the second time, we be overthrown in war, yet
we must not be daunted and discouraged, Deuteronomy. ^0. v. 3. and. 4.
but only repent of sin, and seek help at Gods hand, and God will go with
us, and fight for us.

Thirdly, Gods children may (for their correction and trial) as well be foiled
in fighting in defense of a just cause and quarrel; as have ill success, and
be crossed in other matters.

Fourthly, the experience of our overthrows in battle, will make us more
expert and advised for the time to come.

Fifthly, (though for the time) we have lost the day; yet we must comfort our
selves in this, that we have not lost our faith, our cause, our wisdom, our
virtue, our noble resolution and fortitude, and therefore we must (against the
next encounter) entreat the Lord to go out with our armies, and to guide and
prosper us.

Sixthly, it is better for us sometimes, to have the overthrow in war, then to
triumph over our enemies: for if all things fall out according to our desires,
we would soon put out of our hearts all fear of God, and grow secure, proud,
and arrogant, ascribing all the glory of the victory not to God the only
cause, and the only author of it, (for he alone is the Lord of hosts) but to
the isntrumental causes, and to our selves only, and therefore God will by
some foil and overthrow prevent this erroneous arrogance.

Seventhly, though we loose the day, and receive the overthrow in battle,
Petrarch. de remediis vtr. fort.
yet we have not lost the conscience of our good service, the liberty of our
mind, nor the glory of our skill.

Lastly, as the barrennes of the earth teaches the husbandman skill, the often
arising of storms add tempests, makes the Pilot and Mariner wise to decline
the annoiance of them, and frequent falls makes the rider wary: So sundry
foiles and ouerthrows in battle, make Gods children more politic and
provident, yea, and much more to humble themselves before God, and to implore
and entreat his hand and help.

Q What duties must we perform in the time of war and hostility?

A. First, we are to be expert and old beaten soldiers in the spiritual
battle against the world and wickedness, and against the Devil and death:
Ephe. 6.13
and if herein we putting on the whole armor of God, quit our selves like
me^, other wars shall neither terrify nor trouble us.

Secondly, we must search the Scrip^tures, and by the^ examine the lawfulnes of
our defiance or resistance, and if ou^ quarrel and conscience be good, the
issue cannot be evil.

Thirdly, we must not be careless and secure in the greatest peace and
prosperity, seeing that wars come many times when they are least dreaded or
doubted.

Judge 7.3.
Fourthly, the Captains and soldiers must be trained up in the feats of
war, Deu 20.3.4.
and in all policies and stratagemes, they must be valorous: the Ministers
must exhort them to be courageous in Gods cause, and they must call upon God,
and depend upon his power and promise for success, and then al shall go well
with them. And what if their bodies be slain? yet the truth still remains,
and their souls shall live for ever.

Lastly, the Princes, Ministers, and people at home must renew their faith, and
repentance, and their covenant with God, and then the enemies shall fall before
them.

Q. How shall the servants of God comfort themselves against civil war?

A. Mat 24.6.7.
First, that this evil comes from God in his justice: for when the greater
sort refuse to make their peace with God, and to reconcile themselves to
Christ, and when they despise the doctrine of salvation, God does so forsake
them, that they by vprores and mutual dissensions devour and destroy one
another.

Secondly, it is a common evil, and therefore the more patiently to be endured.

Thirdly, God has defined and determined the beginning, manner, and end of it,
and does try and exercise only those that are his children by it.

Fourthly, as all worldly things are mortal and mutable, so have Cities, and
great States and Kingdoms their maladies, and diseases, creeping and growing
upon them, wherefore private grudges and civil wars often befall them.

Fifthly, in what places now are goodly and fair towns, and cities, there have
been in times past, woods, forests, wildernesses, and so may and will be
hereafter.

Lastly, a resolved Christian that sees civil wars in their true face and
hue, puts away childish fear, Lipsius de Co^st.
and is no more broken at them, then the house top is with the hail dashing
against it.

Q. What duties are we to perform in time of civil war?

A. First, let us not abuse our present peace and prosperity when we enjoy it.

Secondly, it behooves us to bewail, and forsake our sins, that bring all
these evils into the world.

Thirdly, we must be wary and provident that we be not so many firebrands to
nourish the flame of civil contention, lest we smart for our folly, an^ when
it is once begun, we must endeavor by supplication, rebukes, admonitions,
threatenings, and promises to suppress and quench it.

Fourthly, if we must, or needs will take parts, then it is our wisdom, and
justice to take part with the best cause and persons, and to pray unto God for
counsel and assistance: 2 Chapter 14.11
and then God can and will give victory (when it pleases him) as well by a
few, as by many.

Fifthly, let us beseech the almighty to grant repentance to the authors of it,
and to save our country.

Lastly, for as much as civil wars proceed from the ignorance of Christ,
and from the contempt and disobedience of the Gospel, we must for the ceasing
and remoouall of this evil, make our peace with God and entertain his word
with more delight and devotion.

CHAP. VI. Of the Plague or Pestilence.
Question.

IS the plague and pestilence of our time, contagious and infections?

A. Yes, questionless: for first as the leprosy amongst the Jews infected
not only men's persons, but also their garments, and their very habitations: so
does the plague, as experience proves it.

2. Sam. 24.17.
Secondly, although the plague be Gods special hand, and his destroying
Angel, yet it comes not immediately by the sensible touch of an heavenly
Angel; for if it did so come, it were extreme vanity, and madness it self, to
shun the infected persons and places; but (ordinarily) by outward means and
occasions: this to be true, experience teaches, that very many by declining
the infected places and persons, have been saved and preserved.

Thirdly, sundry persons not infected, have been so kept by physic
preservatives; and many infected persons have been cured by medicines and
plasters; but if God had immediately stricken the^ from heaven, 2. Sam. 24.15
(as he did 70000. of David's people) they had all died without recovery.

Q. But why are not all tainted and infected that live amongst the visited
parties and persons?

A. First, all persons are not (by reason of their natural constitution*) apt
to take the infection. Secondly, God so rules and restrains the plague, that
it shall touch none, nor in any further degree then God has appointed. Lastly,
the execution of charitable duties about the visited, preserves many, and
fervent prayer delivers sundry persons.

Q. Is it lawful for any man to flee the infection?

A. Yes: for albeit Magistrates, necessary officers, and they that are pastors
of the visited congregatio^s may not flee, yet they that either are fearful,
or freed from their ordinary calling, (for they are not bound, being in no
public, and necessary office) may lawfully flee: for first a man may preserve
himself by flight, so that he nothing hurt another, A man may shun dangers of
the like nature as war, famine, waters, fires, and why not then this
judgment?

Thirdly, there is less danger of infection, when the concourse of people is
abated and diminished.

1. Objection. They that fly cannot but distrust Gods watchful providence.

A. The fault is not in the action, but in the person, because he distrusteth.

2. Objection. Ob. But it is offensive for a man ^o flee.

A. The offense is taken and not given.

3. Objection. Ob. Whatsoever is against the rule of charity is unlawful: but
to flee, and so forsake our neighbor, is against the rule of charity, ergo.

A. Our neighbor is not forsaken so long as he wants the help neither of
Magistrate, nor of kinsfolk, and other friends.

4. Objection. Mat. 25. v. 43.
Ob. But we are to visit the sick, and that by Gods commandment.

A. Leprous persons were excepted amongst the Jews, and why not then the
plaguie persons in our days? seeing that this disease is no less contagious.

Q. What is the duty of them that flee?

A. First, they must seriously repent of their sins, else God will correct them
in some other kind (if not in this).

Secondly, they must earnestly entreat the Lord by prayer to stay his heavy
hand, and to be merciful to the visited.

Lastly, they must willingly contribute money to the visited.

Q. What is the duty of them that abide at home?

A. They must not be secure and desperate (for oftentimes, Gods most excellent
servants are not only tainted and infected with, but also die of the plague)
but humble themselves under Gods hand, and endeavor by prayer and repentance
to pacify and put away Gods displeasure.

Secondly, they ought not censoriouslie to condemn, but charitably to judge of
them that fly from infected places and persons: for, many of them are not tied
to be resident by any special calling, and many (specially those that live by
their labors and by their trades) have no sufficient means at home to
maintain them and theirs withal.

Q. Why does God sometimes in one Country, or other, cut down and destroy so
many thousands of men, by the sword of plague and pestilence?

A. First, if God, now and then should not take this strict course, the number
of men, (especially amongst Turks, Papists, Pagans,) would exceed: for
ordinarily men are faster borne then they die, and hereupon God thrusts in
his reaping hook, and cutteth down certain thousands, when the places where
they live and are resident, could not otherwise well contain, much less
maintain them.

Secondly, to snib and control the pride and presumption of such, who (with
David when he numbered the people) glory and rest in their multitudes and
millions: 2. Sam. 24. v. 1. and 15.
hereupon he to repress their vain confidence, and to cure general and
desperate sins, abateth and lesseneth those numbers and multitudes.

Q. What meditations are meet for to comfort Gods children in the time of a
general infection by the plague or pestilence?

A. First, the plague is not casual and contingent, but is from God and in his
disposition, so that none die and depart this life, sooner or latter, in
greater or smaller number then God permits and has preordaianed.

Secondly, in the time of the old Testament, in the time of the Apostles, and
in every age since, (in one place, part, province or other) Gods dearest
servants have felt the contagion and noisomnesse of it, and sundry of them have
died of this visitation.

Thirdly, it is a more mild, gentle, and sufferable chastisement, then either
war or famine: for in the beginning, progress and disposition of it, God
rather works by himself then uses the ministry of men, and who in judgment
remembers mercy; but men when they are made the instruments to chastise us, so
follow the violent stream of their own corrupt affections, that they show
themselves destitute and deprived of all mercy and moderation.

Fourthly, when God does by the plague correct us, he will try and prove our
faith in his powerful and gracious providence: our tender compassion toward
our distressed brethren, and our thankfulness toward them that either by
public authority, or, of their charitable disposition attend upon us, and that
minister to our necessities.

Fifthly, God does in the greatest infection when the plague most rages,
preserve very many, and especially those that are employed about charitable
offices which concern the visited.

Lastly, Gods children that die by this visitation are as blessed as they that
(...) by the common course of nature; for the Angels carry their souls into
Abraham's bosom.

Q. What duties are the visited persons to perform?

A. First, they must commend themselves to God, who will for Christ his sake,
be merciful unto them.

Secondly, they must (whiles that there is any hope of life, and whiles they
have opportunity) use preservatives, medicines, physic, restoratiues, (for so
did Ezechias:) but if they perceive the fatal hour to be come, they must
willingly, and confidently commend their spirits into Gods hands.

Thirdly, if they be parents and masters of families, they must exhort their
children, kinsfolk and servants, to the profession and practice of godliness
and virtue: for the last words that such utter, do (commonly) leave the
deepest impression in the hearts and minds of their chlidren, friends and
servants.

Lastly, it they recover of the plague, they must be thankful unto God, Psalm.
66. v. 14.
pay unto him the vows which their lips have promised and their mouth has
spoken in affliction; and for the time to come they must fear afterclaps, and
beware lest a worse thing do heareafter befall them.

CHAP. VI. Of dearth and famine.
Question.

WHat is famine?

A. Gods scourge, for manifest and notorious sins and enormities.

Q. Who is the inflicter of it?

A. God: for it comes not by fortune or chance, Psalm. 107.34. Psa. 105 16
Amos 4.6.
but God calls for it, a^ may appear by infinite places of Scripture. 2.
Chron. 7. verse. 13. Deuteronomy. 28.38 Ier. 14.16.

Q. What are the outward means, causes and instruments of dearth and famine?

A. They are diverse; as sometimes ba^cennesse of the ground, sometimes drought
and heat (as in Iudeo and those Easterly countries) sometimes (as in our
nation of England) unseasonable weather and immoderate rain, sometimes the
Canker, the Palmer worm, the Grasshopper, sometimes hail, storms, whirlewindes,
and oftentimes war and hostility; lastly, surfeiting, drunkenkennes pride, or
excess in meat, drink, apparel in all ranks and orders of men.

Q. Who are principal outward means to increase dearth and famine?

A. Amongst the rest, enclosers of ground, when they convert so much a^able
ground into pasture* that there is not ground enough for tillage. Secondly,
monopolists or ingrossers. Thirdly, badggers and forestallers. Fourthly,
hoarders of Corn. Fifthly, transporters of it beyond the Seas. Lastly,
oppressors of the poor, namely such as either deny them their wages, or take
and retain their pawns and pledges, or those that upon advantage of the
pooremans distress, buy his land, goods, living, etc.

Q. What is the deserving and procuring cause of dearth and famine?

A. Sin and disobedience in general.

Q. What are the particular sins which move the Lord to send dearth and
famine?

Ans. First, Leu. 25.14.
Idolatry and corruption of Gods service and worship, Deuteronomy. 28. 11.

Secondly, Atheism, and the contempt of Preaching, Ier. 11.21.22.

Thirdly, when men being addicted to the world and their own gain, Agg. 2.4.9.
do altogether neglect the building of Gods house, and the reformation of his
Church.

Fourthly, Perjury, false oaths, and the breaking of lawful oaths.

Fifthly, Esa. 5.9.10.11.
covetousness, oppression of the poor, and enclosing of the common grounds.

Ier. 34.
Sixthly, cruelty toward the poor^ and the wronging of them by fals^ waights
and measures, Micah. 6.10.

Seventhly, pride in Princes and R^lers, 2. Sam. 24.

Eighthly, surfeiting and drunkenness. Joel 1, 5.

Mal. 3.9.10.11.
Lastly, neglect of tith-paying and of maintaining the holy Ministry.

Q. Why does God this way sundry times try and chastise his own children who
do not sin contemptuously, o^ with an high hand as wicked men do?

A. First, there is natural corruption in them, which deserves this
chastisment, especially when (as sometimes it comes to pass) it breaks out
into blaines and gross sins.

Secondly, God by correcting them in their bodies, preuenteth in them more
grievous enormities, and saves them from eternal destruction.

Q. What use is to be made hereof?

A. Let the wicked and profane tremble, fear, and betimes return unto God:
for if God correct small faults so sharply in his own dear children, how much
more will he punish them that sin so presumptuously?

Q. What spiritual meditations are necessary to comfort our souls in time of
dearth and famine?

A. These (or the like) following. First, we must know that it is Gods hand,
and that it comes not by the will of man, much less by chance: and therefore
we must repent and patiently endure this correction.

Secondly, God by dearth and scarsitie does prevent his children from
committing many sins; such as are riot, excess, gluttony, drunkenness: for as
a Physician lets his patient blood, to prevent diseases in him: so deals
God with his children in this chasticement.

Thirdly, God in the time of dearth does not pine and starve, Ps. 33.19. Prou.
10.3
but provide for, and quicken his children and servants. Thus in time of
famine, God made Joseph the means to nourish his father Jacob, and his
brethren. Thus he fed Elias by an Angel, yea by a ravenous Raven: thus he
multiplied the oil and meal to the poor widow of Sarepta: Luke 4.26.
thus for forty years space he fed the Israelites in the wilderness with
Manna from heaven: thus God provided for Elimeleks, his wife and children, and
for the noble Sunamite, and no marvel: for if God feed the fowls of heaven,
ye^ the young Ravens that cry unto him, Ps. 147 9. Luke 15.17.
how much more will he feed his sons and servants?

Fourthly, neither in this, nor any other evil, will God tempt them abo^^
their strength, for he intends their reformation, and not their ruin: but i^
they repent and pray unto him, Psalm. 34.19.
he will mitigate, if not remove the dearth and famine, and in the mean time
feed^ them.

Fifthly, if God keep them sho^^ of these earthly things, yet he gives them
far greater gifts, namely, faith, hope, charity, assurance of salvation, etc.

Lastly, if God sometimes permit their bodies to pine, (as we have an example
in Lazarus, and in some of the persecuted Israelites, Heb. 11.37.
in the time of Antiochus) yet he does sustain their spirits with patience and
feed their souls to salvation with the hidden Manna of his word.

Q. What duties are there in such ^ distress to be practiced?

A. First, we must confess, acknowledge* and bewail our sins, Joel 2.13.
the cause thereof: we must beware that we contemn not Gods word, nor abuse
his good creatures; and we must withal entreat the Lord to lessen or take away
this plague, and (in the mean time,) suffer this correction with patience and
thankfulness.

Secondly, if all outward helps fail us, yet let us hold fast the hope of
mercy and salvation, and then we shall find ease and refreshment in our
troubles.

Thirdly, Ministers and Preachers must endeavor to make the people to feel
the greeuousnesse of the calamity, to stir them up to repentance and
patience, and exhort the rich to liberality.

Fourthly, rich men must regard, pity, and relieve the poor, they must
sacrifice on these altars, they must fill these empty vessels, and let the
fountain of their liberality run out unto them.

Lastly, magistrates and rulers, must not only provide against dearth, Neh.
5.10.
but also suppress monopolists, engrossers, badgers, transporters of grain,
hoarders of corn, etc. for Vae illis, etc. Hi sunt mercatores humanarum
calamitatum: that is, woe unto them that enhance the price of victuals, for
they are hucksters of humane miseries.

CHAP. VII. Of Oppression, Worldly losses, Poverty.
Question.

WHat comfortable theoreme^ does Gods word afford us against wrong, injury, and
oppression?

A. First, it is the part of good men (rather) to suffer injury, then to offer
it.

Secondly, the wrong done, redoundeth to the hurt of him that does it.

Thirdly, if men cannot, or will not right us, 1. These. 4.6
yet our God can and will avenge such indignities: and therefore we must commit
and commend our cause unto him, yea and wait his leisure.

Fourthly, we have the Saints of God for our companions herein: an^ therefore
we may not judge our selves forsaken, as those that are singled out to these
abuses.

Fifthly, Act. 7.3.
if Gods people do but sigh and groan under their burden, he will come
down, yea and ease and deliver them.

Sixthly, Eccl. 7.9.
oppression makes a wise man mad.

Seventhly, oppression of the innocent and the indignities offered to just men,
Iam. 5.4.
enter into the ears of the Lord of hosts, and cry to heaven for vengeance.

Seventhly, they that defraud and oppress others, must look to receive the
like measure again in Gods powerful justice.

Eighthly, God will hereby try and prove whether that we will bless them that
curse us, and he will have our virtues of love and patience, to be more eminent
and conspicuous. But if we carry a cankred affection, and (especially) if we
will requite evil with evil, then does God discover unto us our corruption,
which we must labor to pull out, if we will be the masters and conquerors of
it.

Lastly, we must meditate upon Gods gracious promises, and his just and wise
providence, which will be a means to keep us from all impatience and desire
of revenge.

Q. What duties are the wronged and oppressed to perform?

A. First, if we would redress a wrong, we must forget it.

Secondly; we must make the Judges, Justices, Luke 18.3. Romans 12.20.
and Christian magistrate, the reuengers of our wrongs: but if they fail us,
we must commit it to God, to whom vengeance belongs, and he will right us.

Thirdly, we must labor to be innocent as Doves, we must hurt none, but strive
to do good to all, and the more innocent we are, the more ease and peace shall
we find in our own souls.

Fourthly, if in a country we see the oppression of the poor, Eccl. 5.7.
and the defrauding of judgment and justice, we must not be astonished at the
matter: for on^ high that is above the high takes notice of it, nay the
highest is above them, (that is) God which is in heaven, and does excel all
men's greatness, far more incomparably, then the greatest Monarch surpasses the
meanest vassal or subject, and he does with infinite eyes, behold and view all
things. Ezech. 1.18. Zach. 3.9. and 4.9.

Lastly, we must, whatin us lies, and what we may with the testimony of a
good conscience, defend others from wrong and oppression, and then God will
stir up them that shall defend us.

Q. How shall a Christian in poverty, and in want of outward necessary things,
resolve and comfort himself?

A. Albeit poverty is in it self, a vile and miserable state of life, by
reason of the want of necessary money and riches, yet there are manifold
meditatio^s wherein the child of God is to comfort himself, as for example.

First, poverty is to Gods child not a bane, but a blessing, not a curse, but a
correction: for Christ himself our blessed Savior was borne poor, 2. Cor.
8.9.
lived poor, died poor, and that to make us rich; and shall we take that lot
grievously, whereby we may be made conformable to Christ, and grow rich in
grace?

Secondly, Apoc. 21.7
every Christian is rich, and with Christ a Lord and possessor of heaven and
earth, and of all the riches therein contained, and how then can he be poor?

Thirdly, he that is rich in grace, has the true treasure of eternal life in
his heart, and therefore he cannot be poor.

Fourthly, we lie, and live in great (...) and security; for we are freed and
disburdened from many cares, fears, and dangers: we need not fear the hurts
of fire and water; fained friends, and fawning parasites, shall not eat us up,
ill servants shall not pilfer, and purloin^ from us, nor run away with our
goods, neither shall we stand in danger of thieves and robbers; to all which
inconveniences the rich are exposed and subject.

Fifthly, we want many occasions of infection, and prouocations unto evil: for
many men are no longer good then they are poor, and therefore God denies us
riches which we would abuse to pride, vanity, covetousness, oppression, and
usury.

Sixthly, if we be content, few things are wanting, for nature is content with
a little, it desires only bread and water; and he is not poor that lives
according to nature; but a covetous worldling always is bare and needy, and
wants that he has.

Seventhly, to a rich man all mediocrity is sufficient, for he is rich being
content with his own: and he is a good scholar and proficient in Christ his
school, Phil. 4. v. 12. and 13.
having learned with S. Paul as well to want, as to abound, and that which he
wants, labor, virtue, and learning will supply.

Eighthly, poverty is a touchstone, and discovers who are faithful friends,
and who are false: who are hollow, and who are holy: for a poor man is
commonly contemned, and he will soon shrink from us, that seeks not us but
ours.

Ninthly, Pro. 30.8.
God that gives us life which is the principal, will (for the necessary
sustenance of it) give us daily bread, Psalm. 23.1.
which is the less principal; he is our father, and will feed us, and he is
our shepherd, and will suffer us to want nothing that is convenient for us.

Tenthly, Christ is our Lord, and we are his servants, and therefore he will
not forsake us, but furnish us with things needful: for if he provided for the
12. Apostles, his family, when he was in poor estate on the earth; how much
more will he provide for us being in glory, and in the actual possession of
heaven and earth?

Eleuenthly, Wealth is no part of that happy and glorious inheritance that
Christ has purchased for the Saints: it is none of our own, but another ma^^
but if it were simply bonum, it we^ bonum commune, whereof wicked (...)
ordinarily more partake then Go^^ children.

Twelfthly, it is better to be counted religious then rich, and poor then
pr^phane and impious; for poverty, religion, and blessedness, may possibly and
happily concur, but riches cannot make the possessor blessed; and riches and
godliness do but rarely consort and meet to gether in one and the same subject
and person.

Thirteenthly, riches commonly do corrupt and effeminate the mind, they like
thorns choke the seed of Gods word; they are the matter and fuel of riot,
excess, covetousness, and vanity: for they do not banish them away, but beget
them; nor extenuate them, but increase them; neither do they take away
necessities, but cause them; and therefore we have no such reason to lament the
lo^^ of them, or to be so eagerly set upon the^, but rather to lament our
sins, the cause of all our misery.

Fourteenthly, what though thou now be poor, yet God may hereafter enrich and
advance thee, Psalm. 113.7.8.
(as he did Job, David, and diverse others) for he raises the needy out of the
dust, and lifts up the poor out of the dung, that he may set him with the
princes of his people, etc.

Lastly, the poorer that we are in life, the more joyful shall we be in death:
for no man lives so poorly, that would not desire to have lived more poorly
when he dies, for he must needs part with all, and render an account to God how
he has gotten, kept, and disposed all his goods.

Q What use are we to make of poverty? or how are we to demean our selves in
it?

A. First, we must remember that heaven is our country and kingdom, and that
this life is but a pilgrimage, and the earth a place of banishment; and
therefore we must not carke and care, Col. 3.1.
toil, and moile for the things of this world, but seek the things above, and
rather labor to be rich in grace, then in goods.

Secondly, the poorer that we are, let us be so much the more humble, and by
prayer and faith purchase and hold (...) Christ that rich pearl and hidden
treasure, whereof we read in the Gospel, Math. 13.44.
^ then we can never be poor.

Thirdly, let us not contemn, mu^^ less condemn any person for his pe^ry and
poverty; for then we shall many times magnify the wicked and condemn the
generation of Gods children, Psalm. 73.15
wh^ (for the most part) are poor in these outward things; yea and we may
hereby (...) provoke God to displeasure, that he in his justice will press us
with their burdens, and leave us heartlesse and helples in our distress.

Lastly, if we want outward helps, we must desire God to supply our wants, ^
withal apply our wits to those arts o^e^ which chance has no power, and which
can never be lost; we must get godliness and virtue; which will procure riches,
but riches cannot procure them.

Q. Comforts and directions for them that either feel or fear poverty by
reason of the multitude of children.

A. First, many poor men have had many children, and have maintained a great
family, and that competently, and joyfully.

Secondly, he that feeds the birds, fowls, and beasts, will feed parents and
children, so they can believe and depend upon him; and he that gives life,
will not deny daily bread.

Thirdly, if the bringing up of many children be troublesome unto thee,
remember that no man lives without some trouble: and admit thou had no
children, yet other cares would succeed in and possess their places.

Fourthly, if thou want portions to bestow on thy sons and daughters, God
that is all-sufficient, will in time provide for them: for as he has given them
wit, and means to live, so he will give them convenient portions.

Fifthly, children are thy riches, and how can thou be poor amongst thy
riches and part of thy happiness? And hereupon Jacob calls them the children
that God of his grace had given him: Genesis 33.5.
for if thou account thy oxen, sheep, beasts, bees, menseruants, and
maidseruants for part of thy riches, shall not thy sons and daughters much
more be thus esteemed and justly accounted?

Sixthly, this is a kind of power and dominion, to have many children; and
these are like so many arrows to shoot at their parents enemies, and so many
pensioners to defend and guard thy person.

Seventhly, good children are the solace and ornament of their parents, the
ease of their labors, the renewing of their age: and what if for the present
they be poor, they may in time arise to such dignity and promotion, that they
(after the example of Joseph) may relieve and nourish their parents, brethren,
kinsfolks.

Lastly, the children of Kings, Princes, and great potentates, live not better,
longer, more contentedly, nor more safely, holily, and happily then poor men's
children: for gentry and greatness does not make them better, but many times
puffs them up, and makes them more loose and licentious.

Q. What use is to be made hereof?

A. First, thou being a poor man, must live within compass, and cut thy coat
according to thy cloth, and then the less will suffice thee.

Secondly, if thy daughters have no ioyntures, thou must endeavor to bring them
up in virtue, learning, and commendable qualities in Arts, that not so much
their money, as their modesty, their riches, as their religion, nor their
wealth, as their wisdom may be desired: for virtue makes their marriage
happy, and then they shall be matched with good men, where they shall live more
honestly and contentedly, then if they were married to Kings and Princes.

Lastly, thou must joy in the number of children, for they are the renewing of
immortality, and the preservation of thy name.

Q. What comforts are there against baseness and meannesse of parentage?

A. First, God does call to the state of grace, yea and (many times) to dignity
and honor in this world, as well the mean as the mighty, and the ^asely
descended as the honorable and noble: for he is no respecter of persons.

Secondly, a man meanly descended, if he be learned, religious, virtuous, is
the cause of nobility to his posterity, which his parents never gave him; he is
the founder of their glory, and his virtues are more conspicuous and eminent.

Thirdly, virtue only is true nobility, and therefore we must not seek from
what root a man springs, as of what disposition he is of.

Fourthly, our baptism and new birth by faith and repentance, makes us truly
noble and honorable before God, as it did the Prophets and Apostles and
others, and it takes away all note and imputation of mean birth.

Q. Propound some comforts for a regenerate man that is basely and unhonestly
borne.

A. First, some basely descended have been blessed and great instruments of
good, as Judas, Iepta, and Constantine the great.

Secondly, he must live well, and then he shall die well.

Thirdly, his first deformity is washed away in the beginning of life, by the
sacred water of Baptism; for he has God for his father, and the Church for
his Mother.

Fourthly, his parents sin does not corrupt him, except he be guilty of the
same; for they shall answer for their own sins: Ezech. 18.20.
for God does not impute the iniquity of the father to the child, nor the
iniquity of the child to the father.

Fifthly, he must seek for good things in himself, and not out of it.

Sixthly, let him live more holily and chastely, and he shall cover his parents
shame.

Seventhly, he being borne against the laws, let him do nothing against
them, but do all things according to them.

Eighthly, let other men judge of his descent, he only shall render a reason
of his behavior and life; therefore let him beware that he add no worse
thing to it.

Ninthly, the sweetness of his manners, and the renown of his life, shall
wipe out, not only the spots: but also all remembrance of his dishonest birth:
for if virtue extol him, his mean birth cannot depresse him.

Lastly, seeing that his parents have blemished and stained his birth, let him
live well and he shall die well: he has reason to be more humble and not more
heavy; for his own virtues and religious behavior* will make him more
glorious then the imputation of base birth can make him reproachful.

Q. Why does God suffer his dear children to undergo so many losses, to be
undone by fires, floods, inundations, of waters: yea and by thieves, robbers,
pirates, cousoners and ill servants, to be spoiled and deprived of their goods?

Ans. First, to free them from the love of money, and of these outward things,
which otherwise would work their ruin, for many more have perished by reason
of riches, then by the temptation of poverty.

Secondly, God hereby preuenteth many sins, into which otherwise they would
sink: for as a father takes ^ sword or a naked knife from his child, lest he
should hurt himself, so God by these above named means bereaueth his children
of riches, which they otherwise would pervert to pride, ostentatition,
covetousness, oppression and usury.

Thirdly, he would not have them to trust in these transitory trifling and
uncertain things, 1. Tim. 6.17.
but to trust in him only, who gives his all things abundantly to enjoy.

Fourthly, they (many times) suffer, their money to be idle and unfruitful*
and do no good with their present riches, but make them instruments of evil,
and therefore God does justly deprive them thereof.

Fifthly, Luke 12, 15
to weane and withdraw them from worldliness and covetousness, for it
choaketh the seed of the word; and as for worldly riches, though a man have
abundance of them (yet) his life stands not in them.

Lastly, to chastise, and correct them, and to cause them to see and be sorry
for their error, for that they in their prosperity, were puffed up and withal
slack and negligent in releeuing the necessities of their brethren; and also
(as all earthly things are changeable and vain) to make them more seriously to
seek the things above, Heb. 10.34
and that enduring substance that is laid up for them in the heavens.

Q. How and wherein shall they comfort themselves that are despoiled of their
worldly goods?

A. By considering, first, that all these outward things (to speak properly)
are none of our own, Luke 16.11.12.
and none of the true and spiritual riches which can never be taken from us:
for they are subject to the danger of thieves, robbers, fire, shipwreck, and
therefore these temporals are to be had in the less regard.

Secondly, they shall nourish no parasites, flatteres, and smel-feasts, and all
such vermin and vulturs shall never hurt them.

Thirdly, by the loss of them, they are freed from all thoughtfull care in
getting and in keeping them.

Fourthly, he that enjoys them the longest, must of necessity part with them
in death, and then he knows not what will be come of them, nor into whose
hands they will fall.

Fifthly, God can make us gainers by our losses, and restore our goods double
unto us, Job 42.10.
as he did unto patient Job.

Sixthly, al necessities and wants shall be abundantly supplied at the day of
the general Resurrection, and therefore they must in the mean time possess
their souls by their patience.

Seventhly, God has but taken away his own, and therefore we must not be
discontent with Gods doings, but be patient and thankeful.

Eighthly, ill gotten goods shall not prosper nor long continue in the thieves
or robbers hands.

Ninthly, if they be learned, they must comfort themselves in that, for they
carry it about them, and it cannot be lost. Hereupon Bias wisely said, Bia^*
omnia mea mecum porto. So also their virtues cannot be taken from them:
whereupon Stilpon the Philosopher, when his Country was taken, and his wife
and children perished in the common fire, when Demetrius the Tyrant asked him
whether he had lost ought, he answered, that he had lost nothing: for (says
he) all my goods, (1. learning and virtue) are in me.

Lastly, Seneca.
(as says an ancient Philosopher) qui se, (imo qui Christum) habet nihil
perdidit.

Q. What uses are we to make hereof?

A. First, we must persuade our selves, that all these losses and damages
fall out for our good, for God disposes them to the best advantage of them
that love him.

Secondly, Christ our blessed Savior was stripped of all that he had, 2. Cor. 8.9
and became poor to make us rich, and therefore let us not take it scornfully
to be made conformable to our blessed Savior. Let us learn and practice
patience, Heb. 10.36
that after that we have done the will of God, we may receive the promise.

Thirdly, we must look to receive evil things from God, as well as good, and
to obey God as well when he corrects us, as when he comfort, and bestows
good things upon us.

Psalm. 62. v. 8.9.10.
Fourthly, let us not trust in goods, lands, livings, money, for these will fail
us, and may soon be lost: but let us trust in the Lord who will never fail,
nor forsake us; and let us whiles we enjoy these earthly things (like good
stewards and disposers of Gods gifts, with which we are betrusted, Ecc^e. 11.
ver. 1.
) bestow a good part of them on the poor and needy, and then we shall not
loose them.

Fifthly, the loss of our precious time, (which we ought to redeem) and of
our good name, should more trouble us then the loss of our worldly wealth; and
we must much more bewail our sins, the causes of our miseries, the^ our
hindrances and losses.

Sixthly, it is certain, that the wicked that be the instruments of our decay,
or undoing, shall not long enjoy that which they have unjustly gotten from us,
but pay sweetly for them in the end.

Lastly, we must not so much look upon the outward instruments of our woe, as
unto God, who does order and turn all to our solace and salvation in the end.

CHAP. VIII. Of cosenage, falsehood, and deceit.
Question.

HOw shall they that in bargains, coin, covenants, promises, are gulled,
coosened, and ouerwraught, comfort themselves?

A. First, it is better to be deceived, then to deceive, and to be a patient
in this point then an agent: for it is simplicity, rather then sin, to be
deceived in outward matters.

Secondly, Psalm 32.1.2.
as it is a sign of a man truly regenerate to have his spirit without guile,
viz. in duties toward God and men: so it is the brand of a wicked man, and of
a corrupt disposition to be a deceiuer, and hereupon they are compared in the
Scriptures to Foxes: Ioh. 8.44.
They are liars, and therefore children of the Devil, who is the father of lies.

Thirdly, there is no man, (especially if he be an honest and a good man) that
is not in this false and cunning world deceived, beguiled, deluded, for now
craft reigns, deceit dominereth, and faith is fled out of the country.

Fourthly, the wicked by their cunning fetches, and crafty collusions show,
that they have no faith in God, nor truth of grace in their hearts; for in
scripture, crafty and deceitful men are branded and noted always for evil
men.

Fifthly, God never blesses the crafty man, but crosses and curses in the end
all his undermining and subtle practices; Pet. Raven. in quadam Epist.
whereas contrarily some live simply, and use no deceit, and these prosper in
all things.

Lastly, they that deal falsely with us, were never our friends; for then they
would not collogue with us, nor cosen us, but deal plainly and justly with us,
and why then should the displaying of falsehood so trouble us?

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, we must strive against the stream of the worlds corruption, our
hearts and words must accord, we must not make show of one thing, and do
another, like him that roweth in a boat, that turns his face one way, and
goes and is carried another way.

Secondly, God our heavenly Father, is true, plain, simple in his nature,
attributes, words, promises, etc. and deceives no man; therefore as children
borne of God, we must imitate our heavenly Father. Far be it then from us
to convert that wit and understanding that God has given us for the good of
mankind, to the hurt and undoing of others: for this is to be like the Devil,
and to become his flaues and scholars.

Thirdly, the more glosing and deceitful that men are, the more let us beware
of them, and have no familiar conuersement with them; they have honey in their
mouths, but poison in their hearts, and wiles in their works.

Fourthly, let us not believe any whose faith is suspected, and by the loss of
smaller matters, let us learn to prevent greater evils.

Lastly, let us never deal perfidiously nor falsely with others, much less lay
snares to entrap and entangle them in, Psalm. 9 v. 15.
lest we be deceived our selves, sink down into our own pits, and our feet
be taken in the net that we have hid.

CHAP. IX. Of diverse public evils, and common crosses which concern the
body, and namely, of sickness, and death.
Question.

WHat is sickness?

A. It is the disproportion of the four Elements, or an ill disposition in the
body against the natural constitution of it, which by the effect of any
action, breeds offense to it, and makes the use of the body worse.

Q. Who is the sender or imposer of it?

A. God only: for it is his scourge, rod, and discipline.

Q. Why does God send and inflict it?

A. For the trial, chasticement, and amendment of his children, and to keep
their souls from sin.

Q. What is the attractiue, deserving, or procuring cause of sickness?

A. Sin, as well Original as actual: Lam. 3. v. 39.
for why does man suffer but for sin? And hereupon our blessed Savior, Luke
5.20.
before he cured the man that was sick of the palsy, v. 24. and 25.
did forgive him his sins, and then restored him to his perfect health, to
teach us, that sin was the cause of it.

Q. What spiritual and special comforts does Gods word afford us against
sickness, diseases, pains?

A. First, sickness and pain is one of Gods rods to disple and correct us,
with: it is healthful for the soul: it disswadeth us from lusts; it is a
mistress of chastity and modesty.

Secondly, 2. Cor 12.
Gods power is and will be perfected by our infirmity.

Psalm. 41.3. Lam. 3.23.
Thirdly, God does make our bed in our sickness, and every night and morning
does visit us by his spirit.

Fourthly, it puts us in minds of our mortality, drives away drowsines and
forgetfulness, and points out our journey to heaven.

Fifthly, it is but a temporary and gentle chastisement, leni^^ed, tempered,
and disposed by our heavenly father, for our good.

Apoc. 14.13
Sixthly, death will ease us of diseases, sickenesses and infirmities, and at the
universal resurrection, we shall be glorified even in our bodies; therefore
let us be content (for so short a space of time) to undergo them.

Acts 14.22
Seventhly, it is the narrow way and strait gate that leads to life.

Heb. 12.1.
Eighthly, all the Saints of God have traced this way before us.

Ninthly, this yoke is but easy, and the burden exceeding light, for the
sting thereof is taken away by Jesus Christ, Esa. 5.3. Mat. 1^.28.29.
and yet he bears the burden with us, and indeed wholly takes it upon
himself.

Lastly, the infirmities and afflictions of this present world, are not worthy
of the glory that is to be revealed and communicated unto us; for what
comparison, between finite and temporary infirmities, and infinite and eternal
glory?

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, Romans 12.1^
let us enter into the house of mourning, and mark the chasticements of the
Lord upon others, laboring to stir up our bowels toward them, and to weep
with them that weep.

Secondly, we must confess our sins, the causes thereof, and be sorry for
them, and (earnestly and constantly) desire and entreat God to pardon them: for
as when the sore or wound is cured, the plaster will fall off, so when sin is
pardoned the affliction will cease, or (at least) work to and for our salvation
in the end.

Thirdly, we must offer and present our souls to the heavenly Physician Christ
Jesus to be cured, and then the body will the sooner be healed.

Fourthly, if our bodily disease, be desperate, or remediless, the more we are
to joy and rejoice, because we shall not only have the strength of the holy
Ghost to lead us through, Phil. 4.13.
but also be the sooner delivered out of the dungeon of our sinful bodies.

Phil. 1.23.
Fifthly, let us all (with Paul) desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.
Let us pray for the coming of our Savior that we may be clothed with our
house which is from heaven: 2. Cor. 5.2.
for these desires and prayers are spiritual wing^ to carry our minds and
thoughts into heaven, where is our Lord, our country, our joy, our
inheritance, and our treasure.

Lastly, if we recover our sickness, we must be more circumspect for the
time to come, Ioh. 5.14.
and beware lest a worse thing befall us.

Objection.
Q. But my sickness is most sharp, grievous, and violent, that I think that
God has wholly forsaken me.

A. Job, David, Lazarus, and others have been in this taking and perplexity,
and yet not forsaken, but inwardly sustained, and (at length) delivered. For
whom God loves most, Heb. 12.6.
he corrects most.

Secondly, these violent sicknesses are healthful and wholesome unto thee, for
they are like strong and vehement purgations, to rid and purge thee of thy ill
blood, and corrupt humors of sin.

Thirdly, nullum violentum est perpetuum, if they be violent, they will not
long continue; for God is faithful, and will not suffer thee to be tempted
above measure, 1. Cor 10.13.
but will give an issue with the temptation, that thou may be able to bear
it; he will either end thy sickness, or take thee out of this wretched world.
For God is a loving and a merciful father, Heb. 12.10
not erring in affection and in the manner of correction (as earthly fathers
often do) for he does chastise thee for thy profit, that thou might be
partaker of his holiness.

Fourthly, the issue and event cannot be but good, for hereby sin is
mortified, grace is increased, and thou fitted for heaven.

Fifthly, the smart and pain of sickness is not (in it self and simply)
evil, because it is not sin, and it rather touches the outward man, then
any way corrupts the mind and conscience.

Lastly, heathen men, (especially their Philosophers) that had no other teacher
and direction then the dim and dark light of degenerate nature, have
patiently endured exquisite torments; and shall not we Christians that have the
lantern and lamp of Gods word, Psalm. 119.104.
and his blessed spirit for our helper and comforter, be much more courageous
and ^^solute.

Q. What duties must we perform in such an extremity?

A. First, it stands us in hand, early and earnestly to cry unto God for the
pardon (especially) of all our known and gross sins, and then God who
loves the righteous, Iam. 5.16.
and who knows our hearts, cannot but (in due time) speed our fervent prayers
and requests.

Secondly, we must put on the whole armor of God, and especially the helmet of
hope, Ephesians. 6.16. 1. John 5.3.
and the shield of faith that overcomes the world, and that quenches all the
fiery darts of Satan, and then our pain shall increase our gain, and the
smart of it shall never hurt us.

Lastly, we must never trust in our selves, Ephesians. 6.16.
nor seek so unto the Physician, that we forget the Lord, but we must make God
our (chief) Physician, for he heals all our infirmities: Ps. 103.3.
and we must patiently endure Gods hand, and desire his help, and then as our
afflictions do or may abound, so he will cause our consolations to abound much
more. 2. Cor. 1.

A second Objection.
Q. But what if our sickness and disease be of long durance, or of many years
continuance, how then shall we stay and comfort our selves?

A. First, our sins, whereof we must seriously repent, have (perhaps) long
time prevailed against us, and therefore the medicine must a long time be
applied to it.

Secondly, our sins have deserved everlasting pain, Dan. 9.6.
and therefore we must patiently endure this which is temporary and tolerable.

Thirdly, Psalm. 73.
the blessed saints and servants of God in all generations have had experience
of this temptation, and have been our companions and copartners herein. For
example sake, Job in the old Testament was very long (no doubt) sick, pained,
and vlcerous: Aza long diseased in his seete: and in the new Testament, a poor
woman was twelve years long, troubled with a bloody issue. A daughter of
Abraham, Luke 18.
( i. a godly and religious woman) bowed by Satan eighteen years; John 5.5.
and a creeple (whereof we read in John's Gospel) was lame, thirty eight
years.

Fourthly, the longer that our afflictions are, the more easy they will be;
for God (in his compassion) will either mitigate our pain, or add unto our
strength.

Fifthly, if our outward man decay, yet shall the inward (or regenerate man) be
renewed daily, so that corruption vnius, is (by Gods mercy) generatio alterius.

Sixthly, the temporary (though long and tedious) afflictions of this world,
Romans 8.18.
are nothing to the eternity and unmeasurableness of glory in the world to
come.

Seventhly, God will hear and help us, Hos. 5.15.
after that we have been long humbled, and diligently sought him.

Lastly, the longer that the deliverance is delaied, Psalm. 5.15.
the greater will the comfort be when it comes Prou 13.12.

The third Objection.
Q. But what if either the violence, or the long continuance of our sickness
bereave us of natural sleep, whereby our life and strength is prolonged and
maintained; how shall we in this case comfort our selves?

A. By these rules and directions following First, sleep is a resemblance of
death, and the image of it, for they differ only in time, sleep being but a
short death, and death a long sleep, and therefore the less that we sleep,
the longer do we live.

Secondly, we may, and must conceive good hope of procuring natural sleep,
and rest; for if sickness take it away, health may restore it; and if fear
deprive us of it, hearts ease and quietness of mind will make us again
partakers of it.

Thirdly, we are by our wakefulnesse, and want of sleep freed from the terror
of dreams, and from many illusions, doubts, fears, wherewith men in their
sleep are assaulted.

Lastly, God will have us to esteem more highly of the blessing of sleep when
we obtain and enjoy it; and to show our selves more thankful for it.

Q. What course are we to take that we may procure rest and sleep?

A. We must first of all, and most earnestly pray unto God that gives his
beloved sleep in peace, Psalm. 4 8. Act. 12. v. 6 Hest. 6.1.
and that gave S. Peter (that was bound with two chains, and between two
soldiers) sleep, to bestow this gift upon us, which is many times denied to
great Monarchs.

Secondly, we must strive to disburden and unlade our selves of cares and
thoughts, and to shake off sickness (what in us lies) and then sleep will come
upon us unlooked for.

Thirdly, in our non rest, we must read the holy Scriptures, and good books
(especially of Divinity, Psalm. 1. v. 2
) and have them about us, with whom we may talk and confer, and we shall find
much ease and refreshment. Psalm. 77. v. 11.3.4. ad 12.

Lastly, we must in the day time (especially if our sickness will suffer us)
diligently, honestly, and conscionably walk in our lawful callings, Eccles.
5. v. 1
and we shall have experience of Gods gracious blessing even this way.

The 4. Objection.
Q. I am (as it were) a close prisoner in my earthly house, and I am not able
to go to Gods house that I may behold the beauty of it, Psalm. 27.4.
and visit his temple, how then shall J comfort my self?

A. First, though thy body be bound, yet thy soul is at liberty, Psalm. 41.
Esa. 38. Act. 9 33. Luc. 5.18.19.
and kept unpolluted of sin and error.

Secondly, David, Ezechias, Aeneas, and many others have (against their will,)
by sickness been kept from Gods house.

Thirdly, God (in this case) accepts the will for the deed, and requires
the heart, and the affection only.

Lastly, in this estate thou must read the scriptures, and godly treatises,
and muse and meditate upon that thou have heard, read, learned.

The fifth Objection.
Q. Alas, we want friends, kinsfolks, and good neighbors, to relieve, direct
and comfort us; what instructions can you yield us?

A. First, our case is not singular, and without example: for Job, David, etc.
yea and our blessed Savior in this case were neglected, Math. 27.42 43.
misiudged, forsaken.

Secondly, we must learn to bear our friends death, and therefore much more
their absence; for this absence will not appall them, whom death does notdismay.

Thirdly, it may be that we in our health made small account of, and were
offended at them, and therefore now we are justly deprived of them. For as in
all things, so in friendship, too much abundance does dull the appetite,
whereas want does sharpen it, and hunger is the best sauce.

Fourthly, though they be absent in place (when that their eyes, ears, hands
and feet perform not their office,) yet they may be with us in their mind, and
affection: and thus Paul was present with the Colossians, Col. 2. v. 5.
and with the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 5.4.

Lastly, let us not be discouraged, nor faint hearted, Ios. 1.9. Heb. 13.5.
but trust in the living God, and be content with those things that we have,
for he will never fail nor forsake us.

Q. What duties are we to perform in this distress?

A. First, we must not trust in men, who are lighter then vanity it self,
Psalm. 62.7.
they are like a broken staff that will fail them that lean on it, Job. 13.15.
and like a reed that will break in a man's hand: but we must trust in the
living God, (though he should kill us,) and live by faith, and then we shall
have the recompense of reward. Heb. 2.4.


Secondly, when God raises up friends and kind neighbors unto us, let us be
more thankful unto God for them, and have them in more request and estimation.

Q. What if the violence and continuance of sickness, want of friends, and good
neighbors, and lack of sleep concur, or (at least) we faint under some
one, or more of them, how then shall we practice patience?

A. By observing and practicing those instructions and conclusions following.
First, that many of Gods Saints, as Job, Psalm. ^.
David, etc. have encountered with all these temptations, and yet have by faith
and patience overcome them; and though these men may seem unto us Phoenices
and rare birds; yet we must the rather take notice of them, and endeavor to
imitate them.

Secondly, if our minds be armed with faith in God, our bodies shall be the
better enabled to bear them all, yea, and to overcome all temptations.

Thirdly, God is a present help in trouble: Psalm. 46. v. 1.
where man's help ends, there his begins, and his power is perfited in
man's infirmity.

Fourthly, Psalm. 22.1. Luke 22.41.43.44.
Christ our Savior, God blessed for evermore, endured for our salvation, and
that most patiently, exquisite torments of soul and body, yea, the pangs and
pains of hell, (though his soul was never in the place appointed for the
damned,) in comparison whereof ours are but light and easy, nay sweet and
pleasant, and therefore we may the better endure them.

Fifthly, we must not judge of the evil of our pain, Psalm. 73.16.17.
by our deceitful senses, but by Gods word, the true touchstone and infallible
rule of truth.

Sixthly, if we fret, grieve, and grow impatient, we shall do nothing but
increase our evil, and to the disease of our body, add the disease of our
souls.

Sixthly, we have need of patience and we in midst of all these evils, must
uphold our selves, by our courage and valor, Luke 21.19
that after that we have done the will of God, we might receive the promise: for
yet a very little while, Heb. 10.36, 37.
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

Lastly, let us in our inward and outward griefs, abstract and withdraw our
minds from them, and think upon some other matter, and object, that may more
please, content, and affect us; and when our weak and dazeled eyes cannot
behold the Suns bright beams, let us look upon the green coat and color
of the earths herbs, flowers, fruits, leaves, etc.

Q. May we not fitly number amongst the evils of sickness, the pains of women
in trauile, and the inconveniences of old age?

A. Yea, for they are distempers of the body, caused by man's sin and
transgression, and tending to the hurt of the body.

Q Seeing that by many places of scripture, by often allusions unto the pain of
women in travail, and by the testimony of heathen Philosophers, Arist. 7. lib.
de animal.
(as Aristotle) no creature has so sore pains in travail as a woman: what
comforts can you profound for the sweetning hereof?

A. First, though a woman's throws and pains are bitter, yet are they but
short, and therefore they may be the better borne and endured in hope of speedy
deliverance.

Secondly, no creature besides, brings forth so divine and excellent a
creature as a woman does, John 16.21
and at the knowledge and experience hereof, she (for joy) forgets her pain.

Thirdly, these pains are to the believing women, Rom 8.1.
no part of the curse, but only fatherly corrections, and the straight way to
guide them, and transport them to the heavenly Canaan.

Lastly, to interpret that place of Timothy properly as some do, the believing
women shall be saved, 1. Tim. 2.15.
(...), that is, by the birth and nativity of Christ, which was the beginning
of the accomplishme^t of the work of our redemption.

Q. What comforts are proper to old age that is religious?

A. First, old age is honorable, if it be found in the way of virtue: Leu.
19.32. Prou. 16.31
for a good thing is (commonly) commended for the antiquity of it.

Secondly, an old man is (in some sort) the image and representation of Gods
eternity; Dan. 7.9.
and therefore the more to be reverenced.

Thirdly, let him not grow old in vices and errors, but in grace and virtues,
and then he has more cause of comfort then of complaint.

Fourthly, an aged man and gray headed, is more like a beautiful swanne, then
a crow or raven; Eccles. 12. v. 1, 2. etc.
and though beauty, health, strength, and the use of bodily pleasures cease,
and are out of date, yet gravity and virtue then most flourish in Gods
children, and they are often the oracles of God for counsel, (as Jacob, Job,
Nathan, Chuzai, Roboams ancients are examples) and in stead of enjoying outward
pleasures, they behold the beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4.
they visit his temple, they are satisfied with the faines of Gods house, Psalm.
36.8.
and drink out of the waters of his pleasure, and do find marvelous
contentment in the desirable meditation of the kingdom of God at hand.

Fifthly, after the general resurrection old men shall renew their age, as the
Eagle does hers; yea they shall ever be fresh and flourishing, and never decay.

Sixthly, an old man has a singular prerogative, in that so few attain unto
his years.

Seventhly, an old man has had a long time of preparation, Luke 2.28.
and tends to his perfection, and lifts up his head, (for joy) because his
redemption is so near at hand, and they having (by the eyes of faith) seen
Gods salvation with holy Simeon, Luke 2.29.
are desirous to depart this life in peace.

Lastly, youth is the glass of folly, and the bait of vanity, apt to be drawn
to any evil; and therefore they may be glad that the rage and intemperate heat
of youth is past.

Q. What duties is an old man to perform, and put in practice?

A. First, he must purge himself of lust, Genesis 19.
covetousness, anger, riot, idleness, and the like sins, for these vices
disgrace old age, and by the domineering of them in many ancients, youth is
maruellously corrupted and infected, that are ready to follow such evil
presidents.

Secondly, he must spend all his time in preparation, and learn to die daily,
that so he may be ready for the Lord, and enter into his joy.

Thirdly, as the body daily decaieth and is posting to his long home: so must
the soul and inward man be renewed, 2. Cor. 4.16.
and look toward heaven, and not turn back to the Sodom of this world; Luke
23.43 Luke 16.22
that it immediately (after that it is loosed out of the body) may be carried by
the Angels into the kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. X. Of Death, of the nature, causes, evils, and benefits of it; what
preparation against it is necessary: how a man may in this life have a taste of
eternal life, and of a right disposition in death* the general use of the
Doctrine.
Question.

WHat is death?

A. Phil. 1.23. 2. Cor. 15.1.
It is the loosing and separation of the soul from the body.

Q. What is the procuring cause of it?

A. Romans 5.12.
Adams sin, and the sin of all his posterity.

Q. Who is the author of it?

A. God, as a just Judge imposing it upon man.

Q. What is it in it own nature?

A. It is the Devils weapon, whereby he seeks to murder mankind, it is the
punishment of our sin, the enemy (...) our souls, and the gulf of
damna^^^on.

Q. But what is it to Gods children that believe and are regenerate?

A. It is no enemy, but a friend to sou^^ and body; for it is changed, by
vert^^ of Christ his death and obedience, from a curse to a blessing: it is
Golias hi^ sword to cut off his own head; it is (...) the drone that has lost
his sting (that is ^ eternal torment in hell fire;) it is ^^ sweet sleep
refreshing the body; Ioh. 11.11 12.
it is the accomplishment of our mortification, and fully, and finally, ends
the battle betwixt the flesh and the spirit* and it insteede of being the gate
and sub^urbs of hell, is made the ladder of peace, and the entrance into
paradise to all believers.

Q. Why do holy and regenera^^ men die, seeing that their sins are forgiven
them?

A. First, because the remainders of sin are left in them, which cannot be
abolished, but by changing corruption into incorruption: and this cannot be
performed before the last day.

Secondly, the law of nature must be fulfilled, as well in them, as in any
other.

Lastly, the quality of death is changed in the believers: 1. These. 4.13.
for it is not death, but a sleep, and not a punishment, but a fatherly
correction, yea and a speedy passage to eternal life.

Q. Seeing that the souls of the Saints are immediately after their departure
out of the body glorified, why are the bodies so long kept under the power of
death, and not jointly glorified with their souls?

A. First, the body did sin last, and therefore is glorified last, for this
stands with the proportion of justice?

Secondly, God in detaining the body for a time in the earth, which is the
first death, does hereby declare his mercy in delivering both soul and body
from the second death.

Thirdly, Romans 8.17.
we must by death be made conformable to Christ our Savior, that we may
reign with him.

Fourthly, Genesis 3 19.
God will hereby show the truth of that his threatening, Thou art dust, and to
dust shall thou return.

Fifthly, Christ their head and King, who is the resurrection, 1. Cor. 15.20.
and the life, and the first fruits of the dead, must of necessity be glorified
before the members.

Lastly, the bodies of the Saints, though lying in the grave and consumed
there, yet are without sin, and sense of pain, and they shall arise again
in glory at the last day, and be reunited to their souls, etc. and both
together inherit eternal happiness through the power of God.

Ob. But the bodies of Henoch, before the law, and of Elias in time of the law,
never died, but were rapt and translated into heaven.

A. First, these examples are extraordinary, and therefore they are no common
rule to others. For God did not only hereby signify to the world in what
account he had them, (though the world distasted and despised their persons,
and blessed doctrine;) but he made them types and figures of the general
resurrection.

Secondly, some Divines hold, that their bodies (though rapt up into the air)
were consumed in the air, because Christ in regard of his bodily ascension is
said to be the first fruits of the dead.

Lastly, they died an extraordinary death, such as we the Saints that shall be
found alive at Christ his coming shall taste of, for their bodies were in a
moment changed from mortality to immortality, 1. These. 4.
and from corruption to incorruption.

Q. But why do Infants (that are called Innocents) die, seeing that they do
not, and cannot sin with consent of will, nor of knowledge, as do men of
years?

A. Albeit they want, (as yet) the power, means, instruments, to commit
Actual sin, yet they have the bitter and poisonfull root of original sin,
Romans 5.14. Romans 6. v. 23.
in them, and in it they were conceived and borne, and the wages even of it, is
death,

Secondly, God will sometimes temporally punish or ch^sten the parents in the
death of their children, because they are flesh of their flesh, and bone of
their bones, and who (perhaps) would (if God granted them longer life,) match
and equal their parents in sin.

Q What are we further to consider in prosecuting this argument of death?

A Four chief branches or parts.

First, some of the (principal) reputed and supposed evils of it.

Secondly, the benefits of it, both Privative, and Affirmative, or Positive.

Thirdly, the right preparation against it.

Lastly, a right disposition in death it self.

Q What are some of the principal (and so reputed) evils?

A. Three: First, the suddennes of it in many.

Secondly, the violent death of many.

Thirdly, the uncomfortable, and lamentable effects of it, in that it bereaueth
us of the benefit, company, gifts, prayers, government of many notable, and
worthy persons in Church, commonwealth, and family.

Q. Now (to handle every member of the division in his right place and order)
is sudden death, simply evil, and a curse?

A. I must needs distinguish of sudde^ death; for, qui non distinguit, destruit
artem. First in it self it is not evil; but because it commonly takes men
unrepentant, and unprepared; otherwise the last judgment should be simply
evil, because it is sudden, seeing that the son of man will come in an
hour, when we look not for him: but this sudden coming of Christ is not
evil, 1. These. 4.17.
but good, and happy for Gods children. Again, the manner and time of every
man's death, is not in his own disposition, but in Gods power and hands only.

Secondly, we must distinguish of it, according to the persons, upon whom it
seazeth: they are either irrepentant persons, and thus die; and to these death
is hel-mouth, and the beginning of everlasting torment; Gal. 3.13.
or repentant, and to these it is no curse; for Christ has (by his death and
passion) taken away the curse; but it is a short and insensible cross, and
correction, which freeth them from the fear of death, and does speedily convey
them into the haven of eternal rest.

Secondly, it is not sudden to the godly, that long before foresaw it, and
waited for it.

Thirdly, the sooner that they die, the sooner are they blessed: Apo. 14.13
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Lastly, many of Gods children have died suddenly, yet they were not hereby
defrauded of eternal glory: of this number were Jobs children; Meph^hosheth;
the infants that the bloody butcher Herod caused to be massacred, Luke 13.
Math. 14.
John the Baptist suddenly beheaded, etc. But as for wicked, unbelieving, and
unrepentant persons, they live not out half their days, but sudden, (yea and
ordinary) death is to them a curse, and a swift posting of them into the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, (as we may see in Pharaoh, Nabal, and the
rich churl, whereof we read in the 12 of Luke.)

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. Seeing that death many times steals and encrocheth upon us so unlooked
for; we ought daily to prepare ourselves against it, by prayer, repentance,
and the practice of good works, and to think every day to be the last; for (as
an ancient Father says) vtiliter latet vltimus dies, Augustinus.
vt obseruentur omnes dies, (that is) the last day is for our profit kept
unknown, that all the rest may be observed.

Secondly, being prepared and resol^ued before hand, let us not fear the
circumstances of death, more then death it self; Romans 8.38
but let us (for our comfort) know and be assured, that the sting of every kind
of death is taken away by Christ's death from the true believers, and no manner
of death can divert and divorce them from Christ their Savior.

Lastly, we must daily commend our souls and spirits into Gods hands, as unto
a faithful Creator, not doubting but that he will receive and glorify them;
but as for the time of death, and the warning that God gives us of it, we must
refer it wholly to his heavenly disposition.

Q. Is it lawful for a Christian to pray against sudden death?

A. Yes, when he has liberty so to do, or whiles he has time and memory.

Q. But sudden death cannot prejudice his salvation, and there is no express
form of prayer against sudden death in all the scripture; why then should any
Christian man pray against it?

A. First, because sudden death more often befalls to the wicked, Psalm. 73.19.
then to the good.

Secondly, because fewnes of days, and suddennes of death is wished to the
wicked in way of imprecation, and therefore we may pray for some warning of
death approaching, that the wicked and profane do not rashly censure, judge,
and condemn us, as though we died accursed, and out of Gods favor.

Thirdly, we cannot otherwise (by our good confession and prayer) glorify God
before men in our death, nor give at all a good example of dying well to our
family, or others.

Lastly, if we being of ability) die intestate, and without making a will, the
poor may be defr^uded of all comfort; and much contention may (possibly) arise
about the distribution and disposal of our lands and worldly goods amongst our
wives, children, and kinsfolk.

Q. What shall we judge of Gods children that do perish by the enemies sword,
and (by consequence) are this way cruelly and suddenly massacred?

A. It has been the lotte of Gods Saints in the old and new Testament, and in
all ages sithence, thus to end their lives, Math. 5.2.
and they blessed, yea blessed with a further addition of glory, because they
died for Gods cause.

Secondly, this kind of death cannot kill the soul, Romans 8.32
nor separate soul or body from Gods favor and love.

Thirdly, they had no (special) promise to die quietly in their beds, or in
their friends hands, and (as for their enemies) they have prevented themselus
from having any further power over Gods children, for they have done their
worst. Finally, non nocet bonis (si subito) occidantur, vel si subita morte
pereunt. No^ enim subito moriuntur qui semper cogitauerunt se morituros; that
is; It disparageth not good men, if they be (suddenly) slain, or if they
suddenly die. For they die not suddenly, who always thought that they should
die.

Lastly, right many have been by the sword not knighted in earth, but martyred
here, and crowned in heaven; and this besides the pregnant testimonies of
sacred scriptures,) the experience of all times and ages euinceth and verifieth.

Q. How shall we arm and resolve our selves against the fear of perishing by
the enemies sword, or any such kind of violent death?

A. First it skilleth and mattereth not, whether a burning fever, the
pestilence* or the sword kill us, or whether the prison be set or broken open.

Secondly, we are not so much to fear the hand as the wound; but death does
not so much wound as cure and salve the godly from their sins and miseries.

Thirdly, we may hereby be prevented of a more lingering and fearful death,
as to die by famine, and by r^cking, Psalm 44.22. Romans 8. v. 2
flaying* etc.

Lastly, we must remember that it is the lot of Gods children oftentimes this
way to die and that no kind of death natural or violent can separate them or
us from the love wherewith God loves us in Christ.

CHAP. XI. The third supposed evil of death, in that it depriueth us of most
worthy and excellently deserving Princes, Magistrates, Ministers, patrons,
friends, kinsfolks, etc.
Question.

HOw shall we comfort our selves against the untimely death of any worth^
Christian, whether Magistrate, Minister, kinsman, special friend, or any
private Christian?

A. By marking and meditating upon these (or the like) propositions and grounds
following. First, no man dies before his time: for it is appointed for all men
once to die, Heb. 9.27. Acts 1.7.
and this time not man, but God has in his eternal certainty appointed.

Secondly, they are loosed from the bonds of sin and this earthly misery, and
how can this be out of time?

Thirdly, they as well as any others, owed a death unto God, and were (at Gods
call) to make present payment: now this death is due every day, how then
demanded before the day?

Fourthly, these worthy instruments in Church and commonwealth, these pillars
in Gods house, these noble Cedars in Libanon, these stars in the firmament,
these Phen^ces, and dear saints and servants of God, were fitter for heaven
then earth and therefore, partly because we were unworthy of them, and
unthankful to God for them, 2. King. 22.20. Esaias 57.1.2.
partly because they should not see the evils to come, and partly, that they
should not be changed and infected with the worlds wickedness, God has justly
deprived us of them, but crowned them with the crown of everlasting glory.

Fifthly, a long life is a long labor, and a suspension (as it were) of their
life from immortality; and he that lives long, what has he but increase of
sins, manifold cares, griping griefs, and distastefull discontentments? and
will he count these his gains, gettings, winnings and advantages?

Sixthly, they die not suddenly, that soon have grown old, and have speedily
sailed over the troublesome and tempestuous sea of this world, into the blessed
Canaan.

Lastly, if God see us truly humbled for the loss of these glorious lights,
and earnestly to sorrow for our sins and unthankfulness, that have bereaved us
of them; God can and will raise up a new succession in their stead; he can cause
Joshua to succeed Moses, and Iehoshaphat to succeed Aza; Solomon to follow next
after David; Elizeus to execute the office of Elias his predecessor, and can
(as he did) cause very many worthy and vigilant Bishops, and faithful Pastors
to succeed the Apostles: and therefore in this, though we ought to be humbled,
yet we must hope well, and know that Gods arm is not shortened, nor his power
abridged.

Q. What use are we to make of untimely death, either in regard of others, or
else in respect of our selves?

A. First, in regard of others, we must lament and bewail our sins and
unworthiness, whereby we have deprived our selves of them, and that we did not
more praise God, nor better serve him when we enjoyed them.

Secondly, we must not envy at, but congratulate their advancement and
everlasting happiness, sed eodem animo ferenda mors, Sense. epist.
quo nostram expectamus: that is, we must so take their death as our own.

Thirdly, it is our duty to pray unto God to raise up new in their place; and
if their equals, or those that do in some good measure resemble them do
succeed, it is our duty more to esteem them and have them in the higher
account, nam bona nostra, carendo magis quam fruendo cognos^imus: that is, we
know good things more by wanting of them, then by enjoying of them.

Fourthly, in regard of our selves, if we (as we ought) purpose to do well,
let us do it quickly, lest we be prevented; and if we have begun to do some
worthy acts, 1. Chron 39.2, 3, 4, 5.
as David did, when he made preparation for the building of the Temple, etc.
God the righteous Judge, will regard and reward not only our action, but our
affection, and our desire as well as our deed.

Lastly, let us, laying aside all other works, intend and study this one thing,
which is, to die well; for this is instar omnium, that is, this instead of all,
(for according to the ancient Proverb) All is well that ends well.

Q. How shall we comfort our selves when death has deprived us of very good
benefactors, friends, favorites?

A* First, you have not lost them, but sent them before to God: for death has
not consumed them, but eternity shall receive them.

Secondly, they live in their better part; Heb. 12.22.23.
for though death has taken away his body, yet not his friendship past) nor
our friends* who are forth coming, and whom we shall see, know, and converse
with after the day of judgment. 1. Cor. 13.12.

Thirdly, their virtues are immortal, and for thy practice and imitation, and
the remembrance of them is sweet, delightsome, and comfortable unto us.

Fourthly, it may be when we enioied them, we did not (as our duty required)
honor, reverence, and esteem or them.

Fifthly, if our friends be removed hence, and translated into heaven, we must
labor by our godliness* humility, and weldoing, to gain and get new friends.

Lastly, if all our chief friends and benofactors on earth, be flowen up into
heaven, it must abundantly suffice and content us, that the whole holy and
vndiuideable Trinity, God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are our
friends, favorites, benefactors, vpholders: for they are all in all, and
therefore let us as well trust in God when our friends fail, as when they
abound.

CHAP. XII. Particular comforts for them that have sustained particular losses
by the death of kinsfolks, etc.
Question.

HOw shall a Christian man comfort and resolve himself, that has (by death)
parted with a virtuous and kind wife?

A. Indeed thy loss is great, and it is (as it were) the cutting away of one
half of thee; but thou must remember that she was borne mortal, and that from
Adam to the worlds end, all must die, and therefore thou must take it patiently.

Secondly, Romans 8.28.
all things come to pass by Gods providence and appointment, who turns all
things to the best to them that love him.

Thirdly, God will hereby either correct thy unthankfulness, or try thy
patience.

Fourthly, if she had lived longer, she might (perhaps) have grown worse, and
have been a cross and vexation unto thee.

Fifthly, thou art hereby freed from ielosie and suspicion, to which good women
are sometimes subject.

Sixthly, God can make thee a gainer by thy loss, and procure thee a second,
as good as she: 1. Sam. 25.40, 41, 42.
as when Michal was taken away from David, God afterward provided for him
fair and wise Abigail.

Seventhly, if thou (under God) wast an instrument to make her good, thou
may make the second good by thy instruction and holy example: for though thy
wife be gone, yet thou the workman art alive.

Eighthly, thank God that thou so long time, and to thy great contentment,
did enjoy so good a wife* and therefore now thou must be content to receive
some chastisement from God, as well as good things in former times.

Lastly, preserve and honor her memory after her death, and speak well of
her: and if thou be inclined to match again, pray unto God that thy second
choice may be matchable to thy first and God will hear thy prayer.

Q* What comfortable meditations and directions can you bring forth for a
Christian wife, that has lost a good and a godly husband?

A. First, she is wedded to Christ, and therefore she is no widow, nor can want
any necessary help and protection. Apoc. 12.1. Apoc. 19 7.

Secondly, death has not parted husband and wife for ever, but for a time; for
they shall one day (if they both feared God) see and know one the other,
(albeit all respects of marriage shall then wholly cease.)

Thirdly, God has a special care of widows, Ps. 10.18. Deuteronomy. 24.17.18.
(as may appear by miracles done in their behalf, and for their relief, in
the old and new Testament) and he lays a strait charge upon Magistrates,
Rulers, and Judges, to see them righted and provided for.

Fourthly, if she truly fear God, and intend a second marriage, he that
provided her a good husband before, can provide her a second as good: as he
provided fair, 1. Sam. 25.40.41.42.
virtuous, and wise Abigail for David.

Lastly, it may be either she did not respect him (according to his worth) and
therefore God has justly corrected her unthankfulness, or else, she too much
doated upon him, and was too fond of him, and therefore God by his death, will
heal this sin in her, and cause her to depend upon him only, when the
staff of her outward state is taken away.

Q. Let us hear some comforts for parents, that by death are bereaved of godly
and dutiful children.

A. First, we must always remember, that sin has deserved death, and that
God hereupon in the time appointed, inposeth death upon young as well as the
aged, and his decree cannot be prevented or resisted.

Secondly, herein the Saints of God bear their parts with thee and therefore
thou must endure these common evils with the greater patience.

Thirdly, children and young men are but as flowers in God his garden; and we
must suffer God the sovereign Lord of it and them, to crop and gather them
when he will.

Fourthly, the younger that they died, they were the less defiled with
corruption, 2 Kings 22.20.
and they departed being not laden with the burden of many sins, which
longer continuance of time would have drawn them into. (...).

Fifthly, if there be a decay, mortality and change in Oaks and Cedars, much
more in man, that has rebelled against his Creator.

Sixthly, it may be, that when we inioyed them, that either we were too
tender and fond over them, and so would have corrupted them, or else were not
contented with them, nor thankful to God for them: and therefore God (to
remedy and correct both these extremities) has bereaved us of them.

Seventhly, if our children led a godly life, and so died, then they are in
safety and forth coming; their life is not vanished but changed: and though
we have lost them, yet God has found them, and at the general resurrection we
shall find them, know and acknowledge them: wherefore let us in the mean time
rest content, and comfort our selves in this blessed expectation: 1. These. ^.18.
and therefore we must be so far from murmuring and repining against God for
depriving us of them, that we must bless and praise God for their perfection
and glorification.

Lastly, by their death, we are freed from infinite fears of their mis-doing,
and from many carking cares of providing for their outward estate and
maintenance: but if our children prove untoward and ungodly, then our loss is
the less to be lamented, for we have none to take notice of our gray hairs,
Filius ante diem, patrios inquirit in annos.
none to number our years, none to carpe at our cost, and none to be
discontented at the delay of our death.

Q. What use (in a word) are we to make hereof?

A. First, we must remember that we being mortal our selves, begat them
mortal, and that all men must die (sooner or latter) though the time, place,
and manner be unknown unto us.

Secondly, if we bewail them being dead, we should (in some sort) have
bewailed them as soon as they were born, for then they began to die.

Thirdly, we must out of heaviness conceive matter of happiness, and keep a
measure in lamentation, and not lament for every loss, lest our whole life be
filled with lamentation.

Lastly, we must instruct them, and pray for them whiles that they live: but
when we perceive death to approach, we must not in vain strive against God,
but willingly suffer him to take his own.

Q. How shall poor orphans, namely, fatherless and motherlesse children,
comfort themselves, that have parted with kind, careful, and most Christian
parents?

A. By remembering and observing these directions and duties following. First,
Job 14.1.2.
that their parents were borne mortal, and must needs die: and therefore the
children coming of them, cannot be immortal. If the foundation of the
building in time shrink and be shaken, that which is built upon it cannot
endure. The earth their common mother must receive them all, and at the last
day yield up all again.

Secondly, their parents are not lost, for God has found them, and freed them
from all miseries and molestations: and therefore they in this regard must be
content.

Thirdly, 2. Sam. 12.23.
that they shall not return to their children, but their children go to them.

Fourthly, they were borne first, and therefore must die first, and they are
not forsaken, but sent before them to bliss.

Lastly, God has deprived them of their parents, either to correct their
murmuring against them, or their undutifulness toward them, or (at least) to
try how they will depend upon him, when all earthly means fail and are
wanting.

Q. What duties are they to perform?

A. First, they must patiently undergo Gods correction.

Secondly, they must heartily repent them of their sins, the cause thereof.

Thirdly, they must follow their virtuous example, and immortalize their
memories.

Fourthly, they must more highly esteem Gods benefits when they enjoy them.

Q. What comforts are fit and seasonable against the death of dear brethren
and sisters?

A. First, death is a common correction to Gods children, and no person must
look to be freed from it.

Secondly, though their life was short, yet it was holy and blessed.

Thirdly, though their bodies be dead and interred, yet their souls live, and
their virtues (like so many children left behind them) are immortal, and the
impression hereof (as of their kindness and indulgence toward them) must never
be blotted out.

Fourthly, though they want the comfortable company of their brethren and
sisters, yet they are not alone, being attended upon and guarded by so many
virtues, and all those that fear God and do his will, Mat. 12.48
must be their brethren and sisters.

Use.
First, we must not vnmeasurably mourn for them, but rather bewail evil
things, that hang over our own heads.

Secondly, by such examples of mortality, we must be warned to prepare our
selves against our latter end.

Lastly, we must comfort our hearts in this, that we shall one day to our
hearts contentment, enjoy for ever their most sweet and blessed fellowship.

Q. Is it not a curse to a religious man to die childlesse and without issue?

A. It is a cross, rather then a curse. For first, they are not under the law,
but under grace.

Secondly, Christ has taken away the curse from all true believers.

Q. By what arguments and reasons shall such a man quiet and comfort his
conscience?

A. First, their looseness and lewdness shall never grieve him, and their
future misery shall never disquiet him.

Secondly, he in (...), or want of children, may (in his discretion) adopt such
who may prove more kind, loving, and obedient, then those that might have
proceeded out of his own loins.

Thirdly, he need not trouble himselues about their maintenance: and as for
the distribution of his goods and possessions, he has at hand many poor
seruan^s and children of God, amongst who^ he may more happily divide them:
Luke 16.9. Act. 9.39.
for these will pray for him so long as he lives, and speak well of him when
he is dead; and God will in goodness reward all his well doing. Neh. 5.19.

Fourthly, law may and will supply the defect of nature: for adoption is an act
imitating nature, ordained for the sola^e of such who want children.

Lastly, his children might have grown out of kind, and have obscured and
blemished his name: and hereupon many had died more happily and contentedly, if
they had died childlesse.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Privative and Positive benefit of death.
Question.

FRom what evils does death free Gods children?

A. First, from all sin, and the offense of God, the original and cause of
all evil.

Secondly, death is to them the medicine, remedy, and physician of al evils;
for it ends all their imperfections, and finally freeth them from all
sicknesses, pains, crosses, calamities, g^iefes, distresses, evils, errors,
enemies.

Thirdly, Esa. 57.2. 2 King. 22.20.
it preuenteth all sin and misery to come, both in this world, and specially
in the world to come, for they are wholly and for ever delivered from all Satan's
assaults, and from damnation, and the horror of hell.

Q. What use is to be made hereof?

A. First, if by death we would be freed from all sin, and the most cursed
effects of it, then let us deny the world and the flesh, and live in the fear
of God, remembering the account that we are to render up before God, and the^
the second death shall never have power over us.

Secondly, let us give God all possible thanks and praise, for that he will by
death thus ease and disburden us.

Thirdly, let us in the certain expectation of so great deliverance at the
year of Iubily, be willing to go to God, (as Simeon and Paul were) and in the
mean time to sustain all crosses patiently.

Lastly, let us continually wait and pray for this time of our full, and
eternal rest and deliverance.

Q. Is it then not lawful for Gods children in their distresses and
extremities (for their ease and deliverance) to hasten their death by laying
hands upon themselves?

A. It is simply and utterly unlawful. For, Act. 1. v. 18. and 25.
first, this not the way to ease and avoid misery, but to increase it, yea and
to emplunge and engulfe himself into the bottomless pit of endless torment.

Secondly, if a man should be entreated by the distressed to kill him, he
might in no wise condescend thereunto, for he should be no otherwise
accounted and punished then a murderer, Ephesians. 5.29.
much less may any person kill himself. For he is bound to cherish, and not
to kill his own body and flesh.

Thirdly, he that in any conceited opinion of enjoying present bliss, or in
any impatiency, and impotent passion, dispatcheth himself out of the way, does
nothing but damn and destroy his own soul: examples whereof we have in Saul,
Achitophel, Judas, etc.

Fourthly, he may not depart out of this earthly Tabernacle, nor forsake his
standing until his heavenly General, and Commander God almighty call, and
warrant him so to do: for he is no absolute Lord of his own body, 1 Cor. 7.
v. 20.
neither has he the Free simple of it, but is a tenant at will to God, whose
pleasure he must attend and abide.

Lastly, he must practice, and put in ure, fortitude and patience, he must not
misdread any evil, but trust in the Lord to stand fast in his calling, and
Christ will by faith enable him to ouercom all temptations.

Q. Is death to be feared or not?

A. A distinction must resolve this point, namely, that it is partly to be
feared, and partly, not to be feared.

Q. In what respects is it to be feared?

A. In three respects. First, as it is the destruction and dissolution of
nature: for in this signification Jesus Christ feared it, Heb. 5.7. Luke 22. v.
44.
when he swet water and blood in the garden.

Psalm. 30. v. 9.
Secondly, as it is a paineful correction, though we must most fear death the
cause of it.

Esaias 57.1.2.
Lastly, as it is a mean to bereave us of many worthy guides and governors,
lights and pillars in Church and commonwealth, Esaias. 3. v. 1.2.3.

Q. Is it necessary and good (in some regards) not to fear death?

A. Yes, for it is not profitable, nor expedient for us to live always here,
nor is it possible for us so to do.

Q. In what regards then is death not to be feared?

A. First, because (as has been formerly declared) death does disburden us of
all sin, and gives us our quietus est from all evil.

Secondly, as it is the beginning and gate of immortality.

Lastly, because hereby we are presented blameless to our Lord and Savior
Christ in heaven, and are there solemnly wedded to our heavenly husband and
Bridegroom the Lord Jesus.

Q. How are we to be defended and strengthened against the fear of it?

A. By remembering that Christ (by his death) has disarmed and cassiered death,
Heb. 2.14.
and has taken away the second death, the sting and strength of the former

Secondly, God is by his spirit present with his children in the agony of
death, and does support them against the fear of it.

Thirdly, that God does hereby bisburden us of all sin, and free us from all
maladies and miseries.

Fourthly, we are not to tremble at death, but rather to triumph, because now
we have a special time and opportunity to declare our subjection and obedience
to God.

2 Cor. 5.1.
Lastly, death brings us forthwith i^^to Gods chamber of presence, where (...)
shall see him face to face, and enjoy (...) gracious and glorious presence for
eu^^ more.

Q. What are the Positive benefits (...) death, or the good things wherewith
(...) does possess us?

A. They are manifold and mar^^^lous. For first death brings us into the
immediate fellowship of God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, (...)
therefore it may be called the gate of life, and a passage to the Father.

Secondly, it brings us into the heavenly communion and company of many
millions of glorious Saints and Angels, with whom we shall have perfect rest
and security.

Lastly, it is to us not only the consummation of victory against Satan,
sin, the world* the flesh; but does also inuest us with glory, and put us
into an actual possession of the new heaven, and the new earth, and of all
good things promised us, Apoc. 21.7.
and provided for us. Heb. 12. ver 22.23.

Q. What uses are we to make of these affirmative or positive benefits?

A. First, we are to distaste this present and infectious world, wherein there
is no true contentment, nor any thing that can make us blessed before God, but
rather matter of all sin, grief, evil, falsehood, wrong* etc. and we must
let the love of heaven swallow down the love of all earthly things: let us not
linger in this earthly Egypt or Babylon, but make have unto the heavenly
Canaan, a land not abounding with milk, corn, oil, honey, but abounding in
peace, righteousness, Romans 14. v. 17. Psalm. 36.8.^
and joy of the spirit, where we shall be satisfied with the fatnes of Gods
house, and shall drink out of the rivers of Gods pleasures, and that for
evermore.

Secondly, it serves to comfort us against all the miseries and maladies of
this present life, 2 Cor. 4.17.18.
which shall be so abundantly recompensed with the infinite weight of
everlasting glory.

Q. Whether may a man in this mortality have a true taste of everlasting life?

A. Yes undoubtedly, Romans 5.1.
for so had Job, David, Stephen, Paul, the holy Martyrs and infinite others.

Secondly, the godly have (already) eternal life, Ioh. 3. v. 36.
(viz. in beginning and assurance) and therefore in time they shall have the
fulness of it.

Apoc. 22. v. 20.
Lastly, they earnestly pray for the coming of Gods kingdom, ergo, they have
some taste thereof.

Q. By what means shall he attain thereunto?

A. By remembering, considering, and meditating upon these directions, and
conclusions following.

Q. What things must he consider and weigh?

A. Diverse things. First, the sinful, miserable, and uncertain state of
this mortal life. Eccles. 1.1. Heb. 13.14.

Secondly, the blessed and unspeakable happiness of all Gods Saints by reason of
their immediate fellowshippe with God and with Christ, from which we are absent
so long as we live in this present world. 2. Cor. 5. v. 5. Math. 25. v. 14.
For by virtue of this glorious and everlasting communion, we are not only
perfectly freed from all sin, afflictions, and all evil things, but possessed
with fulness of joy, and of al good things for evermore.

Thirdly, the incomparable difference between the glory, joy, happiness o^ this
world, and the infinite and eternal glory, joy, blessedness of the world to
come, and the consideration hereof will separate and sequester us from the love
and affectation of this world, and make us willing and desirous to go to God.

Fourthly, every man's death is deserved and procured by his own sins, and that
death with all the several circumstances of time, place, manner, person, is
foreseen and appointed in Gods eternal decree and counsel; Psalm. 139.15.16.
the due observation whereof will preserve us (when we are dying) from
distrust, Psalm. 39.10.
impatience, and the (servile) fear of death.

Lastly, Esa. 63.2 Psalm. 91 15*
the special promise of Gods presence and assistance in death, which we must
before hand be by faith persuaded of, and hope after, albeit we see it not,
and though all things may seem desperate.

Q. What are the properties and effects of this taste and joy?

A. First, it arises from sense and grief of sin, and from the knowledge
of, and faith in Christ crucified.

Secondly, it brings with it sound and sweet peace of conscience.

Thirdly, it is grounded upon the holy ministry of the Word, Sacraments,
Prayers, and upon the practice of holy duties.

Fourthly, it is deeply rooted in the heart, and it continues for ever.

Lastly, it causes us to love, look and long for the life to come.

Q. How a man must imprint and ground these meditations in his heart.

A. He must abstain from all impiety and unrighteousness, and practice the
duties of holiness, and righteousness: for God will reveal his secrets to the
humble, and to them that fear him. Psalm. 25.11. Genesis 18.10.

Secondly, he must be frequent and fervent in the holy use of the Word,
Sacraments, and Prayer; for hereby faith and hope are wrought, maintained,
increased.

Q. Why do Gods children die, seeing that their sins are not imputed to
them, and the image of God (which consists in the knowledge of the saving
truth, and in true holiness and righteousness) is repaired in them?

A. I answer: first, though sin be not imputed to them, and so they cannot
be condemned for it; yet all sin is not wholly taken away.

Secondly, regeneration is only in this life begun, and in daily progress.

Thirdly, God will have the godly to die (the temporary death) as well as the
wicked, that they acknowledging the severity of Gods anger against sin, may
learn to hate it.

Fourthly, that they may lay down the remnants of sin, and the adher^nt
miseries.

And lastly, that they may have experience of the power of God, who raises up
the dead.

Q. Whether that death may be desired and wished for.

A. It may not simply and absolutely be desired; for it is an evil and against
nature, and therefore not to be desired, but conditionally we may (lawfully)
desire death.

Q. In what respects may it be desired?

A. In two respects principally: First, as it is a way and means to deliver us
wholly from the burden, bondage, and slavery of all sin, and to free us from
all the maladies and miseries of this wretched life.

Secondly, as it is a means and instrument to bring us to the manifest and
glorious vision and sight of God, and to the immediate and everlasting
fellowship and communion of the whole Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost.

Q Whether that a Christian may lawfully desire life?

A. Yes, in some respect, namely, i^ we desire to do further good before we
die, Psalm. 117.15.
and make the glory of God the end and scope of our life; for God will be
glorified in us so long as we live in this earthly Tabernacle. Phil. 1.
And therefore every man must obediently walk in his calling until it shall
please God to remove and translate him hence; and he must rather seek to
honor God, and do service to his Church then respect his heavenly advancement.

Ob. But the longer that we live the more we multiply sin, and offend our
God, and therefore we may not lawfully desire life.

A. The Argument is not good. For first, Gods children sin, not wittingly and
willingly, nor make a trade of sin as wicked men do.

Secondly, their sins are covered, and not imputed unto them.

Lastly, the good that they be examples and instruments of, is much more
pleasing and acceptable to God, and to good men, then their infirmities and
imperfections are distasteful.

Q. What is required that a man may die well and blessedly?

A. Two things: First, a preparation against death. Secondly, a right
disposition in death.

Q. Is preparation against death necessary?

A. Yea; for first, we must needs die, for sin has deserved and procured it,
and God thereupon has imposed it.

Secondly, in what state soever the day of death leaves us, in the same state
the day of judgment shall find us.

Thirdly, this preparation cutteth off, and preuenteth much sin in us, which
we would otherwise design and commit.

Fourthly, 1 Cor. 15.26.
death is our enemy, and our last greatest enemy, and therefore we must by
faith in our Lord Jesus, labor and strive to subdue and quell him.

Lastly, this is our last journey, and if we dispatch it happily, and according
to Christ our Captains direction, it will forthwith after our death, convey us
into heaven.

Q Wherein does this preparation consist?

A. In sundry meditations and duties.

Q. What must we principally meditate upon?

A. First, we must before hand think on our latter end, and not foolishly
accuse old age, or nature: for death comes, and is inflicted from God.

Secondly, me must betimes think on on the right composing and ordering of our
lives, namely, whether that we have ceased to do evil, Luk 13.35
and have done what good we could: for otherwise death will overtake us, and we
will wish that we had done it, (when it is too late) Luke 13. v. 35.

Thirdly, we must know that Christ has abolished eternal death, and made our
temporary death an entrance to the Father.

1 Cor. 15. v. 57.58.
Fourthly, we must contemplate and muse upon the glorious resurrection of the
body, which will much comfort and refresh us.

Lastly, we must cast our thoughts upon that most excellent and eternal weight
of glory reserved for us in the heavens, 2 Cor. 4.^7.
which does infinitely surpass and ouerway all temporal afflictions
whatsoever.

Q. What duties must the sick man perform in general?

A. Three duties: First, toward God: Secondly toward his neighbor: and
lastly toward himself.

Q. What duties is he to perform toward God?

A. He must seek to be reconciled unto God, and for this end, he must repair
and renew his faith and repentance, partly, because (many times) in temptation,
he loses something; and partly because he daily slippeth or commits new
sins, which require a new act of faith, and repentance.

Secondly, he must constantly confess Christ, and proclaim and publish how
many ways God has been good to his soul and body.

Lastly, he must by the eyes of faith, view, contemplate, and look upon
Christ, the brazen serpent, and then death shall never sting him.

Q. Why must he perform these duties toward God?

A. Because (ordinarily) sicknesses, pains, and diseases are sent and
inflicted of God for a punishment, and for our reformation and amendment, as
most clearly appears in many places of holy Scriptures. Lament. 3.39. Math.
9.2, Joh. 5.74.

Q. What services owes the sickeman to his neighbor, and what duties is he to
perform toward him?

A. He must perform all duties of piety, love and righteousness: and
Magistrates and Ministers must not only command and exhort their people,
subjects, hearers, to listen to, and obey sound doctrine, Ios. 24.14.15.
and Christ his blessed Gospel; but also they must by all possible means
endeavor, that they, after their death may leave them in as holy and happy
estate as they found them. Act. 20.28. 2. Pet. 1. v. 5.

Q. What duties is he to perform to his wife, children, family?

A. First, he must advise, and persuade them to constancy, and to obedience of
the saving truth; for his words spoken at such a time leave the greatest
impression in the minds of them that hear him.

Secondly, he must (for the peace of his own soul, and for the preventing and
cutting of many (needless) suites and contentions in law that might arise
after his death) in equity and conscience make his last Will and Testament, and
bequeath his goods, lands, living, to his wife, children, kinsfolk, friends,
and to the poor, as the law of God and man requires.

Q. What duties is he bound to perform toward himself?

A. He must by faith in the Lord Jesus arm himself against satan's assaults,
and against the fear of death and the last judgment; and he must not so much
fear death, as look on everlasting life.

Secondly, touching the body, he must be careful to use physic, and all
other good means to preserve and continue life and health, until it shall
please God to take it away.

Lastly, Psalm. 31.5.
he must continually resign himself, and commend his soul and spirit into
Gods blessed hands.

Q. Jf all these duties be performed in good conscience, what good will come
thereof?

A. First, God will honor such as fear and honor him; he (I say) will honor
them, as well in life as in death. 1. Sam. 2.30.

Secondly, he will make the name and memory of them precious after death: Ps.
112.6.
for the just shall be had in an everlasting remembrance.

Q What is a right dispotion in death?

A. A religious and an holy behavior of a man's self, especially toward God.

Q Is it necessary?

A. Yes: for first, now it is the very time to practice it.

Secondly, without this disposition and behavior, our death cannot be pleasant
and acceptable in Gods sight.

Q. What are the parts of it?

A. Three, namely, to die in faith, to die in obedience, and to resign or
surrender up our souls into Gods hands.

Q What is it to die in faith?

A. To take notice of, Heb. 11.13 Genesis 49.18
and lay hold of Gods gracious promises in Christ touching remission of sins
and everlasting life, and wholly to rely upon them, as they are revealed and
set forth in the scriptures.

Q. What benefit shall a man have who dies in true faith?

A. He shall be able to keep himself safe and sound against the temptations
and pangs of death, and shall (forthwith after he has given up the Ghost) be
made partaker of eternal life and happiness.

Q. How is our faith to be expressed?

A, Two manner of ways, the one inward, the other outward. Romans 8.16
First, inwardly by deep sighs, sobs, and groans, after a man's redemption.

Secondly, (and that outwardly) by prayer, thanksgiving, and good exhortations,
and often communications touching God and godliness.

Q. What is it to die in obedience?

A. It is willingly and gladly, to submit our selves to Gods will in bearing
the cross, Mat. 27. and without murmuring or grudging, to go to God, who in
death respects us, and will undoubtedly receive us.

Q. What are they to be compared unto that die unwillingly?

A. They (if they belong to God) do, as if a prisoner should delight in his
prison and dungeon, and would not go forth to a glorious palace and perfect
liberty when he lawfully might; either forgetting the slavery and defilements
which he leaves, or the good things to which he goes.

Q. How is this duty to be performed?

A. By learning to die daily, and not through any impatiency, or through the
tediousnes of trouble, to wish death, (as Elias did) for then we discover pride
and disobedience, 1. King. 18.4.
in that we will not wait on Gods leisure, but follow our own corrupt
affections.

Q. How shall we learn to die daily?

A. By taking up Christ his cross daily, and if we do with patience and
meeknes buckle with affliction. For every affliction is a petty death: and if
we can endure to undergo this petty death, 1. Cor. 25.31.
we shall the more comfortably undergo the great death of all, which is the
disjunction or dissolution of the soul from the body.

Q What is it to surrender our souls into Gods hands?

A. To yield them up into his hands, as unto a faithful creator, 1. Pet. 4.19
in certain hope of our present glorification.

Q. What general comforts are there against death?

A. First, the sting thereof is taken away by Christ his death, 1. Cor.
15.55.56.
and the power abolished: death to the godly is like a drone Be, that keeps
a buzzing and humming, but has lost her sting, and cannot hurt.

Secondly, death is to Gods children a gaile delivery from all sin, and the
miseries of this life, and a passage unto the evident and manifest sight and
presence of God.

Thirdly, in death God is not only present with his children, by his spirit to
instruct, comfort, and assist them, but also sends his holy Angels to attend
upon them and to save them, Luke 16.22.
from the violence and vexation of evil spirits, and to carry their souls
into heaven, forthwith after that they are separated from their bodies.

Lastly, by death the souls of the godly shall be made infinitely more holy
and happy, glad and glorious, then ever they were when they were enclosed in
the sinful subject and prison of the body: and as for their bodies, they
(after that they have slept a while in the earth) shall be raised up again,
immortal, incorruptible, and far more bright and beautiful then they had
ever been, if man had never sinned.

Q. What is the quintessence of these conclusions?

2. Cor. 5.1.
A. First, we are taught hereby, not to fear to depart out of the ruinous
house of our bodies, whenever God does call us, knowing that a better life
shall follow after death, for they only are blessed that die in the Lord: and
of this point we must much think and study. Apoc 14.13.


Secondly, we are advertised hereby, not to be cast down nor discouraged at
bodily diseases, dolours, deformities: for the resurrection shall put an end
hereunto.

Lastly, we must not vnmeasurably mourn for those that sleep in the Lord,
seeing their souls (which are the better part of them) live with God, and
their bodies being bought with a price, (namely the precious blood of Christ)
and being made the temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.20
shall at the last day rise again in glory and incorruption.

CHAP. XIIII. Of certain particular evils, defects, and deformities in the
body, and also crosses in the outward state.
Question.

OF how many sorts are these particular evils?

A. Of two sorts; to wit, ordinary, and extraordinary.

Q. What are the ordinary evils?

A. They are either such as are in and about the body, or that have a man's
outward state for their object.

Q. What are those evils and defects that are in and about the body?

A. Deformity, lamenes, blindness, deafnes, dumbnes, etc.

Q. How shall we comfort our selves against the loathsome deformity of the body?

A. By marking and meditating upon these conclusions following.

First, bodily deformity does nothing prejudice the estate of Gods Saints
before God, (as the examples of Job, David, Mephibosheth, Ezechias, Aza,
Lazarus, etc. and of innumerable besides (...) demonstrate.)

Secondly, they endure but for a time, and (at the furthest) end and determine
with this life.

Thirdly, though the bodies of Gods Saints be (for the time) never so loathsome
and deformed, yet are their sins covered by the royal roabes of Christ his
righteousness, Ps. 32.1.2.
and the soul in the mean time is most holy, perfect, beautiful.

Fourthly, at the general resurrection, this vile body of ours shall be made
conformable to Christ's glorious body: Phil. 3.20.
it shall be no more mortal, but immortal; no more vise, but honorable; no
more weak, but always strong, no more heavy, but light and nimble; no more
sinful, but holy: and in a word, no more earthly, and needing these outward
means and helps of meat, drink, apparel, rest, sleep, physic, recreation,
marriage, etc. but they shall be always spiritual, i. immediately supported
by Gods omnipotent power, and absolutely subject and obedient to the spirit.

Fifthly, God does not hate the deformity of the body, but of the soul, by
reason of sin, contracted and committed by it and in it.

Lastly, we must remember, that our bodies are earthly and mortal, and not
heavenly and eternal: and therefore we must not be discontent, 2. Cor. 4.16
if rottennes enter into them; only let us provide, that as the outward man
dies, so the inward man may be renewed daily.

Q. What comforts against lamenesse?

A. First, lamenesse is natural, and is caused by sickness, old age, or
otherwise; and therefore it is to be endured with the greater patience.

Secondly, Acts 9.33. Aeneas.
the children of God (as Mephibosheth* Aza, the creeple, whereof we read in
the fifth of S. John's Gospel, and a daughter of Abraham) have been, Luke 18.
are, and shall be subject hereunto, as much as the profane and irreligious.

Thirdly, though the bodies of Gods Saints (for their correction, 2. Cor. 4.16
trial, and exercise) be subject hereunto, yet are their souls holy, sound,
and nothing impeached by the lame body. Psalm. 92.

Fourthly, death and the last judgment, which is the time of the restitution
of all things, will put an end to it and the body shall rise again in far
greater integrity then ever it appeared in, when it was in the best plight.

Fifthly, physic or surgery may possibly in time recover the body, and
therefore the means are not to be neglected.

1. Pet. 1.21.22.
Lastly, let our faith and hope be in God, and our souls purified in obeying
the truth through the spirit, and lamenesse shall not hurt us.

Q. Wherein shall a blind man comfort and solace himself?

A. In many things. First, that blindness is a great part of innocence: for the
eyes (since Adams fall) are the windows of concupiscence, and the porters to
let in all vices, from which enticements unto evil, and blind are freed.

Secondly, the blind see nothing to distaste their stomachs, to offend their
eyes, or to grieve their minds, whereas just Lot endued with the sense of
seeing, 2. Pet. 2.8.
vexed his righteous soul from day to day, in seeing the unlawful deeds of
the Sodomites, etc. And so it fares with Gods children that are blind, who see
not the evil objects nor wickedness of the world.

Thirdly, blindness is natural and contracted by old age, sickness, and the like
infirmities, and therefore Isaac, Bartimaeus, and the blind man in the ninth of
John's Gospel, and diverse Saints of God in all generations have borne their
parts herein; therefore this correction is so much the more patiently to be
borne.

Fourthly, though the godly have no bodily eyes to behold the heavens, the
earth, and the creatures, which eyes the beasts, birds, and creeping creatures
have common with them, yet they have spiritual and Angelical eyes, whereby
they behold God their Creator, and look upon Christ sitting on the right hand
of God his Father in heaven.

Fifthly, the eyes are not simply necessary for godliness, for God requires
the heart and understanding: and yet notwithstanding they shall be restored,
yea and glorified at the general resurrection.

Wherefore let us clear the eyes of our understanding, and cast out of them
all beams of self conceit, and all dust of error. And because our memories
are then most sharp and retentiue, having no outward object to blunt their
edge, let us apply them to the learning of the best things, and with patience
wait the time of the restitution of all things. Acts 3.21.


Q Propound some comfortable meditations for a deaf man.

A. First, the deaf person cannot be infected with lies and errors, he cannot
be deceived and gulled by flatterers, nor be possessed with the ingredients of
grief, he cannot be provoked to wrath, he sees nothing to disturb and
disquiet him, and (that which most contenteth him) he cannot hear Gods blessed
name blasphemed.

Secondly, by reading the scriptures, sermons, treatises, catechismes, he
hears God speak unto him: for God has no need of ears, but only requires
a devout mind.

Ioh. 14.26.
Thirdly, that which he formerly learned* the holy Ghost brings to his
remembrance.

Lastly, his perfect hearing shall, (if not before) be restored unto him at the
day of judgment, and his deafness in the mean time cannot separate him from
Gods love.

Q What use must a man make of his deafness?

A. First, whiles we enjoy the benefit of our hearing, Ps. 119.71.
let us attend to Gods voice in the scriptures preached us, and let us treasure
up the word of God in our hearts to bestead us in time of need.

Lastly, though we cannot hear nor discern the notes of music, and the
sounds of men and birds, yet we have the use of our eyes, to behold the
creatures, and God the Author of them.

Comforts for a dumb man.

A. Men by reason of this want and affliction, are kept from many sins,
evils, dangers, which many that cannot temper and govern their tongue run
into, for they cannot lie, slander, deceive, they cannot blaspheme God, nor
stir up the coals of con^ention, the seeds whereof an evil tongue does
cherish.

Secondly, they are not undone by their rash and intemperate words, much less
are they in danger to lose their lives, as many lewd and slanderous speakers
are. Psalm. 52.5.


Thirdly, it is a labor to speak truly: and in silence there is rest.

Fourthly, if thou have lost an il tongue, thou art a great gainer by it.

Fifthly, if thou can not speak with thy tongue, then speak to God in thy
heart; for God can and does hear as well when thou art silent, as when thou
speak.

Lastly, if thou do but groan, sigh, and cry unto God, Exodus 3.7.
he hears thee, and that thou shall feel and find. For as he that hears
God speak and answer, Exodus 14.15.
is not deaf: so likewise he whom God hears is not dumb.

CHAP. XV. Of ordinary particular evils from without us, whether at home or
abroad.
The crosses of evil and bad husbands, wives, parents, children, masters,
servants, and of a shrewd mother in law.
Question.

HOw are good women to comfort themselves when they are matched with evil
husbands?

A. First, they are not alone. For Abigail was crossed by Nabal her husband; 1.
Sam. 25.
and many innocent wives in Moses time, Mat. 19.8.
by reason of the cruelty and unreasonableness of their husbands, were divorced
from them.

Secondly, if their husbands in the flesh be evil and shrewd, yet Christ their
spiritual husband will always entreat them kindly, and lovingly visit them by
his spirit, if so be that they fear him and believe in him.

Thirdly, they must be of pure conversation and reverence their husbands, the
hidden man of the heart must be vncorrupt, 1. Pet. 3.1.2.4.5.
with a meek and quiet spirit, and subject themselves unto their husbands, and
then they shall either win them, or (at least) leave them without just defense
of themselves, or excuse.

Q How shall good husbands comfort themselves, when they are married to evil
and unquiet wives?

A. First, (it may be) they were rash in their choice, and did not consult with
God by prayer, and with good men by conference about it.

Secondly, David, Job, Moses, etc. were this w^y somewhat crossed; and this is
almost a common evil, and therefore the more patiently to be undergone: and if
we cannot so well practice patience, we must (during the tempest of chiding)
absent our selves, and retire our selves into some priua^e place.

Thirdly, they must acknowledge that they are thus crossed for their sins, and
therefore they must the more willingly bear the burden of their offenses.

Fourthly, if they can endure rain and smoke in their houses, why not then
their wives?

Fifthly, they must either by gentleness, good persuasions and admonitions
reform their wives; for then they make them better; or else they must bear
with their infirmities, and so they make themselves better.

Sixthly, let their own consciences bear them witness, that they fail in no
duty of godliness and love toward them: and the^ let them commit the matter to
God; and what know they whether (at length) they shall convert them or not? 1
Cor. 7.16


Q. How shall good parents comfort themselves that are troubled and crossed
with evil and disobedient children?

A. First, goodness and virtue in children is not natural, but from above, and
comes not from their first birth, but from their second: for that which is
borne of the flesh is flesh, Ioh. 3.6.
and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit; and hereupon many good men
have had evil children, as Abraham had his Ismael, Isaacke had his Esau, David
his Absolon, and Amnon, and Hezechias his Manasses.

Secondly, sometimes Parents are punished in their children, partly, because
they have been disobedient to superiors, and to their own parents, and
partly, because they have been negligent in teaching, correcting, and bringing
them up.

Thirdly, all children are not predestinate to salvation, (as we have Elies
sons, Hophni and Phineas for examples) and therefore we must not look to have
all good and holy: for justification and sanctification follows only
election, and is not common to all.

Fourthly, parents must give their children holy example, Ephesians. 6.1.
and when they are young bend and bow them, and bring them up in the nurture
and information of the Lord, and then if they prove not good, their
ungodliness shall never be imputed to the innocent parents.

Lastly, though for the present they be evil and desperate, yet hope well of
them, and pray for them, and use all means constantly for their amendment, and
then leave the success to God the changer of the hearts.

Q. How shall virtuous children comfort themselves that are crossed with
unkind, evil, and irreligious parents?

A. First, sometimes severity in Parents, is for their childrens good, who if
the parents should not sometimes grow unkind, they would forget God and
themselves.

Secondly, we must bear, with and excuse their infirmities, (as far as we
lawfully and honestly may) attributing it to old oge^ choler, melancholy, etc.
and therefore we must either speak gloriously of them, or keep silence.

Thirdly, the more degenerate, and irreligious that they be, the more by our
humility, dutifulnes, good example, and prayers, we must labor to reclaim, and
win them.

Fourthly, we must note that our parents have authority and power over us, and
not we over them; and therefore we must bear with their manifold infirmities.

Fifthly, let us ascribe it to our sins, and want of duty, and reueence to
them, that we find them otherwise then we expected.

Sixthly, if we fail in no duty toward them, yet we must remember, that good
Jonathan was the son of wicked Saul, 2. Chr. 18.1
Ezechias the son of wicked* Ahaz, and zealous Josias the son of Idolatrous
Amon; who were (no doubt) much crossed by, and grieved at their ungodly
fathers, yea and tempted by them.

Q. What comforts are fit for good Masters that are crossed, by evil, and
unfaithful servants?

A. First, they must see and consider whether that they have given them good
example, and have been careful to train them up in true religion, and
godliness, otherwise they are as much in ^ault as the servants; and if they
perform all offices unto them, they may or will prove like the Captains
servants that attended at his beck; Math. 8.9.
for when he bad any to come, he came, when to go, he went, and when he bad
him do ought he did it.

Secondly, they must partly by gentle admonitions, and partly by seasonable
corrections, labor to reform their misdeamenours; if this will not serve, if
thou have hired many servants, lessen the number of them, and they will the
better agree, and thou shall not be enforced to put them away: but if thou
have few, and they be incorrigible, put them away, Gal. 4.30.
as Sarah turned out Hagar, and David resolved to have no slanderer, Psalm.
101.5 and 7.
no proud, no deceitful, nor lying servant to abide in his house: and as the
Lord of the unjust Steward expelled him.

Thirdly, henceforth be more advised in thy choice, Luke 7.^.
and when thou have good and faithful servants entreat them kindly, and
(according to their good service, and deserts) do unto them that is just, Col.
4.1.
and equal, knowing that thou also have a master in heaven.

Q. What comforts and instructions are meet for diligent and dutiful
servants, that either are wronged, misused, or (at least) unkindly entreated by
evil Lords, and Masters?

A. First, many right good and trusty servants have been not only unkindly,
but also cruelly entreated both of ancient and of latter times. Thus was Hagar
severely handled by Sarah. Jacob collogned withal, and deceived by Laban:
Joseph put out of service, and wrongfully imprisoned by Potiphar; David
persecuted by Saul; and therefore no strange matter has befallen them.

Secondly, the more griefs and wrongs they endure for conscience toward God
and for well doing the greater praise and reward shall they receive from God.

Thirdly, their hard service or bondage, will one day end.

Fourthly, that they are Gods freemen, for his service is perfect freedom.

Lastly, that God in time will right their wrongs, and requite them that
misused them; for he is no respecter of persons.

Q. What duties are they to perform?

A. Servants must fear God and use all good means to gain their favors, and
obey them (as well in their absence as in their presence) in all lawful
actions, Ephesians. 6. v. 5 6.7.
and do them service, as unto the Lord: and if their masters will not yet
relent they must comfort themselves in their innocence, and recommend their
cause to God, whose freemen they are.

CHAP. XVI. Of private evils that are occasional and from without us.
Question.

HOw shall they comfort and behave themselus that are crossed with hard and
shrewd mothers in law?

A. First, they must content themselves in this, that they have an heavenly
Father, and good Father in the flesh, and that they have the Church of God for
their mother.

Secondly, she is a woman, and of the weaker sex, and therefore it is not a
part of a valiant man to resist a woman.

Thirdly, that it is a matter far more glorious and acceptable to God and good
men, to pass by and pardon wrongs, then to offer them.

Fourthly, it must suffice, that the step-mothers love their Fathers, and
therefore they must for their fathers sake bear with them, and reverence them.

Lastly, the more insolent that their stepmothers are, the more innocent and
humble they must be; they must revenge the wrongs (that their stepmothers offer
them) rather by not regarding them then requiting them, and the more that the
mothers in law hate their sons in law, the more must the sons love them;
for then they shall either win them by their well doing, or else leave them
without al excuse or defense of themselves, before God the righteous Judge.

Q. What comforts are to be ministered unto them that in just and law^ull suites
receive many foiles and repulses?

A. First, it is arrogance and presumption ambitiously to desire to obtain all
things that we need. For mighty Emperors have been denied in many things,
yea God himself (albeit he demand them for our good, and not for his own,
for he needs nothing) he requires many things of us, which we yield him
not.

Secondly, they must persuade themselves, that if their petition had been
condescended unto, it (perhaps) had not been for their good.

Thirdly, they must not be overmuch aggreeued, if men deny unto them small
things, seeing that God graciously grants them things of far greater
worth, use, and excellency.

Fourthly, if Gods children should have no denial in worldly things, they
would affect the world rather the^ Gods word, and rather trust in men then in
the Lord.

Fifthly, in this world, the mighty are preferred ordinarily before the mean,
and great men before good men.

Lastly, though they receive a denial the first, second, or third time, yet if
they be patient and constant, they may speed at last.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, if we would have no repulse, we must crave things honest and
possible.

Secondly, we must be ready to pleasure others, if we would have them to
gratify us.

Q. What counsel and comfort is fit for them that are decayed or undone by
rash suertiship?

A. First, it deeply concerns them to repent of their former unadvisedness,
Pro. 11.15.
and be wiser for the time to come.

Pro. 6.1.2.3.4.5 6.
Secondly, they must humbly sue to their creditors for favor, patience, and
forgiveness, or (at least) for abasement.

Thirdly, that which their poverty cannot pay, they must lay it, and put it on
Christ, and then God will never exact it at their hands.

Fourthly, it fell out through their self-will and voluntary disposition, Genesis
42.37.
and therefore they must take it patiently.

Fifthly, they shall learn by their own hurt, how profitable and pleasant a
thing it is to owe nothing, and to live without bonds and yrons.

Lastly, if they be only decayed, and not undone, it will make them (when the
worst is past) always to dread the like danger, and to fear the like falls.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, it behooves us to be wary, for whom we become sureties, Pro. ^2.26.
and for what sums: always remembering that the day of payment will come
sooner then we expect; and what though for the present, we are able to
discharge the debt; yet we full little know what losses and empouerishment may
befall us in the mean time.

Secondly, other men's decaies by suertiship must be our discipline, and their
woes our warnings.

Lastly, if we be disposed to do good, let us rather impart our goods to the
poor, then (otherwise) to loose our liberty with our living.

Q. What comforts against coffeehouse conceived by reason of good service
toward Church and commonwealth, neither respected, nor rewarded?

A. They must take notice of these rules and directions following. First, this
proceeds from man's weakness, and forgetfulness, and therefore this offense
must not be overmuch aggrauated.

Secondly, many worthy men of good parts and service, have been neglected and
rejected in the world; Joseph was forgotten of Pharaohs Butler; David an humble
petitioner unto Nabal was repelled, and reproched: good Jacob a faithful
servant was evil entreated of Laban: David's life was sought of Saul, and
Christ the Lord of all, (yet servant to all) was forsaken of all Unthankefull
men are ungodly unwise and wicked; and therefore we must the less regard them;
for can men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

Thirdly, we must always do good, and look for our guerdon and reward from
God, and not from men.

Fourthly, the less hope and expectation that we have of reward from men,
(who are many times unthankful, the more reverend and regardfull is our good
service before God.

Lastly, Gods children are plain and simple, and cannot beg, flatter, nor
dissemble* and therefore they are not esteemed in the world, much less
promoted and preferred.

Q. What duties must we perform herein?

A. First, we must render to no man evil for evil, but good for evil, and
other men's unthankfulness must not hinder us from doing good.

Secondly, let us beware, lest whiles we complain and cry out of other men's
unthankfulness, we be found unthankful our selves, especially toward God.

Lastly, the unthankfulness of men must not bar us from doing good, lest that
we forgo the comfort of a good conscience.

Q. How shall a man comfort himself whose wife is barren, and how shall
likewise the woman quiet her self?

A. First, they both are freed from evil children, and from the fear of sin
and danger, that they might otherwise fall into.

Secondly, they are freed from the contentions of nurses, and the yelling of
infants.

Thirdly, the husband shall be sure never to nourish and bring up another man's
children for his own. And this is a great benefit; for if an adulterous wife
be a great evil, much more is ^hee that is in this case fruitful.

Fourthly, the reproach of barrenness, makes the wife more diligent and
dutiful: for she with Hannah weepeth, and is silent, when many other women
are insolent and imperious. 1. Sam. 1.9.

Fifthly, God will hereby correct covetous and worldly affections in the^ which
by the number and multiplication of children might be caused and increased.

Lastly, in common calamities, especially of the sword, Math. 24.19.
war, and persecution, such shall with more expedition shift for themselves,
Luke 23.27 28.29.
and have no cause to mourn and howl for bloody and untimely death of their
children.

Q. Comforts and counsel for godly and innocent persons, unjustly cast into,
and detained in prison.

Math. 25.36.
First, many of Gods Saints, as Joseph, Paul, etc. have been wrongfully
imprisoned, Act. 28.31
and have herein been kept in safety from the enemies rage, as Paul was, who
had a soldier tending on him, and who in prison two whole years, received all
that came in unto him, and preached Gods kingdom, and taught those things that
concerned the Lord Jesus, with all boldness, no man forbidding him.

Secondly, many in their imprisonment have not only been preserved from the
great evils of the sword, famine and penury, but have wrote many famous
Epistles and works, (as Paul then endited most of his Epistles) yea they have
converted many to the Lord, and some have from hence (as Joseph) been exalted
to great honor and dignity, Eccles 4.14.

Thirdly, their mothers womb was once their prison, and the grave shall be
their second prison: and why then do they so much fear the Magistrates prison?

Fourthly, many of devotion to God, and because they would be crucified and
mortified to the world, have spent and ended their mortal lives in dens,
caves, cloisters, dungeons, and therefore they in prison must carry the same
mortified affections, and all will be well.

Lastly, Act. 3.19.
the day of death, and the day of judgment will put an end to it at the
furthermost, and therefore they must take their false imprisonment most
patiently, Psalm. 123.2
and with Paul and Silas pray unto God and sing Psalms, and wait also Gods
good leisure for their deliverance.

Q. How shall we comfort them* that are heavy hearted and afflicted, because
they are borne down and oppressed in their lawful suite?

A. First, we must possess their minds and hearts with this, Eccl. 5.7.
that nothing befalls them but by Gods providence, and for their good:
Eccles. 4.^.2.3.
for he suffers this wrong to be done: he sees it, and will in time
require it.

Eccle. 7.17
Secondly, Solomon in his time saw a righteous man perish in his justice; and
why may not the like happen in our declining days? c. 8. v. 14.
There are righteous men to whom it comes according to the work of the wicked.

Thirdly, God will hereby have the adversaries of the just man's cause (whether
Judges or Justices, Eccles. 3.16.17.
Lawyers, Procters, or Apparitors etc.) to fulfill the measure of their sins,
and so (if they betimes repent not) to engulfe themselves into the lake of
eternal damnation.

Fourthly, God will have his people to suffer many wrongs by the wicked, that
they should not be corrupted with the flattery of the world, and so should be
condemned with it.

Lastly, let us truly and constantly serve our good God, and he will (partly
in this world, and abundantly in the world to come) comfort, right, and advance
us.

CHAP. XVII. Of the extraordinary euilles, which even the bodies of Gods Saints
are in this world (many times) subject unto.
Question.

WHat are the extraordinary evils unto which the bodies of men are subject and
liable?

A. Two especially, to wit witchcraft and possession.

Q. What is withcraft?

A. It is a wicked Art or practice, Perkins.
serving for the working of wonders, by the assistance of Satan, so far forth
as God shall in justice permit.

Q Whether that Gods children can be annoied, or hurt by the practices of
witches and enchanters?

A. Yes, why not? For first (as shall be afterward more particularly showed in
the doctrine of possession) S^tan transported the holy body of Christ from
place to place: he smote Job with sore boiles from the sole of the foot unto
the crown of his head; he slew his (religious) children, Job 1.19. and he
bowed together a daughter of Abraham eighteen years, Luke 13.16.
so that she could not lift up her self.

Eccles. 9.2
Secondly, all outward things may come alike, both to the good and to the bad.

Thirdly, God will let his children have a taste of satan's might and malice,
that they should beware of his subtle practices, and should desire strength
from God, and depend upon his power and providence only.

Lastly, God does hereby either manifest and correct spiritual pride, or some
hidden sin in his servants; or else he does quicken and revive the latent
and hidden graces of the heart, that they may be thankful to God for them, and
feel them increased and confirmed in themselves.

Q What use is to be made hereof?

A. First, hereby it is apparent, that they are wholly deceived, who have a
strong imagination that their faith is so mighty and perfect, that all the
witches in the world, and all the devils in hell cannot hurt them nor shake it.

Secondly, it behooves Gods children never to presume of outward security from
any temptation, but to prepare and arm themselves against it; and if Satan by
his instruments at any time (by Gods permission) afflict and torment them, they
must know that it is only for the trial of their faith and patience, Matthew
5.10, 11, 12.
and therefore the end cannot but be good and glorious.

Q. Why does God suffer his children thus to be tormented?

A. First, that he may (for the time) try their faith, and likewise exercise
their patience.

Secondly, that he may at length (either by life or death) wholly deliver them,
and then give Satan the greatest soil, when he looks for the greatest
victory and advantage.

Q. What use and application is to be made of this point?

A. First, we must beware that we do not censure all, or any, thus tormented,
with the black note and mark of a reprobate, seeing that Gods children are
liable (sometimes) to the hurt of witchcraft, as well as the wicked and profan^
people.

Secondly, we must be content that Satan should go about to winnow us as
wheat, Luke 22.31.32.
for he shall not prevail against our faith: well may the chafe be parted and
divided from the wheat, but the wheat and the saving grace of God shall never
be driven out of our hearts.

Lastly, the more Satan bestirreth himself to annoy and displeasure us, Iam 47.
let us the more v^liantly and vehemently by the word of God, by faith, and
prayer, resist him, then he will fly from us, and we shall foil him.

Q Why does Satan by his instruments, endeavor rather to annoy Gods children
then those that are wicked?

A. Because he has the wicked fast in his hold, and if he should (ordinarily)
torment them he might possibly estrange them from him, and so lose them. But as
for the godly, they have escaped his hands, and therefore he labors to
recover them: they are as the Merchants ship, fraught and laden with great
riches and precious commodities and therefore he strives either to take them,
or else to drown and sink them.

Q. What means and remedies are there to prevent and cure the practices of
witchcraft?

A. There is one sovereign and principal preservative, and th^^ is, to be
within the covenant of grace, made and confirmed in the Gospel by the blood of
Christ, touching remission of sins and everlasting life; for to such on one
appertain the promises of the blessed presence of Gods spirit, and of the
presence and special protection of his holy Angels, Psalm. 92.10.
to pitch their ten^s about them, Number. 23.23.
and to preserve their souls and bodies from the power and practices of Satan
and his instruments, (namely) so far forth as is expedient for them.

Q. How may a man be certified that he is in the covenant of grace?

A. By a lively faith, applying to himself the saving promises of God in
Christ and by the fruits of it, in true repentance and obedience.

Q Deliver some general restauratiues and remedies against the practices of
witchcraft.

A. They that are annoied by witches and the practices of withcraft, must
practice three duties. First, they must note that sin is the true and proper
cause of it, 1. Sam. 15.
as may appear in Saul vexed with an evil spirit, 1. Tim. 1.20
in Hymeneus and Alexander, (for their pestilent errors) given up unto Satan;
and in the incestuous Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5.5. And therefore they must never
rest, until that they have found out this sin, and withal wounded and
slain it.

Secondly, they must show forth by hearty prayer and fasting, their faith
whereby they rely on Gods mere mercy; and herein they must pray absolutely for
the pardon of their sins, but conditionally for deliverance from the hurts
and torments of witches and sorcerers, for they are but temporal evils.

Lastly, they must comfort themselves in this, that the devil and his
instruments, are but Gods executioners, who directs their practices to his
childrens good, and that he being a most wise God, and a loving father in
Christ, will not suffer them to be tried and exercised above their ability, but
will in his good time, either in this life, or in the end of this life, by
death eternally deliver them, and put them in present possession of everlasting
ease and happiness.

Q. What is possession?

A. It is when the devil is manifestly present, either in the whole body, or
in some part of it; so that he has the power and government of it. As for
examples sake, when he possesses the instrument of the voice, as the tongue,
and withal makes the party possessed to speak strange languages, which
formerly he never either heard or understood, and when he causes the party
possessed to give notice of secrets, and of things done far off

Q. Whether is there any possession in th^se days or no?

A. Though possession by evil spirits is in these days of truth but rare, and
of few noted, yet there is, and will be such. And this the Writers of the
Centuries do record to have fallen out in every age, and frequent experience
in our own kingdom does also confirm it.

Secondly, the causes of possession, namely sin as the meritorious cause of
it, and the demonstration and execution of Gods justice as the final cause,
cease not: for sin is as rife, yea more raging then ever heretofore; and God
is as just to punish sin, as at any time, and then why should there not be
possession an effect of it?

Thirdly, the proper signs and symptoms of possession, namely loud crying of
the party possessed, Mark. 9 26
renoing of his body, and his lying dead at the point of his dispossession, are
in these days descried and observed: Mar. 9.24.
and why is there not then the thing signified?

Lastly, the ordinary means of expelling Satan, namely prayer and fasting
remain, and why not possession?

Objection.
Q But the miraculous and extraordinary gift of eiecting evil spirits out of
the possessed, is now altogether ceased, Ergo, there is now no real and bodily
possession.

A. The argument follows not: for though possession in our days be far
more rare then in Christ and the Apostles times, and the miraculous gift of
casting them out (by miracle) be ceased, yet there is an ordinary course
remaining and left to the Church, namely, prayer and fasting; Mark. 9.2^
and not without good reason; for there is no temptation but God has provided
a remedy for it, and much more for such an extraordinary affliction. and
hereupon when the Disciples of Christ having jointly received power and
authority to cast out devils; and when they assaying to cast out Satan out of
one of the Scribes sons, and because satan yielded not at first, and they
began to doubt of the sufficiency of their authority, they had no success;
for the gift of miraculous faith, was for the time interrupted: hereupon Christ
refers them to the ordinary means, namely prayer and fasting.

Objection.
But God has made promises to his children, Iam 4 7.
that Satan shall have no power over them.

A. All temporal blessings (whereof this is one) are promised with condition,
namely, so far forth as may stand with Gods good pleasure, and the good of
his children, and not otherwise: but it is his decree, and for his childrens
profit, sometimes to be bewitched and annoied by Satan's instruments.

Q Whether those that were vexed by evil spirits, in the time that Christ
lived on the earth, or in any age sithence, were only obsessed and outwardly
tormented by Satan, or possessed by the substantial inherence of him in their
bodies.

A. (No doubt) they were tormented both ways. Touching obsession, there is no
question; and touching possession, it is apparent by these and the like
arguments. First, by a distinct voice heard out of the person possessed,
differing from his own natural voice.

Secondly, by the speaking of the hardest languages, which the party possessed
never formerly understood.

Thirdly, our blessed Savior Christ cast out a devil out of a man, and bad
him enter in no more.

Math. 12.43.44.
Fourthly, the unclean spirit being gone out of a man, and finding no test
elsewhere, purposes and endeavors to return into his house from whence he
came: Ergo, he was formerly in it.

Lastly, (a few words satisfy men not conceited or contentious) the experience
of most ages, and the judgment of the most Orthodox Divines proves it.

Q. Whether that Gods children may be at any time, or are in these days
possessed by evil spirits?

Eccl. 9.2.
A. Yea truly; first in these outward things, al may fall alike to the good and
bad.

Secondly, Satan by Gods permission, had power over the blessed body of our
Savior Christ, and transported it from place to place, Mat. 4.8.
viz. from the wilderness to a wing of the temple in Jerusalem.

Thirdly, Satan infected Jobs body with loathsome and pestilent botches and
boiles, yea and ouerturned the house wherein Jobs children were upon them, and
so crushed and squeesed them in pieces.

Fourthly, holy and blessed Paul was buffeted by satan.

Fifthly, 2. Cor. 12.7
a daughter of Abraham was troubled eighteen years with a spirit of
infirmity; for Satan so bowed her, that she could not lift up her head.

Sixthly, the woman of Canaan her daughter was vexed with a devil. Mat.
15.21.22.


Seventhly, the child of a true believer was by satan possessed.

Eighthly, the experience of all ages and times (more or less) verifieth and
justifies the truth of this assertion.

Lastly, fatherly and temporary chas^isements yet remain; but possession is
(to Gods children) but a temporary and fatherly chastisement.

Q. What general comforts and directions are there against possession?

A. First Satan's both nature and power is restrained, limited, and bounded:
for touching his nature, he is but a creature, and finite both in knowledge and
power. And as touching his power, (though it be very great) yet he is so
bridled and restrained by the decree, and will of God, that he cannot put in
execution all his natural power, to the hurt and annoiance of any whatsoever.

Secondly, sundry of Gods saints, as Job, and a daughter of Abraham, that was
bound by satan eighteen years: yea and our blessed Saviors body, was subject
(for the time) to satan's malice, and yet all happily escaped, and were
delivered: Christ by his own power foiled him, and the other were conquerors
in and through Christ.

Thirdly, that in Gods children, possession by satan only annoieth the body,
which is as it were the outward wall or the circumference; but he can never win
or overcome the castles of our hearts, nor attain unto the center of our
conscience.

Lastly, that possession by evil spirits, is (to the believers) but a
temporary chastisement, and shall determine in death, (if not long before)
espe^ally, if public and private prayers and fastings be (according to Christ
his ordinance) used.

Q. What duties are the possessed to perform?

A. They must heartily pray unto, and call upon God in Christ, to check satan,
and to restrain his power and malice, and (consequently) to deliver them and
theirs: and in the mean time, they must patiently bear that particular
affliction, and wait Gods leisure until he deliver them. Job 13. Heb. 11.17.

Secondly, they must have recourse to God in his word, in which he promises
them his presence, and protection in their greatest dangers. Psalm. 91.10.11.
Zach. 2.51. Esaias 66.12. Number. 23.25.

Thirdly, Mat. 17.21.
there must prayer and fasting of the Church be used for them: for so Christ
has ordained and commanded. Mark 3.29. Psalm. 37.34.

Lastly, they must to their holy professions, join practices of good works and
newnes of life, and then all things will go well with them in the end.

Q. What duties are the friends of the possesed, and his neighbors, and those
that attend upon him, to perform unto him?

Romans 12.15.
A. First, they must condole and grieve with him, as members of one and the
same spiritual body. 1 Cor. 12.25.


Secondly, they must visit him, and by prayers make intercession to God for
him; Iam. 5.15.
for so God has commanded; and the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if
it be fervent.

Esa. 8.20.
Thirdly, they must advertise him that he in no wise send to wizards, nor fly
to any unlawful means; 2 Kin. 1.3. and 4.
for this is not the means to expel satan, but to entertain and also to
strengthen him.

Lastly, because in possession, God does either correct some evil in the party
possessed, or make trial of his faith, his friends must endeavor to bring him
to repentance for his sins, and this being done, to persuade the said party
to wait constantly and patiently for the good time of his happy deliverance.

THE SECOND BOOK, Wherein are contained sovereign and most sweet
consolations, directions, and remedies against such inward or outward evils,
crosses, afflictions, which properly and peculiarly concern Gods Church and
Children.

LONDON Imprinted by William Hall for John Stepneth. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable his very good. Lord, the L. HARINGTON, Baron of EXTON;
and to the right Noble and Virtuous the LADY HARINGTON his wife, and my
singular good LADY, Grace, Mercy and Peace.
Having (Right Honorable) in the former book treated of such public and
private troubles, vexations, losses and calamities that are common to Gods
children with the wicked; and having (according to my measure) sorted out, and
set down such plain and compendious rules, directions, and consolations, as
may seem most fit and necessary; I have in this second Book propounded in
order those doubts, distresses, griefs, scandals, trials and afflictions,
which did specially and properly concern Gods Saints and servants: (for many
are the troubles of the righteous, and the better Christian the more tried and
afflicted) and I have withal expressed and drawn out of Gods book such
certain resolutions, undoubted conclusions, and choice comforts, as (I hope)
will give good satisfaction and contentment to every good Christian. And hoping
that through Gods blessing this small work may do much good, I have been
willing to make it common, and for many just and weighty reasons me moving, do
deuote and consecrate it to your Honors. For, first, your Honors being
Pillars in Gods house, and goodly Cedars in the Lebanon of his Church militant,
bear your parts in affliction, and therefore the comforts do appertain unto
you; you share in the conflicts, and why not in the conquests?

Secondly, this my discourse being a subject and matter of religion and
learning, who have greater interest in it, then such a noble Theophilus, and
honorable Sunamite, who both do so much favor, further, and wish well to
learning and godliness?

Thirdly, in whom do might and meekness, honor and humility, greatness and
gratiousnes, more happily concur, then in your Honors?

Lastly, having received so many great and undeserved favors from your
Honors, as the Root, and from your noble offspring, as the blessed branches; I
could find no better means to manifest my humble duty, and to testify my
thankful heart, then by dedicating, and commending these my labors to your
patronages.

Vouchsafe therefore not only to peruse my meditations, but also to approve
them; that the Author may receive the greater encourageme^t, and the fragrant
perfume of your favorable disposition, may more amply enlarge, and make known
it self. But fearing to be offensive and tedious, and assuring my self of
your Honorable acceptance; I do here most heartily sue and supplicate to God
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to bless the bright Morning Star, that
Princely charge under your careful tuition, and herein to respect and reward
your faithful service, and watchful attendance, to remember in goodness all
your kindness showed to his Church and children, to continue you long in health,
to increase you in all grace and honor, and to replenish your hearts with all
hope and comfort.

Your Honors in all duty, most affectionate, THOMAS DRAXE.

THE SECOND BOOK. Of the sovereign and most sweet consolations, directions,
and remedies against such inward or outward evils, crosses, afflictions, which
properly and peculiarly concern Gods Church and children.
CHAP. I.
Question.

WHat are those crosses, troubles and afflictions, that properly and peculiarly
concern Gods Saints and servants?

A. They are either inward or outward.

Q. What are the inward crosses?

A. Those spiritual temptations that assault the souls, faith, and
sanctification of Christians.

Q. How are they to be distinguished?

A. They are either such temptations which arise from within the mind of Gods
children, or which are accidentally occasioned and objected from without them.

Q. What are those inward temptations and distresses that arise from within the
minds of Gods children?

A. They are either anguish of mind and distress of conscience (in general,)
or doubts of, and assaults against faith and sanctification (in particular.)

Q. What is distress of mind?

A. A lively ^eeling of Gods displeasure for sin committed, whereupon the
person distressed is in suspense of Gods favor, and of his salvation, and does
further expect the increase of the same distress. Heb. 5.7.


Q. Why is it put in the first place?

A. Because it is the most bitter and grievous cross of all others.

Q. Render some reasons of your assertion.

A. First, because they that are hereby tried, exercised, and buffeted, strive
not with men, who are weak and mortal, but with God almighty, who is highly
offended with them, and is a revenging God.

Secondly, no outward act, physic, counsel, medicines, might or means, can
possibly relieve and cure such, but only the word and spirit of God,
revealing and applying the blood and obedience of Christ unto the party
afflicted.

Thirdly, such distressed souls are more tormented by the coveting and
remoouing all sense and feeling of his graces, then if they should be put to
all the racks and gibbets in the world, insomuch, that in their symptoms they
are moved and drawn sometimes not only to complain of God, Job. 6.2. and
3.24 etc. 16 12.
but to blaspheme him, and to cry out that they are damned.

Lastly, P^al 6.1.2 3 Psalm. 116.3.
these temptations and distresses do of all torments most nearly resemble the
pains of the damned, and hereupon David says, that the pains of hell gat
hold on him.

Q. For what ends and purposes does God oftentimes so t^ouble and afflict the
minds and consciences of his children.

A. For diverse ends: First, that they finding (to their grief) how odious
sin is in Gods sight, may be the more stricken down, yea and confounded in
themselves, and so be the more mightily stirred up to godly sorrow.

Secondly, God will hereby check and correct spiritual pride in them, by
reason of illumination, revelation, graces, acts done, etc. Hereupon Paul says
of himself, ^. Cor. 12.
that lest he should be exalted out of measure by spiritual revelations, God
sent the messenger of Satan to buffet him, and the prick in the flesh to
humble and exercise him. God hereby like a good Physician lets them blood,
and eases them of all ill humors of pride, worldlines, looseness of life,
security, etc. and estrangeth them from the friendship, and familiarity of
wicked men.

Thirdly, God will hereby try and prove, that is, make known to themselves
and others, their faith, and a train of most excellent virtues that follow and
attend upon it.

Fourthly, they hereby, when they are once delivered, Gen 45.5. and 6.
shall be more compassionate to their brethren in the like extremity. Psalm.
51.13.
For as one piece of iron cannot be souldred and fastened to another unless
both pieces be made red hot, A Similitude.
and beaten together: Luke 22 33.
so one Christian member cannot be soundly affected to another, unless both
have had experience of the same, or the like misery.

Q. What if temptations and afflictions be (...), that is, of long durance,
how then shall a Christian man hold out, and lose no ground?

A First, by considering that (besides the long afflictions of Job, David,
Hanna, a daughter of Abraham, that was bowed by Satan 18. years, and the
distresses of particular persons in all ages) the children of Israel were long
in captivity in Egypt, in Caldea, in Babylon: the ten general persecutions
were of long continuance, but the end and issue of all, were happy and blessed.

Secondly, God by the long continuance hereof, does cure many desperate sins in
them, and prevent many evils, into which otherwise they would cast themselves
headlong; these long continuing plasters will fall off as soon as the wounds
are cured.

Pro. 13.12.
Thirdly, the longer that the deliverance is deferred, the more comfortable will
it be when it comes.

Lastly, if process of time rid them not away, yet death will end them.

Use.
Wherefore let us humble our selves under Gods mighty hand; Ioh. 5.14.
let us seek his face, and desire his mercy, which being obtained, let us
sin no more lest a worse thing befall us, let us then beware an after-clap.

Q. From what special causes does distress and anguish of mind arise?

A. From two, the one inward and original, namely, a deep apprehension, or
rather, an ouerrating of sin committed; and the other outward, and
occasional, namely, crosses, calamities dangers, distresses, persecutions, and
troubles.

Q. What meditations are good for our restitution, and for the regaining of
Gods favor once felt and enioied?

A. We must remember and weigh diverse things. First, that in these desertions,
the Saints of God in all ages, share and are copartners with us.

Secondly, that they are finite, momentany, and sufferable.

Thirdly, that if they be weyed in a balance either with the horrors and
torments of the damned, from which Christ has delivered us, or with the
glorious joys of heaven* wherein our Lord has slated us, 1. Pet. 1.6.
they are as nothing, and therefore we are more patiently, and joyfully to
undergo them, 2. Cor. 4.17. Heb. 10.37

Fourthly, if these temptations, be great and grievous, then they (like strong
purgations) will work our greatest peace at length.

Fifthly, we must note, that the way to heaven is not strawed with flowers, and
roses, but set with thorns, and therefore we ought to be well shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.

Sixthly, God will not long leave us comfortless, but as the temptation
abounds, so shall the consolation much more, and the event shall be always
good.

Seventhly, God does sometimes forsake us, so that we sin greatly, and
sometimes that we are hopeless in our troubles, that Gods favor recovered,
should be more esteemed of us. For as the morning light is more comfortable
after the darkness of the night, as walking after sleep, health after
sickness, a calm after a storm, and peace after war: so is Gods love more
admired after, and his favor more desirable and acceptable, when sundry
temptations and desertions have gone before.

Lastly, God in due season will bring these doleful desertions to an excellent
issue, and to a blessed conclusion.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First; we must be heedfull that we do not rashly and uncharitably
censure any of Gods afflicted children, as though they were finally forsaken.
For whom God loves most he chastises most, and he puts his chiefest
Champions and Worthies to the greatest hazards.

Secondly, we must never promise to our selves any immunity from these
troubles and trials, but arm and prepare our selves against them.

Lastly, we must not pine away in our troubles, nor despair, but we must live
by faith, and wait upon our God, until he gloriously deliver us.

Q. With what comfortable directions and rules, are the consciences of Gods
children to be relieved that are vexed in soul by reason of some grievous
sin committed?

A. First, they must know that God (in the matter of our salvation) works by
the contraries, Romans 8.28.
and turns the poison of the sin of his children into excellent
preservatives, and restoratiues, and therefore he sometimes so leaves them to
themselves, that they commit some great sin that wounds the conscience,
that his grace may be more conspicuous and apparent in their recovery, and that
they having felt the weight of Gods displeasure, may be more watchful and wary
for the time to come.

Secondly, Ioh 3.16.
they must remember that Christ his satisfaction to Gods justice is of infinite
value and worth, and that if they do by the hand of a lively faith apply it to
their souls, it will cure the wounds of their souls, be they never so great.

Thirdly, if they debase themselves before God, and strip themselves of all
opinion of their own worthiness, and withal truly desire to be reconciled unto
God, then God will give grace to the humble, and accept the will for the deed.

Math 24. v. 26 Ioh. 20.25.27.
Fourthly, that doubting, and desperation is like the great monster Golias, that
defieth the living God, and therefore we must not yield to it, but resist it,
and (with the fling and sword of Gods word) slay it.

Lastly, they must meditate upon Gods sweet mercies, past, present, and to
come, and lay his precious promises close to their hearts, and they will be so
many flagons of wine and apples of comfort to revive their fainting souls.

Q. With what considerations shall Gods children comfort themselves, when God
(for the time) delayeth either to remove, or to mitigate inward, or outward
afflictions?

A. First, that God is the author of them, Amos. 3.6
and not man only (or principally) and that he turns them in the end unto
the special good of his children. Romans 8.18.

Secondly, Romans 8.27.
that Gods children of all times are subject to this temptation and are our
companions and copartners herein. 1. Pet. 5.9.

Thirdly, that the longer that our temptations endure, the more easy will they
be; and that the more violent they be (like the blustering and stormy winds)
the sooner they will end; for nullum violentum est perpetuum; and God will not
(such is his tender compassion and indulgence) have his children tempted above
their measure and strength.

Fourthly, that the Lord Jesus has long sithence drunk up the poisoned dregs
of affliction, and has sanctified and sweetened the remainders of it unto them.

Fifthly, Ps. 91.15.
God is present with his in trouble, he by his spirit does instruct, direct,
comfort and strengthen them, Verse. 16.
and ^ill (in good time) graciously and gloriously, by life or death, free and
deliver them.

Q. What is a second, (though an accidental and occasional) cause that
causes and increases distress of mind?

A. Melancholy.

Q. What is melancholy?

A. It is (in regard of the outward matter and original of it) a kind of earthy
and black blood, (especially in the spleen) corrupted and distempered, which
when the spleen is stopped, conueieth it self to the heart and brain, Perkins.
and there, (what by his corrupt substance, and infectious quality, and what by
corrupt spirits) annoieth both brain and heart, the seats and instruments of
reason, understanding and affections.

Q. How does melancholy breed and nourish distress of mind and conscience?

A. By furthering evil and fearful conceits: for when the mind of the
melancholic person has imagined, conceived, and presented to it self
dreadful things, then affection works upon it, and then jointly from the
mind and affection disturbed and distempered, proceed fears, horrors,
desperations.

Q How is distress and grief of mind to be distinguished from melancholy?

A. Many ways. First, melancholy may bear sway and prevail, when the
conscience is in a slumber, and no whit disquieted.

Secondly, distress of conscience perplexeth the whole man; but melancholy
troubles the imagination only.

Thirdly, distress of conscience arises from the knowledge of sin, and from
the fear and feeling of Gods indignation; but the fear and distress that is
occasioned by melancholy, arises from pretended and supposed causes.

Fourthly, he that is distressed in conscience, may, and has courage in all
other things; but the melancholic person fears and misdoubteth every thing.

Lastly, melancholy is curable by physic; but distress of conscience can by
no other means be removed, but by faith in Christ his merits and mediation.

Q. How is melancholy to be cured?

A. First, the melancholic person must be brought not only to an
acknowledgement of his sins in general, 2. Cor. 7.9.10.
but of some special sin in particular, that so his melancholic sadness may
be turned into a godly sorrow.

Secondly, he must be distinctly acquainted with the precious promises of
God, Psalm 34.12.
made to repentant sinners. Psalm. 97 10.

Thirdly, he must touching the outward state of his body, suffer himself to
be governed by his friends and men of skill, or else he must be contained in
order by violence.

Fourthly, he must suffer nothing to enter into his heart that may vex and
disquiet him.

Lastly, the ordinary means of physic must be used; for it serves to abate
the evil humor of the body, and to cure the distemper of it.

Q. What are the principal and usual effects of distress of soul and
conscience?

A. Six especially: first, sadness and heaviness: secondly, troublesome and
unquiet dreams: thirdly, wearisomenesse of this present life by reason of
daily discontentments: fourthly, desperation of salvation: fifthly, fear of
the last judgment: lastly, fear and expectation of hell fire.

Q. What comforts and remedies are there against this sadness and heaviness?

A. First, in this temptation a Christian man must by the feet of his faith,
and the wings of his affection come, Mat. 11.28
yea and fly unto Christ, and take upon him the yoke of his fatherly
correction, and then he shall find rest unto his soul.

Secondly, let him look and long for the Lords gracious and favorable
presence, no otherwise then the sea-beaten traveler longs and looks for
the haven: and even as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hands of her mistress: Psalm.
123.2.
so his eyes must wait upon the Lord his God, until he have mercy upon him.

Thirdly, he must with Jacob wrestle with God by prayer, and not cease to urge
and importune him, until he bless him, and then he shall (at length) prevail
with him, and have his quietus est.

Fourthly, he must consult and be advised by the Ministers and Preachers of
Gods word, Job 33.23 24.
to whom he has given the tongue of the learned, Esaias 50.4.
that they should know how to minister a word in season to the weary, and
comfort the foeble minded.

Fifthly, the greater that his unquietness is, the more must he fasten and
fix his mind upon Christ, in whom alone he shall find peace. A simil^^ude.
For as he that climeth up a ladder, the higher that he ascends, the more
fast hold he takes, so the more that a man is oppressed with heaviness, the
more earnestly should he fix and fasten his mind upon the Lord Jesus.

Sixthly, he must turn and transchange his worldly sorrow into a godly
sorrow; for then his sadness shall end in gladness, and his sorrow in singing, no
otherwise then after rain comes fair weather, and after storms calmes.

Seventhly, he must not so muse and think upon sorrowful and displeasing
objects, much less yield unto that sorrow whereof he can render no certain
cause, for then his sorrows will become incurable, and kill him: 2. Cor.
7.9.10.
but it is his part to study and ponder upon the sweet promises of God in
Christ, 1. Pet. 1.6.7
made to humbled and repentant sinners; he must also joy in, and be thankful
for Gods graces and gifts conferred upon him, which will feast and refresh his
soul.

Eighthly, he must use and take comfort in Gods good creatures, Eccles. 2.24
of meat, drink, herbs, plants, and especially solace himself in the green
and most delectable spring of the glorious resurrection daily approaching, 1 Thessalonians. 4.15.
when God shall wipe all tears from his eyes, and fill him with unutterable
pleasure.

Lastly, when he is recovered, he must be truly thankful to God; and pity
and kindly entreat them that are in like extremity.

Q What comforts are to be applied to them that are disquieted with fearful
dreams?

A. First, few dreams are true, because they are either equivocal, or
ordinarily false, and therefore not to be bebeleeued; and as for all
Prophetical dreams, they are now ceased.

Secondly, it is better to dream of things that are dreadful unto us, then
those that are delectable and desirable: Petrarch. de remed. vtrius. fort.
for the deceit of a dreadful dream is pleasant, and the issue of a delightsom
dream is many times sorrowful.

Thirdly, Job David, and others have been this way afflicted.

Fourthly, if we dream of any evil that may befall us, as we may not credit
it, because it is a dream, so it is good we should beware of it, and the
occasions thereof, and prevent it by prayer.

Lastly, disquiet and fearful dreams proceed ordinarily from cares, Eccles.
5.2.
vexation and distraction of mind in the day time, and therefore we must
disfurnish and unlade our selves of them.

Q. What practices are necessary to prevent fearful dreams?

A First, moderate and spare diet; for from a full stomach arise noisome fumes
which trouble the brain.

Secondly, a quiet disposition, and the following of quiet studies in the day
time, which will be the cause of quiet repose in the night.

Thirdly, a careful and conscionable execution of the works of our Christian
and civil calling.

Fourthly, before we go to sleep, a diligent examination of our selves, Psalm.
4.4.8
and a sorrow for sin committed, and good omitted, and the exercise of
reading, conference, prayer.

Lastly, if our dreams be troublesome, terrible, and from Satan, we must by
earnest prayer resist him, and bid him anaunt, and we shall find marvelous
comfort after it.

Q. How much a Christian quiet and pacify himself that is weary of this
present life, by reason of many crosses, toils, troubles, and discontentments?

A. First, he must remember that every man is borne to many crosses, and that
no calling is freed from them: and therefore he must learn to take up his
cross daily, Luke 9.23. and 24.
and to follow Christ.

Secondly, he must as well look to be chastised of God, Job 2.10.
as cherished, and to be as well crossed as comforted; for he must by many
afflictions enter into Gods kingdom: Acts 14.22.
and therefore he must encounter with these evils, and use no unlawful
evasion to ease himself of them.

Thirdly, he must read much, yea muse and meditate upon the sweet and sugared
promises of God, contained in the scriptures: if he delight herein, he shall
not perish in his troubles: Psalm. 119.92 but be revived.

Lastly, he must be often conversant with Gods children, and desire their
advice, prayers, Cant. 3.2. and 3.
counsel, direction, and then they will be like so many Ionathans to comfort
him, and so many Simons to help him to bear his Cross.

Q. What is desperation?

A. It is when a man in his own sense and feeling, is without all hope of
salvation.

Q. How does this come to pass?

A. Thus, when a man being prevented, falls into some offense, which satan
does maruellously aggrauate, both by accusing the offender, and affrighting him
with the judgments of God. Matt. 27.3, 4, 5.

Q. With what comforts and persuasions shall Gods children arm and furnish
themselves against this temptation?

Esaias 1.16.17.
A. First, that Gods mercies in Christ are of an infinite extent, and do by
many degrees exceed and go beyond all their sins whatsoever. Psalm. 103.10,
11, 12.

Secondly, that Christ came into the world not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance, and that they that see not, might see: and that they
which see, (namely, John 9.39.
in their own opinion and conceit) might be made blind; and to seek and save
that which was lost (namely, in their own sense and esteem): and therefore
afflicted sinners have no cause of doubting, much less of despair.

Romans 5.10.21.
Thirdly, the greater that our sin is, the greater is Gods mercy to them that
depend upon him; so that where sin abounds grace abounds more.

Fourthly, Christ is a continual intercessor for them to God his Father, and
God hears him always. John 11.

Fifthly, that to call Gods goodness, truth, John 20.25.27.
and power into question is a great sin, and that thereby they offend him as
much as by any other sin.

Sixthly, that many of Gods dearest saints and servants have been (in a sort)
emplunged and engulfed in the pit of despair, as David, Job, the Church in the
Canticles, etc. yet by prayer, by meditating upon their former experience of
Gods mercies: Ps. 77.10.11.12. 1. Sam. 17.37. and by waiting Gods leisure with
patience, they have happily recovered themselves, and have been more confirmed
for the time to come.

Seventhly, that God, when his children seem utterly forsaken and do conflict
with Gods wrath, Lam. 3 3^.
are not wholly nor finally forsaken, but are inwardly with the woman of Canaan
supported by Gods power, Mat. 12.11.
who does in his good time bring judgment unto victory, or truth, that is, he
will so judge and reign, that at length he will be a conqueror.

Eighthly, that God in this case accepts the will for the deed, Matthew. 5.6.
and a desire of reconciliation for reconciliation it self: so that this our
desire be matched with a settled purpose, and a full resolution to forsake all
sin* Acts 11.23.
and to turn unto God. Luke 15.18.

Ninthly, that in the beginning of a man's conversion, Mat 9.22.
and in the time of some grievous temptation, God accepts of a desire to
believe for faith it self. Mat. 8.25.26.

Tenthly, that desperation in Gods children is but temporary, and therefore
curable: John 13.3.
for God teaches them, he loves them with an eternal love, he enlightneth
and guides them by his spirit, and having begun in them the work of grace,
Phil. 1.6.
he will finish it until the day of Christ.

Lastly, that all the rules and principles of Christian religion are
demonstratiue, and certain both in themselves, and also in the minds and
understandings of Gods children.

Q. What use is to be made of all these propositions?

A. First, seeing that desperation is the high way to hell, yea and the mouth
of it, let us not nourish it, and so hereby increase our sin, and lessen and
discredit Gods rich and royal mercies, but rather let us build and bind upon
them, Acts 3.19.
for the haven of mercy is prepared for the repentant.

Secondly, it is our part to beware of doubting, Heb. 4.1.2.
distrusting, and unbelief; for hereby we stop the current of Gods mercy, and
shut the doors of our hearts that the sunneshine of his grace cannot enter in
unto us.

Lastly, we in this case must not cast our eyes upon our own unworthiness,
as though we should bring a pawn in our hands, and bind God unto us by our
own works; but we must take notice of the infinite extent of Gods mercy and
compassion, Romans 4.19, 20, 21.
and strive to believe and apply all the promises of salvation.

Q. How are they to be comforted, that tremble at and are sore afraid at the
remembrance of the last judgment?

A. First, their fear of the last judgment (so that it be not unmeasurable
and unreasonable) is a notable alarm to awaken them out of, and to keep them
from the slumber of security. Hereupon Saint Paul by the terror of it, 2. Cor.
5.11
endeavored to persuade men to repentance. And Saint Jerome (whether he did
eat, drink, sleep, study) thought that he heard always sounding in his
ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

Secondly, Gods children being in Christ, and having him for their Savior,
friend, Romans 8.1.
mediator, and Judge, shall never come into the judgment of condemnation, but
shall hear that comfortable sentence; Mat ^5.41.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world.

Q. What use (in a word) is to be made hereof?

A. We must spiritually imitate the last judgment, 1. Cor. 11.32.
by arraigning our selves before the bar of Gods judgment; we must indite
and condemn our selves for our sins, and then the last judgment shall not
minister unto us matter of terror, but of triumph.

Q. Js it peculiar to Gods children thus to be sometimes perplexed with
doubting of Gods favor, and their own salvation?

A. Yes: for first the wicked and profane man is not sensible of his own
wants, but is presumptuous and confident, though he be notwithstanding deuoid
and destitute of faith and inward holiness.

Secondly, that the child of God is subject to such doubtings and wauerings, it
thus appears. Luke 22.32.
First, satan desires to sift them only, and to spoil them of the rich
treasure of grace in their minds and hearts.

Secondly, whosoever truly believes, feels and finds in himself many
doubtings and distrustings, as the whole and sound man perceives in himself
many grudgings of diseases, which if he had not health he could not feel.
Hereupon we read how many of Gods most worthy servants have doubted, yea and
almost despaired. Mar. 9.21.
The man in the Gospel, whose son was possessed with a devil, doubted when he
prayed Christ to help his unbelief: Job 3. and 13. David, Psalm. 77.8, 9, 10,
11. and Psalm. 116.1. Ezechias, Esaias 38. and many others have been brought unto
the pit of desperation.

Thirdly, Gods children only complain of, abhor and resist doubtings and
wauerings, yea and pray against them, and therefore they must needs be subject
unto them.

Q. What are the principal means to suppress these (or the like) doubtings?

A. The consideration of these meditations following. First, it is Gods
commandment that we should believe his manifold and precious promises, 1. Ioh
3.21.
which if we refuse to do, we justly defraud our selves of Gods favor, Heb.
4.11.
and of our own salvation. Hebr. 3.18. and 19.

Secondly, the promises of grace are general to all Gods children, and shut
out no particular person: Esaias 55.1.
and therefore when such offers of mercy and grace are made unto us, and
confirmed by the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, let us by the
hand of faith apply them to our own souls and consciences.

Lastly, that by doubting of, and calling the truth of Gods goodness, and
sweet promises into question, we offend God as much almost as by any other
sin; for hereby we rob God of the glory of his mercy, 1. John 5.10
and make him (what in us lies) a liar, because we will give no credit to his
promises, nor apprehend and lay hold on them.

Q. What practice is necessary for our help and recovery?

A. We must retire our selves into some secret place, humble our selves before
God, make known our wants unto him, and entreat him to work faith, and
suppress unbelief in us, and he will hear us.

Q. Comforts and counsel for them that stand in fear, and expectation of hell
fire.

A. It is good and profitable, even for the regenerate oftentimes to speak,
think of, and stand in fear of hell, that they may hereby be preserved from
evil, and confirmed in goodness. Hereupon our blessed Savior thus armeth and
exhorts his Disciples against persecution; Fear not them which kill the
body, Mat. 10.28.
but are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him that is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell fire.

Secondly, there is no hell to the believers, for the sting of death is taken
away by Christ, the godly have eternal life, 1. Cor. 15.55 56. Ioh. 3.36.
and are already (viz. in beginning and hope) passed from death to life, 1.
Ioh. 3.14. Joh. 5.24.

Thirdly, Christ did not only (many hundred years sithence) by his death, and
soule-sufferings satisfy his fathers justice for us, but always sits on
his Fathers right hand to make continual and effectual intercession for us: 1
Ioh. 2.1. and 2.
Romans 8.34. and how then can we possibly perish?

Lastly, our souls forthwith, after that they are loosed from our bodies,
Apoc. 14.13. Luke 23. Ioh. 6.54.
are carried by the blessed Angels into heaven, and our bodies shall be raised
in glory at the general resurrection; how then can we slauishly fear hell?

CHAP. II. Of doubting of Gods favor, and love toward us.
Question.

WHether it be incident to any of Gods children to doubt of his love and
favor?

A. Yes verily, and that sundry times.

Q. For what ends?

A. First, that he should know, that faith, and a full persuasion of Gods
mercies is not natural, or proceeding from the power of a man's own free will,
but spiritual, and inspired of God by his spirit.

Secondly, that a Christian seeing his own weakness, Luke 17.5.
and how busy Satan is to take the advantage of his infirmity, should by
prayer entreat the Lord to strengthen his faith, and to ease him of scruples
and doubts.

Lastly, that hereby God might train and exercise his elect in the spiritual
battle; for they seeing their manifold doubts and ignorances, are hereby
provoked to search the scriptures, Ioh. 5.36.40.
and to take notice of Gods promises, that by the due application hereof, their
faith might be fortified and strengthened, and the remainders of ignorance and
doubting, be by degrees abolished.

Q. How shall Gods children comfort themselves, when by reason of the number
and heinousness of their sins, they cannot be persuaded that they are Gods
children?

Romans 7.18 19.20 and 24. Psalm. 103.10.11.12.
A. By remembering and laying close to their consciences, these (or the like)
rules and directions following; first, it is a great part of our perfection to
learn out, and so to lament a man's errors, and imperfections.

Secondly, God will pardon all sins to them that believe, and repent, be they
as the sands of the sea for number and weight: and hereupon we read in the
Scriptures, how that Judas having committed incest; David having in the pride
of his heart numbered the people, and added thereunto adultery and murder;
Solomon in his defection giving a toleration to idolatry; Peter having thrice
denied his Lord and Master; Mary the Adultresse, Paul a blasphemer and
persecutor, Zacheus an extortioner, diverse Con^urers, whereof we read in the
Acts of the Apostles, the incestuous Corinthian, repented, and were received
into grace and favor with God.

Thirdly, Ephesians. 5.2. Heb 2.14.15. Ioh. 6.35 37.
Christ their Savior came into the world to save sinners, and for this end
gave himself for them (to be) an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savor to God, and by death has destroyed the devil that had the power over
death; and therefore he will deliver them which for fear of death are in
bondage.

Lastly, if they do but hunger and thirst after grace, and in good sadness
seek the Lord, and the pardon of their sins, they shall never be sent away
empty, 2 Chapter 15.4
but be filled with good things, and in Gods court get their quietus est, Luke
1.53. Apoc. 21.6.

Q. What course must a Christian take that he may be eased and disburdened of
his doubting?

A. First, he must be provident that he do not minister matter and nourishment
to this doubting, by calling the power, truth, and mercy of God into question,
and by giving credit unto satan, who is always a liar, Ioh. 8.44.
and a murderer, and seeks his confusion; but he must against hope, Romans
4.18 19.20.21.
believe under hope, all that God has promised, and vali(...)st the devil,
and he will flee from him.

Pro 28 13 1 Ioh. 1.9.
Secondly, he must often meditate upon Gods excellent and abundant mercies, and
appropriate them to his own use, and by faith fly unto the throne of grace,
and then he shall find help in time of need, namely, rest to his soul, and
peace to his conscience. Psalm. 103.9.10.11.12.13.14 15.

Cant. 3.2 3.
Lastly, he must not only confer with and communicate his doubts and
irresolutions to Gods Ministers, and his Christian friends, that may be the
organs and instruments of God to persuade and comfort him; but importune the
Lord by constant and earnest prayer, to send down his holy spirit, that may
teach him al truth, and guide his feet into the way of peace, and then he
cannot but speed well.

Q. How shall a poor distressed Christian be informed and reformed in his
persuasion, that doubts whether that Christ be his Savior in particular, or
not?

A. First, he must knew that Gods mercies in Christ cannot for length, Lam.
3.32. Psalm 130.7
breadth, deepenes, and continuance be comprehended, and like the sun so
shine upon all men, and like the running springs, so offer themselves to all
sorts, that none are put by, and shut out, but by their own unbelief and
wilfulnes: and therefore he must entitle himself unto, and make claim of
Gods general pardon in Christ, and then he shall never miscarrie.

Secondly, if a man be teachable and fractable, and do humbly sue and seek
unto Christ for assurance of faith, he shall undoubtedly obtain it.

Lastly, seeing, that (in the work of our redemption specially) God works by
contraries, out of darkness, he draws light: out of sin, sanctimonie: out
of want, wealth: out of reproach renown: and out of death, life: etc he must
with faithful Abraham, contrary to hope, believe under hope, and he shall (at
length) be assured that Christ is his Savior.

Objection. Where there is no Word of God there is no faith: but there is no
particular word of God to ascertain me that Christ is my Savior in
particular, how then can I have any special persuasion of faith?

A. Though thy name be not mentioned and expressed in Scripture, yet there is
that which is equivalent thereunto, namely, a commandment to believe, and a
promise of salvation to him that believes, Math. 28.18. and 19.

Secondly, if thou can not at first be persuaded that Christ is thy Savior
in particular: Heb. 10.24 and 25. Mal. 2.7.
be a diligent hearer, frequent and fervent in prayer, an ordinary resorter to
the Lords Supper, a conscionable liver and confer with thy Pastor, and
christian brethren, and it shall be said unto thee, as unto the woman of
Canaan, Great is thy faith, be it unto thee according to thy desire.

Objection But Hypocrites, Heretics and profane persons may make an apply of
the general promise, and yet be far wide of any true assurance.

A. Their application is but a mere deceit or illusion, for they make an
application presumptuously, having neither the hand of faith, nor the seal of
sanctification. The Devil plaieth the iugler with them, and makes them
believe that they see that which they see not, and to be full of faith, when
they are stark banckrupts in all saving grace. But it is far otherwise with
Gods children; for they being endued with the spirit of grace, appropriate Gods
general promises to themselves; for when God in the preaching of the gospel
says, Seek ye my face, they answer, O Lord we will seek thy face: and
when God shall say, thou art my people, they shall answer, The Lord is our
God. Zach. 13.9.

Lastly, Gods elect when they are adulti, and tall men in Christ, they do
firmly believe, and so undoubtedly know it, as a man that holds a precious
jewel in his hand knows so much, Simile.
otherwise they should find no comfort in their calamities, nor be thankful to
God for graces received. Romans 8.38.
Math. 9.2. Math. 15 28. Psalm. 143.12. Romans 4.22.

Q But my faith is full of weakness, ignorance, doubting, and therefore I fear
that I have no faith at all.

A. (Dear Brother,) you have no such reason of fear and doubting; for albeit
your knowledge which is the eye of your soul, be somewhat dim, yet (blessed
be God) it sees him that is invisible; Heb. 11.27.
and though the application of faith in you (which is the very life of your
faith) is but feeble, yet it is sufficient to touch the hemme of Christ his
garment, and so to save you, and as for other parts of it (such as are
confession for sin, godly sorrow for the same, hunger after grace, and
earnest desire of pardon) they are strong, sound and sure, and of such force as
the gates of hell shall not prevail against them, and the least spark of this
faith quenches all the fiery darts of the devil, Math. 12.30.
and no marvel: for Christ your blessed Savior will not quench smoking flax
nor bruise a broken reed, but will perfect the begun work of grace in you.

Secondly, (by your own confession) a weak faith (so it has Christ only, so
as he is revealed in Scripture for his only object) is a very true faith: a
weak and sickly man is a true man, A comparison.
so a weak faith is a true faith: and therefore it has in the Scriptures the
denomination of faith, Mark. 9.23.24.
and is accepted with God for faith.

For as every grain of gold is gold, so every quantity of faith is faith, and
the imperfections and failings in true faith, do no more take away the name
and nature of it, then a great mountain of chafe does take away the name and
nature from the corn contained in it, or the dross in a great mine of gold,
does take away the name of it, (albeit the gold be the lesser part) for God
accepts it for the better part.

Thirdly, no man is absolutely perfect in faith, Romans 8.24
for the most regenerate have but the first fruits of the spirit, Luke 17.5.
i. some small portion of it: and hereupon the Apostles themselves besought
Christ to increase their faith; wherefore in this case we must not be daunted
nor discouraged, but beseech God to confirm our ^aith, and be frequent in
hearing and reading of the scripture: for the Word preached that begat it, will
increase and strengthen it.

Objection. But my calling is very laborious, and many difficult works offer
themselves to be performed, which I cannot see how I can undergo.

A. First, God that has given thee thy calling and fitted thee for it, will
bless thee so long as thou walkst in his ways, Psalm. 90.17
he will prosper thy handy work, and perfect his power in thy infirmity, 2.
Cor. 12.

Secondly, God according to gifts and graces received, measures out to every
man his calling, Mat. 25.15
and the labors thereof; for he observes a Geometrical proportion in
distributing his temptations according to his servants strength, and in
employing them in services answerable.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost is the spirit of strength, who enableth thee to
dispatch and absolve the most weighty, and dangerous works of thy calling (as
he did Abraham, Phil. 4.12.
David, Paul etc) and by the help of him that strengthens us, we shall be able
to do all things.

Fourthly, no excellent work can be performed, or notable act achieved at
home, or abroad, without labor, pains, diligence, continuance.

Lastly, God has promised to bless and assist us in the works of our lawful
calling; Psalm. 128.1
wherefore let us depend upon Gods commandment, and desire strength of him,
and we shall obtain our desire.

Q. But the sacred Scriptures are so diversely, yea and contrarily in sundry
points and places expounded, that I cannot be persuaded that they are Gods
word.

A. First, the diversity or variety of interpretation does not prejudice the
truth of Scripture: for many scriptures, as for example the Canticles, diverse
Psalms of David, as the 2. the 45. the 73. the 91. etc have both a literal
and an allegorical sense.

Secondly, diverse places may be diversely expounded, and yet nothing expounded
against Faith, Hope Charity, and then the exposition is not evil.

Thirdly, they that expound the scriptures in an absurd or contrary sense, are
but mere naturals and carnal men, who (for want of spiritual understanding)
cannot discern the things of the spirit. For as the eye in the body cannot see
without the light of the sun: so the natural man, (be he never so acute and
critical) cannot without the light of the spirit judge of heavenly things.

Fourthly, though many parts of scripture be hard and obscure to the most
regenerate man: Psalm. 119.105.
yet this darkness is not in the scriptures, for they are light it self; but
in our blindness, ignorance, infirmity.

Lastly, no man understands all things, but some man one thing, and some
another, 1 Cor. 3.13.
according to the measure of grace received, and every day the truth is, and
will be more fully revealed.

Q. But how can the scriptures be Gods undoubted word, seeing that by the
preaching, interpretation, and application of them, many are offended, and made
worse?

A. First, the pure, powerful, eternal, and holy word of God, Romans 1.16.
is not the cause hereof, for it is in it own nature the wisdom of God and
power of salvation, the immortal seed and food of the soul; but the fault is
altogether in the hearers, who either do not understand it, or believe it not,
or else contemn it: to them alone it is the savor of death unto death: 2 Cor.
2.16.
they are owls, and cannot endure the light of the sun; they are sick of a
burning fever, and cannot abide the wine of the Gospel; they are filthy swine,
and therefore cannot abide this delicious muskadell, but are thereby swelled
unto death.

Secondly, the vain and Atheistical hearers, do conceive of the Scriptures
as of a man's invention, and not (as it is indeed) the saving word of God, and
hereupon they being offended at it, are (accidentally) made worse. And herein
they are like to Samuel, who when God began to call him, as he did several
times hear the voice of God and not knowing it so to be, but supposing it to
be the voice of Elie, returned to his natural sleep and rest: So the
greatest sort of them that are outwardly called, because they hear Gods word
as the word of men, 2 Pet. 2.22
and so esteem it; they like dogs and swine return to their former filth and
vomit of their sins.

Lastly, as we must not contemn nor condemn Jewels, precious stones, arts and
sciences, because the ignorant know not their worth, and so regard them not, so
though some, or many, ignorantly or contemptuously refuse to be bettered by
Gods word, we must not be offended at their abusing and despising of it, but
rather condemn their madness, and make benefit of it, and thank God that he
has given better light and more grace.

Q. Why does God suffer the faith of his children to labor of so many doubts,
wants, and imperfections?

A. First, to bring them to a true touch and sense of their sin, and that
they may perceive in what need they stand of Christ, and of every drop of his
blood, that so they may sue and seek unto Christ for recovery.

Secondly, to correct, abate, and pull down pride, humor, and self conceit
in them, to which they are so liable, and enclinable.

Thirdly, to train and practice them, in the daily fight and battle against
sin, and to make them such expert soldiers, Luke 22. v. 31.32.
that Satan though seeking an occasion to sift them, shall be wholly
disappointed of his expectation.

2. Cor. 12.9.
Fourthly, to perfect his power in their infirmity, he will enable them to
perform all, for his grace is sufficient for them.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, we must be thankful unto God for the seeds and beginnings of
grace, Math. 25.28.29 30.
and for the least measure of true faith, lest otherwise we provoke God either
to deprive us of, or (at least to diminish his graces bestowed upon us.

Secondly, we must bewa^le our manifold defects, wants, and back slidings, and
diligently use all holy means, to cherish, further* and confirm our begun
faith, such as are the ministry of the word and sacraments, preaching prayer,
conference, meditation, and the holy practice of all good works.

Lastly, having a true faith (though for the present borne down with the
winter of affliction) let us persuade our selves that it will revive in the
spring of Gods graces.

CHAP. III. Of the distress of mind that arises from the sense and seeling of
a Christians weakness and imperfection in sanctification, and first of all in
prayer.
Question.

WHat course must a Christian take to relieve and ease himself, that finds
and ^eeleth many imperfections in his prayers?

A. First, he must acknowledge and bewail his wants and failings.

Secondly, he must desire from God a further addition of zeal.

Thirdly, when he cannot pray as he desires, Romans 8.25.26.
let him then sob and sigh unto God in his prayers, for God who searches the
hearts, knows what is the meaning of his own spirit; and no marvel, for
these groans are effects of Gods spirit in him, and are (as it were) so many
glorious beams breaking out from it; and God accepts and approves of them,
as may appear in the examples of Moses, of the children of Israel, of
Ezechias, of Iehosaphat, and others.

Fourthly, he must remember that the power of Christ remains to cure his
infirmities, and to remove his imperfections.

Lastly, the more imperfections that he finds and perceives in his prayers,
the more earnestly must he labor for the remouall and reformation of them.

Q. What use is to be made hereof?

A. First, hereby are met withal and condemned, all such who ignorantly count
them the best proficients in prayer, who never knew what these wants and
imperfections meant.

Secondly, no man must cease from this exercise of prayer, because of his
wants: for so long as any man lives here, he is but in the beginning of
perfection.

Q. But I feel my self cold, dull, and drousie in my prayers: how then can I
have any true sanctification?

A. Yes, thou may well assure thy self of the truth of thy sanctification,
so thou love God* and delight to commune with him by prayer.

Secondly, it is good that thou shoulde^t sometimes discover and discern the
dulnes and deadnes in prayer, that thou might more earnestly desire this
gift: otherwise thou would think it natural, and would attribute the
glory of it not to thy God, but to thine own self; for thus thou would
offend, if thou could always pray according to thine own satisfaction.

Lastly, Psalm. 51.17
if we can but sigh and sob (for we preu^ile more by sighs then by words) God
will hear and help us. Exodus 14.14
For shall an earthly father pity and regard the groans and sobs of his sick
son, and will not our heavenly father much more regard and pity us?

Q What uses are we to make hereof?

A. First, when we have an ability to pray, and a will thereunto, we must be
thankful to God for it.

Secondly, if the spirit of prayer be weak in us, we must call and cry unto
God for further grace, and we shall obtain it.

Lastly, we must by all good means stir up the spirit of prayer in our
selves.

Objection.
I in my prayers am troubled and disturbed with many evil, idle, worldly, and
carnal thoughts, and therefore J doubt that I have not the spirit of prayer.

A. (Dearly beloved brother) though these vain and sinful thoughts are so
many sparkles of corruption that proceed from the furnace of our unclean
heart, and are like the birds that defiled and disturbed Abraham's sacrifice:
yet note for thy comfort, that the most regenerate man in earth cannot sound
out all the corruptions in his heart, Ier. 17.9.
much less is he able to remove them. For his new birth is only begun,
and tending toward perfection, but not complete; and then no wonder though
some dregs of corruption yet remain.

Q. What course shall we take for our help and redress herein?

A. Seeing that prayer is so heavenly an exercise, and so preualent with God,
and so offensive to Satan, let us stir up our zeal herein: and for our
furtherance herein, it is good for us, (before we pray) to talk and confer
reverently of heavenly things, to read the Scriptures diligently, and
meditate in them, and then we shall be possessed with better thoughts.

Lastly, we must not yield to, but resist, and earnestly pray against evil
thoughts, yea and entreat the Lord of his grace to purge and purify our
hearts, and then these vain and idle thoughts shall less vex and annoy us.

Objection.
I have long importuned the Lord by prayer, and the Lord will not vouchsafe to
attend unto my prayer, therefore I fear I have not the spirit of prayer.

A. You have no cause thus to doubt; For God does not defer you, because he
purposes to deny you, but to cause you to have his gifts in more high esteem,
and to make you more sound sincere, and more earnest and instant in prayer.

Secondly, it may be that the thing that you desire of God, if it were granted
you, would not profit you, but turn to your hurt; and therefore God in his
mercy refuses to speed your years.

Thirdly, David, Job, the people of God in captivity, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3.
and the Church in the Canticles, that sought Christ in her bed by prayer, and
that consulted her Christian acquaintance, and the Ministers of Gods word, were
long delaied, but at last graciously heard.

Fourthly, God by putting off your prayers, will exercise and set on work your
faith, Luke 18.8.
patience, constancy: and when he prospers your petition, he will replenish
you with the greater joy.

Lastly, though God hear you not, according to your will, yet he hears you
for your wealth; and though he hear you not according to your expectation, yet
he hears you to your salvation, and therefore you must take all in good part.

Q. When God delaieth and deferreth to grant our prayers, what duties then
behooves it us to perform?

A. We must not faint in our prayers, but persist therein, and cry unto God day
and night, and then God will hear us, and we shall prevail with him as Jacob
did. Our petition shall not be returned non inuentus est, but we shall have
corpus cum causa.

Secondly, we must look that the things we beg and crave, be lawful and
convenient for us, and then (if we with patience wait Gods leisure) he will
speed our desires.

Objection. But I fear that I have committed that unpardonable sin against
the holy Ghost, because I commit so many sins against knowledge.

A. Thou (dear brother) have no cause thus to doubt, because thou art sorry and
grieved for thy sins. Secondly, thou repentest of them: but he that
commits this sin, never sorroweth nor repents for so doing.

Secondly, they that sin against the holy Ghost, tread under foot the Son
of God, they count the blood of the new Testament, as an unholy thing, they
despite the spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29
they f^ll away wholly and finally from the reue^led truth of the doctrine of
Christ, Heb. 6.6.
and of their redemption, yea they incessantly blaspheme, deride, and persecute
it; but thou continuest in the approbation, profession, and practice of the
truth, and remainest sound in judgment, and sincere in affection; therefore
thou art far from this sin. Only thou art to be advised, that thou beware
of back sliding, and the occasions thereof, and that thou (as often as thou
sinnest) so often thou renew thy faith and thy repentance, and so preventing
the beginnings of apostasy, thou shall never come to the extremity of it.

Q. What if a man find himself remiss, careless, and negligent in the
duties of praise and thanksgiving unto God, can he then assure himself that
he stands in the state of grace?

A. Yes: for he does acknowledge his infirmity, and would feign be cured of it,
and this is a print of the seal of Gods blessed spirit in him.

Secondly, all Gods children are subject to this sin, for either they forget,
neglect, or loss esteem Gods benefits, then their worth and excellency
requires: but yet they are revived and stirred by preaching, doctrine,
exhortation, admonition, and Gods fatherly corrections in depriving them of,
or in diminishing his blessings formerly bestowed upon them.

Q. What restauratiues are there for a man's recovery?

A. These meditations and practices following. First, that he by nature is
deprived of the life of God, and utterly destitute of grace, and therefore
unworthy of the least of Gods mercies.

Secondly, that the benefits of redemption, and the graces of salvation, do far
excel and exceed (in use and continuance) all earthly blessings: for they are
transitory, they cannot quiet the conscience, much less save him, or any man,
from the wrath to come, or from death and everlasting destruction: but these
spiritual graces and blessings make the possessor of them truly blessed in this
life, and perfectly blessed in the life to come.

Thirdly, that thanksgiving unto God is more excellent and acceptable then
prayer for it sometimes is hypocritical and constrained; Apoc. 7.
but thanksgiving is a free will offering, a sweet smelling perfume in Gods
nostrils, and the principal exercise of the Church triumphant in heaven, and
therefore we must herein imitate it, and give God all the glory of it.

Lastly, the forgetfulness of Gods benefits, whether in saving us from evil,
or in leading us into good, is a brand of a profane man, and a thing most
distastefull to the Divine Majesty.

Q What practices are good for our help and furtherance herein?

A. First, we must sundry times and seriously meditate upon our vows of
repentance and new obedience which we made to God in our baptism, whereof
thanksgiving is a part.

Secondly, we must renew our thanksgiving by the often and holy receiving of
the Eucharist or Sacrament of the Lords Supper: for herein is a lively
representation of our redemption, and of the heavenly blessings of Christ
bestowed upon us, and wrought for us.

Thirdly, we must wonder at, extol, and admire Gods gracious gifts and
blessings; for this practice will make us more thankful for them.

Lastly, we must note that many, yea and most kingdoms, countries, nations,
provinces, cities, towns, villages, and in them many millions of people, have
not so much as the outward means of those graces of salvation, wherewith we are
(or may be) richly adorned: and therefore how thankful should we be?

CHAP. IIII. Of a relapse into sin, and of long continuance in it.
Question.

CAn that man have any dram or scruple of saving grace, that falls eftsoons
into one and the same sin?

A. Yes: why not? For first there is no greater perfection i^ the effect, then
in the cause, nor in the whole, then in the parts: but the cause of our
obedience, i. our faith, and the parts of our regeneration.i. the renewing of
our understanding, will, affections, are imperfect; ergo the whole must needs
be imperfect, and therefore no marvel that a Saint of God falls once,
again, yea, and the 3. time, into one and the same sin.

Secondly, Abraham lied twice, and Sarah consented: Lot was twice drunke^, and
so twice committed incest: Peter (through fear) three several times denied his
good Lord and Master: and (to omit more examples) John the Evangelist, twice
fell down to worship the Angel, taking him for Christ: but all these were
Gods dear servants and repented.

Thirdly, God would hereby correct presumption of our own strength in us, and
make us more to pity our brethren when they fall, because we are subject to
the like infirmities.

Fourthly, our gracious Savior is full of mercy and will infinite times forgive
them that repent and turn to him.

Fifthly, the true Christian at length does recover out of his sin.

Lastly, Christ is a continual, and an effectual Mediator for such, and
therefore they cannot fall away from grace, Lam. 3.24.25.
nor perish; for he will not forsake them for ever, 1. John 2.1, 2.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, we in our anguish and distress of soul, must set before our eyes
the examples of those that have through infirmity often committed the same
sin, and yet have been forgiven.

Secondly, we must be grieved in our hearts for every sin so committed,
Heb. 3.12.
and sin no more lest a worse thing befall us, and lest custom of sin breed
an habit, and so we be hardened in it, and perish.

Thirdly, we must not yield to the enticements of sin, (as Adam did to Eua)
but we must resist them, as Job did his wife provoking him to sin.

Fourthly, seeing that few such are recovered, let us willingly make no trade,
Luke 13.
practice, or occupation of sin as do the workers of iniquity.

Lastly, if we be cladde with the glorious garments of Christ his imputed
holiness and righteousness, we must beware that we stain and defile it not
by sins of knowledge and presumption; and we must (for the time to come) be
careful to avoid all occasions and allurements unto sin.

Q. But what if a Christian long sleep and continue in a known sin, how then
can he any way assure himself of the truth of his sanctification?

A. Yes: he sinning either of some ignorance, or of infirmity, without any
delight in sin, or resolution to sin; for grace and a resolution to
continue in any known sin, cannot stand together. The reasons that a
sanctified person may long continue in a sin, are, or may be these.

First, (perhaps) he is not thoroughly convicted that it is a sin.

Secondly, he is always in battle against sin, satan, and the world, and
therefore may receive a venue or wound that is not presently cu^^^, Luke 22.32
but yet his faith cannot fail.

Thirdly, David continued a whole year in his murder and adultery, Perkins.
before he repented, and Master Luther when he began to see the truth, lay some
three years in desperation.

Fourthly, a regenerate man in his spiritual sight is taken captive, but full
sore against his will; for he is grieved much for it, and from his heart
desires to be delivered, Psalm. 119.11.
and therefore by such a temptation, grace and faith are not wholly taken away,
but rather declared and made manifest.

Q. What use is to be made hereof?

A. First, if a man (through infirmity) have laien long in any sin he must
study and strive by all good means to get ground of it, and to ouermaster it,
and then it shall be laid to Satan's charge, and not be imputed to him.

Secondly, seeing that he in the continual combat against the world, the
flesh, and the devil, cannot possibly escape without some spiritual wounds,
(yet not deadly to the believer) he must by spiritual medicines salve and cure
them.

CHAP. V. The complaint of small profiting by the ministry of the Word and
Sacraments.
Question.

I Profit very little, and nothing so much as I would by the Word and
Sacraments, and therefore J fear that my profiting is to no purpose, and my
hearing of the word fruitless.

A. Your manner of reasoning and concluding is not good. For first, you bewail
your wants, 2. Sam. 24.10.
and withal zealously desire to make better proceedings; and this is no work
of nature, but of grace.

Secondly, little increases, as in all natural things, so in spiritual, are
true increases, and many littles make a mickle.

Thirdly, they that find themselves to make such small and leasurely
proceedings, do hold that which they have learned by the ministry of the
word, far more surely, and soundly, then they that so suddenly seem to
profit.

Fourthly, admit that your knowledge be not much increased by the ministry of
the word, yet your affection is much bettered, and your life much more reformed.

Last^y, albeit you do not forthwith after the hearing of Gods word, and
immediately after the receiving of the Sacrament, find and feel the graces of
the spirit revived, enceased and confirmed in your self, yet you must wait
Gods good leisure, and expect the fruit of it in the time appointed. For as the
seed cast into the earth does not instantly fructi^ie: a purgation does not
forthwith work, and express his virtue: and as an Infant grows not to man's
estate in a moment (but time and space is required to all these:) So you must
not look that the seed of the word will incontinently work in you, or the
Manna of the Lords Supper presently and sensibly increase your faith, hope and
love to God and your Brethren, but let it suffice you, that you grow by
degrees, and in truth.

Q. What use is to be made hereof?

A. First, you must beware left by the ignorance of your own estate before God,
or by too much complaining of your infirmities, you rob not God of the glory of
his graces bestowed on you.

Secondly, the less that you find your self to profit, the more diligent you
must be in hearing* prayer, conference, etc.

Q. But J am dull in conceiving the meaning and use of Gods word preached, how
then can I be a right hearer?

A. First, the apprehension and sense of thy dulnes (if thou be careful to
learn) will make thee more capable of the sweet and heavenly influence of God^
word, which he that would be partak^r of must lay aside all conceit of his own
wit, understanding, and capacity.

Secondly, if there be in thee ^ut o^e spark of heavenly understanding, Luke
24.45
(...) faith, if it be stirred up by the breath, of Gods mouth, will soon take
the match and ^inder of familiar and gracious instruction.

Thirdly, the more dull that thou art, the more attention, sobriety,
watchfulness, and diligence then must use, and thou shall at length prevail
and profit.

Fourthly, a dull wit and modest, is better then a quick and desperate, for a
dull wit, if it once truly apprehend a point, it will long reta^ne, but a
quick wit will soon forget that which it has quickly and suddenly learned.

Lastly, we for the remedy of our dullness must pray unto Christ, to open our
wits to understand the Scriptures, Psalm. 119.18. and 34.
and to enlighten our eyes to behold the wonderful things of his law, and he
that taught his Apostles the whole will of his Father, will teach thee all
things necessary for thy salvation.

Q. My memory is very weak, and I remember very little or nothing of so many
excellent lessons and instructions tha^ are taught me, how shall I comfort and
relieve my self?

A. First, thou must strengthen, and confirm thy memory by daily exercise: for
diligence, indu^^y, and method, will much help memory, and supply the wants
of it.

Secondly, the more weak and uncertain that thou find thy memory, Act.
17.11.
the more speedily must thou call things that thou have heard, to account, an^
confer with thy godly Brethren about them.

Thirdly, thou must be sure to remember the text well, to affect the Minister
teaching, and to delight in his good doctrine, and this will much further thee.

Fourthly, thou must remember what vices reproved thou art subject to, and in
what duties urged by the Preacher thou failest: and apply this particularly to
thine own soul, and thou shall remember more. Happy art thou if Gods word and
Minister find thee, and happy likewise art thou, if thou can* wilt remember
that thou art thus found.

Lastly, thou must pray unto God to give thee understanding and capacity, and
to sanctify thy memory for the conceiving and treasuring up of the best
things, Ioh. 14.26.
and then God will hear thee, and send his blessed spirit the comforter to
teach thee all things, and bring all things to thy remembrance that thou have
formerly heard.

Q. But I am hardhearted, and the word of God little or nothing moves me; what
course shall I take to soften and mollify my heart?

A. First, it argues grace in thee to be sensitive of this thine infirmity,
and to desire redress of it.

Secondly, hardness of heart will always (plus minus) steal upon us, and haunt
us, therefore let us arm our selves by the word of God against it, and (to
this end) let us not only endure private admonitions, Psalm. 141.5.
but suffer Gods blessed Ministers by the hammer of his law and judgments to
work upon our hearts, yea and to break and bruise them.

Thirdly, thou must by earnest, and continual prayer, Ezech. 3.4.26.27. Isay
66.2.
entreat the Lord to take the stony heart out of thy bowels, and to give thee a
fleshy and a soft heart, whereupon God may work by his word, and wherein his
spirit may dwell.

Lastly, thou must bewail this thine infirmity, and for the remouall of it,
and the further sanctifying of thy heart, thou must wait for, and tarry Gods
leisure, who will in time cure and ease thee.

Q. What shall they do, that having sundry times received the Lords Supper,
do yet complain that they perceive in themselves no increase of faith, hope,
and love by it?

A. First of all, they must lament, and bewail their former negligence, and
want of preparation.

Secondly, they must for the time to come, 1 Cor. 11.2^.29. 2 Chr. 30.19.
keep a Court and day of hearing in their own consciences, and better examine
and prepare themselves for so holy a Sacrament: for thus they are commanded,
and without performance of this duty, there is no worthy receiving.

Thirdly, they must not look at the very instant, or immediately after the
receipt of the Sacrament, to find and feel their profiting: for as a good
medicine shows not forth his virtue at first, nor the seed straight ways
grows and yields increase: So the Sacrament (though in faith and reverence
received) does not always presently yield sensible comfort to the receiver.

Lastly, they must call upon God to bestow further grace upon them, and then
they must wait his leisure until he speed their desire.

Q. How are we to prepare our selves before we come to be partakers of the
public. Ministry of the Word and Sacraments.

A. First, we must consider the super-excellent majesty of him, Eccl. 5.1.
before whom we appear, and the most excellent nature, use, profit, and
comfort of the Word and Sacraments, in faith, and reverence heard and received.

Secondly, Psalm. 26.8.
we must love the habitation of Gods house, and the place where his honor
dwells, ver* 6.
and therefore before we come thither, we must wash our hands in innocence,
we must lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of mali^iousnes, and receive
the word of God with meekness, Iam 1.21.
and with all readiness, Act. 17.11.

Thirdly, we must come with a mind to learn and profit; we must hear what
the Lord our God says unto us, and by the hand of faith receive whatsoever he
offers us.

Fourthly, we must come to the holy assemblies in the love of God, and our
neighbor, and feeding at Gods Table, both in the preaching of the word, and in
the administration of the Supper of our Lord, we must bring with us the
wedding garment of faith and true holiness: otherwise neither the word nor the
Sacrament will profit us, but rather make us worse, and poison us.

Psalm. 86.11
Lastly, we must entreat the Lord by private prayer, to teach us inwardly by his
Spirit, and to frame our hearts to the obedience of his will.

Q. How are they to be censured and judged, and what course must they take for
their redress and comfort, that indeed find in themselves a great desire and
zeal to obey, but yet fail often in the Act of obedience?

A. First, a godly man is perfect by imputation by Christ's righteousness, ^
not by inherent and begun holiness; and he is perfect rather in purpose then
in his practice: and rather in his desire, then in his deed.

1 Samuel 16.7
Secondly, God (in his children specially) looks unto the heart and affection,
and not to outward things.

Romans 15.7 ad 22. 1 Cor. 2.14.
Thirdly, it is a sign of a perfect man to find his imperfection; for this
proceeds not from nature (that is altogether blind in matters of
regeneration) but from the spirit and grace of God, whereby he reuealeth to his
their estate.

Fourthly, the more that he fails in obedience, the more humble must he be,
and desire further grace and strength from God.

Fifthly, he must remember, that yet the Iebusite and Cananite (1. sins and
imperfections) are in his borders, and therefore he must put on and exercise
the spiritual armor, until he has foiled and subdued them of blasphemous
thoughts.

Q. Can they (possibly) have any true sanctification that are often assaulted
and encountered with many vile, horrible, and abominable thoughts?

A. Yea undoubtedly, for Satan that seeks to sift al holiness out of them,
will violently suggest and foist such thoughts sometimes into their minds.

Q. How are these thoughts to be sorted and distinguished?

A. They either arise from within the^, by reason of the corruption of their
hearts, or else they are outwardly objected and iniected by Satan.

Q. What if they arise from within us, what must we do for the removing and
reformation of them?

A. First, we must not only not consent unto, allow, and cherish them, but
repent of them, pray against them, steadfastly resist them, and be careful by
the rule of Gods word to order and compose them, and then God will (in his
mercy) pass by, and pardon them all: but if we neglect and omit these duties,
then we shall lie open to all the assaults of the devil.

Psalm. 86.11
Secondly, we must be frequent in the reading and meditation of the holy
scriptures, and entreat the Lord to open our eyes to understand them, and frame
our hearts to obey them; and then these wicked thoughts shall either not come
into our minds, or else they shall be soon driven out of possession.

Lastly, we must be advised to make more conscience of holy duties, and
(especially) of preaching, prayer, and of receiving the Lords Supper, then
formerly we have done; lest for the omission hereof we be justly given over to
ill thoughts.

Q. But what if they be only from without, by Satan objected unto us, and
thrust upon us, we giving no assent unto them, how shall we comfort our selves?

A. We must comfort our selves in this, that our blessed Savior was thus
tempted by Satan, Mat. 4.3. and 6.
who suggested and iniected due thoughts into his mind; but Christ never
assented to him, but overcame him, and has for us broken his head, and
dissolved all his works, so that he cannot prevail against our faith, or
prejudice our salvation.

Q. What course must we take for our help and redress herein?

A. First, we must not strive against them; seeking violently to drive them
away: for then we shall be the more entangled with them, and like so many Bees
buzzing about us, they will sting us: but we must let them go.

Lastly, if they continue molesting us, then we must turn to Christ and desire
his help, who has so conquered them for us, that they shall never get full
victory over us.

CHAP. VI. Of those temptations, scandals, and offenses that are by tyrants,
wicked men, Heretics, Apostates, Schismatickes, profane Protestants, false
Brethren, and by the manifest abuse of the law, and Ecclesiastical discipline,
accidentally occasioned, or objected outwardly unto us.
Question.

WHat signifies this word scandal or offense?

A. It is a borrowed speech, and properly signifies a block or stone laid in
a man's way, Mat. 18.7.8.
at which he stumbleth.

Q. What is it?

A. It is any cause or occasion of grief or offense, whether in word or deed,
example, or counsel, whereby a man is hurt or hindered in the course of
godliness, or whereby he is hardened, and confirmed in evil.

Q. Why does God permit it?

A. First, to try and prove his people whether they will by any occasional
matter objected in their way, be revoked from his love and obedience.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 11.19.
to manifest lewd minded men and reprobates, who are ready to take any occasion
of stumbling, sinning, and erring.

Q. What are the kinds of it?

A. Two, Active, (or that which is given) Passive, (or that which is taken.)

Q. What is a scandal given?

A. Any evil doctrine, word, or work, that is contrary to the love of God and
our neighbor, whereby the godly are grieved, the weak drawn to sin and
error, and profane men confirmed and hardened in their licentious courses.

Q. Of how many kinds and sorts is it?

A. Of four kinds: Apoc 6.13. Apoc. 12.4.
First, when weak consciences are by false doctrine, and the falling away of
men from the truth, withdrawn from the simplicity and sincerity of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, when holy and innocent men are defaced.

Thirdly, when men are offended by ill examples, especially of the professors
of orthodoxe religion.

Lastly, when by the abuse, or the untimely, or unseasonable use of their
liberty, men drive the weak from christianity.

Q. What use are we to make of scandals given?

A. First, in this general corruption and wickedness of men, Luke 17.1.2.
we are to look for nothing else, but we must arm our selves against it.

Secondly, let us beware, that neither through pride, vnseasonablenes, or any
preposterous word or deed, we be an offense to others, lest we bring a woe
upon our own selves.

Lastly, let us by our words, works, and behavior, endeavor to draw others to
follow us in virtue and holiness. Phil. 2.14. and 15.

Q. How shall good Christians arm themselves against, and preserve themselves
from the gangrene, poison, and pestilence of false and damnable Doctrine?

A. First, 1. Cor. 11.29.
by remembering that false teachers must of necessity arise, and false doctrine
be broached, that they that are approved may be known: but woe be to the
authors of it: Luke 17.1.2.

Secondly, by considering, that this smoke of the bottomless pit does only
blind their eyes, Apoc. 9.2. 2. These. 2.10.
who despise prophesying, and will not walk and delight themselves in the
clear light of the sacred Scriptures.

Thirdly, they must note that the true sheep will not follow a stranger, Ioh.
10.5. and 27. 2 Epist. Ioh. v. 10. and 11.
( i. one that brings strange and false doctrine) but they will ^^ee from
him: for they know not the voice of strangers, neither will they bid God speed
to such: but they hear the voice of Christ and follow him: for he has the
words of eternal life, and to whom should they go besides? Ioh. 6.68.

Lastly, that it being none of Gods plant shall (at length) be rooted out, Mat.
15 13
and the clouds of it shall be wholly dispersed when the Sunshine of the
Gospel breaks out.

Q. What duties are we to practice herein?

A. First, seeing that false doctrine is most dangerous and damnable, putting
out the sight of our spiritual eyes, and infecting the affections of our
hearts, we must so much the more beware of it: and for our direction herein
hear Christ, watch daily at his gates, Pro. 8.33.
and give attendance at the post of his doors, that we may know Gods will, 2
Pet. 3.18.
and grow and increase in the knowledge and obedience of it.

Secondly, it stands us much upon to shun the company of false teachers and
seducers, lest by their doctrine, disswasion, and ill example, we be tainted
and corrupted: for why should sheep converse with Foxes, and Lambs with Wolves?

Lastly, we must hold fast that which we have learned, Apoc. 3.3. Romans 16.17.
and 18.
and confirm it by daily hearing and reading of the holy scriptures; but as
for those that are false teachers, which cause division and offense, contrary
to the truth, and by fair words deceive the hearts of the simple; let us mark
them diligently, and avoid them.

Q. How shall weak Christians arm and resolve themselves against a general
declination and apostasy from the Gospel of Christ?

A. First, the wicked and profane are the greatest in number, they know not
the law of God and are accursed, and therefore we may not in matter of Religion
make their example a rule and warrant of our faith and practice.

Secondly, they that revolt from the professed truth, 1. Ioh. 2.19
and from the communion of Gods saints, are those that are none of the
Catholic Church, for then they would have continued in it, and they are such
whose names were never written in the book of life. Apoc. 13.18.
They are chafe by the fan of affliction ^euered from the good Corn: they
are like the prodigal Child that would needs depart from his Fathers house,
Luke 15.13.14.
where he lived blessedly; but yet they with him never reuert, nor repent; and
they are spunges that being pressed with tribulation, soon lose and let go
all the water of Gods grace, which they (in some sort) had, or (at least)
seemed to have.

Thirdly, these that thus fall away from the soundness and sincerity of truth,
are such that either did never content themselves wi^h the simplicity of Gods
word, but did, and do mingle it with the poison of humane Traditions, or else
did never receive the love of the truth.

Fourthly, most of them were (peradventure) never rightly informed in the
knowledge of the truth, much less convinced of the soundness of it in their
consciences, no marvel then that they fall from that they never knew, and had
no other ground for it, but the command of Princes, and the example of others.

Lastly, Apoc. 13 8
this Apostasy from faith and sound doctrine both in the reign of Antichrist
and that which shall be toward the end of the world, Luke 18.8.
was long sithence foretold by Christ and his Apostles, and therefore we are
the less to be offended at it.

Q. What duties must we in such an Apostasy perform (for our preservation)
and the cure of others?

A. First, we must attend diligently to the blessed ministry of Gods word (for
it is a lantern to our feet and a light to our paths, 2. Pet. 1.19
without which we shall stumble in the dark, and shall not know whither to
go) and we must live, love, and obey it. Mat. 7.25.
They that hear Gods word, and do it, are the wise men who build upon the
rock.

Secondly, we must (if we can) separate our selves from the common infection,
or at least mourning for our hard hap, get us the preservative of faith and a
good conscience.

Thirdly, Christian magistrates must maintain the truth, and banish error and
false Teachers (if they can.) And all faithful Ministers must by the word of
truth refute all infectious doctrine, and exhort them earnestly to be constant
in the profession and love of sound and sincere instruction; and they must more
labor by the preservative of wholesome doctrine, to preserve the sound from the
pestilence of error, then to cure the infected, which are (commonly and for the
most part) incurable.

Lastly, we must beware of the beginnings of Apostasy, for, nemo repent fit
turpissimus.

Q. What comforts and preservatives are there against the scandal of false and
unjust excommunication?

A. First, it is oftentimes incident to Gods children thus to be dealt withal.
John 9.35
John 9.35. and 16.2.

Secondly, if the Pope and his adherents excommunicate us, we must note that
they are heretics, idolaters, and no true members of a true visible Church,
and therefore their excommunication i^ but like a Fencers flourishing, or
rather like a leaden dagger, and cannot hurt us. For the keys of discipline
and doctrine, and the eccle^iastical censures, are proper to the true Church of
Christ, whereof they are no parts nor members.

Lastly, if any Governor, officer, or Elders of the true visible Church,
unjustly excommunicate any of Gods children, they are so far from
excommunica^ing them from the favor of God, from the kingdom of heaven, or
from being true members of the Church, that they (as an ancient Father writes)
excommunicate themselves; wherefore let us endeavor to be holy, innocent, and
inoffensiue, and then we have no need to fear any false or abused
excommunication.

Q. What if we in the country or kingd^me where we dwell, see the poor
oppressed, and innocence defaced, how shall we then keep and preserve our
selves from being scandalized?

A. First, if we see in a country the oppression of the poor, and the
defrauding of justice, Eccles. 5.7.
we must not be astonished at the matter, for the highest sees and regards it.

Secondly, if we look for a Church or State without spot and taint of error
and injustice, Ephesians. 5.27.
we must seek it in ^eauen only, where all things are established in an
absolute and eternal order and perfection; or else we must get us into
Mauqsun, or Sir Thomas More his Vtopia, Face^e.
where we shall find such a state and policy.

Thirdly, in this distress we must have recourse unto the magistrate his
help, and when one fails or neglects us, we must seek to another.

Lastly, if we see all outward means to fail, Luke 18.7.8
we ought to call and cry day and night unto our God, we must make him our
judge and revenger, and wait upon him until he right us, and then (though he
seem to use long patience toward our adversaries) he will avenge us and that
quickly. 2. Pet. ^ 7.


Q. Why does God so sharply censure, and so roughly handle his just and
innocent children?

A. First, no man is innocent before God, for there is no man that sins not;
if God straitely mark man's) iniquity, who shall stand? and no flesh (by his
own works) can be justified in Gods sight, 1 King. 8.46. Psalm. 130.3. Psalm.
143.2.
so that the all-piercing eye of the almighty, that is ten thousand times
brighter then the sun, and clearer then crystal, can (if it please him) find
sufficient matter to condemn them in their begun justice and innocence:
wherefore we must not think them to be altogether vncorrupt in this wicked
world, as the fish that live in the salt sea, their own element, Dissimile.
nothing savor of the saltnes of it: but that they (in part) are tainted with
the worlds corruption.

Secondly, God will not have his children perverted with the worlds sins,
much less perish with them, 1. Cor. 11.31.
and therefore he does thus severely, and that sundry times, scourge and
chastise them, for he would have them with this salt water of trouble, to wash
out the spots of sin.

Thirdly, man is no equal Judge of men's sins, and so of their afflictions,
but we must reserve the censure and judgment hereof to God only, for he
only eyeth man's secret sins, and can and does righteously censure and punish
them, but man is so far from finding out the number and nature of secret
sins, that he in the cloudy mist of his own ignorance can hardly discern
the quality and desert of notorious offenses, and those that are already
brought to light: but only takes notice of certain outward tracks,
impressions, and actions. And therefore we must not thus without cause
complain, nor pick quarrels with God Almighty.

Lastly, God would hereby affright the wicked, 1 Pet. 4.17 18.
if not reform them; for if judgment begin at the house of God, what shall be
the end of them that obey not the Gospel? and if the righteous be scarsely
saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

Q. What use are we to make of Gods proceedings herein?

A. We blind sinners must not take upon us to judge of the guilt, and to
determine of the circumstances of men's sins, and of their estate before God;
but we must refer the judgment hereof to Gods all-seeing eye, and to his
sincere justice.

Secondly, in such hidden and intricate causes and cases, that are unknown
unto us, we must shut our mouths and suspend our judgments; Romans 14.4.
for who are we that condemn an other man's servant? for he stands or falls
to his own master.

Lastly, if God seem to deal extremely with us, we our selves then must s^^
the remouall of this imputation, Lam. 3.39.40.41.
search^^ sift into our own ways, and call t^ our remembrance, what duties
commanded we have omitted, and what evil things forbidden we have committed;
Psalm. 130.3
and how that God in his strict justice might condemn us for the least
offense, and then we shall admire God; patience that he handles us so
gently, and does in his bottomless mercy pass by and pardon so many
imperfections and offenses in us.

Q. But forward men in religion, and many noted professors by their loose life
and practices of injustice, offend many simple hearted men, and weak, yet well
affected Christians; what preservative is now to be used?

A. The due meditation and practice of these Canons and conclusions following,
as namely;

First, many professors are not so bad as the world would make them, a mole
hill in them is made a mountain, and a moat is made a beam, their
infirmities, like spots in white paper, or fine linen, are soon espied and
noted: but profane people are not observed, and their gross sins are
silenced and suppressed.

Secondly, if any, or many, under the cloak, and mask of zeal, labor to
cover their practices of deceit, covetousness and injustice, etc we must know
that the visible Church of Christ is compared to a field, Math. 13.
wherein is not only wheat but tares; to a garden, wherein are both good
herbs, and also weeds; and to an house wherein are not only vessels of gold,
and silver, but also of wood and earth; and therefore if we look that all
professors should be without fault or infirmity, 2. Tim. 2.20.
and all should be good and none evil; we must look for them in heaven only,
and not in earth, where are more evil, then good men.

Thirdly, the diseases and sins of the soul are not contagious as those of the
body are; for the soul is not infected* unless it give a consent and
allowance to other men's sins; and therefore let us keep our selves free from
their sins, and then we need not to be scandalized at their evil dealings
which we cannot help.

Gal. 6.4. Ezech. 18.20.
Lastly, every man must bear his own burden, and answer for his own sins;
and therefore let us rather correct our own sins then be scandalized at
other men's faults: and let us strive to be perfect in an evil generation.

Q. What practices are necessary in such a case?

A. First, we must beware that we do not without cause, Romans 2.1.2.3.
censure, and condemn such; and if we find them faulty, and hereupon reprove
them, that we be not as bad and worse our selves.

Secondly, if many vary much from their sacred profession, and be workers of
iniquity, (for the prevention of this offense) we must know that we are to
walk rather by rule then by example, and rather by the Canon of Gods word,
then by custom.

Lastly, it is our duty to reprove, pity and pray for such offensive
professors.

Q. How shall poor and weak christians confirm themselves in the faith, or
preserve themselves from defection, when many noted and notable persons that
seemed pillars, revolt from the sincere truth of Religion?

A. First, they that fall away from the substance of true religion, and forsake
the assemblies and fellowship of the Saints in the use of the word, prayer and
Sacraments, were never well rooted in it: ^or had they been, no wind or
tempest could have ouerturned them; they were only Meteors or blazing stars
soon extinct, but not true stars, for then they had continued in their
firmament, and no night of afflictions could have put them out; for if they had
been of the Church, they would have continued in it. 1. Joh. 2.19. Apoc. 13.8.

Secondly, 2 The. 2.10.
they never received the love of the truth, and were never soundly grounded in
the principles of Christian faith* and therefore they were apt to be seduced
with the poi^on and efficacy of error. For as the fire burns nothing but
that which is combustible, and apt to be consumed: so heresy infecteth none
but such as neglect the means of knowledge, or that deny the power of
godliness in their hearts and lives.

Lastly, God will by their reuolting take an occasion the more justly to damn
them, and to try, and make known the constancy of his children, who never do
wholly, or finally fall away from faith.

Q. What duties are we to perform to prevent an apostasy in our selves?

A. First, because eminent persons by their fall like oaks bear down all
things that lie in their way; let us beware of their company and communication.

Secondly, let us beware of the beginning and occasion of Apostasy: and for
our direction herein, pray for the spirit of revelation and strength, and in
no wise neglect the ministry of the word and sacraments.

Q* But how shall a nouice and a weak Christian persuade himself of the truth
of his sincere profession, when he sees and hears that sundry learned men
die in defense of Idolatry and Popery?

A. First, no Heretics (though they die in defense of errors) are martyrs, but
all Papists are heretics: for the obstinate maintaining of justification by
works, invocation and adoration of Saints and Angels, worshipping of images,
and especially of their breaden God, denying the sufficiency of the canonical
Scriptures, are so many heresies; Ergo, Jesuits, Seminaries, and popish
Priests, that are put to death by the Christian magistrate, are no martyrs.

Secondly, Cypr. Apoc. 14 13
Non poena sed causa facit Martyrem, they that b^are the Cross, and follow not
Christ, are no Martyrs of his: and therefore most damnable is the condition of
Jesuits, Seminaries, who die for treason, and not for truth: and not for
testimony of a good conscience, but for the wilful trangression of Christian
Laws.

Thirdly, their suffering is of no account before God, 1. Cor. 13.3
for they want charirity: which appeaeth in this that they are utter opposites
and adversaries to the Gospel of Christ and the sound professors of it.

Fourthly, they being no true members of the Church of Christ, but rather
incurable persecutors of it, and being slain out of the Church, do not win
the crown of their faith, but the reward o^ their felly.

Lastly, true Martyrs ascribe all the glory of their redemption and salvation
to Gods mercy in Christ only; but popish martyrs glory in their own works
(though never so vile and imperfect) and they make them exp^atory for sin,
and to me ^t salvation.

Q What use are we to make hereof?

A First, we must distinguish and rightly judge between true martyrs and
false ones, which we shall be enabled to do by observing these rules
following. First, true martyrs die in defense of the substance of pure
religion: but false martyrs suffer and die in defense of error heresy, and
idolatry.

Secondly, true martyrs at their execution show sorth singular patience in
their words, testimony, behavior; but false martyrs either are outrageous and
impatient, or (at least) by Art do stupifie and dead their flesh, that it may
become insensible of pain.

Thirdly, true Martyrs die holily, courageously, joyfully, without all fear
and doubting of the truth of their cause, or of the certainty of salvation: but
popish martyrs die (many times) irresolued and astonished.

Fourthly, true and Euangelical martyrs are holy, chaste, innocent, fervent in
prayer, and diligent in their civil and Christian callings: but the like
cannot be verified of the popish martyrs.

Lastly, God at the death of true martyrs, has sometimes wrought strange and
wonderful works, as to speak when their tongues have been cut Romanus Bruno.
out, and to be untouched of the fire John the Evangelist.
albeit oil were put into it: but in the popish martyrs no such accidents have
fallen out.

Secondly, let us see and be resolved by Gods word, that our cause is good, and
for Christ; and then let us suffer as co^fidently, yea much more comfortably
and happily, for the truth, then they for Antichrist and superstition, knowing
that our end shall be blessed.

Q. When factions, divisions, schisms, grow and prevail in the Church, what
are we to judge of that Church, and how is a Christian then to arm himself?

A. First, we must remember that where the truth (many times) most
^lourisheth, there Satan labors to make rents and divisions, and to sow
tares amongst the good wheat.

Secondly, the Church of Corinth was a notable Apostolical Church, 1. Cor.
3.3, 4, 5, 6.
and yet there were many factions in it.

Thirdly, we must not separate our selves from such a Church, except it err
in the fundamental points of faith and true religion; but we must herein
comfort our selves, that this schism is without heresy.

Fourthly, as long as there is error in judgment and peeuishnes in affection,
we must look for nothing else but schism.

Fifthly, schismatikes that depart from the communion of the faithful, and
from the participation of the body and blood of Christ, endanger their own
souls.

Lastly, God permits divisions, factions, and schisms in the Church, that
the faith and love of his children might be tried; 1. Cor. 11.3
now their faith is tried, whiles they stumble not, nor suffer themselves to be
seduced: and their love and charity is tried in admonishing them that are the
authors and occasioners of these sidings, schisms, divisions.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. If we be men in authority, we must betimes strive to root out, and
remove out of the Church whatsoever may justly minister an occasion hereof.
Secondly, Ministers must by doctrine and writing note and confute those
diligently, which cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which
they have received, and avoid them. Romans 16.17.

Secondly, if we be but private persons, we must beware of pride and
selfe-conceitednes, lest we rashly condemn a true and notable visible Church
for defects and imperfections in the doctrine and practice of discipline or
Church policy, and so without sufficient cause make a rent from the same, and
hereby disturb the common peace; for we must not depart from it, until it
depart from Christ.

Lastly, we must by prayers, suits, supplications, tears, and amendment of
life, labor to procure better reformation in Church and Commonwealth: and if
we cannot attain it when we would, then let us in the mean be a discipline
to our selves, and execute it amongst our families, and let us passing by the
imperfections of a Church, be thankful for, and make use of the good things
of it; for it is better to endu^e an inconvenience and cover an infirmity, then
by any public opposition to make a rent in the Church.

Q. How shall a man comfort himself that lives amongst evil, unquiet, and
irreligious neighbors, or what duties must he execute and perform?

A. First of all, he that has a good neighbor, has (as we say) a good
morrow: but an ill and unquiet neighbor, is like a bear, a lion, a tiger, a
viper; and therefore some evil, by reason of an ill neighbor: and herein we
must learn either to win him, to endure him, or else (if we can conveniently)
to get our selves far from him.

Secondly, if we would dwell near no ill neighbors, we must get our selves
into some wilderness.

Mat. 7.2.3, 4, 5.
Thirdly, we must beware lest we be as bad or worse our selves; for every man is
a sharp censurer of others, but he is a p^rtiall Judge of himself.

Fourthly, it may be that a man has been harsh and sharp to his neighbor,
and therefore he is justly plagued with such an one himself.

Lastly, let us be innocent as dones, giving no just occasion of oftence unto
him, Math. 10.17.
but rather praying for him, and endeavoring to win him by kind offices, but
let us be wise as Serpents, to beware he do no mischief against us.

Q. How must they arm and comfort themselves that are forsaken, beguiled,
abused, and betrayed by their (reputed) friends?

A. First they must remember, that the world has not wanted such evil
examples, and pernicious presidents: was not the caitiffe Cain false and
traitorous to his innocent brother Abel. Genesis 4. 2. Sam. 16.
was not Achitophel perfidious and treacherous to David, Ioab to Abner, and
Amasa, yea and Judas to our Lord and Savior? and the world since that time
is nothing reformed, but rather generally worse.

Secondly, unfaithfulness and true friendship are incompetible, and can never
suite nor consort together, and therefore the loss of such fained and false
hearted friends is rather to be entertained with laughter, the^ with lamentatio^.

Thirdly, their falsehood shows; that truth and integrity is good,
contratiorum contraria est ratio.

Fourthly, such fawning, and yet failing, and faithless friends are infamous
and loathed of all well disposed persons.

Lastly, such deceitful friends more hurt themselves then them that trust
them: for they only betray those that put affiance in them, but they undo
themselves.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, we must never put any confidence in men, who are lighter then
vanity it self: Psalm. 62.
but trust only in the living Lord, who will never fail, nor forsake us.

Secondly, that ye more falsely, and Iudas-like others deal with us; let us (as
becomes Gods children) be so much the more whetted on to deal faithfully
with others, and let our conscience be a l^w unto us.

La^tly, let us betimes distrust such, and by small losses learn to prevent
greater ones.

Q. How shall good and religious Princes, Peers, and Potentates comfort
themselves, that are grieved at, and troubled with disobedient and disloyal
subjects and people?

A. Diverse ways: as first, that the most rare and renowned kings and princes,
such as were Moses, David, Solomon, and many in our late memory, (whereof our
late Queen Elizabeth, our Deborah, our Hester, our Judith, and of incomparable
learning and virtues, was as the Moon amongst the lesser stars) had woeful
experience.

Secondly, they that resist Gods deputies and vicegerents, procure to
themselves destruction and damnation.

Thirdly, though their subjects and people under them may be stubborn and
disobedient to them, (as they were to David in the beginning of his reign, and
sometime afterward) yet they may prove loving and loiall at the last, and
therefore they are to hope well of them.

Q. What duties are such princes and rulers to perform?

A. They must seek rather to be loved then feared, for whom the subjects only
fear, him they hate.

Secondly, they must not so much look to find their people good, as to make
the^ good and if they do show all possible diligence herein, God will accept
and prosper their studies and endeauours.

Lastly, that Ministers of Gods word must labor to persuade them to obedience,
and if they cannot prevail, the Magistrate must by the sword correct them (and
when need is,) cut them off, otherwise the sparing of the wolte is the death of
the sheep.

Q. How must subjects and people behave themselves that are il entreated, and
much oppressed by evil rulers and Magistrates?

Exodus 3 7. and 8.
A. First, they must acknowledge (in general) that God is just, and that malo
populo malus rex datu, and therefore they must bewail their sins, the
procuring cause thereof, and God will (in time) relieve them.

Secondly, the more evil their governors are, 1 Pet. 2.13 14.15.16.
the more innocent let the subjects he, that they may have comfort in their
sufferings, namely, when they are for true religion, and righteousness sake.

Thirdly, let them pray unto God, to turn their hearts, and to amend them: 1.
Tim. 2.1.2.

Fourthly, let them obey them and their laws so far forth as they may with
good conscience, that they minister no just cause and occasion of offense unto
them, Romans 13.^
and (if they be not incurably evil) they shall at length find them more mild
and merciful, for God has their hearts in his hands.

Lastly, the subjects must note and remember well that the life and tyranny of
their Regents shall not continue always: for God will not suffer the scep^er
of the wicked to rest upon the lot of the righ^eous, Psalm. 125.3.
lest that they (through violent courses) should stretch out their hands unto
iniquity, and therefore they must prevent that by their wisdom, yea, and
possess it by hope and patience, which God and time will work.

Q. How shall weak Christians be strengthened that are scandalized, and are
ready to be perverted, either by ignorant, idle, or else by evil Ministers?

A. First, if they be ignorant, and cannot teach, we must seek for
instruction elsewhere, unless we would pine and sterue our souls.

Secondly, if they can teach well, and yet be lazy, Col. 4.17.
and idle, and will not employ their talent, we must lovingly (and yet
earnestly) exhort them to more diligence in their calling, add give them all
good encouragement: and if we cannot this way prevail, we must complain of
them, and present them to lawful authority that may compel them: but if
authority fault herein, we must pray God to amend them, and so leave them unto
him.

Thirdly, if the Ministers teach well, and diligently, and yet live lewdly and
vitiously, then they must know that God sends them such a scandalous Minister
for their trial or punishment: and therefore we must repent us of our
peculiar sins, and wait the good time, until either God or his deputies
remove or reform them. But touching their doctrine, seeing it is sound and
good, we must hear and embrace that with all reverence; we must (as our Lord
wills us) observe what they bid us, Math 23.3 Luke 12.47
but after their works we must not do, lest we with them knowing our Masters
will, and doing it not, be beaten with many stripes.

Lastly, when the public and ordinary means of salvation are wanting or
defective, we must entreat the Lord of the harvest to thrust forth more
laborers, and (in the mean season) plie more often and earnestly the private
means of reading, conference, and good examples at home.

Q How shall a Christian arm himself against the scandal that the weak take
at the stream and inundation of sin, and at the general corruption in
manners?

A. First, Math. 7.14
that the way that leads to life is narrow, and the gate straight, and few
there be that find it, and therefore we must not make the example of the
multitude, or of the most, a certain rule or warrant of his life and p^^ctise.

Secondly, Ier. 5.4.
the greatest sort of people are ignorant of Gods ways, and strangers in the
holy Scriptures, making custom a rule for conscience, and they more delight in
vain inventions, then in the knowledge and obedience of the holy Gospel of
Christ.

Thirdly, 2 Timothy 3.2.3.4.5.
sin has abounded in all ages, and the greatest number of Christians has
been in many places more licentious then religious, and more profane then
sincere, and the nearer the world grows to his final period and
consummation, the more Atheism and Libertinisme shall abound, for men shall
generally give themselves to surfeiting, Luk 21.34 35.
drunkenness and the cares of this life, men shall be lovers of themselves, 2 Timothy 3.2.3.5.
despisers of them that are good, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God;
and though many have a form and profession of godliness, Luke 18.8.
yet they deny the power of it, so that when Christ comes to judgment, he
shall hardly find faith upon the earth; and therefore he is the less to be
offended hereat.

Fourthly, when there is a general corruption in manners, then are the
faithful servants of God most discerned, and their incorrupt sincerity is most
emine^t; then they show themselus pure and blameless, and without rebuke in
the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, amongst whom they shine as lights
in the world: Phil. 2.15.
Noah is just in his generation, Lot is righteous amongst the Sodomites: in
very Pergamus where Satan had his throne, were many faithful and stout
Christians: Apoc. 2.13 Apoc. 3.4
and in Sardi, (that was in a manner dead before God) were a few names that had
not defiled their garments.

Lastly, Ephesians. 5.15.16*
the more lewd and licentious that the world is, the more wary and strict must
we be in our conversation, unless we would perish with the world.

CHAP. VII. Of Offenses Passive, or those that are taken.
Question.

WHat is a scandal, or an offense taken?

A. It is any wholesome doctrine or counsel, Mat. 15.12 13.1^.
any honest and godly speech, deed^, example, which through error of
judgment, peeuishnes of mind, and perverse interpretation, is turned to an
occasion of offense.

Q. What are the causes of an offense taken?

A. First, blindness, and imperfection of man's reason. Secondly, corrupt
judgment arising from the ignorance of Gods word. Thirdly, preiudicate and
forestalled opinions. Fourthly, hatred of the godly, and their proceedinges.
Fifthly, distaste and dislike of good policy and discipline. Sixthly, in the
wicked an eager appetite and desire of worldly gain and authority, with an
earnest affection to hold and maintain it. Lastly, the manifold afflictions of
such as fear God.

Q. Who are the persons that unjustly conceive an offense?

A. First and principally, the wicked, Secondly, Gods children.

Q Whereat (in regard of the godly) do the wicked take an offense?

A. At four things especially.

Q How shall we arm and strengthen our selves against offenses, which wicked
men unjustly conceive against us?

Math. 15.12. Act. 4.29. and 30.
A. First, we must constantly, and chearefully go forwards in our good
purposes and proceedings, much more regarding the keeping of Gods
commandments, and a good conscience then the imagined and pretended scandal
and offense, that the wicked unjustly take: wherefore let their offense taken,
rather hearten us then hinder us, and more drive us forward in good actions,
then discourage us.

Secondly, the more clamorous and envious that they are against us, the more
let us endeavor by all good means to draw them to the practice of holy duties.

Thirdly, if the wicked were falsely and unjustly offended at the excellent
person, Math 11.6.
the rare humility, the heavenly doctrine, the extraordinary miracles, and the
sinnelesse conversation of our most blessed Savior, so that they reviled,
whipped, persecuted him, and put him to the most ignominious death that could
be invented: how much more will they be offended at us that are sinners, and
who many times minister matter of offense?

Lastly, let us (what in us lies) live inoffensiuely, and please our
neighbors in all things, not seeking our own good, but their salvation.

Q. What is the second pretended offense, at which the wicked stumble and fall?

A. At the godly for using their lawful liberty in things indifferent.

Q. How shall the godly either prevent or (at least) arm themselves against
this offense by the wicked, taken, and not by the godly given?

A. If they that take the offense be obstinate enemies, they must not for
their pleasure remit ought of their christian liberty, but rather with the
Apostle Paul to use it: Mat. 15.12. Gal. 5.1. For in this case we are bound
only to avoid the offense of our weak brethren, and not of our incurable
enemies, who will never be pleased nor satisfied. But if christians that are
weak in faith, and not yet fully resolved of points, take an offense at the
use of our liberty in meat, drink, apparel, etc. better it is for us (for
the time) to yield somewhat to our weak brethren, Romans 14.15.
then by the unseasonable, and inconvenient use of that which is lawful (in it
own nature) to scandalize them, and so cause them to perish, for whom Christ
died. Therefore let us do all to Gods glory, and give offense to none, 1 Cor.
10.31.32.
neither Jews nor Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. 1. Cor. 10.31.32.

Secondly, we must not for the pleasing of men's humors, and to decline an
offense taken (and not given) temporize with Gods enemies, nor frame our selves
to all companies and professions: for better it is that all the wicked in the
world should be offended at us, then that we for the preventing of their
(unlawful) offense should be injurious to Jesus Christ, or prejudice any part
of his revealed truth; and therefore we are not to communicate with such in the
least things. Gal. 2.5.
When therefore the omission of our Christian liberty does either renew error,
or confirm men in it, we must then never dispense with it.

Thirdly, in matters of faith, and in cases of conscience, Gal. 6.16
we must walk by the Canon and rule of Gods word, and not by imperfect
examples: Gal. 5.1.
and having gotten certain resolution, we must stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free and not be entangled with the yeake of
Antichristian bondage.

Lastly, it shall be our wisdom to use our liberty with advised discretion,
and (what in us lies) to minister no matter nor occasion of (just) offense to
our enemies; but, if notwithstanding we cannot avoid their offense without
sinning against God, and corrupting our own consciences: this offense that
they take, must neither remove us from our sound judgment in things
indifferent, nor from the lawful practice and use of our holy and Christian
liberty.

Q. What is the fourth offense that the wicked ones and enemies take against
the godly?

A. Their manifold crosses, tribulations and afflictions.

Q. How shall, or must Gods children arm themselves against this offense?

Phil. 1.29.
First, it is given to them (as a special privilege) not only to believe in
Christ, but also to suffer for him.

Luke 16.25.
Secondly, the wicked are none of Gods children, and therefore he lets them in
this world, (many times, and for a long season) to escape unpunished, that they
may at once have their eternal punishment in hell fire.

Heb. 12.
Thirdly, God loves his children, and therefore he does rebuke and chasten
them; and therefore none are to take an offense at their troubles, nor to make
an ill construction of them: for if they were without all correction, they
should be bastards and no sons.

Fourthly, That they are blessed that are not offended in Christ, Luke 7.23.
so neither at his word, nor at the contemptible estate, and manifold
afflictions of his children: but acknowledge Gods providence, and admire his
wonderful wisdom, Act. 14, 22.
who has consecrated the prince of our salvation through afflictions: Heb
2.10. and does by many afflctions bring his children into his kingdom.

Fifthly, the enemies of God, and of his children, either want judgment, and
the spirit of discerning, or else are transported with humor and malice, and
therefore we are not to regard their rash censures, nor their unjust offense.

Sixthly, the afflictions of the faithful come not by chance, but by the
counsel and providence of God, which disposes all things in a most excellent
sort, for their profit and salvation, Genesis 45.45. 2. Sam. 16 10. Psa. 119.71.
Act. 14.21.

Lastly, let it be sufficient for us, that God accepts our persons,
sanctifies our afflictions unto us, and and highly rewards our service and
sufferings, and therefore though we be in no grace and request with the
wicked world, whose favor and friendship can neither help us, nor their false
judgment and contempt prejudice us, let us not be moved, nor amated at it.

CHAP. VIII. Of Offenses taken by Gods children.
Question.

WHat are the offenses that Gods children (in their ignorance or weakness)
many times take and conceive?

A. First, the long life and flourishing prosperity of evil Rulers, Tyrants,
Persecutors.

Secondly, the long impunity, and Gods toleration of lewd, wicked, profane,
and villainous persons.

The third* is the inuoluing, or inwrapping of holy and innocent men with the
wicked in the execution of public judgments.

Q. How shall Gods children arm and comfort themselves against the long life
and tyranny of wicked rulers?

A. They must note and consider diverse things: First, that these Tyrants and
oppressors do not reign and dominere without Gods holy and provident
disposition, and that either for the exercise of the good, or for the plague
and punishment of evil doers; and therefore they must seek either by their
innocent carriage, and dutiful obedience to pacify and please them, or else
they must learn to endure with patience their tyranny.

Secondly, that austere and tyrannizing rulers, are sometimes necessary for the
common wealth, to restrain vice, and to curb and keep down insolent and
wanton people, who by security and overmuch liberty grew to this height of
profaneness; and therefore, they that know not how to love, must know how to
fear.

Thirdly, that the excess of sin, and licentiousness in the multitude, who
delights more in pleasure, then in piety, in goods, then in goodness, and in
love of money, then in true liberty, does (if not cause, yet) increase tyrants
and oppressors.

Fourthly, that every state and government at one time or other, is subject to
such tyrannical oppressors.

Fifthly, that tyrants and oppressors have their golden fetters, yea, they
oftentimes drink poison in gold: they fear the multitude, as much as the
multitude does them, and they do not wrong others, altogether without
punishment and revenge, but are met withal one way, or other.

Lastly, because nullum violentum est perpetuum: A Similitude.
for the more boisterously the winds blow and rage, the sooner will they cease;
and the more that tyrants and oppressors rage and persecute, the sooner God
will remove them, or break their horns.

Q. How must the people and subjects behave themselves?

A They must first of all perform Honor, Tribute, Reverence, Subjection, and
obedience unto them; Romans 13 7
and if they will not this way be won, they must rather endure all evil
then seek private and unlawful revenge: But if these tyrants command any
false worship, then the subjects must take another course; they must obey
God their supreme Lord, and not the Magistrate, lest otherwise their unlawful
obedience to man, be punished as the highest disobedience to the God of Heaven.

Q. How shall the godly clear Gods justice when they see the most villainous
and mischievous men, long to escape unpunished in this world?

A. First, they must remember that quod defeitur, non aufertur, forbearance is
no forgiveness. The stiller that the waters are, the more deep and dangerous
are they: God does not spare the wicked for a time, because he likes of their
doings; but he will have their sins to grow ripe first, and withal leave
them without all excuse: but he will at length plague and punish them, yea damn
and destroy them; God comes (as the Proverb is) with woollen feet, (^. fair
and softly) but he strikes with iron hands and punishes so much the more
severely. Sin is in the heart, and vengeance at the heels.

Secondly, they are like the fish which has swallowed the Anglers bit, A
comparison.
which though it sport it self with the bait for a time, yet when the Angler
draws his Angle rod, it is taken; and they though they revel and roist it
out, yet they are Gods prisoners, always in his sight, and repriued for a time
unto a further doom, their judgment and damnation sleeps not, the terror
of imminent punishment cannot be removed out of their minds, neither is the
image of direful death conveyed out of their sight; but terrifieth them as the
hand writing on the wall did Belshazzer, Dan. 5.5.6.

Lastly, though the children of God, who cleanse their hearts, and wash their
hands in innocence, be corrected and ch^istened every morning, Psalm 7^.13 14.
v. ^3.24.
yet God is with his, he will guide them by counsel, and afterward receive
them to glory. Wherefore let us rather supplicate for such wicked doers, then
be scandalized at them; and let us wait but until they have played their
parts, and acted their tragedy, and they will make a ruthful Catastrophe or
conclusion, and all men that see it, shall say, that it is Gods doing.

Q. But why does God punish sometimes with visible and manifest punishment,
some evil doers, and not all?

A. First, To 20.21.
God is an absolute Lord, and his will is justice it self, and therefore we
must rather reverence and adore Gods judgments, then rashly to require a
reason of them: for shall an earthly Prince disdain to be accountable to his
subjects concerning all his proceedings, A Similitude.
and shall a Master of a family scorn that his servant shall exact an account
of him? how much more will the divine Majesty refuse that his actions and
counsels should be called into question?

Secondly, a few punished, are a purgation for, and a warning to the rest: so
that it is a mild justice toward many, which seems cruelty to a few.

Thirdly, if God should visibly, and manifestly punish all evil doers, then
nothing would be thought to be reserved to the last judgment, and if none
should be here punished, men would think that either there were no God, or
(at least) no justice and providence.

Q. How shall Gods children in the execution of public judgment, justify the
equity of Gods proceedings, or practice patience: when they temporally smart
for the sins and idolatries of their forefathers?

Ezech. 18.20.
A. Many ways they are to stay and comfort themselves. First, (to speak
properly) God does punish the idolatry and sins of the children, and not of
the parents: for if they tread in the footesteppes of their parents, and do
not repent of their sins, it stands with Gods justice no longer to put off
their correction.

Secondly; though in the universal deluge, Psalm. 51.5. Job. 14.4.
and in the destruction of Sodom, and in the sacking of Cities the very
Infants perished with their Parents: yet we must note that they were not
sinnelesse and innocent before God, but borne and conceived in sin, the
children of wrath, and subject to everlasting damnation.

Thirdly, albeit God correct good men for the bads sake, and inuolue them in
the common calamities of war, famine, pestilence, shipwreck, fires, etc. yet
these afflictions are rather preservatives then punishments: for as Physicians
do by bitter medicines preserve and restore a man's health: so God does turn
the punishments that they have deserved into a medicine, a trial, a
preservation.

Fourthly, Gods children though they resist sin and wickedness, Psalm. 130.4.
Dan. 9.5.6 7.
yet they in hearing Gods word, in prayer, and in the performance of the duties
of piety, justice, charity, fail and are imperfect; and therefore they cannot
say that God offers them any wrong, if they with the wicked be included in
the same outward and public evils, as Jonathas, Josias, etc. were.

Fifthly, we are all of us the children of rebellious and traitorous Adam, who
has tainted our blood, and forfeited his and our estate to God almighty, and
there is a chain of faults reaching from Adam to us, which though we repent
of, yet God may in his justice punish the remainders of them in our posterity.

Sixthly, there is (if not always) a deriuation of special fins from the
forefathers to the posterity, yet there is a deriuation of punishment, and
therefore God does afflict herein the Parents, and their posterity as one body.

Seventhly, as in one and the same person a fault committed in youth, Lypsius.
is justly punished in old age: So God in kingdoms, empires, persons does
punish old and inueterate sins, for they are before God joined together by an
outward fellowship, both in time and parts.

Lastly, if we will be heirs to the commodities, and rewards which are due
to our ancestors, it is no reason that we should refuse their burdens and
afflictions.

CHAP. IX. Heavenly Meditations and Conclusions against general and particular
persecution.
Question.

WHat is persecution?

A. It is the state and condition, either of the Church in general, or of any
member, in particular, whereby the one, or the other, in Gods everlasting
counsel and decree, are appointed and marked unto diverse dangers and troubles
for the name of Christ, and for righteousness sake.

Q. Is not the Church of God at any time or in any age wholly rooted out and
subverted by the enraged violence of persecutors?

A. No: for first, God will always reserve to himself a people that shall
serve him, Apoc. 11.3 and 4.
yea, and some that shall openly and publicly maintain and confess his truth
in one place or other.

Romans 11.4.
Secondly, as in the time of Elias there were 7000 holy worshippers of God, that
never bowed their knees to Baal, 1 Kin. 19.18.
and yet they were not visibly known to the enemies and persecutors: Apoc. 12.7
so God has a latent Church sometimes, and the church is feign to fly into
the wilderness, and that partly that she should not be corrupted, and partly
that she should be preserved from the enemies rage and malice.

Lastly, it appears by the diverse things to which the Church is compared and
resembled, that she never cease to be, nor is ever wholly extinct: for it is
compared to a ship tossed with waves and surges, Comparisons.
but not sunk: to Moses Bush, burning, but not consumed; to a City daily
besieged, but not taken or won: to the moon, which is soon eclipsed, and
often in the wa^e, but yet often renewed: to Noah's Arc tossed in the waters,
but not drowned: Apoc. 12.2.5.6.
and to a woman in travel, whom the Dragon seeks to devour together with
her child, and yet both are preserved.

Q. For what ends does God suffer his children to be persecuted?

A. First, that holy and pure doctrine might be maintained: otherwise all
would in persecution disclaim, and forsake it.

Secondly, that the graces of his children should be increased and exercised,
and that they like spices pouned in a mortar, and like sweet wood burnt in the
fire, should yield a more sweet swell.

Thirdly, that they by their constancy in the profession and defense of the
truth, might be distinguished from hypocrites, who like Sodom apples,
Comparisons.
if a man crush them, fall into chafe; and like unto spunges wet in the water,
which if a man press them, let out all the liquour contained in them.

Fourthly, God will have his children to deny themselves, and their own
abilities, and to depend wholly upon his power and promises for their
strengthening or deliverance.

Fifthly, he will hereby make them so many lights and guides to direct the
blind world in the road way to Heaven. Lastly, GOD will hereby increase their
reward and glory in heaven.

Q. Who are Gods instruments herein?

A. Satan, and wicked men, in the world, namely, Tyrants, Heretics, Atheists.

Q. Why does God in the punishment and persecution of his children, use the
ministry of wicked men?

Math. 20.15. Romans 9.21 22.
A. First, to show his absolute and unlimited liberty, for he is a free agent,
and he may correct his children by whom he will. For as a natural Father, does
sometimes make the Schoolmaster, or one of his servants, the instruments to
correct his son, though he (perhaps) is not ignorant, that they may
intermingle their private affections: So God, (and that without any man's just
controlement) makes wicked men, who have their private ends and aims, the
rods to whip and correct his children withal.

Secondly, God suffers the wicked to stumble at the life, or profession of
his children, and to run themselves out of breath, Mat. 23.2
that they may fulfill the measure of their iniquities, and so incur the weight
of his displeasure.

Thirdly, Apoc. 11 12.
God by the patience of his children, and by their constant death, and
sufferinges, appalleth, and inwardly tormenteth the minds and consciences of
the persecutors, and leaves them without all excuse and defense of their
doings, before his judgment seat.

Fourthly, he sometimes by the singular patience and sufferings of his saints
overcomes the enemies hearts, and gains them to himself, and so they that
seemed conquerors are happily conquered to Christ, and of his foes are made his
friends.

Lastly, Esa. 10.1
God (against the wicked men's intentions) turns their persecutions to the
good of his children: for as an arrow attaineth unto the Archers mark without
any sense of his own: so the wicked though blindfolded, execute Gods secret
decree: they are Gods Fullers to whiten his children; God uses them as the
Goldsmith does lead, to melt and purify his gold; for hereby God does perfect
them, and purge them from the dross and dregs of earthly corruption.

Q. Why do wicked men so persecute Gods children.

A. First, because there is a continual enmity between the wicked, who are
the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15.
and betwixt the godly, who are the blessed seed of the woman.

Secondly, the godly are not of the world (id est) they are contrary to it in
profession, Ioh. 15.19.
life and practice, and God has chosen them out of the world, and therefore
the world hates and abhors them.

Thirdly, Gods children profess, preach and confess Gods sincere truth, Ephesians.
5.9.12. Ioh. 3.19.20.
which the wicked men do distaste and detest, and do also by the light of
their holy life and example check the deeds of darkness in the wicked.

Fourthly, the godly weaken the devils kingdom; hence he by his imps and
instruments, purposes and practices continually their death and destruction.

Q. Is it not lawful for the godly to use all lawful means of preserving
their lives in persecution?

A. Yes: for, first they are not bound to make confession of their faith to all
persons, as namely, to scorners, open enemies, that have no authority to
demand a reason of our profession, nor to ignorant persons, that are
contemners of good counsel.

Secondly, it is lawful to flee from the persecutors (or to avoid our
habitations. 1 King. 19. Ier. 38.24.25.36.
)

Thirdly, we may decline the danger of persecution by modest answers, by
concealing part of the truth, when we are not required thereunto: yea,
sometimes by our money and goods, by the change of our apparel, by the cutting
of our hair, and by setting our adversaries and enemies at difference amongst
themselves. Act. 13.6.9.10.


Q. Is persecution gainefull, and commodious to Gods children?

A. Yea, and that many ways. First, hereby Gods Church grows, and is much
enlarged: for being watered by the blood of Martyrs (which is the seed of the
Gospel) it more flourishes, A Similitude.
and it is like Camomi^l, the which the more that it is trodden upon, the more
it grows.

Secondly, Act. 11.19.20.
Christians in their dispersion and banishment sow the seeds of the Gospel in
other parts and provinces, Countrries, and Kingdoms, Act. 11. Romans 15.

Luke 2.35.
Thirdly, Reprobates in such a time descrie themselus, and power forth their
venom; and as for hypocrites, who were taken for true professors, they being
indeed nothing but chafe, (as the event shows) are by the fan of
persecution separated from the wheat of Martyrs. Luke 8.13.


Fourthly, Gods power and grace is proved and perfited in the faithfulls
infirmity, and the adversaries are confuted and confounded, 2. Cor. 12.9.

Lastly, the godly are hereby humbled and mortified, they are weaned from the
love of this vain world, and are brought to mind and muze on a better life,
and so they obtain peace of conscience and holiness of life, Heb. 12.11.
Psalm. 78.38. 2 Cor, 1.4.
Hos. 5.15 Ioh. 15.2.

Q. What good inducements and persuasions are there to move us to constancy in
persecution?

A. These following, or the like: First, that God exacteth and requires it at
our hands; which if we do not accordingly perform, we are altogether
unworthy the name of Christians, and altogether unmeet for the kingdom of God.
Luke 9.23 24.


Secondly, if we fall away from the profession, love, and practice of the
sacred Gospel of Christ, all our former good beginnings shall nothing bestead
us, 2 Pet. 2.20 and 21.
and all the righteousness that we have done, shall not be mentioned, but we
shall die, Ezech. 18.24.
and perish in our sin and apostasy. Heb. 10.26.27.

Thirdly, A Similitude.
the truth is victorious, and triumphant, and like the Sun, the more that it
is clouded, the more gloriously it will shine out; and therefore we must not
betray it.

Fourthly, we have a cloud and infinite company of witnesses, confessors,
martyrs, Heb. 12.1.
for our lights, lamps, guids, and directors, whose holy examples, if we
follow, we shall be partakers of their glory and happiness.

Fifthly, shall Jews, Heretics, Schismatikes, yea Turks, Panyms, and Pagans,
that have no promise of eternal life, be so stout and steadfast in their
profession, and shall not we Christians that have such comfortable promises of
Gods assistance, and of everlasting happiness, be much more courageous and
constant in defense of Gods immortal truth.

Lastly, we shall by our patience, suffering, innocence; if not (as sometimes
it comes to pass) convert, yet we shall daunt, and confound the enemies of
the Gospel, in that they cannot possibly remove us from our confident
confession, and in that our persecution gains many unto God.

Q. What practices are herein necessary?

A. First, we must in persecution depend upon God, and implore his help, and
then he will at the very instant suggest unto us what to speak, Luke 21.14.
and 15.
and enable us to suffer, and perfect his power in our infirmity.

Secondly, we must be persuaded of the truth of the doctrine for which we
suffer.

Thirdly, we must never make open confession of our faith, but either when we
are called and urged by public authority so to do, or (at least) when there
is some hope of doing good; 1 Pet 3.15 and 16. Mat 7.6.
for we must not betray our selves, nor cast holy things before dogs, and
pearls before swine.

Lastly, if we would march valiantly, we must not presume, but suspect all our
ways, and we must rather fear our selves then flatter them: and we must
chearefully entertain, and diligently put in execution the motions of the
spirit.

Q. What duties are we to perform to persons afflicted and persecuted?

A. First, we must have a fellowlike feeling of their misery, Amos 6.6.
and sympathize with them; otherwise we cannot effectually comfort them: A
Similitude.
for as iron cannot be joined, and fastened to iron, unless both of them be
made red hot, and beaten together: so one Christian can yield no comfort to
another, unless both suffer together, (if not in action) yet in fellow feeling.

Secondly, we must help them with our prayers, and be intercessors to the
Almighty for them, that he would arm them with strength and patience, and
direct all their sufferings for their own good, and the advancement of his
blessed Gospel.

Thirdly, we must, (as we have any opportunity offered) assist them with our
counsel, and with the words of exhortation, cheer, encourage, and embolden
them.

Mat. 25.43. 1 King. 18.13.
Lastly, we must (if we can) visit them in our own persons, or (at least)
minister unto their necessities, as Obadiah ministered unto the necessities of
an hundred of Gods Prophets, in the reign and persecution of Ahab and Iezabel;
and as Onesiphorus often refreshed Paul in prison, 2. Tim. 1:^6.
and was not ashamed of his bonds and chains; and this duty of mercy and
commiseration God will never leave vnrecompensed.

CHAP. X.
Question.

HOw are Persecutions to be divided?

A. Into persecutions of the affection, persecutions of the tongue and of the
hand, or outward action.

Q. What are the persecutions of the affections?

A. Contempt, envy, hatred, or malice.

Q. What comforts are to be imparted to Gods Children that suffer contempt?

A. First, it is a glorious matter to be contemned for virtue and well doing;
for in this case we are like unto Christ our blessed Savior, who was derided
of Herod and the Jews for his holy life, doctrine, zeal, miracles, etc. and
therefore we have cause to rejoice.

Secondly, we must note, who they are that commonly contemn us; they are
either enemies of the truth, or profane worldlings, who cannot discern of our
worth and excellency, and that have no knowledge and practice of true religion
and virtue, and therefore we are the less to care for their censure: for even
as precious pearls being enclosed and hidden in base earthen shells, are not
seen; and therefore they being not discerned, are not esteemed according to
their price and excellency: so the wicked and profane, looking only at the
contemptible condition of godly men's persons, and not discerning the grace of
God in their hearts, take an occasion to despise the^: or else they are scorned
and contemned of hypocrites factious and schismatic persons, who being more
humorous then truly holy, and more haughty then humble, and wiser in their
own eyes, 1. Cor. 3.3 4. etc.
then worthy in Gods sight, do distaste and falsely censure their brethren,
that are better then themselves; and hereof blessed S. Paul had expe^ience
amongst the Corinthians.

Secondly, it is the practice of Satan and his impes, thus to depresse and keep
under Gods children, that they who are famous and illustrious by the brightness
of their holiness and virtues, should be sullied and obscured by misreports
and contempt of their persons: but nevertheless, they hereby loose nothing of
their inherent excellency: for as a precious jewel, albeit by hogs and swine
trodden and trampled under feet, A Similitude.
abateth nothing of his natural excellency: So Gods children scorned and
contemned of the wicked lose nothing of their virtues; for contempt does not
hurt them but profit them.

Thirdly, it is an usual matter for learned men to be despised of the
ignorant, rare men of the rude, and wise Sages to be contemned o^ sots;
hereupon Seneca says very well, Seneca de morbis.
Nondum foelix es, etc. thou art not as yet happy, if the multitude does not
monk thee.

Fourthly, Math. 7.2.
they that ca^^ contempt upon others (unjustly) shall be conte^ned themseluee:
for with what measure they mete, it shall be measured ^o them again.

Lastly, let it suff^ce that God dignifieth and honors us, and that he has
garnished and embrodered us with the precious and princely graces of hi^ spirit.

Q. How are we to carry our selves when we are misregarded and contemned?

A. First, Math. 5.11 and 12.
let it be our joy and comfort to suffer contempt, and to run through good
report and bad for Christ his sake; for God will in the end, the more honor
and magnify us.

Secondly, it behooves us by speaking well of all men, by interpreting things
doubtful in the better part, by contemning no person without cause, and by our
good service and offices toward Church and common wealth, to wipe and wash
away the mire of contempt flung in our faces, and then in time our contempt
will be turned into credit, and our base esteem into glory.

Thirdly, let us strive to be that we would seem to be, and also by honest
means, and by our blessed behavior seek to grow into the favor and
familiarity of excellent, famous, and eminent Personages, and then we shall not
be despised but dignified, and not be neglected, but notice will soon be
taken of us, and our eminency.

Lastly, if good men (through ignorance, misreports, emulation, infirmity)
dislike and despise us, 2. Cor. 1.12.
we must be content (with others) to endure a common evil, and in the mean
time to comfort our selves in our honesty and innocence.

OF ENVY.
Q. What is Envy?

A. It is a grief or sadness, by reason of another man's outward or inward,
spiritual or temporal prosperity and happiness.

Q. How shall a Christian arm and strengthen himself against it?

A. First, excellent piety and prosperity is ever subject hereunto.

Secondly, no friend of sincerity, and undissembled godliness and goodness,
1. Ioh. 3.12
did ever want this exercise: for as the shadow does follow them that walk in
the Sun: so does Envy follow and pursue them that are noble and noted for
learning, wisdom, and well doing.

Thirdly, it is better to be hated then unhappy, and to be maligned then
miserable.

Fourthly, to envy greatness and goodness in others, argues a base, rascal,
and satanicall disposition: for first, they envy those good things in others,
which themselves want: secondly, they do but prick, stabbe, and wound
themselves with their own weapons: thirdly, they hood-winke, or cast dust into
their own eyes, that they may not behold and discern Gods graces in others.

Fifthly, the envious person is the cause of greater good to him that is
envied; for by his carping and deprauing of others, the virtues of the person
^nuied are brought upon the stage, and made better known: but the spiteful and
envious person does nothing but some out his own shame.

Sixthly, they are tormenters of themselves, and work their own ruins: for
as the moath does consume the garment, Comparisons.
rust the iron, and the viper eats out and consumes the belly of her that
conceived her: so does envy at length and by degrees, wast and destroy the
possessor. Lastly, the evils that they wish to others, they have themselves,
and increase upon themselves.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, let us leave envious men to themselves, and suffer them to torture
and torment their souls and bodies.

Secondly, the more that we are envied and maligned for zeal in pure religion,
and for well doing, the more let us be stirred up to the practice of religion
and virtue; for we shall by no means so much vex and torment envious persons
as by our well doing.

Thirdly, if we cannot otherwise avoid the tempest and storm of envy, let us
avoid it by modesty: let us avoid all ostentation, and for the time separate
our selves from the company of the envious, and suppress and hide whatsoever
might make us to be noted: for some enemies are no better overcome then by our
humility and obscurity.

Fourthly, if we would approve our selves good men, Mal. 3.7.
let us envy at no man's prosperity (be he never so wicked) for they shall be soon
cut down like grass, and shall wither as the green herb. Lastly, let us pray
unto God fervently so direct and preserve us.

Q. What comfort against hatred and malice?

A. First, the world and the wicked hate us unjustly; for they hate us not for
our sins and imperfections, but for the better pa^ts, namely; because we are
separated from them in profession and life, and because we seek the ruinating
of satan's king^ome, and because they will not be reproved and convinced of
sin.

Secondly, the world is addicted to traditions, and little esteems Gods
blessed Word, it is in love with earthly things, and neglects those that are
heavenly; no marvel then that it so distasteth and maligneth Gods children,
they love not God, and then how can they but hate his servants?

Thirdly, Abel, Lot, David, Elias, Paul, the Prophets, Ioh. 15 18.
Apostles, Christ himself, and his Saints in all ages have been causlesly
hated of the wicked: and this is a pregnant proof that they were Gods
children, and that we are likewise: for, Ioh. 15.19.
if either they or we had been of the world, the world would love his own.

Fourthly, we must remember, that we have deserved greater evils, and
therefore we ought more patiently to endure this.

Lastly, let it content us, that we are known, loved and liked of God and good
men who love us in the truth. And if the loss of the love of the common people
grieve us, we must note that their love is light, and without judgment and
discretion: and therefore their love oftentimes ends in ill will and hatred.

Q. How are we to demean and behave our selves when wicked men malign and
hate us?

A. First, seeing that malicious men are good neither actu, nor potentia, (that
is) neither in act, nor in possibility, and that they do but suck the
greatest part of their own poison, seeing they are perverted in judgment, and
opposite to sincerity: let us beware how we nourish occasions of hatred, and
that we be not too sociable and familiar with them.

Secondly, let us love God and his word, for then we cannot hate men's persons,
much less any virtues in them.

Thirdly, let us decline hatred (what in us lies) by dutifulnes and good
service; for in so doing, we shall either gain and pacify our enemy, Romans
12.20.
or (at least) leave him without excuse; for this is to heap coals of fire on
his head.

Q. May we lawfully hate them that hate us?

A. We must not, nor may not hate them in regard of their persons, or as they
are Gods creatures, or in private respects: but it is lawful for us to hate
their vices, and to abhor them, as they are Gods enemies and adversaries of
the Church; but we must not hate them as they hate us; namely, our persons, and
the better parts in us: but only hate their errors and vices, etc. which are
contrary to Gods nature, will, word and commandments.

Q. What are the persecutions of the tongue?

A. Slander and false imputations.

Q. How are we to comfort our selves against slander?

A. First, that the life and profession of the Church and Saints of God has
been traduced and slandered in all ages; and therefore no singular and
extraordinary matter befalling us, it is with more contentment to be endured.

Secondly, we herein are like unto Christ, who though he were more holy then
all men and Angels, yet he was called a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicanes and
sinners, an enemy to Caesar, and he was said to have the Devil.

Thirdly, slander cannot make a man miserable, (for where sin reigns there
is misery indeed) nay, it is a matter of honor and glory to be ill spoken of
for well doing: for they hate us because that we are better then they, and
because we run not to the same excess of riot, 1. Pet. 2.3.4
and the more that wicked men belie, slander and rail at us, the more in the
end will they make our virtues known.

Fourthly, false imputations cast upon us, will not continue long, they are as
so many blasts and fumes that will soon be dispersed and blown away; for God
will at length clear our innocence as the noone day, Psa. 37.6.8 1 Pet. 4.14
and our reproach shall be turned into the glory of an Angel Psalm 37.6 and 8.

Fifthly, though the wicked do willingly derogate from our good name, yet they
do addere mercedi nost^ae, Augustinus.
id est, increase our reward, albeit against their wills: for blessed are we
when men revile us, Mat. 5.10.
and say all manner of evil against us for Christ his sake; for then great is
our reward in heaven.

Sixthly, if the titles and attributes of the justice, truth, power and mercy
of God, be not free from slanderous imputations: let us much less look to be
exempt and privileged from evil tongues: Psalm. 10.11. and 12. Mal. 3.14 and
15.

Seventhly, if the rascal multitude, or the scumme of the people rail upon
us, and belie us, we must note that they do it rather of humor then of
knowledge, and of an ill affection rather then of judgment and aduisement; and
they will be silent when they have much barked and bawled: and as for their
lying tales and reports, because they arise from false grounds, and trifling
occasions, they will soon be dead, buried, extinct.

Eighthly, the slanderer does but hurt and discredit himself, and foame out
his own shame: for his slander, like an arrow shot against a stone wall, or a
tennise ball cast against it, 1 Samuel 25.39.
redounds upon the slanderer.

Lastly, God discrediteth his dear children with the world, and lets them
fall sometimes into the mire of wicked imputations, that they should not be
stained with the corruptions of it.

Q. How shall we behave our selves when we are thus belyed* and slaundered?

A. First, let us descend into our own souls, 2 Cor. 1 10.
and if we find our selves innocent, then let us comfort our selves in the
witness of our own conscience: neither let us think, that there is more
weight in their detractions, then in our own testimonies.

Secondly, in this case, let us rather look unto God who permits them,
Micah. 7. 2 Samuel 16.10.
then at the howling, barking, and biting dogs that annoy us: this course took
David.

Thirdly, whereas the rude and iniudicious multitude does cast false
imputations upon us; let us not only with the sponge of honest Apologies wipe
away these pretended spots, but also labor to have a precious report, and an
immortal memory amongst Gods children.

Fourthly, if we desire to be well spoken of, let us not rashly think evil
of others; for the better that any man is, the more hardly does he judge
another to be evil; much less let us secretly bite and sting them, nor take
that in the worse sense, that may be construed in the better meaning.

Fifthly, let us lend no ear, much less give any applause to the slanderer;
but show our dislike of him, and then he will not willingly speak that which
he shall perceive to be unwillingly heard.

Lastly* slander is a special sin of the Devil, Apoc 12.10.
who is a liar, and the slanderer of the brethren, and therefore let us beware
of it, and abhor it.

Q. What are the persecutions in action and in deed?

A. These and the like following; whippings, taking away of men's goods,
banishment, bondage, nakedness, death by the sword, want of burial, etc.

Q. What comforts against whippings?

A. First, Christ Jesus and his Apostles were thus dealt withal.

Gal. 6.17.
Secondly, as it was the mark of a true Apostle to bear in the body the marks
of the Lord Jesus: so it is the Character of a sincere Christian to suffer the
like in time of persecution.

1 Pet. 2 24.
Thirdly, Christ was whipped, and shed his blood for us; and shall we sinful
persons refuse to do the like, that we may make known our conformity with
him in his sufferings?

Fourthly, it is given unto Gods children (as a special prerogative) not only
to be whipped for, Phil. 1.16.
but to die for the Lord Jesus. Apoc. 12.11.

Lastly, the more indignities, and torments that any suffer for Christ, or for
righteousness sake, Apoc. 7.14* 15.16.
the more they shall advance the Gospel of Christ, and receive the greater
measure and proportion of glory in the world to come.

Q. How are or ought we to comfort our selves when we are violently by the
enemy despoiled of all our goods?

A. First, we must remember that many good men have fallen into the hands of
thieves (like that man that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10.30
and fell among thieves, who robbed him of his raiment, yea and wounded him,)
and yet have afterward recovered their former estate.

Secondly, Psalm. 23.1. Luke 10.33 34.35.
Christ is our Lord and master, and we his servants, and therefore though we be
despoiled of al our worldly goods; yet, he will never forsake us, but provide
for us things necessary: for so he dealt with the Samaritane.

Thirdly, we want not things (simply) necessary; for natura paucis contenta.

Fourthly, though we be spoiled of our goods, yet we have not forgone our
goodness, and we retain our life and liberty, which is the greater blessing.

Fifthly, God in his justice will in due time punish and revenge our wrongs.

Sixthly, we must (after the example of the blessed Hebrews) suffer with joy
the spoiling of our goods) knowing in our selves, Heb. 10.34
how that we have in heaven a better, and an enduring substance.

Lastly, if we be patient and content, we may (in time) with David enjoy our
enemies (that are so many Nabals) goods, 2 Samuel 25.42.
or by some other providence be gainers by our losses.

Q. What duties are we then to perform?

Job. 2 10. Mat. 9.27.
A. First, we must with holy Job be content to receive evil things from God as
well as good, and to praise God for all; and with the Apostles to forsake all
for Christ his sake; yea, and with that heroical woman in the Apocalypse, to
tread the Moon ( i. all earthly and transitory things) under our feet; Apoc.
12.1.
we must withal seek the things above, and the heavenly Jerusalem.

Secondly, it is our duty to procure wisdom, learning, virtue, godliness;
these are our proper endowments, and can neither by fraud nor force be taken
from us.

Thirdly, let us (whiles we enjoy the fickle and uncertain things) let us for
Christ his sake love his members, and with our worldly goods bountifully
relieve them in their need and necessity, Ioh. 1.3.17.
else how dwells the love of God in us?

Lastly, Iac. 2.5.
let it suffice us, that we are rich in grace, heirs of glory, and that we
have in heaven (our Country) a better and an enduring substance; and that after
this mortal and miserable life is expired, Heb. 10.3.4. 2 Pet. 3.13.
we shall actually enjoy the new heaven and the new earth wherein dwells
righteousness.

Q. Propound some comfortable meditations against banishment.

A. First, Moses, Elias, John the Evangelist, and infinite more in the
Primitive Church of the Apostles, in the ten general persecutions, and
sithence, have been exiled: and shall we refuse to be partakers with them?

Secondly, Math. 21.33. Heb. 13.13.
omnis terra commune naturae exilium: id est, Every country is a common
banishment of nature, and the whole world is but a strange country unto us:
(for in it we have no abiding City) and how then can Christians properly be
said to be banished out of their country, when they have none here?

Thirdly, though the godly be banished from their native soil, yet they
cannot be banished from the favor of God, Psalm. 7^.19.20.25. and 52.53.54
nor from the communion of Saints, nor from the kingdom of heaven; and God,
that is by his essence every where present, is as ready to help his children
in any strange Country, as in their own. Psalm. 105.12.13.14.

Fourthly, sundry men have gotten great honor, and attained unto great
learning and living in the place of their banishment.

Fifthly, here we shall be secured from envy: evil men shall not molest us,
but good men shall love us, and long for our company.

Act. 11.20.21.^2.
Sixthly, as the husbandman remoueth his plants and trees out of one orchard
into another that they may the better prosper: So God for greater good of his
Church does translate his children into some other country or coast.

Act. 8.1. and 4.
Lastly, the time of our banishment well spent, will send us into a far
better, that is an heavenly one.

Q. What duties must a Christian practice in his banishment?

A. First, he must comfort himself in the conscience of his righteousness,
which the enemy cannot blot, much less bereave him of.

Secondly, he must at their strict commandments and enforcement, relinquish
and depart out of his native soil, and then his departure shall be rather a
pilgrimage, then an expulsion, and a benefit then a banishment.

Thirdly, he must hear God speak unto him in the Scripture, Ioh. 10.27.
(for it is his voice) and he must speak, and have familiar speech and
conference with our God by prayer, and then he shall have God for his
companion, and the holy Ghost for his Comforter.

Fourthly, he must not delight in their conversation and company, that deride
and despise him, and by abode with whom he cannot receive any good information,
but much defilement: and therefore in this regard he must prefer religion and
a good conscience before country and native soil.

Lastly, he has the benefit of his priuatenes, and lives in peace without
distraction, or disturbance, and therefore he must by the advantage hereof,
betake himself to divine studies and meditations.

Q. Propound and deliver some heavenly consolations against bondage and
thraldom.

A. First, it is the greatest bondage to be captiuated and enthralled to sin
and Satan, Ioh. 8.35. and 36. Romans 5.1.
from which slavery Gods children are by grace freede; for their consciences
are at peace with God, and they are the servants of God, whose service is
perfect freedom.

Secondly, this bondage is greatly mitigated, yea sugared and sweetened to Gods
children: for God does not only restrain and moderate the enemies malice, but
also (sometimes) greatly honor, prefer and exalt them: examples whereof we
have in Joseph, Jeremie, Daniel, Sidrack, Mesheck, Abednego, in Hester,
Mardocheus, and diverse others.

Thirdly, death puts a term and end to this bondage, (if we find not
deliverance long before) and why cannot we a while expect this year of our
absolute freedom, and everlasting Iubiley?

Lastly, Gods children are Christ's freemen, Job 8.15.
being redeemed and ransomed by his blood, Phil. 3.20. Joh 3.25.
and they are free Denizens of heaven, having everlasting life in beginning,
and being (by faith) secured of the full possession of it, and therefore though
for a time they be plunged in many evils, yet they can never perish: for they
are afflicted, but not forsaken, tried, but not tired out.

Q. What is the quintessence or special use of all these propositions and
conclusions?

A. First, hence we may take notice of the miserable estate of wicked
worldlings and ungodly men, who though they enjoy outward wealth, ease and
liberty, yet are they drudges to the world, vassals and slaves unto sin, and
cursed caitiffes; for they are locked in golden fetters, and shut up in the
prison of their own sinful desires, which is the worst kind of bondage.

Secondly, let us serve the Lord our God, and not Satan, Sin, nor Antichrist,
and then we are Gods free men, and no bondage can impeach, or hinder our
spiritual liberty and happiness.

Thirdly, far be it from us to contemn or misiudge any of Gods children for
their outward servitude and bondage, unto which, tyranny and iniquity of times,
do or may enwrappe them; but let us pray to God to furnish them with joy, and
the spirit of long suffering, Ezech. 18.16. Esa. 58.7.
and in his good time to rid and deliver them: we must also (by occasion)
freely and franckly contribute to their necessities, for they are our own
flesh and blood, borne of the same both natural and spiritual seed,
breathing of the same air; and servants to the same God.

Lastly, when we are thus restrained and distressed, it behooves us timely and
truly to repent us of our sins, for otherwise we are to expect no
mitigation; much less a speedy deliverance out of our misery.

Q. What comforts against violent nakedness caused by flight, or the enemies
unmercifulness?

Psalm. 22.18. Mat. 27.28
A. First, Christ our blessed Savior was stripped of his raiment, and has
sanctified this evil unto us, and has turned the shame of it into glory.

Secondly, very many of Gods excellent servants have been thus shamefully
misused by their enemies. Basil says, that forty Martyrs were turned out
naked to be starued in the cold of the night, and afterward to be burned.

Thirdly, they must count it for some benefit and blessing, that the enemy does
only spoil them of their garments, and not of their lives.

Fourthly, though they endure shame and reproach of the world, Heb. 12.2*
yet it makes them not unhappy: for Christ suffered the shame of the cross to
make them honorable.

Fifthly, the enemy cannot possibly disrobe, dismantle, and despoile them of
the garments of Christ, his holiness and righteousness, wherewith they are
clothed, and wherewith their deformities are covered.

Sixthly, Romans 8.38
this is but a temporary and fatherly correction, and can never separate any of
Gods children from his love.

Lastly, it is not the gay garments but godliness, not outward pomp but piety
that makes men honorable: as for the proud man's honor, it is in his garment
and not in his person.

Q. What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, let it be a shame to us to be called naughty, rather then naked.

Secondly, though Gods enemies rob his children of their garments, Esaias. 58.7.
let us in our charity cloth them.

Lastly, let us by faith put on the Lord Jesus, and then we shall never be
found naked; for he only is naked who has lost Christ.

Q. Why does God suffer so many of his best beloved Saints and servants to be
massacred and murdered by the enemies sword?

A. First, we herein must rather reverence and admire Gods secret, yet just
proceedings, then curiously to diue and enquire into the ground and reason of
them; and we must assure our selves that the end is good, albeit our dulnes
cannot so well apprehend it. For Gods purposes and decrees attain unto their
holy and appointed ends, no otherwise then certain riualets (though they
vanish out of our sight, and are hidden under the earth) are carried and convey
themselves into the sea.

Secondly, by the effusion and spilling of their innocent blood, the number of
true professors is both manifested and multiplied, and the bloody butchers and
Bonners, either converted (albeit most rarely) or else convinced and left
inexcusable.

Thirdly, though the enemies think to root out the Church, and the name and
memory of true Christians; yet God does and will cross and curse their
designs: for contrary to their expectation the Gospel is more published and
proclaimed, the innocence of Gods children more cleared and testified; and
their madness and badnes made known unto all the world.

Lastly, the sufferings of the Martyrs does procure unto them a greater measure
of glory in heaven: but tyrants, heretics, persecutors run themselves out
of breath, and draw upon themselves the greater damnation.

Q. How are we to arm and comfort our selves against this kind of death?

A. First, they are blessed that die in the Lord, Apoc. 7.13.
and for the Lord; they are glorious in Gods sight, and are arrayed in long
white robes.

Secondly, they do not lose their lives but find them, and incomparably better
them: Luke 9.

Thirdly, the sword touches the garment of the body, but not the soul, nor
their faith: for God herein deals with his children, as the Persians in
punishing some noble Personage; for they take away his garment and his hat, and
hang them up in some place, and all to beat them, as though they were the man
himself: so they (by Gods ouerruling hand) do not touch our souls and our
faith, but beat only the garment of our persons.

Aug. de Cr^. Dei l. 3. c. ^.
Fourthly, they that die for Christ, receive some what of death, that it be^al
not whol^ unto them.

Lastly, their innocent blood which the persecutors have shed and sucked,
cries like the blood of Abel to the Heavens for vengeance against them, and
they with the souls in the Apocalypse that were killed for the word of God,
Genesis 4.
cry with a loud voice, saying; How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Apoc. 6.10
and this their cry the just Lord, does and needs must hear and regard.

Q What use are we to make hereof?

A. First, we must never promise to our selves long prosperity, or immunitie
from persecution; but we must prepare and strengthen our selves against the
time of trial and martyrdom: and though it be not our lot always to die for
the Lord Jesus, and his blessed truth; yet we must be Martyrs in desire and
affection, and then God will accept the will for the deed: for there is
Martyrium sine flamm^, i. a martyrdom without a faggot.

Secondly, we must not esteem, nor think the fiery trial as some strange
thing, 1 Pet. 4.12.
but rejoice in as much as we are (hereby) made partakers of Christ his
sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, we may be glad and rejoice.

Thirdly, we must comfort and stay our selves in the expectation of the
fearful end that abides Gods enemies; ver. 17. Psalm. 37.9.
they shall soon be cut off, their pomp shall be despised and soon vanish
away* Psalm. 73.19. They are Gods rods to correct and disciplinate his children
by, who when they have done their office, must be cast into the fire and
consumed.

Esa. 10.21.22.
Lastly, there is no persecution so general and grievous, but many shall be
preserved in it, and from it; and after long wrestling, God will grant a
breathing time.

Q. What if Gods children cannot be suffered to be buried when they are dead,
what shall we judge of them, or how shall we comfort our selves against this
evil?

A. Their dead bodies are members of Christ, temples of the holy Ghost; and
they shall rise again in glory to eternal life; therefore we may not judge
them accursed.

Secondly, the want of burial does nothing hurt them, as the performance of it
does nothing profit the wicked: and as for these funeral solemnities, they
are rather viuorum solatia, quam mortuorum auxilia, id est. Comforts for the
living, then helps for the dead.

Thirdly, many of Gods Saints, yea some most blessed Martyrs, Apoc. 11.8
have wanted burial, Psalm 79.2. and yet have been received up into glory.
Apoc. 11. ver. 12.

Fourthly, other evils, (as death by drowning, by fire, by earthquakes, by the
fall of houses, by the cruel rage of wild beasts, etc.) are as much (if not
more) to be feared.

Fifthly, Tegitur coelo qui non habet vrnam, The sky is to them in stead of a
coffin.

Sixthly, Job. 19.25.26.
though some Personages be never so sumptuously entombed and gloriously buried,
yet must the worms (in the body) consume the bodies of such.

Seventhly, the want of burial (though it is a curse to Gods enemies, who
perish both in soul and body) yet it is but a fatherly, and favorable
chasticement to his children, and can never part, nor divorce them from him and
his love.

Lastly, Apoc. 14.13.
though sometimes the dead bodies of Gods Saints want burial, yet they feel
no smart; and their souls in glory cannot, and do not behold the lothsomnes
of their unburied bodies.

Q. What use is to be made hereof?

A. First, we must not (so much) trouble our selves about this matter, but
commit the disposition of our dead corpse to Gods providence, and the care of
the living.

Secondly, let us bury our sins in Christ his grave and sepulcher, and then
the want of burial and funeral solemnities shall neither shame us, Romans 6.3.
and 4.
nor harm us.

Lastly, if in the heat of personal persecution the bodies of Gods saints
known unto us, and near us, do want burial, we must (after the manner of
those devout brethren that buried Stephen) enterre them; Act. 8.2.
for hereby we do not only testify our love and reverence toward them, but
also declare our good hope of their glorious resurrection.

Q. By what special considerations are we to arm and hearten our selves
against persecutions?

A. First, we know it is the lot of Gods children to be persecuted of the
wicked in every generation, Apoc. 12.17.
but most notably in the reign and rage of Antichrist. For they that are borne
after the flesh will persecute them that are borne after the spirit, Gal. 4.29.
and therefore why should we be so offended at persecutions, having so many
compartners, and companions herein.

Secondly, that we are hereby made con^ormable unto Christ our Captain, leader
and guide, and therefore if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him.

Thirdly, that Gods power and his goodness does as much appear in privative
blessings as in positive: for God is with us in trouble, Psa. 76.9. and 10.
he (when it pleases him) represseth the power, and checketh the malice of the
enemy, reformeth and refineth us, and gives a joyful issue, evasion and event
to our afflictions.

Fourthly, that persecution is a badge, ensign, and ornament of the true
church; for hereby open enemies take occasion to oppose themselves against Gods
servants, and hypocrites; and time seruers are discovered.

Fifthly, Heb. 5.8.
that persecution is a schoolmasters to make us understand Gods will, and a
plain commentary of Gods word; for we learn that by experience, which we
heard by the publik ministry.

Lastly, persecution is good for Gods children whether they escape it, or die
by it; for God does order it for their profit and happiness, and they are
gainers by it many ways. Luke 18.28.29.30.

Q. What duties are we to perform in persecution?

A. First, we are to prepare our selves against it by daily mortification, and
by the experience of the sweet and heavenly society that we have with our
blessed God that dwells in us, 1 Cor. 15.30.31.
and so we shall learn to die daily.

Secondly, let us be assured that we suffer as Christians, 1 Pet. 4.16
and not as malefactors, and then we are not to be ashamed, but to glorify
God in that behalf. For we are Gods Worthies, and his champions, placed in the
theater of the world, and if we fight stoutely and wisely in our Lords quarrel
and cause, he will honor and advance us accordingly both here, and hereafter.

Thirdly, because persecution is not only a trial, but also a correction for
our sins, we must entreat the Lord to pardon them, and then the flame of
affliction shall brighten us, but not burn us, scour us but not consume us.

Fourthly, we must possess our souls and the graces of God by our patience:
we must seek the Lord in our trouble, 2 Chr. 15.4
and he will be found of us; and it is our duty with Moses (for our
encouragement) more to look unto the infinite and transcendent measure of
reward in the kingdom of heaven, then either the Sunshine of present
prosperity, or the blustering winds of persecution.

Fifthly, persecution does only touch the vestment and garment of our body, but
cannot reach unto the fort of our faith, nor the hold of our heart, and
therefore it ought the less to astonish and distract us.

Sixthly, let it be our wisdom and practice in the blustering tempests, and
the weltering waves of the worlds persecutions, to adhere unto, and stand fast
upon Christ the rock; and then we shall not need to fear the waves under
us, much less dread drowning.

Lastly, if it please God temporally to deliver us, let us receive Gods
precious word with greater joy: for when men and outward means fail us, it
will be a staff and stay to us in all our tribulations, and fill us full of
comfort and hope: Romans 5.4. Psalm 19.7.8.
for the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the testimony of the
Lord is sure, and gives wisdom to the simple, the statutes of the Lord are
right and rejoice the heart, the commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives
light to the eyes. Let us praise and magnify God for our gracious deliverance,
Amos. 6.6.
let us remember Joseph his afflictions, and help our persecuted brethren by
our goods and money (if we can): and (at least) by our prayers and
intercessions: for this evidently proves that we are feeling members of the
same mystical body, whereof Christ is the head. 1 Cor. 12 26.


CHAP. XI. The general use and application of the whole Treatise.
THe quintessence of all that has been formerly and at large in this treatise
handled, may be aptly and pithily reduced to these ^ew conclusions fol^owing.

First, that man by his first creation, was pure, holy, innocent, and lived in
a most happy and blissful estate.

Secondly, that he by his voluntary fall, and apostasy from God, and from
his former integrity, has in soul and body corrupted himself and all his
posterity; and not only deprived himself and all his sucsessours, of all
original holiness and happiness; but also, wholly subjected them and
himself* to all plagues and miseries, both temporal and eternal*

Thirdly, that sin is very distastefull, odious, and stinking in Gods taste,
sight, and nostrils; for otherwise the most just Lord, would never so
grievously, nor with such variety of plagues and punishments execute his
indignation, not only upon men of years, but also upon the very infants that
have committed no actual transgression.

Fourthly, the Lord, that draws light out of darkness, life out of death,
and in judgment remembers mercy, has given his only son Jesus Christ to
die, to make a perfect satisfaction to his justice, 1 John. 2. l. 2.
for the sins of all the elect, and to be a perpetual intercessour for them;
so that they are not only freed from the guilt, dominion, and everlasting
punishment of sin, but also entitled unto, and shall in time certainly
possess everlasting and unspeakable glory and holiness.

Fifthly, that Christ has by virtue of faith in his death and merits,
transnatured and changed to all his elect, the temporary and eternal plagues
and punishments of sin, into certain gentle, momentanie, and fatherly
corrections and chastisments.

Sixthly, that God has not left his people, in their crosses, temptations, and
afflictions, without hope, help, and remedy; but has given them the sacred
and all sufficient Scriptures, to instruct, direct, and to confirm and comfort
their souls and cosciences in all distresses, inward and outward; in all
afflictions, and against all scandals and persecutions whatsoever.

Seventhly, God has provided for his people, Ministers, by their pure
preching, and judicious writings, to resolve them in all doubts; and christian
friends and acquaintance, to solace and support them: Wherefore we must daily
bless God for his infinite mercy in Christ; attend unto, and consult the
Scriptures, our pastors and christian brethren.

Eighthly, we must make use of the treatises and volumes of godly learned men,
who have traveled to good purpose in this kind.

Ninthly, we must in our afflictions and distresses, find out, confess and
bewail, our particular sins, and earnestly entreat God, for Christ his sake
to pardon them; for they are the meritorious causes of all our miseries.

Tenthly, we in our miseries and troubles, must not murmurre and repine against
God, nor use any unlawful means of ease and deliverance, much less despair
of Gods gracious mercy and help; but we ought to commend our souls, bodies,
and outward state to Gods blessed government and promises; we must desire
direction, and the spirit of strength and constancy from God, and in hope and
patience, wait upon him, until he have mercy upon us.

Eleuenthly, we in our prosperity, must prepare our selves against adversity;
and we must with such a sympathy and fellow feeling, remember them that are in
affliction, and so endeavor to relieve and resolve them, as if we were also
afflicted in the body. Heb. 13.3.

Lastly, when we are recovered out of any temptation, or delivered out of any
trouble, we must give God all the glory of it: and in our rest and prosperity,
g^ther grace and strength, and so hearten our selves, against the next
temptation.

Now the God of all grace and consolation, for Christ Jesus his sake, so direct
and instruct us by his blessed spirit. to perform all these duties, that his
Majesty may have all the glory, his Church and children good examples of
imitation; and we our selves have joy and comfort in this world, and eternal
Salvation in the next: Amen.

A LARGE TABLE, CONtaining the chief points, heads, and particulars, that are
handled and applied in both the Books of this CHRISTIAN ARMORIE.
The first Book.
CHAP. I.
THe original of man's sin and misery. What sin is. Who is the subject of
it. What be the kinds of it. What is original sin. The titles and names of
it. The parts, causes, and uses of it. Why the corruption of it remains in
Gods children. What was Adams fall. What was the object of it. Why the eating
of an Apple was so grievously punished. The isntrumental and formal cause of
his fall. How God did forsake our first parents. Why did God permit their fall.
How it can stand with Gods justice, that all Adams posterity should smart for
his sin. How can Adams personal sin be imputed to his posterity. How can
parents derive corruption unto their children. The parents do not beget the
souls of their children, how can they then infuse corruption into them. What
use are we to make hereof. What is actual sin. The o^iginall of it. The
inward and outward causes of it. The difference between original and actual
sin.
CHAP. II.
What follows sin. Whether afflictions and temporal evils be (properly)
cur^es and satisfactions to Gods justice. How are they qualified to the
believers. The sins of Gods el^ct are forgiven, and why are not the
chastisements with a^l remoud. The use of the point.
CHAP. III.
What the cross is. Why no ^eruant of God is freed from it. What is to be
thought of them that feel no cross. The use of the point. Whether that the
cross be good or not. For what ends God does cross and afflict his c^ildren.
Wh^ do not the same ends, effects, and events appear in the wicked. Arguments
to move us to patience under the cross. Comfortable conclusions and
meditations against the cross. What duties are to be performed toward the
afflicted.
CHAP. IIII. How the Cross is to be divided and distinguished.
What comforts are there against war. Comfo^ts and holy counsel for them
that are foiled in battle. What duties are to be performed in time of war
Comforts against civil war. What duties are then to be performed.
CHAP. V.
Whether that the plague be infectious or not. Whether a Christian may lawfully
flee i^ the time of the plague. Certain objections answered. The duty of them
that flee. The duties of them that abide at home. Why God sometimes, does by the
pestilence cut down and destroy so many thousands. Heavenly meditations
against the plague. The duties that the visited persons are to perform toward
God, themselves and their neighbors.
CHAP. VI.
Meditations against death and famine. What are the outward causes of it. What
use is to be made hereof. For what special sins it is sent. Duties to be
practiced.
CHAP. VII
Comforts against wrong and oppression. The duties of the oppressed. Manifold
meditations and comforts against poverty and want. The use of poverty. Comforts
and directions for them that fear poverty, by reason of a great charge of
children. Comforts against meannesse and baseness of birth and parentage. For
what ends does God expose his children to so many losses Comforts against the
spoil and loss of worldly goods. Duties then to be performed.
CHAP. VIII.
Comforts and directions for them that are cosened and defrauded. Duties then
to be performed.
CHAP. VIV.
What sickness is. Who is the author of it. The end why it is inflicted. The
procuring cause of it. Spiritual comforts against it. Duties to be performed.
Comforts against sharpness and violence of sickness. How a Christian must
then behave himself. Comforts against the long continuance of sickness.
Comforts for them that cannot sleep. Comforts for the sick that cannot go
out of doors. Comforts for them that are in their sickness, falled and forsaken
of their friends and kinsfolk. Duties then to be performed. Consolations
against the concurrence of many evils, Comforts against pains in childbearing.
Comforts against old age. How an old man must behave himself.
CHAP. X. Of Death.
What death is. The procuring cause of it. The imposer of it. What it is in it
own nature. What it is to Gods children. Why regenerate men die. Why are not
the bodies of Gods Saints departed, glorified together with their souls. Why
the bodies of Henoch and Elias died not, but were rapt up into heaven. Why
infants die. Whether that sudden death be a curse. The use of the point.
Whether it be lawful to pray against sudden death or not. Comforts against
violent death by the enemies sword.
CHAP. XI. Of the supposed evils that death brings.
Comforts against the untimely death of worthy men in authority. What use we
are to make of their untimely death* Comforts against the death of friends, and
benefactors.
CHAP. XII. Comforts against the death of kinsfolk.
Comforts for him that has parted with a good wife. Comforts for a wife that
has lost a good husband. Comforts for parents that have parted with virtuous
Children. The use that is to be made thereof. Comforts for poor Orphans, that
want father and mother. Their duties. Comforts against the death of brethren
and sisters. The use of the point. Comforts for a married man that dies
without Children.
CHAP. XIII. Of the privative benefits of Death.
What be the evils that death freeth Gods children from. What use is to be
made hereof. Wheth^r it be lawful for any man to kill himself that he may
be eased of his present pain. Whether that death is to be feared. In what
respects death is to be feared. In what respects it is not to be feared. How we
are to be defended against the fear of it. What are ^he positive ben^fits of
death* Whether that a man (in this mortality) can have a taste of eternal life.
What considerations and practices are necessary her^ unto. How he must ground
these meditations in his heart. Why do regenerate men die. Whether that death
may be desired. In what respects. Whether it be lawful to desire life. What is
required that a man may die well. Whether that preparation against death be
necessary. Wherein it does consist. What are the meditations. What duties must
the sick man perform toward God. Why so. What duties must he perfo^me* to
his neighbor. What duties must he perfo^me* to his own family. What duties
is he to pe^form toward himself. What will follow upon the performance of
these duties. What is a right disposition in death. Whether that it be
necessary. The parts of it. What it is to die in faith. What is the benefit
hereof. How is faith to be expressed. What is it to die in obedience. How is
this duty to be performed. What it is to surrender our souls into Gods hands.
Comforts against death. What use is to be made hereof.
CHAP. XIIII. Of Personal and particular evils.
Comforts against impotency and deformity of body. Comforts against lamenesse,
blindness, deafness, dumbness.
CHAP. XV. Of outward particular evils, or crosses.
Comforts against evil husbands. Comforts against evil wives. Comforts
against evil children. Comforts against evil and unfaithful Servants.
Comforts against evil Lords and Masters.
CHAP. XVI. Of private evils that are from without us.
Comforts against shrewd mothers in law. Comforts for them that receive foiles
and repulses in lawful suites. Counsel and comfort for such as are either
undone or much decayed by ^uretiship. Comforts for them whose good service is
neither respected, no^ rewarded. Comforts against barrennes in wives. Comforts
against false imprisonment. Comforts for them that are oppressed in their
lawful suite.
CHAP. XVII. Of extraordinary evils to which the bodies of men are subject.
What is witchcraft. Whether that Gods children can be bewitched. The use of
the point. Why does God suffer his children to be thus tormented. What use is
to be made of the point. Why does Satan seek rather to annoy Gods children
then the reprobate. The spiritual remedies against witchcraft. What possession
is. Whether that there be any in these days. Whether there can yet be any
possession, seeing that the miraculous gift of expelling them, is ceased.
Whether the Demoniaks in Christ his time, were possessed by the devil, or only
obsessed or tormented from without. Whether that any of Gods children were,
are, or can be possessed by Satan. General comforts and directions against
possession. The duties of the possessed. What duties are the friends and those
that attend upon the possessed, to perform.
The second book.
CHAP. I. Of anguish of mind and distress of Conscience.
What distress of mind is. Why of all crosses and troubles it is the
greatest. Why does God sometimes try and exercise his children by so great
afflictions. Comforts against the long continuance of them. From what cau^es
distress of mind arises. What comfortable m^ditations are necessary for the
regaining the loss of Gods gracious favor once sweetly felt. The use of the
point. Comforts for those that are troubled in conscience for some notable
sin committed. Comforts against the long continuance of inward and outward
troubles. What melancholy is. How it causes distress of conscience. How it
differs from trouble of conscience. Comfort against sadness and heaviness of
mind. Comforts against fearful dreams. Practices to prevent it. Comforts and
remedies for him that is weary of this life by reason of troubles and
discontentments. What desperation is. How it is (ordinarily) caused.
Meditations and remedies against it. The use of the doctrine. Comforts against
the fear of the last judgment. The use of it. Comforts against the fear of
Hell.
CHAP. II. Of doubtings.
Why God does suffer his children, to be persecuted with doubtings. Whether
that they can be thus distressed. Why it is proper to them, to be this way
tempted and afflicted. The means to suppress doubtings. What practices are
good for this purpose. Comforts and resolutions, for them that doubt of their
adoption, by reason of the number and greatness of their sins. What be the
means to remove these doubtings. Resolution for him that doubts, whether
that Christ be his Savior in particular, or not. Whether that hypocrites and
profane persons can, or do, ever soundly apply Gods general promises. Whether
a weak and a doubting faith, be a true faith, or not. Comforts for them that
are to encounter with most dangerous temptations, in discharging their
particular callings. Whether that the diversity of interpretation of
Scriptures, be any sufficient argument to prove that they are not Gods word.
How can the preaching and reading of them, make some worse if that they be
Gods word. Why God suffers the faith of his Saints to labor of so many
doubts.
CHAP. III. Of imperfections in prayer and sanctification.
The duties that a Christian is to perform when he perceives many
imperfections in his prayers. The use of them. Whether that dullness and
drowsines in prayer can stand with true sanctification. The use that is to be
made hereof. Whether evil and vain thoughts in prayer can consist with true
sanctification. What course a christian must take for his help heerin.
Comforts for them whose prayers God delayeth Whether that a regenerate man may
be negligent and remiss in the duties of tha^ksgiuing. Remedies for a man's
recovery herein. What practices are necessary.
CHAP. IIII. Of often falling into, and continuance of a man, in one and the
same sin.
Whether that a regenerate man can fall eftsoons into one and the same sin.
The use of the point. Whether a true sanctified man can possibly he long in one
and the same sin. The use of it.
CHAP. V. Of small profiting by the word and Sacraments.
Whether little profiting by the ministry of the word and Sacraments, be no
profiting at al. The use of the question. Comforts and directions for him that
is dull in conceiving and understanding Gods word. Directions and comforts for
Gods child that is troubled with a weak memory. What means are good to cure
hardness of heart. Counsel and directions for them that complain that they
feel no present increase of faith and comfort by the Lords supper. How a man
is to prepare himself before he hear the word of God, or receive the
Sacraments. What we must judge of them that having a great desire to obey,
fail in the act of obedience. Whether Gods children be at any time assaulted
with blasphemous thoughts. How blasphemous thoughts arising from within us, are
to be reformed, or removed. How we must arm our selves against blasphemous
thoughts objected from without us.
CHAP. VI. Of scandales and offenses.
What a scandal is? Why God permits it. What are the kinds of it. What is
a scandal given. Of how many kinds it is. The use that is to be made of
scandals given. How a Christian shall or must preserve himself against the
scandal and contagion of false doctrine. What duties he is to practice herein.
How a Christian may stay and comfort himself in a general apostasy from the
Gospel of Christ. What duties he is to practice at such a time. Comforts
against the scandal of false excommunication. Comforts against the scandal of
innocence oppressed. Why God does so severely handle holy and innocent men. The
use of the point. Comforts and directions for weak Christians, that are
offended at the loose life, and vile practices of some professo^s. What
practices are then necessary. Comforts against the apostasy of eminent and
famous persons. How we may prevent it in our selves. Whether popish Martyrs be
true martyrs. We may preserve our selves from this scandal. How a man is to
arm and comfort himself against factions, schisms, and divisions prevailing
in the Church. How we must behave our selves at such a time. Consolations
against evil and unquiet neighbors. Consolations against false and fained
friends. Comforts for Princes that are troubled with evil and disobedient
subjects. Comforts for subjects wronged and oppressed. Comforts and directions
against the scandal of evil, idle, and offensive Ministers. Comforts and
directions against a general corruption in manners.
CHAP. VII
What is an offense taken. What are the causes of it. Comforts against the
offense that wicked men take against us. How shall Gods children comfort
themselves when wicked men are offended at their lawful use of things
indifferent. Comforts against afflictions of good men.
CHAP. VIII.
How shall Gods children reform themselves, or resolve their minds, that are
scandalized at the long reign and prosperity of tyrants and persecutors.
Reasons to remove Gods children from conceiving offense at the long impunity of
evil doers. Why God does not alike punish in this world, all evil doers, but
spares many. Why does God in the execution of public judgments, as of war,
pestilence, famine, include the good with the wicked.
CHAP. IX. Touching Persecution.
What persecution is. Whether that persecutours in any generation, do, or can,
root out the Church. For what ends God does suffer his Church and children to
be so persecuted. Who are Gods instruments herein. Why does God use the
ministry of wicked men in the chastising of his children. Why wicked men do
so persecute the godly. Whether that in persecution, Gods children may not
lawfully use all good means to preserve themselves. Whether that Gods children
be gainers by persecution. Reasons to move us to constancy. What practices
are necessary for this purpose. What duties are we to perform toward the
persecuted.
CHAP. X.
The kinds of persecution. Comforts against contempt. How we must behave our
selves when we are contemned. What envy is. How a Christian must, or should
arm himself against it. What use are we to make hereof. Comforts against
hatred and malice. Whether that we may lawfully hate them that hate us. How
are we to behave our selves, when we are maligned and hated. Comforts against
slander. How the belied and slandered, should behave themselves. Comforts
against whipping. Comforts against the violent taking away of our goods, by the
public enemy. What duties must we then perform, when we are thus violently
handled. Comforts against exile and banishment. How must we behave our selves,
when we are banished out of our country. Comforts against slavery and
bondage. What use are we to make hereof. Consolations against nakedness. Why
God suffers so many of his children, to be devoured by the sword. Comforts
against this violent kind of death. What use is to be made hereof. Comforts
against the want of Christian burial. What use is to be made hereof. Special
considerations and consolations, against all kind of persecutions. What duties
we must then perform.
CHAP. XI.
The general use, and application, or the breue and epitome, of the whole
treatise.
FINIS.

