THE WORLDS RESVRRECTION, OR The general calling of the Jews,

A familiar Commentary upon the eleventh Chapter of Saint Paul to the Romans,
according to the sense of Scripture, and the consent of the most judicious
interpreters, wherein above fifty notable questions are soundly answered, and
the particular doctrines, reasons and uses of every verse, are profitably and
plainly delivered.

By THOMAS DRAXE Minister of the word of God.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop
near Christ Church gate. Anno. 1608.

To the Right Honorable and most virtuous Lady, the Lady LVCIE Countess of
Bedford: grace and peace, with increase of all holiness and happiness.
THe wisdom, power, and providence of God, as it does (right Honorable) most
eminently and admirably appear and shine forth in the frame, preservation and
government of the universal world, and of all things therein contained: so in
the mystery and matter of predestination, in the illumination and blinding,
salvation and condemnation both of Jews and Gentiles, it is most deep, yea
and past man's founding out. For who can comprehend the depth of Gods council,
or render any particular reason of it? why God, who had amongst all the nations
of the earth elected and selected the Jews to be his only peculiar and
beloved people, with whom he made such a singular covenant of mercy and
salvation, to whom appertained the adoption, Rom 9. v. 4. and 5.
the glory, the law, the service of God, of whom are the Fathers, and of whom
(concerning the flesh) Christ came who is God blessed for euer-more, should for
so many hundred years, even from the Apostles preaching unto our days,
generally cut and cast them off from being his people and Church? and by
occasion of their unbelief and desertion, have in their room and stead, so
generally in all countries and kingdoms of the world, adopted and substituted
us Gentiles, Romans 11.17. Deuteronomy. 32.21. Ephesians. 2.12.
who formerly were nothing but Wild Olives, no people, not beloved, strangers
from the Covenants of promise, without Christ, without hope, without God in the
world?

The reason (I say) and moving cause of Gods decree and council, is unsearchable
and past finding out; yet if we duly examine and consider the event, and
execution of it, we cannot but discern and acknowledge that God has most
justly revenged himself upon the Jews and powered out his wrath upon them to
the utmost. For before Christ his incarnation, they often misused, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
ver. 15* and 16.
derided, persecuted, and slew Gods prophets, and since they refused and
murdered the Lord of glory, they forbad his Apostles to preach to us Gentiles,
they persecuted and killed them, and from that time to this present hour,
cease not to blaspheme and spi^ out their venim against Christ his church, his
gospel and his servants. And yet, (notwithstanding all this) is it not a
mystery to be wondered at and adored, that God has in all ages of the Church,
chosen and reserved to himself, and called to Christ a remnant of them, which
is undoubtedly, a forerunner and argument of their general conversion not far
off. Secondly it is a marvelous work of God, and not without his mystery, that
the Jews (howsoever wandering and dispersed in all countries almost,) should
still continue such a distinct and unconfounded nation, so innumerable in
multitude, and so constant in the keeping and observing of (as much as they
possible may) their ancient laws, rites, and ceremonies. Thirdly they have bin
in the times of greatest persecutions, when the tirants of the world sought to
extinguish, and root out the scriptures (and still are) the faithful keepers
and preseruers of the old testament: and all this may put us in some good hope
of their future calling and conversion. Lastly God has (as Saint Paul
manifestly proves,) made an evident promise of their plenary calling and
salvation, when the full number of us Gentiles, is (successively) come into the
church.

Thus seeing their miserable state for the time past, and also at this present,
and that a remnant is always remaining, and the conversion of the nation of them
is daily expected; we must not pass by so memorable a work of God without use
and application. By their fall and apostasy we must not only justify, but
also tremble and stand in awe of Gods judgments, fear to offend the divine
Majesty, and beware least through unbelief, contempt of the gospel and
profaine security, we at length attract and draw the like judgments upon our
selves. Secondly, in that so great a multitude of them shall be again ingrafted
into Christ and believe the gospel, we must be so far from despiseing them,
or scandalizing them by our ill life and example, and from despairing of their
salvation, that we must heartily pray for them, and by our zealous profession
and holy life and conversation study and strive, through the working of the
holy Ghost, to reduce them into the right way.

Lastly, Christian Monarchs and Magistrates must not only by enacting and
execution of severe laws, repress their vile and intolerable vsuries, whereby
they plague and oppress many poor Christians, and punish with all sharpness
their horrible blasphemies against Christ and his gospel, but cause them being
under their authority and subjection to be by degrees instructed in Christian
religion, and for the sooner effecting of it, to compel them to hear the
gospel. Then shall the miserable and seduced Jews be brought home, the world
revived, the hearts of Gods people replenished with unspeakable joy, all
nations shall glorify God in Christ, and we shall al in short time be fully and
finally, perfected and glorified.

This is (most noble Lady) the sum and subject of this small volumne, which
hoping that it will be profitable and comfortable to many, I thought good to
publish it, and in many respects me moving, to commend the protection and
patronage of it, to your Honor.

First your Honor, is zealous, religious, wise, and learned, and always have
been (and still are) in these regards; illustrious and renowned.

Secondly, you to your greatness, join goodness* to your honor, humility;
and to your knowledge, Chiristian kindness and benigni^ie, and therefore you
cannot but accept of, judge of, and read at your leisure, any sound and
wholesome treatise that directs and furthereth you therein. Lastly, I am so
deeply obliged and indebted unto your most noble and religious Parents, and to
the honorable, studious, and hopeful Knight your brother, that the
signification of my thankfulness does in equity also belong unto your Honor.

Wherefore I most humbly beseech you, graciously to respect my small labors*
and to make use of them for your edification. Thus desiring your good
acceptance, and craving pardon for my boldness, I pray the God of heaven to
increase you in all honor and grace, to make you a noble Cedar in his house, a
bright Star in his Church, fruitful in all good works, happy and blessed in
your good courses, and after fullness of age, faith, and felicity, to crown
you with everlasting glory in his heavenly kingdom. Amen.

Couentry. November. 1608. Your Honors in all duty to be commanded, Thomas
Drax.

CLARISSIMO, Viro and doctrina and pietate praestanti, Domino Clementi
Throgmortono equiti aurato, gratiam pacem and omnia prospera.
QVanquam, (eques or natissime) quidan^ pij and eruditi homines, de futura illa
generalique Iudaica nationis vocatione, propter diuturnam eorum Apostasi^m and
virulentum contra Christum and Euangelicam veritatem odium, vel desperarunt,
vel valde saltem dubit arunt: veruntatem Divus Paulus eorum errorem diserte
damnat, and pluribus and maximi ponderis argumentis plenam Iudoeorum
conuersionem sub finem saeculi futuram, disputat and euincit.

Primo* ipse, cum sit Israelita, suae conuersionis exempl^, ostendit eos non
esse in vniuersum abdicatos, Secundo ex Dei praescientia, id est,
praedestinatione and fauore, Deu^ reliquias quasdam Fidelium sibi semper
reseruare, manifestum facit. Tertio, ex similit^dine suorum temporum cum
temporibus Eliae, Deum in densissim^s ecclesiae tenebris and corruptissimo
illius statu, suos electos habere, alere and conseruare declarat. Quarto,
Gentium zelum and sanctissimum exemplum, Iudaeos tandem, ad sanctam eorum
aemulationem prouocaturum; and ex aduerso, numerosissimam illam Iudaeorum
vocationem mundum illuminaturam, and hominum languescentem fidem exuscitaturam
demonstrat. Quinto, Apostolus vbique (per occasionem) proprium ministerium
exornando aliquis ex illis conuertere and seruare contendeb^t. Sexto, Dei
foedus cum Israelitarum patribus initum, and eius vocationem and dona (in
Electis) perpetuitatem and immutabilitatem induere testatur Septimo, quum
vocatio and salu^ omnium Electorum, ex sola miserecordia Dei pendeat, Iudaeos
aeque ac Gentes seruari posse persuadet. Octauo, ex De^ omnipotentia, coru^
vocationis spem and probabilitatem colligit. Postremo, innumerabiles Iudoeos,
post plenitudinem Gentium in Ecclesiam ingressam, Euangelium amplexuros,
euidentissimis scripturis confirmat.

Haec cum ita se habeant, ea^^d institutionem and vsum nostram transferamus.
Primo hinc discimus (quemadmodum fusius in Epistola ad splendidissimam
comitissam docuimus) Deo licere pro liberrima sua voluntate, and absolutissima
potestate Eligere, reijcere, and indurare vel conuertere quoscunque voluerit.
Secundo puram Dei misericordiam in Gentium vocatione elucere, at feueram eus
institiam in communi Iudaeorum abiectione tantum conspici. Quapropter Dei
gratiam gratis animis praedice^u^, digne Euangelio ambulemus, Dei iudi^ra time
a^^s, and a Iudaeorum ^ncredulitat^, horrendis blasphe^^js, vsuris, contemp^^
Christi, reliquisque peccatis abhorrendo; caneamus. Vltimo, nostris assiduis
and ardentissimis precibus little conuersionem promoueamus, and syncerae
doctrinae and obedientia luce, eos lucrifacere studeanius. Cum igie^^ haec
materies (vir nobilissime) tam sit admirabilis and omnibus Christian^s tam
necessaria, censui in publicum emittere, and tuae etiam non tam erudi^ae
censurae quam clementi patrocinio committere. Quum ^nim Tu, propter religionis
puritat^m, Theologiae accuratam cognitionem, and Dialectica and Philosophicae
scientia praestantiam, ^is, ornatissima in Dei Ecclesia, Cedrus* in familiae
tuae ordinatissima disciplina David and Joshua, and in nostro Warwicensi agro
publicae ^ustitiae lumen, non potes quin praecepta, moni^a, and consilia, eo
dirigentia, laeto and libenti amnio excipias. Denique cum pater tuus antiqu^
nobilitatis and beatissimae memoriae vir, iamque in Coelis triumphans; me in
vita sua, summa beneuolentia complexus sit: confido certe, te cum sis eius non
solum bonorum, sed etiam eximiarum virtutum haeres iustissimus, velle me, non
modo charitate quadam complecti, verum etiam lucubrationes meas vtcunque
approbare. Quod profecto expectans and humillime expetens, hic dicendi quidem,
sed tui colendi finem numquam facio.

Iehoua opt: Max: te omnibus externis and internis dotibus and ornamentis
cumulet and perpoliat, tuos pios conatus prouehat, and tibi, tuisque longaeuam
in terris faelicitatem, and tandem aeternum in Coelis gaudium and triumphum
largiatur. Couentriae. 1608.

Tuae dignitatis, studiosissimus THOMAS DRAXE, verb^ D^i Minister.

A Table containing the number of the Questions, which are, by occasion
propounded and resolved.
1. CAn Gods covenant with his Elect be made frustrate through man's unbelief.
Neg. page 2 2 Whether that Gods foreknowledge does distinguish the elect from
the Reprobate. affir. page 3 3 Whether that the idolatrous Jews in Elias his
time sinned in demolishing altars, seeing that they were set up in places
unlawful. affir. ibid. 4 Whether that the Church can err in matter of faith
and doctrine. affir. ibid. 5 Whether that the Church of God does ever fail
upon earth? neg. p. 11 6 Whether that God had any church or people in the dark
mist of Popery? affir. p. 12 7 How our forefathers were then taught and saved?
p. 13 8 Why God does many times cause his militant church to be invisible? p.
14 9 Whether a Protestant may dissemble his religion and so go to idol
service? neg. ibid. 10 May a man seek for justification and salvation and not
obtain it? p, 23 11 Does God harden the Reprobate? Distinct. ibid. 12 How does
God harden the wicked? ibid. 13 How can God be said to blind the Reprobate,
seeing that he offers the means of illumination to many of them? p. 28 14
Whether that David, Paul, Elias did sin or not in using imprecations against
wicked men? neg. p. 32 15 Whether that we may lawfully use imprecations and
pray against Gods and our enemies? Affir per distictionem. p, 33 16 In what
respects and with what cautions we are to pray against our enemies? ibid. 17
Can the true church of God, and the members of it fall away from the favor and
grace of God? neg. p. 40 18 Are they excused before God that by their unbelief
and unthankfulness occasion other men's conversion? neg. ibid. 19 Can the fall
of the Jews which is an evil, be an accidental cause or occasion of the
conversion of the Gentiles? affir. p. 44 20 Whether that a minister can be
properly said to convert souls? affir. per distinc. p. 46 21 How can the
calling of the Jews be the reviving of the world seeing that Christ shall
hardly find faith on the earth at his second coming? p. 50 22 Whether grace
and holiness can come by generation and succession? neg. p. 51 23 Whether the
Jews be not in many prerogatives more excelent then us Gentiles? affi. p. 52
24 Can the true members of the Catholic church become infidels? neg. p. 56 25
Who they be that fall away from the church and the communion of it? p. 57 26
How are men engraffed into the church? ibid. 27 Is or ought a man to doubt of
Gods favor and love or no? neg. p. 65 28 Can ^eare, and assurance of salvation
consist together? aff. per did. p. 66 29 Can any man be said to be a natural
branch of the church, seeing that all are sinners and children of wrath by
nature. Aff. per distinct. ibid. 30 What persons fall away from the fellowship
of the church? p. 67 31 In what manner and by what inducements do men fall
away? ibid. 32 Is not God changeable in his covenant and promises, seeing that
he changed his former bountifulness toward the Jews into rigor and
severity? neg. p. 77 33 Can the elect wholly loose or be deprived of faith and
grace? neg. ibid. 34 Is predestination conditional depending upon man's belief
or unbelief? neg. p. 78 35 When is likely to be the time of the Jews
conversion? p. 88 36 Whether they shall ever recover the holy land? neg. ibid.
37 What the fullness of the Gentles does signify? p. 89 38 Whether this
fullness be yet come in or not, or any other countries and kingdoms are (in
probability) yet to be called and enlightened? p. 90 39 What is meant by all
Israel, whether the Jews, Gentiles or both? ibid. 40 Whether the coming of
the Deliverer unto them, must be understood ^o^ily or spiritually? p. 91 41 Can
one and the same people be truly said to be beloved of God yet his enemies?
aff. in diverse generations. p. 102 42 Is any man called and converted by reason
of his parents merits and worthiness? neg. ibid. 43 Can the gifts and graces
of Gods spirit in the elect be taken away? neg. p. 103 44 Does God ever
repent? did. ibid. 45 Is God any cause of unbelief in man? did. p. 109 46
Are all men by nature equally guilty and prone unto cuill? aff. ibid. 47 How
then comes it to pass that one natural man is outwardly better then
another? ibid. 48 whether there be any universal election or grace? neg. p.
110 49 If Gods ways be unsearchable how then are we commanded to search the
scriptures? p. 116 50 Has not God, reueiled all his will and counsels to
Prophets and Apostles? neg. ibid. 51 Why are we commanded to give glory to
God, seeing that we can add nothing to his perfection? p. 117
The worlds resurrection.
Romans. Chapt. XI.
I Demand then, has God cast away his people? God forbid: for I also am an
Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.

God has not cast away his people which he knew before? know ye not what the
Scripture says of Elias, how he communeth with God against Israel, saying.

Lord they have killed thy Prophets, and dug down thine Altars: and I am
left alone, and they seek my life etc.


WHat then (may some repining Jew object) has God, Sense.
that is unchangeable in his decree and covenant, and whose compassions fail
not, cast away.i. has he wholly and universally cast of and excluded from
righteousness and everlasting life his people? that is the Israelits or Jews,
for whose faith and preservation he has wrought so many miracles, whom he
has fastened and affianced unto himself by so sollemne a covenant and by so
many precious promises, and whom he has enobled and renowned by so many
illustrious Patriarchs? God forbid.i. far be that from any man's thought and
imagination for it cannot be. For I: also am an Israelite, of the seed of
Abraham of the tribe of Benjamin.i. I by mine own example can testify the
contrary, for I (notwithstanding I formerly was a Pharisie, 1. Tim. 1.13.
a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and an Oppressor) am not cast of, but I am an
Israelite, therefore God has not cast of all.

God has not cast of his people whom he knew not before.i. Albeit, God has
generally rejected and cast of the body and greatest number of the Jews that
were called, and so deemed in their own eyes, and in the estimation of the
world, by reason of the tenor of Gods covenant and the ceremonies and outward
excercises of religion, called (I say) and reputed to be Gods people; yet
those amongst them whom he knew before.i. whom he predest^nated to salvation,
whom he acknowledged and approved for his own, and whom he prevented by his
special favor, this people he never failed, nor ever will renounce and
relinquish.

Know you not what the scripture says of Elias? i. I for resolution of this
doubt refer you to the word of God, I hope that you are neither so supine and
negligent that you have not read it, nor so gross of capacity that you
understand it not; how he makes request, or intercession unto God, saying
against Israel, i. in how lamentable and zealous manner, he complains against
them, namely that they were all fallen away from the true service of God, unto
the worship of the Idol Baal. Lord they have k^lled thy Prophets, and dug
down thine altars, i. they have testified and declared their virulent hatred,
rage, and malice, against thee and thy truth, by murdering and massacring all
thy holy and sincere Prophets, Priests, Levites, that by preaching, doctrine,
examples and practice, would not assent too and applaude, but condemn and
oppose themselves against their idolatry: and as for thine altars erected and
builded up long ago by these holy Fathers for thine honor, they have defaced
and destroyed them. And I am left alone, i. none else constantly and sincerely
serves God in the kingdom, and none do, or dare publicly defend thy cause
but my self, and they seek my life, that is, they think it not sufficient to
have committed all the former insolences and villainies, but they also, (to
make up the measure of their iniquity, and in hope to root out every true
worshipper;) lay wait for my life.

Quest. Is Gods covenant made with his people, by men's unfaithfulness ever
abolished and dissolved?

A. No, for it is grounded only in GOD who is unchangeable, and not in man,
who is a liar, lighter then vanity it self and therefore not to be trusted.

Secondly, Gods covenant is an everlasting covenant, and his mercy extends
unto a thousand generations, therefore we must not for the unbelief of some,
condemn all, but rather hope well of all, 1. Cor. 13.7.

Q. Whether does Gods foreknowledge in the Scripture, ever make a difference
and distinction between the Elect and the Reprobate?

A. Yes many times, as in this and other places of holy Scripture, where Gods
knowledge and foreknowledge is taken for the good pleasure of his will, for
election and his special love and approbation, as in Romans 8.29. 1. Pet. 1.2.
2. Tim. 2.19. Psalm. 1.6.

Q. Was it a sin in the idolatrous Jews, to demolish and pull down altars,
seeing that they were set up and seated in places where they ought not?

A. Yes, for their mind and intention was wicked; for they did not destroy and
overthrow the Altars, because they were not set up only in Jerusalem, where
they ought to be by Gods express commandment; but because they would not have
sacrifice done to God (only.)

Q. Whether that the true Church of God in the mysteries of predestination and
other points of faith, may not err and be deceived in judgment?

A. Yes; for first, if that notable. Prophet of the Lord Elias erred in
judgment of the Church, 1. Sam. 16. v. 6. and 7.
and Samuel the Prophet was deceived in the choice of Is^i his sons; yea and
the Apostles themselves for a time were ignorant of the Article of the
resurrection of Christ and of his kingdom, yea and Peter after that the holy
Ghost in the day of Penticost had descended upon him, Act. 10. v. 13.14.15.
knew not that the Judicial differences of meats were already abrogated, and
thought the Gentiles were not capable of the Gospel, except withal they should
admit of and receive the ceremonies of Moses his law, if these Prophets and
Pillars of the church were ignorant and did err even in matter of faith, why
may not much more other both Pastors and people err that have not, nor never
in this world shall have any such extraordinary calling, gifts and illumination?

Secondly the Church and the principal members of it, sin always and are
ignorant, yea, and many times err in the right interpretation of the
Scripture, ergo, they may err in faith. But herein lies the difference, first
the true Church builds her faith only upon the Canonical Scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles, secondly she never stiffely and obstinately (as
heretics do) maintains any error against the maine principles and
foundations of true religion.

Q. Has God cast away his people?

Doct. Romans 3. v. ^.4.
A. Gods covenant and saving promises are never made frustrate and void by the
unbelief of the multitude, nay, if there were but one true believer in the
whole world, God would not break his promise and covenant with him for all the
rest. Genesis 6.^. Genesis 19.
Thus Noah and his family were saved, when all the world besides perished.
Thus Lot was preserved when the Sodomites were suddenly destroyed with Fire and
Brimstone from heaven. Luke. 2.
Thus Simeon, Anna, and a few others were saved in a general corruption of
doctrine and manners, and lastly in the mystie fogge and more then Aegyptiacall
darkness of Popery, Apoc. 11. v. 3. verse. 12.
Christ's two faithful witnesses.i. the small number of his true Ministers and
constant champions and confessors (albeit cruelly massacred by the Romish
Antichrist) ascended up to heaven in a cloud, their enemies seeing them. Nay
amongst the unbelievers themselves, and Idolaters in the Papacy, God saves
many by reason of the promise of his covenant pawned with them: hence it is
that he conuerteth many before the close and end of this life, whom otherwise
he might justly leave in their idolatry and so destroy them.

Reason. The reason hereof is, first, because the truth and performance of Gods
promises rests in himself, and not in any man whatsoever.

Secondly all his saving gifts are without repentance.i. constant and
unchangeable.

1. Use. Let us hang all our salvation on Gods covenant and promises only, for
all other helps and additaments of men are vain, false, and will fail and
deceive us.

2. Use. Secondly let us lay hold upon, and apprehend them all by faith, and so
enclose, and impropriate them to our selves: for only faith does give us right
unto them, yea and infeoffe us in, and give us livery and seison of them.

I also am an Israelite.
From Paul's example and conclusion, we learn: That every godly and believing
man, may be fully persuaded and assured by faith, 2. Tim. 4.8.
that he is a member of the true church, and that he shall undoubtedly be
saved, and therefore it is his duty firmly to believe so much. 2. Pet. ^.10.
Romans 8. v. 23. and 38.39.

Reason. The reason is, the promise and assurance hereof is made to the
believer and sanctified person. Psalm. 15.5. Psalm. 24. v. 3.4.5.

Secondly doubting and despair of Gods love and favor, and of our salvation,
is a great sin and against the attributes of Gods truth, mercy, and
goodness: and if we do great wrong and injury unto good and faithful men,
when we call their love and loyalty into question, much more when we doubt of
the goodness and truth of the infinite and unchangeable good majesty of God:
And particular doubting distrust and despair, is often and much condemned in
the Scriptures, Math. 14. v. 31. Luke 12. v. 29. Heb. 12. v. 12. and 13.

Use. 1. Hereby is condemned that false and comfortless opinion of the
Romanists, that depriueth and dispoileth faith of his form and of his firm
apprehension and application, and makes it nothing else but a general belief
of the promised blessedness of God, and a giving of an assent to other
mysteries reueiled of God touching the same, which the very devils, and
reprobates have or may have.

2. Use. We must labor and strive by the continual and careful use of the
word preached, the Sacraments, prayer, and conference, and observation of Gods
favors toward us, both in blessings spiritual and temporal, to attain unto
the (...) and full assurance of it and having once obtained it, to norrish and
cherish it by the same means.

Q. Has God forsaken his people whom he knew before?

A. Here Gods foreknowledge, being taken for his special favor, for his
Predestination and adoption of them (which is always firm and unalterable)
we are taught these two conclusions. First that the Predestination and the
Election of Gods Saints is firm, certain and immovable, and can never be
lost, and that not only in Gods decree, but also in their own sense and
feeling Romans 8.33. Tit. 1.1. Romans 9.11. Romans 11.7.2. Pet. 1.10. For it is a
foundation that cannot be shaken. Math. 16. ver. 18
Secondly it is grounded upon the rock and therefore the gates and power of
hell cannot prevail against it.

Use. It checketh the Papists who make predestination mutable and uncertain,
and so would despoile and disarme us of the maine ground of all comfort.

Whom he has fore-knowne.
In that here the cause why God does never finally reject or forsake his
people, is only ascribed to his foreknowledge. 1. to the pleasure of his good
will, Doctr. Romans 9, v^. 11
inward favor and eternal predestination; it excludes and remoueth all man's
merits, and all outward dignities, prerogatives and excellencies what-soeuer,
from being any cause of it.

Tim* 3.4 and: 5
And no marvel, for if man (though regenerate) cannot, in respect of his
finite and sinful nature merit ought at Gods hands, having a being both by
nature and grace, much less could he merit ought before he had any being or
existence at all.

Use. Ergo, seeing there is no cause of glorying in us, or any outward
ornament, and seeing nothing moved God to elect us, but only his mere mercy
and favor, let us ascribe and return with thankful hearts all the glory and
praise, thereof to him, to whom alone it appertains.

Know ye not what the scripture says of Elias?
In that it is here presupposed, (if not granted) that the Jews to whom Paul
especially addresseth his speech, (for by an Apostrophe he afterward speaks
to the Gentiles, from the 13. verse to the 25.) were most ready and expert in
the scriptures; we are advertised how profitable, nay, Doctr.
how necessary the knowledge and understanding of them is; for thereunto are we
referred in all our doubts, controversies, and difficulties, for resolution,
Isai. 8.20. Luke 16.28. and 31. Ioh. 5.38. Secondly, they contain the means,
deeds, evidences, charter, and the broad seal of our salvation. Ioh. 5.34.
Ioh. 20.31. Romans 1.16. 1. Tim. 3.15.16. Psalm. 19^7. Thirdly, the ignorance and
neglect of them, is the cause of all Athiesme, error, heresy, sin,
rebellion, persecution, misery, yea and damnation it self, 2. King. 17.26.
Psalm. 95.10. Isay. 5.13. Math. 22.29. John. 12.35. Romans 10.2. 1. Cor. 2.8. 1.
These. 4.13.

Lastly, God has both in the old Testament, as also in the new, laid a
special charge and command upon all sorts of people, sovereign and subject,
public and private persons, mighty and mean, to exercise themselves, and
continually to travail in the reading and meditation of holy scripture: Deuteronomy.
6.6.7.8.9. Joshua. 1.8. Psalm. 1.2. Coloss. 3.19. John. 5.39. 1. Tim. 4.13.

Use. It condemns the idleness and vanity of this present age, wherein
many, and most, bestow none or little time in reading and consulting the sacred
Scriptures, wherein they might be made circumspect, redress their ways* have
comfort and supportance in all afflictions, and be made wise unto salvation*
But in the practice of the unfruitful works of darkness, in the excess of
sin and vanity, and in the reading and reuising toys and trifles that can
minister nothing unto them but matter of mourning and cause of after
repentance, they can willingly and wilfully spare and spend whole hours,
days, nights, weeks. The Lord amend this, and renew and revive the dying and
pining zeal of his people and servants in so many places.

How he makes request unto God speaking against Israel.
And in the 1. of Kings 19.10. he says that he has been jealous for the Lord
of Hosts (all tending to one purpose) from which place I observe and gather.
That the Pastors and Preachers of Gods word especially must be enfired and
inflamed with an holy zeal of Gods glory, and with a holy indignation against
sin and idolatry, then principally when with Elias and others, they see most
grievous transgressions of the people, when they see Baals Priests, viz.
Jesuits and Seminaries, Popish Emisaries to be had in request and high
reputation; and themselves and the true Prophets and ministers of the Lord
reviled and rejected, yea wringed and wronged, yea killed and slaughtered, when
they see Christ to be vilified and Antichrist to be deified, and when they see
the Gospel trodden underfoot and impiety and superstition advanced. Examples
hereof we have in Moses who seeing the Golden Calfe that the Israelites had
made, Exo. 32. v. 19.
and the dancing about it, waxed wroth, cast the tables out of his hands,
brake them in pieces before the Mountain, burned the calfe in fire, ground it
to powlder, strawed it upon the water, and made the Children of Israel drink
of it.

Number. 25. v. 7.
In Phaenehas the son of Eleazar, who arose up from the midst of the
Congregation, took a spear in his hand and with it thrust through Zimri the
son of Sal^ and Cozbi, the daughter of Zur the Midianitish woman, and so the
plague ceased from the children of Israel.

In Zacharias the son of Ichoiada, the Priest, who observing the people after
Ichoiodah his death, to fall away to idolatry, in zeal reproved them, for
transgressing Gods commandments: he told them, that they should not prosper,
but that as they had forsaken the Lord, so he had forsaken them: and hereupon
they at King* Ioash his tyrrannicall command stoned him to death. In John the
Baptists, for his bold reprehension of the Pharasies and Saduces, and for
reproving of Herod for his incest, and many other sins. In Peter against
Ananias and Saphira his wife Act. 5.3. In Steven in telling the Jews they were
stif-necked and that they like their fathers always resisted the holy Ghost,
Act 7. vc. 16
that they had not kept the law, but that they were the betraiers and murderers
of the just. In Paul, whose spirit was stirred up in him, Act. 17. v. 16
when he saw the city of Athens subject to idolatry. And in himself and
Barnabas, who when the people with their Priest would have done sacrifice to
them, in zeal rent their own clothes and rebuked the people. In David as the
tipe, and most eminently in Christ the truth and perfection, all of whom were
consumed with the zeal of Gods house. Psalm. 69.19. Math. 21.12. Ioh. 2, 15.

Reason. The reason hereof is, because they are Gods watchmen and forewarne the
people, they are Gods trumpetters to tell the people of their sins, and the
spiritual leaders, guides and directers of the multitude.

1 Use. This doctrine serves for reproof of some Ministers of our time who
either are remiss and negligent, and seeking their own ease, never oppose
themselves by doctrine and example, against the errors and sins of their
flocks, but rather applaude them or (at least) in conniuence take notice of
nothing; and if the show any zeal it is rather for their own Diana and
advantage, then for Gods true religion and glory.

2 Use. It is a great comfort for all true and sound hearted Ministers, who in
an aduized and discreet zeal within the compass of their callings, both by
preaching, example and authority show their dislike, and opposition against
superstitions and enormous sins and abuses, being assured that what
contumelies and indignities they undergo for Gods honor, 1 Samuel 2.30
God will accordingly consider of them and censure their adversaries, he will
honor them that honor him and despise them that despise him.

They have killed thy Prophets and dug down thine Alters.
From these two members jointly considered, Doctr.
arises this instruction. That it is the plot and practice of Apostataes and
Idolaters in their hatred and rage against God, to labor, to blot all
remembrance of God, and not to suffer the Ambassadors and Messengers of God to
remain alive. Psalm. 79.1 and 2. Psalm. 8.13. Apoc. 12.2. and 13.16. and 17.
Apoc. 18.24.

Reas. The reason in regard of the holy monuments of Gods service is, because
they are profaine and wicked and regard them not; and as for the good ministers
of God, they like the King of Aram against Ahab (though indeed a most wicked
King*) fight against none (in comparison) but against them, for they seem
stumbling blocks and hubbes in their way who by their ministry and zealous
example vex them. Apoc. 11. ver. 10.

1. Use. Let us be thankful unto God for the long continued use and ministry
of his blessed Gospel, and that neither Prelates nor Pastors nor Preachers are
not given into the hands of our blood-thristy and woluish adversaries

2. Use. Secondly let the ministers prepare and resolve themselves not only
to suffer rebuke and loss for Gods cause, but also to die for it, (if they be
thereunto called) for God will highly reward them, and they shall not be
loosers but gainers by it, and not damnified, but everlastingly glorified.

3. Use. Seeing the good pastors and ministers of Gods word are so much
maligned and assaulted by Satan and his instruments, let all the people of God
pray for their constancy, patience, success of their ministry, for their
delivery and preservation; and then (no doubt) the ministers shall speed and
prosper the better, and the comfort of their perseruation shall redound to the
people.

And I am left alone.
Herein Elias (if we diligently heed the story and time wherein he prophesied)
who a little before thought that he had converted most of the Israelites, and
now he thinks that they have universally revolted from true religion, we are
taught that the most excellent servants of God have their errors and
infirmities, one while, they conceive ouer-well of men, and another while
ouer-ill. Act. 15. ver. 37.38.39.

1. Use. If so rare and singular men these many times err and are deceived,
let no man presume too much of his own knowledge, learning and judgment, but
walk humbly, and always suspect his own ignorance and weakness, and let
him judge rashly or ouer-hastily of no man, but reserve all secret iudement to
God.

If none for the present join with him in the open defense of Gods worship,
Romans 14. v. 4.
or if none such be known, yea if they should all forsake him, as all forsook
Paul when he was conuented before Nero, let them not be discouraged, but go
on boldly, trusting in God, and the goodness of their cause, 2. Kin. 6. v. 16.
and God will assist, strengthen, deliver, yea and glorify them. God being on
a man's side, who can be against him, nay he has more with him, then against
him; and other men's general Apostacy, or starting aside from their duty and
obedience, cannot possibly deprive him of his crown: for he shall live by his
faith, and the more temptations, and discouragements, he finds to hinder
him, the greater will be his praise, preferment and exaltation in the end.
Paraph.
But what says the answer (or oracle) of God to him. i. We must rather in this
Apostacy of the Church attend what the Lord the God of truth says, then
rest upon the conjecture of Elias: ^ have left or reserved to my self. i. I
have preserved from death and idolatry, 7000. men. i. a great number of men,
women, and children, for seven a set number, is put (here as in other places
of Scripture) for one indefinite or uncertain number: that have not bowed
their knees to the image of Baall. i. that have not polluted themselves with
idolatry, no not so much as in outward gesture and action. Even so at this
present time. i. in the time of the new Testament, there is a remnant, i. a
small remainder of Jews in comparison of those that perish, through the
election of grace, i. whom God of his grace and favor has elected to
euer-lasting life, and which shall be saved by faith in Christ.

Questions out of the 4. and 5. verses. Does the Church of God never fail or
cease to be upon the earth?

An. No, for albeit many times and in many places the church cease to be
visible, conspicuous and glorious; yet the true Catholic and invisible
Church, which consists only of the number of the Predestinate and Elect,
ever was, is, and shall be; and shall always remain in the world in one place
or other For first, it never failed when it was brought to the greatest
extremities, but (at length) it has always lifted and put forth her head out
of the darkness wherewith it was oppressed. Secondly Christ his kingdom is
eternal, Luke 1. v. 33. Dan. 7. v. 14.
and shall never end, but shall last and endure for ever, when other kingdoms
shall be overthrown, destroyed and extinct. Thirdly, Gods covenant made with
the Jews and Gentiles, viz. that he will be their God, and the God of their
seed, is everlasting and unchangeable, therefore there must needs be some, in
whom the covenant must be ratified and accomplished. Lastly, Gods promises
cannot lie, and his power can do althings, and God does nourish and preserve
the church by his word and providence, when impiety and idolatry every where
prevails.

2. Que. Had God any church and people in the midst of the darkness of
Popery, when tyrants and false Teachers labored, utterly to root it out?

An. Yes, as may especially appear, Apoc. 12.16. where the woman the Church
flying into the wilderness. i. to places unknown, to the adversaries, had a
place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundreeh
and three score days. i. they were nourished by ordinary means, Apoc. 12 v. 7.
by hearing some true things of their own Teachers, and partly by learning
true faith and doctrine of other better teachers, partly by reading the holy
scriptures, and by meditating and musing of it by themselves, and by conferring
with others.

Secondly, the Papists had some things that appertain to the true Church, as
Baptism (albeit not altogether purely administered) the Scriptures, the
Apostles Creed, the Commandments, the Lords prayer, and a certain ministry.

Thirdly, in the ruinous state, darkness and Apostacy of a Church, the very
reading and repeating of the word, yea, the very sound and report of it is (by
Gods extraordinary working) sufficient and effectual to save all those whom
God will have saved. Act. 11. v. 20. and 21. John 4.28.29.40.41 42. Romans 10 18.

Lastly, God has his Church and seed, even in Babylon, (albeit in faith and
affection separated and disioyned from her) Apoc. 12.7. and these the Dragon
makes war with; Likewise Apoc; 18.4. where Gods people are exhorted to come
out of Babylon, etc. ergo, there were some elect, and some of Gods people there.

Quest. Therefore may not we persuade our selves that many of our Ancestors and
forefathers were saved in the midst of Popery?

An. Yes doubtless, as well as in the corrupt and Apostaticall time of Elias,
for nothing has in the Papacy befallen the Church which has not befallen
unto it in times past.

Secondly (besides the reasons expressed in the answer to the former question)
many of them kept and held the principles and foundations of faith, and so
rightly informed their children, servants, and families therein, Apoc. 13.8.

Thirdly, there have been some that have always and openly, by preaching,
writing, and disputation, opposed and set themselves against the corruption of
error, Apoc. 11.3.4.5.6.11. and 12. Illyricus.
and this is also manifest by Illyricus his catalogue of the witnesses of the
truth.

Fourthly, many thousand children Baptized (and so holy) dyed in their infancy
and childhood, before they could be infected and poisoned with the pestilence
of error, 1. Cor. 7. v 14.
and so were saved.

Fifthly, God pardons many faults and infirmities in his children, whose
hearts and minds are right with him. Mal. 3. v. 17.

Lastly, many of our Ancesto^^ (albeit transported with the common inundation
of error) did before the end of this life, repent of their sin, and utterly
renounce and disclaim their own merits and all confidence in them, and
relied upon Christ only by true faith and so were saved.

Q. Why does God sometimes suffer his Church to be brought into such
affliction, darkness and extremities that the outward face of it cannot be
seen and discerned?

A. For two causes, first, because the world and the wicked is, Heb 11.38.
Math. 21. verse. 41. and 43
altogether unworthy of the fellowship of Gods Saints and the ministry of the
word, and therefore God has most justly deprived them of it.

Secondly, God for the preservation of the Church will have it sometimes to be
secret and unknown, for otherwise the world seeing it, would invade and
destroy it. Apoc. 12.6.

Q. Is it not lawful, yea and sometimes expedient for a true and sound
Christian, for the auoding of offense and the preservation of his life, to
dissemble his religion, and to go to Mass and Idol service?

A. No, for first it is not sufficient for us, to keep our minds free from
assent unto, and from approbation of idolatry, but we must keep our bodies
undefiled also 2. Cor. 7.1. 1 Cor. 6. v. 19 and 20
Secondly God created and Christ redeemed both soul and body, and therefore
will be served with both.

Thirdly, God requires not only the belief of the heart, but also the
confession of the mouth yea and the outward gesture and action also; Romans 10.9.
Luke 9.26. otherwise we play the Hypocrites and God will discover and detest
us.

Forthly, the offense that Idolaters conceive, is by them taken and not by us
given, and therefore we are not in this regard to respect them at all. Math.
15.12.13.14. And if we should communicate with them in their Idolatrous worship
we should both harden them in their error and destroy, or (at least) weaken the
faith of others; and touching prevention of danger, we must use no unlawful
means to divert it, but commit our selves and cause unto the power, Psalm. 37.
ver. 5 and 6. Mich. 7. v. 7. and 9.
providence and goodness of the almighty, who will dispense and dispose of all
things for our good and knows how to deliver us.

Lastly in respect of maintenance of Gods glory our lives, yea, (if need
should require) our salvation should not be dear and precious unto us. Apoc.
12.11. and it is given unto the true members of the Church (as a special
privilege) not only to believe in Christ but also to suffer for him. Phil. 1.
v. 9


I have reserved unto my self.
It belongs unto God only to preserve his church and children from Idolatry,
Doctr.
sin and temptation, even then when the greatest number perish Hosea 13.9.2.
Pet. 2.9. Apoc. 3.10


Rea. The reason hereof is because it is not in the power and ability of any
mortal man to save himself, but it must proceed from the power and promise of
God only.

Use. It condemns all conceit of our own excellency and presumption, which
we see how God corrects in his own dear children, as in David, Peter and
others.

2 Use. Secondly in all temptatious and dangers, we must depend only of Gods
omnipotency, goodness and mercy, and by earnest prayer and supplication crave
assistance and strength from God who will deny us nothing tha^ we ask in
faith and in his Sons name* Luke 11.13. Ioh. 15.16. Ioh. 5.14.

To my self 7000.
Hence we learn the perpetuity and everlasting continuance of the true Church
of Christ upon the earth unto the worlds end Math. 28. verse. 19 and 20. Doctr.
Ephe. 4. v. 11 and 12.13


It is not in the power and policy, might or malice of the diuil and all his
instruments, whether tyrants or Seduce^^ and false Prophets, to root it out
and extinguish it. It is built upon Christ, Math. 10 v. 18 Psalm. 25. ver. 1
and the gates of hell cannot prevail against it, it is the mount Syon, that
shall never be removed, and the ship tossed and turmoiled in the waters,
billows, tempests, and winds of this malignant world, and yet shall never
sink Math. 8. verse. 25. and 26.

Reason. For Gods covenant is an everlasting covenant, his mercy endures for
ever, his truth shall never fail toward the Church, Isay 55. ver. 3
he is always with them to the end of the world, and is both able and ready to
help and relieve them in all dangers and difficulties.

The uses hereof are manifold and most comfortable.
Math. 28. ver. 20.
1 Use. We must learn hence, never, (no not in the most dead, desperate and
declining state of the Church) with Elias, rashly to condemn it: for if the
most Eagle-eyed and sharpe-sighted Prophets have been deceived herein, much
more may we, that are in so many respects so far behind them and inferior to
them.

2 Use We must not be daunted and disheartened, much less despair of Gods
Church and the preservation of a seed and remnant, when the Godly are
diminished, yea and sometimes non inuenti sunt, and the wicked brave it out,
tyranize over the Church and are exceedingly multiplied; for many that seem
good are but hypocrites and dissemblers and the Godly themselves (albeit living
amongst us) are not always known unto us. 1 King. 8. 4 et 15.
It is proper to God only, to know the heart and to know his. 2. Tim. 2 19.
and God in the corruptest estate of a Church that can be immagined, reserueth
a remnant to himself.

3 Use In this case we must walk by faith and not by sight, and judge not by
the outward appearance wherein the wisest and the best may be, and are often
deceived, but judge by the written word and where that determines not, to
suspend our opinion and reserve secret judgment unto God, who will further
manifest the truth in his good time. Deuteronomy 15.15.

Which have not bowed their knees to Baal.
Doctr.
From the authority and force of this place, I observe: That the Godly must not
in the least things expressly forbidden, consent unto and communicate with
Idolatry, no not in the outward gesture of kneeling, kissing, gazing, bodily
presence. Daniel 3.15.16.17.18.

The first reason hereof is, because we are to make a conscience of all Gods
commandments and to abstain from all appearance or (...). 1. kind of evil.
1 Thessalonians. 5. ve.


Secondly, they that carelesley assent and yield unto that which is apparently
evil, are many times and may be drawn unto greater cuills and sins, A
similitude.
even as he that walks to near the pit-brinke or rivers side, may sometimes
fall in, and be drowned, especially if God (to punish his rashness and
presumption) leave him to himself as he left Aa^on, and Peter for the time.

Use. Hereby the wisdom, zeal and practice of those Christians is highly
commended, who choose rather to hide themselves in Den^es, Heb. 11 v. 30
Caves, Mountains, yea, and wander up and down in sheep skins and in
goats skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, then in Churches and
the Groves of Idolatry to show any countenance by any out-ward gesture or
behavior.

2 Use. It condemns the fearfulness, and hypocrisy of such who think it
sufficient if they have (as they say) faith in their hearts, and keep their
consciences to themselves, and so outwardly communicate with Idol and false
worship, but the commandment of God, the practice of Christ, the Prophets,
Patriarchs, Apostles, Confessors, Martirs, and of all sincere Churches, is
directly against it.

3 Use. Thirdly we must be so far from condemning Gods blessed servants and
martyrs for tenderness of consience and scrupulosity herein, that we must our
selves with joint harmony and consent of heart and body fly and shun all just
show and appearance of Idolatry.

Even so then at this present there is a remnant through the election of grace.
This verse conteyneth, the illustration and probation of Paul's proposition
touching the reiection of the Jews: and the sum of the comparison is this.
Even as in the days of Elias, all the children of Israel seemed to have
fallen away from the true worship of GOD to the adoration of Baal, and yet
notwithstanding there were seven thousand, (though unknown to Elias) that
never bowed their knee to the Idol; even so at this time there is a
reservation of many elect amongst the Jews, albeit the greater part of them
(for the time) are cast away. From this application and comparison of the
Apostle, this instruction and doctrine offers it self to our consideration,
viz. That God is always true and like himself and never changes his nature,
covenant, promises Psalm. 89. verse. 33 and 38. Romans 3, 4. 2. Samuel 7.28.
And therefore it cannot be that he has wholly rejected all the Jews. For God
is void of all corruption and alteration in his essence, it can never fail
but remains the same from et^rnity to eternity.

Secondly, he is constant and immovable in his will, he keeps all his
decrees once made, and he neither changes them nor has any need so to do.

1. Use. This serves notably for our comfort and consolation in this life: for
Gods decree of election is certain, and the grace of God in his elect is
perpetual. Romans 11.30. Ier. 31. ver. 31. Therefore we cannot miscarry.

2. Use. Whereas God is always like him and unchangeable, we must learn hence
to be constant, steadfast and unchangeable in all duties of piety to God, of
sobriety to our selves, and of charity and justice toward all men: otherwise
as it is a shrewd and fearful sign of Bastardy when the child in nothing
resembles the parents, so it is a dangerous sign that we be none of the
Lords, when we are so ticklish fickle and false in our duties and covenants
both to God and men, herein nothing resembling the Majesty of God.

V. 5. A remnant through the election of grace.

V. 6. And if it be of grace then it is no more of works, or else were grace no
more grace.

A remnant.
From the warrant and authority of this and the like places, it evidently
appears, that the number of the Elect and of those that shall be saved is (at
all times) very small and few in comparison of those that are reprobates and
that perish; but especially in the time of a general or long continued
defection and Apostacy, Luke 18.8. Math. 7.14. Luke 21.32.
They are a little and a contemptible flock, they are but, a remnant and
reservation, a tenth: Isaias, and Paul say, though the number of the children
of Israel were as the sand of the sea, yet shall but a remnant be saved Isay
10.21. et 22. Romans 9.27. Narrow is the way that leads vntol^fe, and few there
are that enter into it. Math. 7. ver. 13, and 14.

The cause of this small number of them is, not because Christ does envy
salvation to any, Math 1^. v. 27
for he does most kindly inuit and allure all to come unto him, but because
the greatest number refuse the grace of salvation offered unto them, and will
not by faith receive and apply it.

1 Use. It overthrows the error of them that determine of a church by a
perpe^uall multitude; whereas always (though sometimes more and sometimes
less) it is the least number (by many degrees) that treads in the right way,
that follows the truth and that enters in by Christ.

2 Use. We must comfort our selves against the paucity and fewenes of Gods
children, that his can never fall a way, neither can they perish, these God
always has a tender regard of, he does take notice of them, and confirm and
defend them against all cross events and after-claps. And as for other men's
profanesse, unbelief, Apostasy, it shall, nor can, never any whit prejudice
their favor and felicity; for every man shall bear his own burden: and every
man shall be saved by his own faith, or condemned for his own unbelief and
impenitency.

V. 6. And if it be of grace, then it is no more of works, or else were grace
no more grace, but if it be of works, it is no more grace, or else were works
no more works. And if it be of grace. Sens^.
The election, calling and reservation of a remnant, proceeds only from Gods
mere mercy and favor, and not from any foreseen faith, works, or any
outward privilege whatsoever, for else grace. i. not of grace, but wages given
unto them, for the worth and dignity of the work: But if it ^ee of works
then it is no more of grace. i. arising from the gracious love, pleasure and
good will of God ^^sls. i. ^f it be of grace, were work no more work. i. the
merit of works were no more merit but a free gift.

From the Apostle his practice, reasoning and concluding thus; from the
contraries, the affirming of one of which does necessarily deny and take away
the other, this fundamental point offers it self to our view and
consideration; That in the matter and mystery of man's predestination, Doctr.
justification, and salvation, all disposition of man's will, all foreseen
faith and works, all natural and peculiar prerogatives, are wholly debarred
and shut out from being a^y impulsive moving and working cause of it, and
that they proceed only and wholly from the everlasting decree and good pleasure
of God.

The Scriptures are most plain and pregnant for the demonstration of this
principle. Romans 9.11. Ephesians 1.5. John 15.16. Acts 13.48. Deuteronomy. 10.15.

Further reasons to back and fortify this assertion are these, first all
disposion of man's will follows predestination, (as does likewise faith and
works) and therefore cannot possibly be any cause of it.

Genesis 6. ve. 5:
Secondly, it is, naturally bent unto evil continually, and therefore cannot
deserve ought at Gods hand, and as for faith and works they are fruits and
effects of election, therefore no cause of it: they are also imperfect and
therefore void of merit: Thirdly they are the gifts and works of Gods spirit
in us, therefore not of our selves or from our own worthiness: and touching
natural and special prerogatives they (in the Jews) proceeded from Gods
covenant, and not from natural generation, for Jews and Gentiles are alike
conceived and borne in sin. Fourthly the holy Patriarchs never rested, much
less gloried in them.

More-ouer if Gods predestination were caused by foreseen faith and works,
Romans 9. v. 20.
then might an evident reason be given of it, which Paul utterly denies, and
if works could merit ought by their own worthiness, then grace should be
destroyed, Gods glory empaired, and all the works of our redemption obscured.
Ephesians. 5. v. 5 Romans 19. v 23
Lastly, God has chosen us from everlasting in himself, in Christ to the
praise of his glorious grace, and has made us vessels of mercy, of gold and
silver, etc. 2. Tim. 2. v. 20 Therefore in the work of our predestination and
redemption, Gods mercy and goodness is all in all, and has not any respect to
any thing that is without, and not partaker of his own nature and essence.

It serves to beat down all pride and humane glory, and all confidence in
any of our own works, because all the works and glory of our salvation is
from Gods grace and mercy only, and not from our selves, or any thing in us,
Math. 11.26
Romans 9.18.

2. Use. And if it did hang upon our own works we should be uncertain,
because we cannot satisfy GODS justice. Secondly, in that GOD has been so
good unto us, Psalm. 50. v. 14. and* 23.
we must pay unto him the continual impost of praise and thanksgiving, and
for a document and proose hereof, labor to frame and conform our lives, ways
and works, to the rule of his written word.

3. Use. Lastly, we must not doubt and remain in suspense of his love and
favor, but take notice of it, secure and persuade our selves of it more and
more. For God is full of mercy and goodness, who is a loving Father, a kind
and sweet Savior in Christ, and does by the perfume and magneticall
attraction of his mercies, provoke and allure all men to worship, fear, love,
invoke and trust in him; And therefore we cannot offer greater indignity,
nor do more notable injury to so good a Majesty, then to call his grace,
goodness, or mercy into question.

Text. v. 7.
What then, Israel has not obtained that he sought. 2. Section.
i. What shall we say and confess, namely this, as the truth is, that
Israel, i. those carnal Israelites, who boasted themselves to be Israelites,
Parapras.
and gloried in the flesh, has not obtained that he sought, i. that whereas
they went about and endeavored to attain unto justification and eternal life
by their own works and merits, they have not obtained it, v. 22.

But the election has obtained it. i. the elect as far forth as they are
elect, have obtained it, in, and by the force of election, and because they
sought it only of grace through faith. But the rest. i. they are not elected
but rejected, have been hardened. i. their heart has in Gods just judgment,
through their own malice and contempt of Christ, been so brawned and drawn
with such an hard skin, that no doctrine of salvation and faith can be wrought
or rooted in them. According as it is written. i. by the Prophet Isayas, Isai.
6. v. 9.
God has given them. i. powered out upon them in his judgments and
indignation; the spirit of pricking (according to the translation of the
septuagint, which Paul followed) i. all ill affection and bitterness of
spirit, against the light of truth, and sharp and grievous biting of mind or
the torments of envy and of a galling conscience, by reason of the preaching
and success of the Gospel, or (according to the Heb^^w) the spirit of
slumber, i. a dull and drowsy mind, and a deep and dead sleep, in so much
that they are deprived of all judgment and feeling, eyes that they should not
see. i. such a mind, whereby they cannot understand the true doctrine of
salvation: and ears that they should not hear. i. such an heart whereby they
cannot obey the Gospel, and thereby be converted: unto this day, i. from
Elias his time, unto the time of Paul's preaching, for so long continued their
hardening, and ever since unto our present time.

Quest. Why should not Israel obtain that he sought for, seeing that Christ is
the door, and Heaven gates stand open day and night?

Ans. First, because they would not acknowledge nor receive Christ the true
Messiah and mediator. Secondly, they did not, nor would not go the right way
to salvation, but by their own works.

The rest were hardened.
Quest. Who is the author and cause of the Jews hardening, Satan, or
themselves, or God?

Ans. If we consider it as it is a sin, and an offense against God, then it
proceeds only from man, and from Satan; for man's heart is stony, and as
hard as Flint by nature, whereby it is fit for Satan to work upon.

Secondly, man's heart being so hard, Satan does counsel, ^gge, and solicit
it to sin: and man, being destitute of grace, willingly forsakes God, and
yields his assent and consent unto evil, and detesteth good, and so becomes
more hard and indurate.

Thirdly, the more means either of instruction, and mercy, or of threatenings
and judgments, GOD offers to soften and overcome their hardness, the more,
they, by with-standing and resisting them, are hardened and confirm the habit
of their nature, and so grow worse and worse. And thus with Pharao they more
harden their own hearts, so that the sin and fault resideth in themselves,
and is not to be imputed to God:

Quest. In what respects does God harden?

Ans. As it is an action, and judgment, and a work of justice, and in respect
of the end and event, so God does it, and is the author of it: As it is an
action or motion it is good, for we all have our being and moving from God,
but the corruption and defect of the action, proceeds from man's corrupt mind
and will; as it is a judgment God is the author of it, thus he hardened
Pharoes heart, and does by the ministry of his word instrumentally harden the
wicked. Lastly, in respect of the end and event, which is his own glory: and
thus God in the hardening, blinding, and obstinacy of the Jews* took
occasion to call and show mercy to us Gentiles, and thus he turns their
hearts whether soever pleases him, and does move them to execute his own
judgments; and thus God directed Satan's malice, the Scribes and Pharisees
envy, Judas his covetousness, and Pilate his injustice, in killing the Lord
of glory, to the redemption of mankind, the instruments intending no such
matter, Isay. 1^ v. 7.

Qu. How does God harden, and in what form?

Ans. Not by infusing malice, or instilling sin into the delinquent, for he
is just, holy, and purity it self, and therefore he cannot but hate and punish
it; but he does it first, either by not imparting grace, or by withdrawing his
spirit from them, for God is not bound either to confer grace upon them which
they want, or to continue that they have received. He is an absolute Lord, and
a most free agent, Romans 9.
he hardens whom he will, and shows mercy upon whom he will show mercy.

Secondly, God hardneth them by an outward action, that is, indirectly and
accidentally, by casting and obiecting certain outward things to their eyes,
ears, and outward senses, whereby they might be enlightened, mollified and
saved. Of this kind are preaching, sacraments, miracles, benefits, warnings,
threatenings, punishments, all these through their own fault and want of faith,
become hurtful and dangerous unto them: even as good and strong wine, A
similitude.
is most unwholesome and perilous to a sick man. Thus the gospel is the savor
of death to them, yea and a killing letter.

Thirdly, God rejects and puts into their minds and hearts good thoughts,
principles and motions, which they pervert and turn to their own destruction:
thus God put into Caiphas his mind, That it was necessary that one should dye
for the people, Ioh. 11. v. 50. and 52
and to gather all the sons of God into one, and not that all the nation
should perish. The principle was good, but Caiphas his construction,
conclusion, and apply of it was evil. That saying of Pilate, Luke 23. v. 1^.
and 16.
I find no harm in the man, was good and of God; but I will chastise him,
etc. This consequence but a bad conclusion, of himself and altogether evil.
Now the cause why God offers these outward objects unto, and does put these
inward motions into men, whom he knows will abuse them; is that his justice
might be seen and acknowledged by their injustice.

Fourthly, by giving success to their endeavors, and by letting them prosper
in sin. Thus he bad the Devil go and seduce Ahabs 400. false Prophets and
prosper, and thus Judas and Pharao prospered in their wicked designs, but
herein Gods end and scope, and their end and scope much differed. Isay. 10. v.
7.

Quest. How can God be said to blind the reprobate, seeing that many times,
and in many places, he offers the light and brightness of his glorious
gospel unto them, 2. Cor. 4. v. 4.
which is a mean and instrument to inform and enlighten them?

An. First, they are blind by nature, and incapable of the saving truth, and
God is not indebted nor bound unto them, who, albeit he puts blindness
into no man, yet he leaves them therein, and does not infuse light into them;
so that the more means are used for their instruction and illumination, the
more they are hardened and blinded; for even as the Owl by the brightness of
the Sun is blinded, Similitudes.
albeit all other birds are enlightened by it, and as the Claye is hardened by
the same Sun by which the wax is softened and melted: so by the same holy
Scripture and glorious Gospel, whereby the Elect are enlightened and
converted, the reprobate are blinded and hardened, and that only through their
own default and impotency, and not through the Gospel.

Secondly, God in his justice (now every action of justice has in it the
nature and respect of God) because it is the punishment of sin, does by
further blindness and hardenesse of heart, punish their corruption and
stubborn rebellion, which they have and do most greedily drink in, and draw
upon themselves, inso much that they wink with their eyes purposely, and will
not see and acknowledge the truth shining forth unto them.

Quest. In Isay the Lord fore-telleth but a particular judgment, and why is it
here generally applied?

Ans. First, the rule of justice and equity, is one and the same with God in
every age, and therefore he may according to the proportion and number of
their offenses, as well punish many of the Jews in Paul's time and sithence, as
some particulers in Isaiahs time.

Secondly, their sin and contumacie since Christ his coming has been more
general and grievous, then the sins of all their ancestors, therefore it is
accordingly to be punished.

Thirdly, the punishments of particular men in Scripture, serve for general
lessonings and warnings unto us, that except we repent and believe, we are to
expect the like judgments, and so look to drink of the same cup.

Israel has not obtained that he sought.
It is not enough and sufficient for men to desire to be blessed, and to seek
for righteousness and salvation, yea, to take great pains for it, (for so
much Heretics, Idolaters, Hypocrites, Jews, Turks, Papists, yea and Pagans
have performed) unless it be by the right lawful means, Doctr.
and those ways that God has o^dained and sanctified in holy Scripture. It
must not be by the law, for that can justify and save no man, for no man can
keep it, nor by men's own works and deserts, for if they proceed only from
civil and mere natural men, they are altogether sin in Gods sight, and as
for the good works of the regenerate, they are but imperfect, yea and stained
with many defects, and therefore they cannot abide the rigor of Gods justice.

Secondly, they are counteruailed, yea infinitely exceeded with sins both of
commission and omission: but true righteousness and happiness is only to be
sought and found in Christ Jesus, as he is revealed and set forth unto us in
holy writ, Act. 4.12. Act. 13. verse. 38. and 39. Luke. 24. v. 47.

Reas. Otherwise if we seek righteousness and salvation preposterously and
not by right means, we labor in vain, we deny the grace of God, and do
dig Wells that will hold no water. To this purpose the Prophet Isay shows,
that the people does foolishly, who neglecting the sweet and saving meat and
drink of Gods Gospel, did bestow great pain and cost in procuring other
meat, namely humane traditions and supe^stitions, which had no virtue of
nourishing in it, and which held no true contentment to the ouer-seers of them:
Isay. 55. v. 2.
Why do ye (says he) lay out silver and not for bread? and your labor
without being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is
good, and let your soul delight in fatness.

The uses of this doctrine are manifold.
1. Use. First, hereby are condemned all endeavors and good meanings and
intentions that are not of faith, and so are nothing but sin, Roman. 14.
verse. 14. 2. Use. Hereby is refuted the gross error of those that hold that
every man is and shall be saved by his own religion and profession, where-as
there is but one truth, and one way of salvation, and that fully and perfectly
described in holy Scripture. John. 14. verse. 6. Math. 7. verse. 13. 3. Use. We
must (if we would be blessed and so saved) seek for righteousness and
justification in Christ only, for there alone it is to be found. Acts 4.12. 1.
Ioh. 5.11.
But the Election has obtained it.
Doct.
Here hence in a word (for the point has been handled before) we may note,
that the cause of obtaining justification and salvation, is without us in Gods
predestination and free mercy, and not in the merits of our works, Romans 9.18
Titus 3. v. 5. for here is an utter opposition between Election and works.

Use. Wherefore we must be thankful unto the divine Majesty, for so great
and free salvation, and ascribe all the glory and praise of it unto his mercy
only.

And the rest have been hardened.
Doctr.
The beginning of the ruin and damnation of the reprobate, arises from the
desertion and reprobation of God. Reprobation is the very tree, root, and
fountain of blindness; for the wicked forsaken of God, can do nothing in all
their deeds, words and counsels, but pull, hale, and heap upon them Gods
curse.

1. Use. Let not the Elect and the true servants of God be offended, in the
madness and senselessness of Reprobates, seeing that it has his original and
foundation from Gods decree of reprobation.

2. Use. Hereby is condemned the error and ignorance of such, who are of
opinion, that God did not freely of himself (before Adams fall) determine of
all things, persons, accidents, circumstances, etc. where as GOD does effect
and execute nothing in time, but that which he most wisely and holily
determined before all times.

The spirit of pricking or com^unction.
Taking the word in this sense and signification, we are taught this lesson and
conclusion. Doctr.
That God does most severely and grievously punish those that distaste, contemn
and reject his grace offered and tendered to them in Christ, namely they are so
given over of God and so possessed by Satan, that they pure and powerful
ministry of the gospel, and testimonies of Gods word applied against them
does nothing, but vex, gall, enrage and torment them. Act. 7.54. Apoc. 11. v.
10.

Nay they are so offended at, and so envy the success and prosperity of the
gospel and the true professors of it, that they cannot rest, and do (to the
consuming of themselves and hastining of their own speedy and just damnation)
nothing but breath out gall and bitterness, against good m^n, and design Gods
Church and children to death and destruction. Act. 4.16.17.18. Ioh. 9.22. Math.
2. v. 3. Apoc. 20. v. 9.

Rea. The reason is, that they might (to their greater damnation) have some
checks and inward torments of conscience whiles they trouble and persecute the
Godly; which is to them but a beginning and a forerunner of everlasting
damnation.

Use. Let us beware that we do not foster and norrish any root of gall and
bitterness in our selves against Gods truth and servants, least otherwise we
in time become indurate, senseless and desperate, but let us fear God and his
judgments, Prouer. 28 14.
for he that always fears in blessed, but he that hardneth his heart shall
fall into evil.

The spirit of slumber.
Thus it is in the original and perhaps (as it is well gessed at by some) the
word (...), Piscato^* in hunc locum.
is derived of (...), which signifies might, to signify some deep sleep,
wherewith men are usually possessed in the dead of the night, and this
senseless slumber may well be an effect, and the issue of a pricking and
enraged conscience.

The Doctrine which I raise hence is this, Doctr.
that God in his just judgments does many times (to punish men's
unthankfulness and contempt of the truth,) deprive them of all sense both of
their sins and of Gods anger and displeasure against sin, in so-much that
neither by plagues nor promises they will suffer themselves to be awakened out
of this deep sleep and dead securit^e. Isay 28.15.

The reasons hereof (in respect of the wicked themselves,) are, first because
they revolt and depart from the word of God, and hence become so blockish that
they have no sense at all, neither acknowledge Gods hand and counsel in their
pains and punishments.

Secondly enjoying long peace and prosperity, and having no open and professed
enemies, Judge. 18.7. Apoc. 18. ^. 7
they like the secure city of Laish and the proud and careless whore of
Babylon think they are far from al danger and shall see no evil.

Thirdly, they vainly imagine that they have sufficient defense and provision
against imminent evils, and if they fall out they have ways and means enough
to elude and escape them.

Let us be advised from the consideration of Gods hand upon the Jews, and
beware and take heed that we never despise nor reject the gospel and blessings
of Christ propounded and offered unto us; least with them we be left and
forsaken in our natural blindness and by continuing stubbernely and stiffly in
our sins we become worse and worse, and so die in our sins and be damned.

Eyes that they should not see.
Doctr.
God as a just judge does deliver up the reprobates being destitute of his grace
unto Satan and their own lusts to be blinded more and more. Ioh. 9. ver. 39.
Math. 13.13. and this God does not by iniecting new blindness into them, but
by withdrawing his grace from them and by leaving them to their natural
blindness, and so it must of necessity be increased when men are forsaken of
God.

The reasons hereof are, first because they are none of his people and elect
and he is not indebted any way unto them therefore he shows his power and
justice in their blinding and hardening.

Secondly, because for the abuse of the gifts and graces of God and for the ill
employment of their talents, God depriueth them of the knowledge and preaching
of the word, and so they ran daily into great blindness and obstinacy (God
in his just judgment forsaking them) or else, if they enjoy the ministry of the
word; their hearts are so hardened and starkned with wicked desires and lusts,
and by the custom of sin draws as it were such a thick skin upon it,
that it can by no warnings and admonitions be bent or bowed, and they so hate
the doctrine of the gospel, that they never heed it, much less meditate upon
it.

1 Use. Let us not marvel at this judgment as though it were some new thing,
that they that do stubbernely and stiffly reject the gospel, be thus blind,
seeing that the Prophets so long before complained of it, and foretold it; but
let us rather beware of it and pray that we be not for our naughtiness and
negligence given over to the same judgment.

2 Use. Let us be truly thankful unto God, and give glory and praise unto
him, that leaving and forsaking many others in the blindness of their mind
and hardness of their hearts, he has by his spirit opened our eyes and ears
to understand the doctrine of the gospel and to receive it by faith unto
salvation, for he has not done so with every person, neither have the most,
known his laws.

V. 9. And David says, let their table, be made a snare, and a net and a
stumbling block even for a recompense unto them.

V. 10. Let their eyes be hardened that they see not, and bow their back
always.

And David as a figure of Christ says. Paraphras.
Let their table. i. their meat, drink, law, scripture, sacraments of out-ward
worship and all their prerogatives and excellencies, be made. i. turned into a
snare. That is as unhappy birds are ensnared in that wherein they sought
releife and comfort, so, let the forenamed benefits wherein they outwardly
rest, and which by their wicked opinions and errors they have perverted and
abused, and their preposterous zeal against the gospel, turn to their
destruction, Let it be a stumbling block and recompense unto them.

i. Let them stumble against the Law and holy Scripture as against a stone,
that they may not be builded thereby to salvation, but may run headlong to
their own destruction: and let it, as a recompense turn to their more
grievous punishment and judgment, and leave them without all excuse. Let their
eyes of their understanding be darkened. i. blinded that they may not admit and
receive the saving light of the gospel, that they be without counsel in
their affairs and not perceive the evils, which do hang over their heads,
and bow down their backs always. i. Let them not speed and prosper in their
designs and actions, but let them shrink and halt, be cast down and tremble
in their minds and consciences, and let them be brought down and diminished
by slavery, troubles and captivity, and so weaken their strength that they may
be unprofitable unto every work.

Q. Did not David, Elias, Paul and others, sin and offend God in praying and
using imprecation against Gods enemies?

A. No, for first they did it by especial and extraordinary instinct of Gods
spirit, and as Prophets, or figures of Christ unto them, the state and
reprobation of diverse persons was revealed of God.

Secondly, when they did wish eternal destruction to the enemies of God, they
did not (to speak properly) pray against their persons, but against the
kingdom of sin and satan in them, which cannot be altogether destroyed, but
by the confusion of the members and instruments of Satan.

Thirdly their prayers and imprecations proceeded only from pure zeal of Gods
glory and justice, and not from any private distemper, or mixture of humane
passion, for they considered them not as their own enemies but as the enemies
and blasphemours of God.

Q. May we after the example of holy men in scripture pray against any
particular person?

A. No, except we could by a Prophetical or Apostolical instinct discern of
their spirits and of their reprobation, which gift is denied us, or except we
knew that they had committed the sin against the holy Ghost, which is a
malicious and final blasphemy and persecution of the known truth and
principles of Gods word, which is very hard to judge of, for any one particular
person especially in our times, 1 Cor. 12.10.
wherein such a gift of discerning spirits is not granted.

Q. May we not at al pray against the enemies of Christ's gospel?

An. Yes, for first we have the practice and warrant of holy men in scripture
for it. Psalm. 69.22. 2. King. 1.10. Act. 4. ver. 29. and 30. 2. Tim. 4.

Secondly, when we pray that the kingdom of God may come, we, (by consequence)
pray that sin Satan and all his members may be destroyed.

Thirdly, we are to pray that Gods justice may be acknowledged and magnified
in the plagues, punishments and ruin of the wicked.

Fourthly we must love God above al men whatsoever, and if we sincerely love
God, we cannot choose but hate his enemies.

Q. With what cautions and conditions, or in what manner may we lawfully pray
against Gods enemies?

A. First we must pray against Gods enemies in general, for there are, and
will always be many such, whom God will never save.

Secondly against their wicked counsels, plots and purposes, 2 Samuel 15.31.
and thus David prayed that God would turn the counsel of Ahitophell into
foolishness and thus the Apostles prayed against the counsels of the Scribes
and Pharasies, Act. 4. v. 29 and 30.
that charged them with threatenings that they should not preach in the name of
Jesus but we must not pray against these persons.

Thirdly we must pray conditionally, against them, that if they be reprobates
and so incurable, they may be judged and justly condemned, but if they be
elect, and by consequent curable, they may be fatherly corrected and so
converted and saved.

Let their table be made a snare, a net a stumbling block.
In that here the word table is specially and principally taken for the holy
scripture, we note and observe, that the sacred scripture is like a table
fraught and replenished with most heavenly and exquisite dishes and dainties;
Doctr.
here is food abundantly sufficient both to satisfy and also to solace every
hungry and thirsting soul: Some of them and the principallest are, remission
of sins, peace and joy of conscience and eternal life. Pro. 9, 22. Math. 22.
v. 4. Cant. 5. ver. 5.

1. Use. It must teach the ministers of the Gospel always to set forth this
table of the word of God, which is truly the hole-some and saving food of the
soul; and as for all speculations, fancies, decrees, traditions, and haie and
stuble of worldly vanities let them wholly leave them off and renounce them.

2 Use. Let all sorts of men, that will be saved come unto this heavenly banquet
continually bringing with them an appetite to the word, and by prayer and
meditation of their own wants and the sovereign uses of Gods word, put an
edge to and sharpen their appetites: then shall they be replenished with good
things and drink of the well of the water of life freely; otherwise for want
of appetite the soul will soon languish and pine away.

Their table be a snare, a net.
It is proper and peculiar to reprobates and profane persons to stumble at Gods
blessings, 2 Doctr.
and to abuse and pervert them to their own destruction. Titu. 1. ver. 15. et
16. Romans 2, ver. 4. et 5. 2 Pet. 3.16. Amos 6. ve. 4.5.6.

Thus many abuse the doctrine of the law, making it a cause of justification
before God, thus they pervert the gospel to give leave and allowance to
licentiousness and liberty, thus they abuse Gods goodness and patience to
patronize them in their sins, and impenitency, thus they use their riches to
the oppressing of others, their meat and drink to gluttony, drunkenesse and
excess* their apparel to ostentation and pride, the Scriptures to maintain
their errors and heresies, the holy Sabbothes to iornyings, idleness,
sportes, vanities, gaming, their wisdom and counsel to intrappe and deceive,
their might, favor and authority to discountenance and tread down all
Godliness and goodness and to advance and countenance all impiety atheism,
profanes, and evil practisesse.

The reason hereof is, they want faith and purity of heart and affections, and
therefore can use and apply nothing well, Similetude.
their ill hearts and defiled consciences is like to an evil stomach that
turns sweet meats into sower, and wholesome unto noisome.

Secondly, God is their enemy, and therefore all things (that be otherwise
naturally and of themselves good) are by Gods curse, so many causes of their
ruin.

Use If we would not draw and pull Gods curse upon us through the mis-apply
or abuse of his guiftes and blessings temporal and spiritual, let us see and
search whether we be true members of Christ, justified by faith, and have our
hearts sanctified by GODS spirit, for until we be called and regenerate, all
things are impure and unholy unto us and we can in no action please GOD. Romans
14.23.

2 Use. If we could with comfort and good conscience use and partake of any of
Gods creatures we must by the direction of his word, be persuaded of the
lawful use of them, and that they be ours by Gods means, we must also by
prayer sanctify them unto us, craving a blessing of God, and desiring him to
direct us in the right use of them.

Let their eyes be darkened that they see not.
Doctr.
Out of these words, which are part of the cause, it evidently appears, what a
great judgment of God it is for men (otherwise of judgment cunning, subtle,
politic) to be ignorant of the ways of GOD, and to understand nothing well,
Psalm. 95. v. 10.
and to fight and rebel against God and his blessed truth, and yet to persuade
themselves they have understanding.

Numb. 16.
This was the case and condition of Corah and his accomplices, who bragged and
boasted of their sharp sight, and would have put out other men's eye, in so
much that they accused Moses and Aaron (Gods blessed servants) as though their
sins were notorious and open to all men.

Thus the Scribes and Pharisees with whom our Savior so often disputed, and by
name in the 9. of John were made more blind by our Savior CHRIST his
preaching, doctrine, conference, miracles, life, innocence and therefore he
says, that he came unto judgment in this world, Ioh. 9.39
that they which see might be made blind.

i. They that see by their own judgment and think that they need not the
sight of grace, for their pride and contempt, are more blinded, `according to
the threatening and complaint in Isay. Isay 42.19.
Who is so blind as my servant and messenger? And thus the Popes, Bishops,
Priests, Jesuits, Seminaries of the Romish Church, who when they are told of
their errors, demand if the Church may err, falsely persuading themselves
that they are the Church, and therefore they cannot be deceived.

The reason of this judgment is for that this obstinate and malicious
blindness, is the beginning and progress to eternal damnation.

1. Use. When we see such things and judgments come to pass, let us not be
offended nor waver in our faith; but rather be confirmed and strengthened in
it; for as much as such judgments are inflicted upon the opponents and
contemners of it, It must be an admonition against those conceited persons,
who deceiving themselves, think they see, Isay. 5. v. 21.
and to be of all most quick eyed, when all their consultations and
proceedings are against Gods revealed will, and nothing indeed but works of
darkness and the Devil.

3. Use. We must be thankful to the Lord for the light and knowledge
imparted unto us, and supplicate unto his divine Majesty, that he would not
punish our sins with so great a punishment.

And ever bow down their backs.
Obser. Seeing the curse of God hangs over the enemies heads, Psalm 89. v. 17.
and 19. Psalm. 73. v. 17.18.19.20.
we have no cause to be afraid and affrighted at their malice, fury, and
frenzy; but rather to confirm and comfort our selves in our holy profession,
for God will at length bring them to confusion, and will bring and procure joy
and deliverance to his.

The reason hereof is, for that it is in the hands of God to break their
strength, and to smite them with a spiritual blindness, as he smote the
Syrians, the Aegiptians and Elymas the Sorcerer with material blindness.

Use. The use hereof serves to reprove the faintness and want of faith in
such, who because they see no present likelyhoods, beginnings, and
possibilities of the wicked men's ruin and ouer-throwe, begin to call in
question Gods justice, and to frame and conform themselves to their ill ways
and practices, not knowing that the candle of the wicked is soon put out, and
their pomp and bravery soon comes to naught, and that in the mean time the
godly are only proved and tried, whether that they will abuse Gods patience
and bounty as the wicked worldlings and Atheists do, or not.

Bow down their backs.
Doctr.
The weakening of the strength is a special judgment of God, Psalm. 102. verse.
24. that is, if at that time for their sins they were diversely afflicted, and
banished out of their country, and cut off in the middle of their race, that
they should not see the longed for time of the Messiah, nor be partakers of
the promised and expected glory; much more are they (and so remain) to be
afflicted and captiuated since the Incarnation and Ascension of Christ: for as
much as they would not have Christ to reign over them, nor would be ranged
under his banner, nor submit themselves to the Scepter of his Gospel.

Bow down their backs always, or make their loins to stagger, (as in the
original, or Hebrew.) i. cause them to tremble in their consciences^. From
both these translations considered together, we may observe, how grievous and
violent is the inward vexation and perplexities of an evil conscience, Doctr.
especially in mighty calamities and sore temptations, so that oftentimes it
weakneth and shakes the strength of the whole body. It makes them fear where
no fear is, Genesis 4. v. 14.
and with Caine to think, that every body that meets them is their enemy,
Daniel. 5. v. 2.3, 4, and 5.
and will kill them. They in their sports and iollities with Balthazer
oftentimes observe the handwriting of Gods judgment extant against them, and
being alive they are already dead, and being in earth, they are in the very
suburbs of hell.

Use. If we would be free from the torments and trouble of an evil
conscience, we must repent us unfeignedly of all our sins, and with faith and
holy zeal embrace and constantly follow and profess the Gospel of Christ.
For this is the mean and way, both to procure and to retain joy and peace of
conscience in all trials and trouble^ whatsoever.

The third Section or part of the Chapter.
Verse. 11. I demand then have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid:
but through their fall salvation (comes) to the Gentiles, to provoke them to
follow them.


Verse. 12. Wherefore if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles: how much more (shall) their
abundance?


Sense.
I Demand then, have the Jews stumbled? viz. at Christ the Rock and stone of
offense, that they should fall, viz. should in Gods euer-lasting counsel be
wholly cut off and so perish. God forbid, i. let no man think or judge so, for
the covenant is not utterly abolished, but they (many of them) remain in
possession of it: But through their fall, i. accidentally and indirectly,
salvation is befallen to the Gentiles. i. A door and way of Gods grace is
opened unto them, so that they are hereby called and brought into Gods Church
and kingdom.

If the fall of them, i. their fewness and small number, be the riches of the
world, i. so further the calling of the Gentiles, how much more shall their
abundance, (do) i. when the greatest number of them shall be called, and
embrace the Gospel, then they shall much more further it.

And the further meaning hereof is, that if their fall can against nature do
it, much more their fullness, raising up, and calling, according to nature will
effect it. for faith is of greater power and validity, then infidelity, and
grace then corruption, and the Jews if they had believed, had both confirmed
the truth of God, and by their doctrine and example won many, whom now by
their obstinaci^ they have estranged and lost.

Question. Through their fall.
Quest. Can the Church fall away from the covenant, grace, and favor of God?

Ans. The body in general may, (I mean) those that are only outwardly
called, and the ministry of the Gospel may be (as it is often) taken from
them, and so they fall away to Atheism, heresy, or profaneness: for God
always has his elect, which come to Christ, and shall never be cast out, Io^
6.17. Ier. ^2.31. Luke. 22.32.
God puts his fear in their hearts and they shall never depart from him.
Thirdly Christ prays for them, and is always heard. Lastly, the golden
chains of salvation. Romans 8.30.
viz. predestination, calling, justification, and glorification, is, nor can
be never dissolved or broken.

2. Question. Through their fall salvation is happened to the Gentiles.
Qu. Are they excused that by their unbelief and unthankfulness, give an
occasion unto other men's conversion?

Ans. No, no more then Judas, who by his treason and hanging of himself,
ministered an occasion ( viz. accidentally) to the calling and surrogating of
Matthias in his room. For first, they instead of giving good example (which
they are bound to do) offend and scandalize others: Secondly the good comes
not from them as any causes or proper instruments of it, but is to be ascribed
to Gods goodness and wisdom only, who can and often does out of darkness
bring light, and out of sin draw good. Lastly, thieves, robbers, murderers
and oppressors, give occasion of enacting and executing of good laws, yet no
thanks to them, for they had no such intention: secondly, in regard of
themselves, their sins are far more vile and horrible, then the good that
comes accidentally by it.

Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid.
Here we may note and observe Gods goodness, Doctr.
and the constancy of his eternal love in Christ to his children; whom he
loves once, John. 13.3.
he loves ever, he does not for the unthankfulness of many or most, break
off all occasion to do good to his (though never so few in number, and never
so odious and contemptible in the world,) If there be but one Noah and his
family in the world that truly serves him, he will remember and save them,
when all the world besides perishes. If there be but one Lot in Sodom, he
shall be preserved when all the rest are consumed; though Christ's flock be a
little flock, yet they shall inherit a kingdom: and they whom the Lord shall
find waking and well doing at his coming (albeit they be never so rare)
they shall be blessed. Luke 12. v. 37.


The reason is, Gods covenant is unchangeable, and reaches unto a thousand
generations, and the infidelity of men cannot make his faith and truth in
performance of his promises of none effect: Romans 3. v. 3^
Secondly God is just, and does not (as we see amongst men) punish and
condemn the just for the unjust.

Use. This must encourage and confirm us in the course of godliness, and in
saving our selves from the common corruption of faith or manners, we shall not
loose our reward. Be the times never so corrupt, religion never so abolished,
sin never so rife, Atheism and superstition never so much swarm and abound,
yet God thinks never the worse of his, or thereby takes an occasion to
handle them roughly: but he makes a distinction and difference between the
righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3.8.
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

2. Use. Here is condemned the bad and unjust practice of some, that for one
man of a calling or profession that falls and offends, takes occasion
rashlye to censure and condemn all; as though all the Apostles should be
condemned of covetousness and treason because Judas was such; or all holy
Deacons of Apostacy, Idolatry and fornication, because Nicholaus proved to be
such; or all professors of lying and indirect dealing, because Ananias and
Saphyra his wife were detected to be such, and therefore extraordinarily
punished, whereas in this bad and worst world, we may marvel that any
remains good, rather then all or most are such. Secondly, the number of the
good is ever far less then the number of the wicked.

By their fall, salvation is come to the Gentiles.
Doctr.
God in his wisdom does so order and dispose of the things of men, that he
does turn those things which in and of themselves are evil and hurtful, unto
occasion of good. He intends, works, and effects always good, albeit
the instruments intend and work ill. The Alchymists of our time
(notwithstanding all their pains, prating and practicing) can never turn and
convert base mettalls into gold: but God can, and often does, turn evil into
good. Romans 8.. ve. 28
Thus ^hee turned the malice, envy and ill affection of them that put Christ
to death, to man's salvation: Joseph his selling into Aegipt, and his long
imprisonment, to his great and high advancement, ^^d the releeuing and
preferment of his old Father, and of all his envious brethren; and thus he
directed the infirmity of Abraham, and the Mid-wiues in lying, into their
safety; and David before Achis faining himself mad, into David's
preservation.

Use. Let none then that fear God be terrified and daunted with the blustering
threatenings, or furiousness of the wicked against them; but in faith, patience
and silence, commend themselves and their cause to God, for he will direct all
to good, and out of evil premises, draw good conclusions. Psalm. 38. and Psalm.
112.

To provoke them to follow them.
See here and observe the great wisdom and loving kindness of God toward
his children, Doctr.
who by his favor showed unto others; and by substituting others into their
places, makes them ashamed of their unthankfulness, and labors to stir
up in them a desire and purpose of reconcilement. Deuteronomy. 32.
Because (says the Lord) they have moved me to jealousy with that which is
not God: they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: I will moo^e them
to jealousy with (those that are) no people: Ver. 21.
I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation. And herein God deals
with them as a tender Father with his unkind or disobedient child that will
not come to him, Romans 10.19*
he takes another son in his arms, or sets him between his legs,
embraces, praises, and makes much of him, hereby correcting the stubbernesse
of his other son, and provoking him to seek for the like favor and
acceptance.

1. Use. Hereby are condemned those that by their Idolatry (as the Papists
do) or else with others, by their arrogancy, pride and contempt, alienate and
deteine the Jews from Christianity.

2. Use. Secondly, let us endeavor by our pure and sincere serving of God, by
our holy zeal, by our godly life and just dealing, Math. 5. ve. 16.
to^ give light unto the Jews, and at length to provoke them to emulation, and
so to win them, that there may be under Christ the head, ^one fould, and one
shepherd. John. 10. v. 27.

3. Use. Let us, as we be wail their hardness of heart, and vile contempt of
Christ and his Gospel: so daily and heartily with that Elizaeus of our age,
now in glory, pray for their conversion, and with that reverend Father say. O
Lord Jesus, Master Beza his prayer for the Jews.
thou do justly revenge the contempt of thy self, and this unthankful
people is worthy whom thou should most sharply punish: But O Lord, remember
thy couenant^, and regard the afflicted for thy names sake: Also grant unto
us, that are of all men most unworthy, whom notwithstanding thou have counted
worthy of thy merci^, that we profiting in thy grace, may not be instruments
of thy wrath against them, but that we may rather by the knowledge of thy
word, and by the examples of an holy life, through the working of thy holy
spirit, reduce them to the right way, that thou may once be glorified for
ever of all nations and people. Amen.

The fall of them, the riches of the world.
Quest. Can good come of evil? and salvation of the Gentiles come from the
fall of the Jews? is here the corruption and dying of one, the cause and
generation of another?

Ans. Although evil can never produce good as the proper cause of it: yet
indirectly and by occasion it may work it. Thus we see that from evil
manners and the corrupt behavior of men, good laws have their beginning and
original.

Secondly, the omnipotency, and infinite majesty of him, that at the first
drew light out of darkness, can draw good out of evil.

The riches of the world, the riches of the Gentiles.
Doctr.
Here by riches is meant the saving knowledge of the Gospel, the grace of Gods
spirit, remission of sins, and the assured promise and expectation of
eternal life, whence I gather and propound this doctrine. That the grace and
knowledge of God, is the only true and lasting riches, and that alone that
makes the owners and possessors blessed. Hence the godly poor, are said to
be rich in faith, Iam. 2.5.
to be rich in GOD, Luke. 12.21.

This is the true riches, and properly the^r o^ne, for they shall never be
taken away from them, Luke 16.11, 12
and they that are possessed of them shall never hunger nor thirst. Io. 4.

This is the treasure hid in the field of the Church, which when a man has
found, be hides, preserves it, Math. 13.44.
and for joy thereof goes and sells all that he has and buyeth that field.

This is that precious pearl which a merchant finding sells all that he h^th
and buyeth. V. 46.


And as a man, (albeit otherwise, as poor and miserable as Lazarus,) being
possessed with no worldly goods and hereditaments, A similitude.
yet if he have of his own a goodly precious and costly Jewel he cannot be
but rich: even so he that is enriched, with the precious Jewel of the grace
and knowledge of God, albeit he otherwise have nothing, yet before God he is
very rich. That Gods Sons are rich (albeit they are in the account and
estimate of the world and in worldly respects they are many times poor and
bare,) the Scriptures in other places afford plentiful Testimonies. 1. Cor.
3.21. Ephesi. 2.17. 1. Tim. 6.19.

1 Use. Wherefore let us not dote upon earthly and perishable things, which can
never make the possessors happy and blessed before God: but let the word of God
dwell richly and plentifully in us, let us seek to compass the knowledge of
it with all care and endeavor; for of all other things it is most precious,
and it alone being tempered and received by faith, does solace and satisfy the
heart, and yeeldes true and perfect contentment unto it.

2 Use. We must so labor and so order the matter that Christ be our treasure
and our rich pearl and where our treasure is, Math. 6.21.
there must our heart be also: otherwise if we make never so goodly and great
purchases in the world, and be never so stored and furnished with worldly
wealth, and want this spiritual treasure, this spiritual gould, silver,
Jewels etc. we are in the eyes of God, and so shall be one day declared before
the eyes of all men, to be most beggarly and banckrupt, naked and ignoble.
Luke 12.21. Apoc. 3.17.

V. 13 For in that I speak to you Gentiles, in as much as I am an Apostle of
the Gentiles I magnify (or adorn) mine office.

V. 14. (To try) if by any m^anes, I might provoke them that are of my flesh
to follow them, and might save some of them.

Paraphrase.
I speak to you Gentiles, viz. which are called from among the Gentiles: in as
much as I am an Apostle of the Gentiles. i. I have been called of Christ,
principally that I should be the Doctor of the Gentiles, that I might carry
his name before them. Act. 9.15. Gal. 2. ver. 7. and 8. I magnify mine office.
i. I ommit nothing that may appertain to set it forth and make it famous and
illustrious, for this is glorious to my ministry. 1 Cor. 15.10. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
verse.

If by any means I might provoke. i. by preaching and my example stir up,
them that are of my flesh* i. those that are sprung of the same Ancestors and
so entirely beloved, to follow them. i. to believe in Christ and embrace the
gospel, and might save some of them. i. bring to the obedience of faith and,
by consequence, to salvation.

Q. It is proper to God alone to convert men to God, how then can the ministers
be said to convert and save? he alone gives faith. Ephesians. 2.20 he alone gives
repentance. 2. Tim. 2.25. and he alone softneth and mollifieth the heart.
Ezekiel. 32?

An. God conuerteth and saves as the proper effitient cause and author of it,
working inwardly and making the ministers doctrine effectual, but the
ministers and preachers do it as outward means and instruments, propounding,
offering and applying Gods promises unto their hearts, whose ministry is only
so farre-forth saving and converting, as it pleases God to prosper and bless
it. Act. 8. v. 31.37.38. Act. 10.43. 2. Cor. 5* v. 18. Act. 16. v. 14.

V. I magnify my Ministry* that I might provoke them, and might save some of
them. We, here from Paul's practice and pains in the adornation of this
ministry, learn, wherein the dignity, ornament and true honor of the
ministry does consist, not so much in titles, pomp, prebends, multiplication
of benefices, glorious apparel, eminency and superiority of place; (albeit
there is and needs must be an inequality and difference of order and degrees,
in the ministers for composing of controversies and avoiding of confusion) as
in diligence of teaching, in advancing true religion, doctrine and life, and in
winning many to Christ. 2. King. 2.12. Act. 20. ver. 28.

The reasons hereof are these. First God has ordained them and their calling
to this end Act. 26. and if they execute it not their sin is grievous and
their judgment most fearful. Secondly hereby Gods name is magnified amongst
men; and the sweet ointment and smell* of his gospel is dispersed far and
wide. Thirdly they confirm their ministry and comfort their souls here, and
gain addition of glory in the life to come. 2. Cor. 2.16. Apoc. 11. Dan. 12.3.

Use. The use hereof is first to tax and condemn the covetous, idle, worldly,
vicious, vnteaching, dumb, absent, and negligent ministers, who because either
they do not Gods work at all (especially in preaching, or else* execute their
functions very negligently, are subject and lie open to Gods curse, and are to
answer for the damnation of so many souls as perish through their default,
Hier. 48.10. Ezekiel. 33. verse. 6. and 8. Acts 20*26.27.

2 Use. Secondly ministers neglecting all other by-matters that nothing
concern them, and the hunting and hauking after worldly goods and glory must
strive with all diligence to perform their duties, and to make this their
only scope and mark to spread Christ his gospel far and near, and so to
convert and save souls. 2. Tim. 4. ver. 2. and 3. Act. 26. ver. 18.

V. Which are my flesh, and chap. 9. ver. 3. my brethren, my kinsmen. Doctr.
Out of these words the instruction naturally arises, viz. the spirit of Christ
does not make men stocks and blocks, or bereave them of natural affection,
(for these are of God, they are in themselves good, and without the help and
ministry whereof, we can neither truly serve God; nor perform the duties of
righteousness and love to men) but it rather causes and confirms them.

This sympathy and indulgent affection appeared most notably in Christ Jesus in
weeping over the City Jerusalem, and bewayling the aproching ruin of it, it
manifestly also discovered it self toward Mary his Mother, whom he so much
respected and had such a provident care of, Act. 9. v. 21.22.23.
and here it (as in other places) appeared most eminently in Paul, who with the
often hazard of his own life, labored the Jews conversion.

Use. Let us have a due regard to procure good, spiritual and corporal to our
country and kinsfolks, for this both nature and religion requires and
commends; If nature bind us to provide for and do good to our parents,
children and kinsfolk, much more must grace and religion bind and urge us to
care for their spiritual good and comfort.

And might save some of them.
Obs. 2. We learn here that the preaching and ministry of the gospel, is
not a matter only of ciuility, credit or a bare letter, but the power of God,
the worlds salvation, the immortal seed, and to the Elect the sweet savor of
life unto life. Act. 13.46.47. 2. Cor. 2.16. 1. Pe. 1.23. and this it was that
specially exalted Capernaum to Heaven, and fills cities and towns full of
spiritual joy. Acts 8.8.

The reason hereof is, because God has annexed a promise thereunto, and is
effectual, and powerful hereby to draw and save all that belong unto him.
Mat. 28.19.20.^

1 Use. It condemns the Swink-feldains, and the Atheists of the world, that
think the word preached is not of force and power to convert any; for they
look unto the outward sound and letter only, and not to the power, and
promise of God who works effectually in it and by it in all them that belong
unto him. Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 1. ver. 24.

2 Use. Let not men despise, contemn and reject the holy ministry, but think
and speak always honorably of it, let men herein acknowledge Gods goodness
toward them, and accept of the riches and treasures of his grace hereby
offered unto them. For albeit it cannot profit and avail any thing to
salvation without the assistance of the holy spirit: Yet by the help of it,
which always accompanies it in the elect, all that are to be saved, are
ordinarily won. Hence no Eunuch converted without a Philip, no Cornelius
without a Peter, and no Lydia without a Paul.

V. 15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world* what
shall their receiving be but life from death?

V. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump, and if the
root be holy so are the branches.

If the casting away of them, Paraphr.
viz. i. the greatest part of the Jews, be the reconciling of the world. i.
serve and tend to the calling of the Gentles whereby they are reconciled unto
God, what shall the receiving be. i. the calling of the fullness of the Jews,
by which they that before were cast off, shall again be admitted and received
into the Church; but life from death. i. a recovery and bringing of spiritual
life again to the Jews that were so many hundred years dead in their sins,
and also their restitution and fullness shall give an occasion of quickening to
the Gentiles, Call. in hunc locum.
and of enriching many with the knowledege of Christ and salvation, and so of
enlarging Gods kingdom, both amongst Jews and Gentiles, and hence by reason
of the common felicity shall be the true and perfect ^oy of the world.

For if the first fruits be holy so is the whole Lump. i. For as then when the
Israelites had offered the first fruits of their bread and loaves unto God, all
the whole Lump and rest of the fruits were hereby blessed and sanctified unto
them, that they might with good conscience bake, knead and feed upon them: Even
so, if Abraham Isack and Jacob their stock, fathers and founders of their
Nation, were (especially) by reason of Gods covenant holy and accepted with
GOD: so shall the elect of their posterity be (in some sort) favored for
their Fathers sake, And if the root be holy. i. full of the juice and sap
of grace, so shall the branches. i. The holy remainers by force of GODS
covenant shall receive and draw juice, grace and goodness from it.

Q. If the conversion of the Jews shall be not only unto them, but also unto
the Gentiles a spiritual resurrection, and life from the dead, and this must
needs be a little before Christ his second coming, how can this place then
agree, to and accord with, that in Luke where it is said? But when the Son of
man comes shall he find faith on the earth? Luke 18.8. and with that toward
the end of the world Satan must be loosed* Apoc. 20.17. and seduce the people
of the world.

Ans. They may very well and aptly be thus reconciled by distinction: That the
last times of the world shall be happy in respect of the benefits of Christ and
the light of the Gospel; and likewise in regard of the gathering together of
the Church of Jews and Gentiles throughout the world.

But they shall be unhappy and miserable by reason of the worlds
unthankfulness and the seducement of Antichrist, who shall not be (wholly)
abolished before Christ his commming.

Secondly, the number of Atheists, Hipocrites, Apostataes and profane persons
shall incomparably far exceed the number of those that truly fear God and
sincerely serve him: yet, that Church shall never wholly cease but under the
tirany of Antichrist, there shall remain not a few that shall rightly call
upon Gods name, and all the elect shall be saved, whom the Lord out of all the
families, nations, and kindreds of the earth has marked with a certain mark
of Election and adoption.

Or thus, in that generation or age, wherein the Jews shall be converted, there
shall be much faith and zeal upon the earth, but in the next following wherein
many false Christ's shall seduce many, Apoc. 7.9.
then there shall be (almost) none.

What shall their receiving be but life from death?
Q. Shall not the general calling the conuertion of the Jews be in occasion
of the diminishing and reiection of the Gentiles?

A. No, but a reviving of their faith and a quickening of the word. For the
ouerflowing and streaming fountain of Gods mercy and goodness is never
drawn dry, and the more that men use it, the more it runs out and sloweth.

Secondly, if that which is evil in it self. viz. the fall of the Jews was
saving to the Gentiles (albeit accidentally and by occasion) much more that
which is good off, and by it self, shall produce and bring forth good effects.

V. If the first fruits be holy, then the whole Lump, and if the root, then
the branches. Q. Are they, that are borne of holy parents holy, or can parents
derive and transfuse grace and holiness into their children?

A. No, for they are borne and conceived in sin, and are by nature the
children of wrath, but they are holy by covenant and promise only, whether
they be Jews or Gentiles, according to the tennor of the covenant I will be thy
God and the God of thy seed for ever. Genesis 17.7. and Gall. 3.9. and they which
be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.

Secondly holy and believing parents beget not children as they are holy and
believing, (for this proceeds only from grace and Gods free promise) but as
they are men and natural parents; and therefore that which is borne of the
flesh is flesh (as all are by nature) and that which is borne ( viz. again) of
the spirit is spirit. John 3.6:

Q. In that the patriarckes and Ancesters of the Jews are called, the first
fruits, the root, the natural olives are not the preferments, prerogatives
and excellences of the Jews far greater then of the Gentiles?

Rom 5.2.
Ans. Yes, much every manner of way, but not in repect of righteousness and
merit, for herein they are equal and all one Ephesians. 2.23. Ephesians. 2. ver. 3
but in outward privileges and ornaments only.

Question What then were then the special and singular ornaments and
prerogatives of the Jews? Romans 9.4.5


Ans. Nine specially (as they are numbered by Saint Paul). First the glorious
title of Israelites, which name Jacob first obtained by reason of wrestling and
prevailing with the Angel. Gene. 32. ver. 24.25.


Secondly the Adoption to be Gods people in general. Thirdly the Glory. i.
the honor and dignity, in that the Lord of glory did (as it were) dwell
amongst them signs of whose special presence were the Arc and the Temple.

Fourthly, the covenants, that is not only the testament but also many
compactes and the agreements that passed between GOD and the people.

Fifthly the giving of the law, Moral, Judicial, Ceremonial, under, which is
comprehended the Kingly dignity and Magistracy.

Sixthly the service of God, that is, the whole Leuiticall Ministry, and the
Administration of Gods worship.

Seventhly the promises, that is, of earthly and spiritual blessings, and of
the Gospel promised to the Fathers. Romans 1. v. 2. Eighthly the honorable
descent from the holy Fathers and Ancestors, for whose sake God does often
times bless the posterity: Ninthly and lastly, the having of Christ for their
kinsman, Noel. A kinsman.
for of them concerning the flesh came Christ, who is God blessed for euer-more.

Verse. 15. If the casting away of them, etc? what the reconciling, etc. Obs.
The conversion of the nation of the Jews, shall be the worlds restoration,
and shall wonderfully confirm the faith of the Gentiles, Romans 11.12. Ioh.
10.16.

The reason hereof is, for that they both shall have perfect joy, when both
Jews and Gentiles shall alike enjoy the common ^elicitie, and all scruples,
doubts, and all causes of any pretended separation, shall be taken away and
removed.

Secondly, an increase, augmentation and an honor and ornament shall be hereby
added to the Church.

Use. Let us therefore desire and seek after their conversion, and heartely
pray for it, and by writing, disputes, doctrine, and holy example, further and
promote it, for this shall redound to Gods glory, and the amplification and
improouement of our own, both temporal and eternal happiness.

Ver. 15. Be but life from death. In that by the Ministry of the Gospel,
Doctr.
the Jews which were dead in sin, are restored to life, and the Gentiles
faith revived: Romans 1.16.
we learn hence the saving virtue, and effectual power of it.

The first reason hereof is, because it is the power of God to salvation, Romans
1.16.
in all the Elect, for herein God reuealeth his true and absolute
righteousness, with which life and salvation is always joined, and by the
means and ministry hereof, it is conveyed and communicated to them that
receive and obey it.

1 Pet 5. V. 23.
Secondly it is the immortal seed of regeneration and eternal life; for hereby
God does call men to be his children and does convert them, Heb. 4.13.
he raizeth and creates faith in them, and does adopte and regenerate them.

Use. 1. The first use hereof is, to learn us, not only to magnify and have
the Gospel in high account and esteem, that brings such comfort and
commodity with it; but also to receive it, yea to temper it (as men do mix
and dulcifi^ their tart wine with sugar) with faith, and to apply it to our
own selves, otherwise it will be altogether unprofitable unto us.

Use. 2. Secondly we must hereby be induced and persuaded to lead and live a
new life according to the tenor of the Gospel and the intent of the word of
God, Titus. 2. V. 11.
For the grace and Gospel of Christ has brightly appeared, teaching us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live justly, godlyly, and soberly
in this present world. Titus 2.11.12.

Use. 3. Thirdly hereby also we are remembered and put in mind from whence
the. Gospel has his credit, authority and estimation, not from the
approbation of man's reason, nor from the applause of the world, nor from the
persons of the Ministers, but from God, and from the admirable and
supernatural effects and fruits of it: 2 Timothy 3.16.
For it is given by inspiration, it is the voice and letter of GOD and is
autentike of, and in it self, and no other doctrines have any credit,
authority or power but so far forth as they receive it from the Scripture or
accord with it.

Verse 16.
If the first fruits be holy so is the whole lump, etc.
Obs. Here is commended the goodness of GOD and the truth of his covenant of
grace, that does redound and extend it self to posterity and succeeding
generations, even from generation to generation Exodus 20. Psalm. 3. Ver. 9. Psalm.
89. Ver. 33.34. Psalm. 103 Ver. 17.

The reason hereof is, his truth and covenant does not depend upon any
creature or thing, without himself, but only upon himself and therefore
can by no outward means be nullified or made frustrate.

Use. Seeing that GOD is unchangeable, true, and cannot deceive in word or
deed; Heb. 13. Ver. 5.6.
we are put in mind of our duty, namely to trust in GOD who never fails nor
forsakes them that rely upon him; and not in men who are liars, hollow
hearted and lighter then vanity it self, Psalm. 62* 9. Psalm 146.3.4.5.

Use. 2 Let us then by our piety, godliness and goodness, labor to bring
a blessing upon our posterity: For the children and posterity many times
fare the better and are respected for their believing and holy fathers sake:
woe then to ignorant, Popish, Atheistical, lewd, licentious, blaspheming and
filthy minded and living parents, who by their ill example not only pervert
and poison their children, but also bring upon and derive the curse of GOD
unto them who does visit the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate him. Exodus 20. v. 5


Use. 3. We must be admonished and advised hereby, that we do not from men's
unworthiness and present condition take occasion rashly to condemn them, and
imperiously to insult over them. But rather ascend higher, and consider the
root and foundation of the covenant, and proceed to their holy Ancestors, that
we may know that the blessing of the covenant remains in them: Rom 3. V. 3.
For no men's sins and unworthiness can make GODS faith and covenant
frustrate* yea many times where sin abounded, grace (by GODS merciful
disposition) abounded much more, not to encourage any man in sin, but that it
might appear that in the matter of justification and salvation, Gods mercy is
all in all.

Verse. 17. And though some of the branches be broken of and thou being a wild
Olive tree, was graft into [or for] them, and made partaker of the root and
fatness of the Olive tree.

Verse. 18. Boast not thy self against the branches, and if thou boast thy
self, thou bear not the root, but the root thee.

Paraph.
Though some of the branches, that are hypocrites and void of good works be
broken of, id est. rejected and cease to be a Church by reason of their
unbelief, and thou being a wild Olive. i. a branche and bough of it, and
therefore naturally barren, unfruitful, and bearing nothing but bitter leaves,
was graft in for them, and partaker of the root i. of the juice that comes
from the root Abraham, and flows unto all the branches, and of the fatness,
i. of the graces, promises, and all the benefits, and good things spiritual
and outward made unto us in Abraham, of the Olive tree, the Church of the
Israelites which sprang from him.

Ver. 19.
Boast not thy self against the branches, i. (according to the meaning of the
Greek word (...)) do not shake thy neck against them by insulting,
triumphing, and crowing over them, for if thou boastest thy self, thou bear
not the root. i. if you proudly glory and vaunt that some branches being
broken of, thou art ingrafted into the tree of the Church, know thou that the
Church of the Jews receives nothing from thee, but the root thee, i. thou
have thy foundation and sustentation, and whatsoever thou have from this, that
thou without any merit of thine art ingrafted into the Church of God: neither
does the Church need thee, but thou need the Church, that thou may be a
member of it, therefore thou must not for the unbelief of some Jews
scornefully and proudly contemn and rage against the whole body of the people.

Q. Some of the branches be broken off. Can the true members of the Church
become Infidels, and so be broken off from the fellowship of the Church?

Ans. No, if they be living members, and be truly by faith ingrasted into
Christ; for Christ will loose none of those that the Father has given him to
be saved, John. 17. but these that fall away and are broken off, are only
branches and members in regard of the covenant, and in their own conceit, and
the charitable opinion of the Church, but not truly and really, and before
God, seeing they are none of Gods elect, and are destitute of faith, and the
spirit of Christ.

Quest, Who* and how many sorts of people are or may be cut off and fall away
from the Church?

Ans. Two sorts. First, those that be ingrafted into the Church by the tenor
and authority of the General covenant only, whereby God promises that he
will be their God, and the God of their seed, Gal. 4.28. and 29.
but yet are not elected, for every one that is Abraham's son according to the
flesh, is not a son of promise.

Secondly, they that indeed receive the seed of the word [as many reprobates
doe] but they mix it not with faith, and it has no root in them, neither are
they renewed and inwardly changed by it. The word in these may be, and soon is
either utterly lost, or else choked and perverted, and so they may be cut off,
and fall away finally and wholly.

And (to conclude all in a word,) they are only and alone cut and broken off,
that are Abraham's sons according to the flesh only [as the body of the Jews
generally were in Saint Paul's time, and sithence] but the sons of promise, or
Abraham's sons by faith never are, nor ever can be broken off, be their
number never so small, nor their temptations never so great and permanent.

3. Quest. How are men ingrafted into the Church?

Ans. First, by an outward calling, and by an outward profession and
approbation of the word and sacraments. Secondly by Baptism, as a seal of our
adoption and entrance or matriculation into the Church. Thirdly, by the
testimony and in the opinion of the Church, and so may a reprobate or hypocrite
be ingrafted. Fourthly, in Gods secret counsel and by the spirrit of faith and
seal of Gods holy and spirit. hereby men with a prepared and sanctified heart
receive Gods word and keep it, these alone Christ draws unto him and
inwardly changes and transnatureth them until he perfect them and bring them
to the end of their hope, that is, the salvation of their souls. and thus are
the Elect only ingrafted and therefore can never perish.

Doct.
Some branches are broken of.
Seeing that Christ cannot abide barren and fruitless vines, John 15.2.
that are deuoid of faith and repentance, and has by reason hereof cut off and
rejected not only the nation of the Jews generally (for the time) but also
many countries and kingdoms amongst us Gentiles, Luke 3. Ver. 7.9.
we must make use hereof and learn hereby both to abound and increase in
faith and good works. John 15.2.

The reason hereof is, for that the anger and indignation of God goes with it,
and temporal plagues and punishments (which are but forerunners of everlasting
judgment otherwise) surprise and ceaze upon us. Math. 23.23.
Math. 3. V. 8. Math. 7.21. Math. 21 41.43.

Secondly all our faith and profession without works and fruits is not sincere
and sound before God, but copper and counterfeyt. For true faith and
regeneration can no more in their proper time and opportunity be without fruit
and obedience, then the sun without light, the fire without heat and the
springing fountain without water.

Use. 1. Wherefore let us to our outward profession of the Gospel add and
associate the continual train and attendant of good works of piety and
devotion toward God, and of love and justice toward men.

Thus God has commanded, our faith requires (for the testimony and cherishing
of it) our neighbors need it, and God both regards and (in favor) rewards
it: otherwise, if we bring forth no fruit of godliness and goodness, it
follows that we never had true communion with Christ, and therefore in time
we shall be disclosed and discovered to have been but mere hypocrites, and
it shall be notified to our selves and to others, that we never did appertain
unto him, and therefore we shall never be admitted into the Court and Palace
of heaven, but, as unprofitable servants, cast into h^ll fire.

Thou being a wild Olive tree. 2 Doctr.

In that we Gentiles are compared to a wild Olive, we hear learn this
instruction, that as we Gentiles, even the best of us, are naturally, and
before our conversion unto Christ, barren, fruitless and cursed trees*
untoward and unapt to any goodness, and wholly disposed and inclined unto evil.
Genesis 6. V. 5. Titus* 3* V. 3. Ephesians. 2.^.2.3. Psalm. 14.1.2.3. 1. Cor. 6.9.10.11.

The first reason hereof is, because all men are conceived and borne in
Original sin, Psalm. 51. V. 5.
and so are wholly corrupted in all the powers and fa^ulties of body and soul,
so we are become crab trees, wild Olives, wild Vines, and wholly degenerate.
Secondly, all the actions of the Gentiles considered, Titus 1. V. ^5.16. Romans
14.23. Hebr. 11.6.
as they are Gentiles and men unregenerate, are in Gods sight and acceptance
(albeit otherwise never so laudable and allowed before men) nothing but sin, for
without faith it is impossible to please God, and whatsoever is not of faith is
sin.

Use. 1, If we would judge equally and charitably of other men's sins and
folly, we must ^ooke unto our own Original sin and to our stuff at home*
and observe wherein others have the pre-eminence before us so shall we censure
others with more conscience and compassion, and be the more preserved from
filling our selves.

Use. 2. Let no man trust in his own natural goodness, virtue and
worthynesse, Luke. 18. V. 13.
which is nothing but sin, but let him with the poor publicanes hold down
his head and humble himself before God for his sins, let him with the
prodigal son cry out and say, I have sinned against heaven and against God,
Luke 15. v. 18.19.
and I am no more worthy to be called Gods son.

Use. 3. Let every christian, seeing that of a wild Olive, he is ingrafted into
Gods Church, be always thankful for so great a benefit, and lay aside his
wild and savage nature, and in piety, virtue, and good works imitate and
resemble the noble vine Christ Jesus into who^ he is ingraffed, Ephe. 5. ver. 1
for we must walk in the light, as he is light, and walk in love as we have
Christ for an example, for Christ his morrall virtues are not only for our
contemplation but for our imitation.

Use. 4. The Ministers and Preachers of Gods word must not look to find the
people good, for all by nature are blind, ignorant, corrupt, rebellious
sinful; but by doctrine, exhortation, and examples to make them good, let them
labor to husband and proine the vineyard, let them gather out all the stones
and rubbish of infidellity and superstition, and let them endeavor by continu^l
Preaching and exhortation to beget faith in their hearers, and so to ingraft
them into Christ.

V. 20. Was graffed in for them. No man must despise boast or glory against
them that bestow a benifit upon them, Psalm. 35. ve. 11.12.13.14.15.
as here the Gentiles did against the Jews. Thus false witnesses rose up
against David, and rewarded him evil for good; he visited them in their
sickness, prayed, and mourned for them, but they sought his downfall and ruin.

The reason hereof is, for that it is pride and great vnthankefullnesse, Hebr.
6. ver. 8
and God will punish men for it. They are like to the ground that yields to
the husbandman that tilleth dresseth and manureth it, nothing but thorns and
briers, and therefore is reproved nere unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

Use. Seeing that we receive the covenant and doctrine of salvation from the
Jews, and are of mere grace grafted in by God for them, we must humble and
debase our selves before him, Iam. 1. ve. 21
and acknowledge our own unworthiness, that so we may not only contain our
selves from contempt of others, but with meekness daily receive and profit in
the word grafted in us, which is able to save our souls.

Fatness of the Olive.
In that here and also in the 55. of Isaiah and Luke 14. and other places, 4.
Doct.
the gifts, graces, and blessings, (especially that concern salvation in
Christ) are compared to fatnes, fatlings, a banquet, yea to wine, honey, milk,
spices, and such like delicate things, we learn that howsoever the wicked
ones of the world, Prou. 9.^ Cant. 5. v. 1.
glut and pamper themselves with the abundance of Gods blessings, and their
flesh is fatted and fed like hogs, yet their souls pine and famish; whereas
the souls of the believing are filled with Gods liberality and replenished
with spiritual consolation, which is to them a special pawn and pledge of
Gods love and providence toward them.

In the Gospel they have most sweet and delicate food, Isa. 5 5.2
not only for the necessity but also for the delight of their souls, here
their faith is engendered and strengthened, and their trembling souls are
solaced, with the most comfortable assurance of remission of sins, and they
by the word and sacraments are fed and nourished to eternal life.

Use. Let us therefore seek to feed and satisfy our selves only here, let us
love and delight in fatness, and bring always with us an appetite to the
word, and then shall we feed on the bread of life.

Made partakers of the root and fatness of the Olive -- Boast not thy self
against the branches.
These two members may be, and are much more aptly and justly joined together,
then the mingling and blending together of some men's Merchandise and wares, ad
deceptionem visus et emptoris, for better show and vent; and from this
conjunction and the consideration thereof this doctrine arises, Doctr.
that they that either in spiritual, or temporal blessings rise by occasion of
other men's ruins, and flourish by reason of their decaies, must not hereupon
grow high minded, and much less scorn and contemn those that are fallen, but
rather commiserate and relieve them in what they may.

For first thus to offend, argues an unthankful heart to God for his free
mercies which they thus abuse. Secondly, it shows an heart void of equity
and compassion; and therefore GOD in his justice cannot but in time punish the
unthankful, and deny means to those who impart none to others.

Use 1. Wherefore in all preferments and exaltations (for the avoiding of pride
and contempt of our inferiors,) let us walk humbly before our God, and
ascribe our advancement and happiness to his mere mercy and not to our ragged
and sinful merits.

Use 2. By this doctrine are checked and condemned, some in the work, who
rather by prescription of time and secret encrochment, then by equities
(perhaps) and divine approbation, are become monopolists and engrossers of
other men's callings and commodities, and hereupon do not only like the lean
kine of Aegipt eat up the fat kine of Canaan, but (sometimes) also take
occasion to triumph and insult over others that are (perhaps) better members in
a commonwealth then themselves. But herein let the offenders learn humility
and practice more equity in words and deeds, and let the wronged, not
apprehend matters over deeply, or ouerstretch them, but commit themselves and
their just cause to the divine providence, and to human justice, and count it
a more blessed thing to suffer wrong then to offer it

Boast not thy self against them.
Doctr.
No men must for any temporal or spiritual grace wherewith they are endowed
above other, be high conceited of themselves to detract from and despise
others. Luke 18. ver. 9.13. 1. Cor. 11.22. Iam. 2.6. 1. Cor. 4.7.8. Luke 16.15.

The first reason hereof is, they have not these gifts and endowements above
others, because they are better by nature then they, for all are sinners alike,
and they have them not of themselves, 1 Cor. 4.17
but of Gods favor and mercy only.

The second reason is, that God can, and often does, for men's unthankfulness,
Luke 17.24 25 26.
both lessen, yea, and take away his gifts and benefits from them that abuse
them, either by attributing to much to themselves or scorning others.

The third reason is, because God can, and many times does convert those who in
the judgment of the world, are desperate and past care, examples hereof we
have in Manasses, Luke 13.30 Apoc. 3* v. 9.
Paul, Mary Magdalen, and the Iaylor, and in many of them that crucified
Christ, yea and in those whom Saint John calls the Sinagogue of Satan.

Use. This doctrine serves to condemn a sort of jolly and flourishing
professors, who because they exceed others in sharpness of wit, and
quickness of apprehension, and because they can (better then other) argue,
dispute and discourse of Mysteries and matters of faith and Religion, use to
swell in a conceit of their own perfection, as though they were ye only
singularists and magnificoes of the world, but as for their brethren, that are
(perhaps) in respect of unspotted life, guilesse dealing, pure and humble
affection much before them, they, because they want that outward flourish and
acute appreh^^sion wherein themselves seem to excel; deface, and dispraise,
vilify and despise them, whereas God regards the inward parts principally,
without which all outward things are of no acccount with him.

Thou bear not the root but the root thee.
We learn here, Doctr.
that we Gentiles are beholding unto the Jews, and in many respects inferior
unto them, howsoever they (for the present) are generally cast off and plucked
from the vine. Romans 3. v. 2


For first, we have our religion and doctrine yea the beginning, foundation and
establishme^t of our church from the^. Isa. 2.3. but not they from us. For the
Fathers and the Prophets, sowed the seed of the church of the new testament:
Ioh. 4. v. 38
ye covenant is derived from the^ into us and we are changed into their
commonwealth and not they into ours.

Secondly our Savior Christ God blessed for evermore, had his birth and
beginning from them, and so he came from them. Romans 9.4.

1. Pet. 2. v. 9 and 10. Ephesians 2.7. Deutr. 32
Thirdly they were the chosen nation, the peculiar people, and a royal
Priesthood, when all the world besides were out of the covenant, and so no
people nor beloved, yea and were without God in the world.

Lastly all the particular promises, such as were the land of Canaan, a
certain form of government, settled sacrifices, and ceremonies, the glorious
Temple, particular promises of long life, and of dominion annexed to the
morrall law, and the preservation of the stock amongst them, out of which the
Messiah should come belonged and were proper to the Jews of the old Testament
only.

Use. We must therefore acknowledge our selves debtors unto the Jews, and
deeply engaged unto them, we must be so far off from rendering or returning
unto them evil for good, that we must pray for their recovery, and do our
uttermost diligence, by doctrine, writing, and unblameable life to allure and
win them to the approbation and acceptance of the Gospel.

V. 19. Thou will say then, the branches are broken off that I might be graft
in.

V. 20. Well through unbelief they are broken off and thoustandest by faith:
be not high minded but fear.

V. 21. For if God spared not the natural branches, [take heed] lest he also
spare not thee.

Thou will say. i. to me Paul, why do thou boast of the holiness of the
Jewish stock, surely, the branches are broken off. i. they are cast away, that
I might be grafted in. i. am ingrafted in the Church in their sted.

Well. i. thou says truly, they through their unbelief are broken off. i.
excommunicated and eiected out of Gods church: V. r. 21.
and thou now stand by faith grafted into Gods Church, neither art thou yet
fallen into the unbelief of the Jews, be not high minded. i. do not think
proudly of thy self or be ouer-wise in thine own conceit, but fear. i.
remain in true humility and in the fear of God, and be religiously careful
to preserve faith.

For if God spared not. i. but cast them off for their unbelief. Verse. 2^.
The natural branches, i. the Jews borne in the Church descended from those
holy Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, [ take heed] least he also spare not
thee, thou that art but ingrafted in, and taken out of the wild Olive, may
possibly be discovered to be but an hypocrite, may fall away from the grace
of God, and be thrust out of his Church.

Be not high minded, but fear.
Quest. Is a man to doubt or stand in fear, whether he be in Gods favor or
not, or whether he shall certainly be saved or no?

Ans. No, I. John. 4.18.
for first Charity expels all slavish and servile fear.

Secondly Christ forbids doubting and distrust in many places.

Thirdly, doubting and distrustful fear, makes all the foundations and
principles of faith and true religion [which need no demonstration] uncertain
and unfruitful unto us.

Fourthly, it does extenuate Christ's benefits, offer indignity to Gods
goodness, and euert and pervert the nature and form of faith, which is a
firm assent and certain application of Gods benefits to our selves in
particular.

Fifthly, it depriueth us of all sweet and solid comfort in adversity and
affliction, so that our hearts fail us, and our distracted and distressed
conscience, can find no harbor and haven to rest and repose our selves in.

Sixthly, it leaves us no place nor use for prayer and the right invocation of
Gods name, for how can a man possibly, truly, and confidently pray unto God, of
whose favor and furtherance he is always in doubt and suspense.

Lastly, he that believes not, makes Christ a liar, in that he will give no
credit and assent unto the promises that he propounds and offers unto him.

But fear.
Q. Why then does the Apostle bid the Gentiles fear? If they must fear, how
then can they be certain?

A. First Paul directs his speech here not to every particular person, but to
the Gentiles in general, wherein and amongst whom there might be many proud
and unmortified professors, and many doubling and dissembling hypocrites, for
whom this admonition was very necessary

Secondly it is rather a Cave at then a Commination, and serves not to
astonish them, but to stir them up to more* carefullnesse and diligence.

Lastly, fear in this text is not to be understood of any troubling and
tormenting fear, but of a reverend awe of Gods judgments, and of an holy care
and indeauor to prevent and divert the disfauor and wrath of God, which may
very well consist and consort with the certainty and assurance of faith, 1 Ioh.
5.18.
for whosoever has faith and hope, he purges himself and keeps himself
that the evil touches him not.

The natural branches.
How can the Jews be truly said to be natural branches, and consequently
good, seeing that even they are by Adams fall, sinners, enemies to GOD and the
children of wrath, as well as others? Ephesians. 2.3.

Ans. The Jews indeed had no natural holiness, neither was it derived from
carnal succession, neither was their nature better then ours, but they are
natural branches and were so called by reason of the covenant of grace made
with them, only, and their nation.

Secondly, because they were severed and separated by GODS outward covenant and
calling, ceremonies and worship from all the world, Cant. 4.12
besides and were as a Fountain sealed up, and as a Garden enclosed. i.
reserved and sanctified, for Christ his own use and service.

If God spared not the natural branches.
Q If the natural branches be not spared, then they that are ingrafted into
Christ by faith may be cut off.

Ans. The Argument follows not, for they are called natural, not by reason
of their sound faith which they now had, but because of Gods covenant, and
because naturally they had their beginning from the Fathers. Secondly they were
only members of the visible Church wherein are many hypocrites but not of the
Catholic and invisible Church.

Take heed least he spare not thee i. least he disdain thee and cast thee off.

Ques. Can an elect or true member of the Church fall^way and so perish?

Ans. No, for they only have the spirit of regeneration whereby they are
sealed unto the day of redemption: Ephesians. 4. 1 Ioh. 2.20. Ioh. 14.5.
they alone are endued with the spirit of constancy, and Christ does never
cast them off. John. 6.37. but the comforter does abide with them for ever.

They may (for the time) be deprived of the outward ministry and means of
grace and salvation, 1 King. 18.19.
yet they were GODS people before in his eternal counsel. Secondly benig
regenerate and borne anewe of incorruptible seed, they cannot perish nor fall
away, albeit the outward means be removed.

Ques. What are we then to think and judge of those, that from the profession
of sound doctrine fall away to superstition or Atheism, and from outward and
apparent holiness to open profaneness and licentiousness, and thus live and
die, were they ever of the number of the elect or any members of the invisible
Church?

Ans. No, for the elect and members of the Catholic and invisible Church are
only endued with saving faith, true repentance, a lively hope and the true
love of the godly their brethren, which graces never fail, die, or are
utterly extinct: Whereas Apostates* and they that degenerate to Atheism and
open Prophanes, were never endued with true faith, repentance and other graces
that accompany salvation: Well they might (for the time) have the shadow of
them, but they never had the truth and substance.

Luke 22. Ver. 32.
Secondly Christ is always, and he alone an effectual Mediator and Intercessor
for the elect only, whereby they are so preserved in the state of grace that
they cannot fall away. Wherefore Apostates and backe-sliders were Christians
and members of the Church in outward appearance and show only, and in their
own opinion and estimation of others, and indeed all their holiness and
profession is nothing else before God but mere formalitie and hypocrisy. And
therefore all these temporal things and outward seemings, in time of
temptation soon fade and fall away: and of such Christ pronounces that he
knows them not.i. he never did nor does acknowledge them for any of his
elect, nor approve of them.

Ques. Who and what kind of persons fall away?

Ans. First, they that are outwardly ingrafted into the covenant, but yet are
not inwardly called, nor elected.

Secondly they that receive the seed of the Gospel, but without the root of
true faith, and inward change, and renouation of heart and affection, and these
are only the reprobate. Math. 13. V. 19.20.21.22.

Ques. In what sort or in what regard do they fall away?

Ans. First by their unbelief and unthankfulness refusing the promise made
to them. Secondly by corrupting and choking the seed of the word either by
want of memory or understanding, and of defect of change and regeneration, or
absence of the full persuasion of the truth, or finally either by troubles and
persecutions, or else by prosperity, profitt and pleasures. Here-vpon the
word and Sacraments and the golden candlestick of ye Angelical ministry as
wholly taken from them (as sometime it justly comes to pass) or else if they
have no means continued, Amos. 8.11.12.
they either as recusants and mere Atheists, contemn them and refuse to use
them, or else are thereby [through their own corruption] more hardened, blinded
and darkened* for the more good gifts and means of grace which offreth unto
them, and the good motions he puts into their minds, the more they do
corrupt and abuse them.

The branches are cut off that I might be grafted in.
Ergo. Our dignity and worthynesse is greater then that of the Jews, Doct.


We must in Gods especial works and judgments dilligently weye and consider
the true causes and distinguish and diffe^re them from those that are causes
accidentally by occasion only (as in this verse.) For the fall of the Jews
could not be properly any efficient or procreant cause of the salvation of the
Gentiles, the effect arises from the proper cause and resembles and reteyneth
the nature of it. The reason hereof is, because the issue, event and consequent
may be good, (God so ordering, directing and ouer-ruling it) when the
instruments that work only accidentally and aim at their own evil ends,
are evil and mali^ious. Thus Joseph was exalted after all his troubles, and
Jobs restitution and recovery and (...) redemption by Christ his death, was in
regard of the effect and event good, yet they wicked Instruments (that only
accidentally and occasionally wrought it) sinned heinously, and are not to be
excused. For if they would or had pleased God in their proceedings, three
things should have been considered of them. First, that they had the holy
Scripture for warrant. Secondly that their affections were in tune and well
composed. Thirdly that their ends and aims were directly to the honor and
glory of GOD: but of these respects the blind reprobates have no regard.

Use. The use hereof, serves to check and control many insolent, surly and
swelling Gentiles, that not rightly weighing and ballancing the true causes and
reasons, did falsely imagine [and so fondly erre] that the Jews were cut and
cast off for their unworthiness, and that their unbelief was the proper cause
of their admittance and substitution into their empty places and rooms, and
hereby they highly conceited themselves, as though they were more worthy
before God then the Jews.

2. Use. Hereby is met with-all the pride and ill affection of some, who
rejoice at other men's ruins and downe-falls, whether in religion or in outward
estate, or both, whereas it is just with God thus to give them over, and they
that seem to stand, may fall into the like Apostacy and judgments, for they
by nature are made of no better metal then others, and they stand no longer
then God does support them.

Through unbelief they are broken.
Doctr.
Here we see and understand what a vile and dangerous sin, misbeliefe and
infidelity is, it is the root and fountain of all disobedience, it draws
Gods anger upon us, it hasteneth his judgments, it depriueth us of Gods
promises, and nullifieth and makes frustrate his covenant.

Hence it was that the Jews were grown out of request with God, lost their
prerogatives, ceased to be Gods people, and lastly most of them were excluded
from the kingdom of Heaven.

Unbelief was the first sin of Adam and Eve, and was the cause of their
fall, and so of all the sin and miseries that befell unto all their
posterity. Heb. 3. v 12, Heb. 4. v. 2.
Infidelity debarred the Israelites from entering into the blessed land of
Canaan, a Type of the kingdom of heaven: it is the cause of all Apostasy and
reuolting from GOD and his Evangelical truth. It makes Gods heavenly and
sacred word unprofitable unto the hearers, Mark. 1^. v. 16 ^poc. 2^. v. 8.
it makes all things impure and unlawful unto men, Titus 1. verse. 14.15. and
(in a word) it is the forerunner and meritorious cause of damnation and
destruction.

The reason hereof is, because it wilfully refuses the grace of God offered:
it does distrust and discredit Gods word, contemn his promises, rebel against
his will, and [to conclude] it rejects and shuts out Christ, Math. 13 v. 58
the cause, author and finisher of redemption, happiness and holiness.

1. Use. We must therefore beware of infidelity and unbelief, we must be
provident that it do not wound us with his darts, and then the Gun-shotte of
all other temptations shall never blind nor batter us: let us therefore put on
the complet harness of God, and the armor of proof, i. a lively faith, which
will quench and blunt all Satan's Darts: 1. John. 5. v. 4.
well may we be seduced for a time, but not always, nor unto death, for
faith preserves the Castle of our heart, and it overcomes the world.

Secondly* we must always think and speak honorably of Gods word, and
labor to be rich in the knowledge of his will, and with full purpose of heart
cleave unseperably unto GOD, and by assent of mind apply and claspe fast
Christ Jesus, and all his saving graces and promises unto our own selves, and
then nothing shall be able to dampe or daunt us, much less to seclude and
separate us from Christ, and the certain enioyment of the heavenly Jerusalem.

Thou stand by faith: that is. Thou profitest in thy profession and practice
of Christianity by faith. i. by a firm assent of thy mind, relying upon Gods
grace, and acknowledging and receiving Christ, as he is reueiled in holy
Scripture, from whence this necessary collection arises. The grafting in of
the Gentiles into the Olive, Doctr.
does not depend upon their own worthiness, virtues, and merits, but only
upon faith, assenting unto and firmly apprehending Gods gracious promises. Now
this faith is a free yet a most rare gift of God, not common to all professors,
but peculiar only to the elect: from it proceeds both the beginning and the
continuance of their engrafting into Christ, Heb. 3.14.
and hereby we are made partakers of Christ and of salvation, and without this
faith we are in worse estate then any vassal under the Turk, or any Spanish
Galley slave, for their service is only bodily and temporal, but this is
spiritual, horrible, and (if they repent not) eternal. Heb. 2. ver. 15.

1. Use. This doctrine serves, to argue and reprove those that condemn the
doctrine of faith, whereas without it there is neither justification nor
salvation. By it we are made the children of God, John. 1.12. and stand and
stick to Christ the true Vine, Ephesians. 3. v. 17.
and hereby we are interessed in Christ, and all his saving merits and g^aces.

2. Use. We must love the Lord and fear him, for his great mercies shed upon
us, and for his precious promises made to us, for they are not procured by our
deferts or endeavors, but frankely and freely bestowed upon us, of God.

3. Use. We must nourish and preserve faith, and see that it be not of story or
a temporary faith, but a true justifying faith. For a true justifying faith is
such a root, such a foundation and assurance so built and founded upon the
Rock Christ, and the sacred Scriptures, that the gates and power of Hell cannot
prevail against it; and as for temporary and historical faith like a flower,
Ma^^. 16.16.
like painting, and like guilt, and it will soon fade away and be defaced.

Be not high minded.
When we see proud hipocrits to contemn and condemn other poor men for
their present misbeleife and miseries, Doctr.
and to admire and magnify their own selves they must be terrified with Gods
judgments. Isa. 28. ver. 9.10. Luke 16.15. Apoc. 3.16 and 17. Act. 13.40.41.
Math. 21. v. 33

The reason hereof is, Jude Epist. v. 23.
first, that otherwise no good can be done of them if they be not pulled out
of the fire of Gods judgments they will be burned, and if they be not violently
awaked, they will drop away and die in their slumber, as they do that are
bitten by an Aspe.

Secondly for that if they will not repent they may be left without excuse in
Gods sight.

Use. 1. Let us therefore beware and be advised that we do not brave out and
insult upon others, least God call and convert them in his mercy, and plague
and punish us in his judgment, for our pride and contempt.

Use 2. Let no man presume of his own ability and strength, as though he
could stand by it in temptation, neither let him please himself in a conceit
and imagination of his own constancy, as though he might live securely and
dissolutely, and yet escape all danger, least God correct and plague him, for
his conceitednes in suffering him to fall into gross sins, and grievous
evil, as he has suffered many others. 1. Cor. 10. v. 11. and 12.

But fear.
We must not be secure, Doctr.
drowsy and presumptuous and so emplunge our selves unadvisedly into many
sins and punishments; but stand in a reverend awe of Gods judgments, suspect
and misdoubt our own secret corruptions and be careful in every action to shun
and avoid ye offense and displeasure of God. The reasons hereof are, this fear
is ye beginning of wisdom, a part of Gods worship, and a mean to make us
blessed. Prou. 28.14. Gen 39. v. 9
Secondly, it is a notable reine and bridle to keep and retain us from
Apostasy and falling away from God, for he that most suspecteth his own
weakness and seeks means to cure it and to strengthen himself is of all
men farthest of from presumption and perilles: and here; abundan^ cau^ela non
nocet. i. many caueats and prouisoes are not amiss, and Gods grace is perfited
through infirmity.

Thirdly, we are apt and ready upon every temptation to fall and offend and
so deserve reiection; and therefore that we may conteyne our selves in our
duties, and to subiugate and subdue our proud flesh, we had need ever and anon
with David and others, to set before our eyes Gods threatenings and judgments
against sin.

Use. 1. When we see and behold gods judgments to ceaze upon others, we must
be so far from rash and presumptuous censuring and condemning of them, that we
must first descend into our own selves and souls, and ransacke by the light
and lantern of Gods word, every corner of our hearts, least that we be found
iu^penitent and so in wrapped in the common destruction.

Use. 2. We must by a dilligent search of our own sores, and by a narrow view
and inspection of Gods law, justice and judgment, use all diligence and care
to nourish and maintain this holy fear, and so to snib and correct al high
and presumptuous thoughts and conceits that may possibly exalt themselves
against God and his word.

Use. 3. We must learn to decline from all occasions of offending God, and to
beware of al show and kinds of evil, such as are lewd company, immoderate
feastings, idleness, or the lavish spending of our time, either in pleasures
and deceitful delights, or in the affected reading of fables, fained stories,
play books, popish treatises and al unfruitful and dangerous curiosities.

Ver. 21.
If God spared not the natural branches take heed he spare not thee.
Doctr.
The sins and punishments of other men must be our instructions, their
affliction must be our admonitions, and their woes our warnings: their (...)
must be our (...) their rods our remembrances and sufferings our
schoolemaisters; that we do not sin against God as they did, and so draw and
pull upon our selves the same or the like punishments. Jude. 4.7. 1 Cor. 10.
V. 5.6.7.8.9.10.11. Heb. 4. V. 11.

The first reason hereof, is, first because their sins and punishments have a
proportion and likeness with our sins and punishments.

Secondly, God is as much displeased and offended with sin and Apostasy now,
as in time past, for he neither does nor can remitte ought of his zeal and
justice.

Use. 1. We must learn to be wise-hearted and to make our election sure to our
selves, and be kept from negligence, unbelief and security by the desertion
and Apostasy not only of the Jews, but also of the whole world [in a sort] for
most are revolted long ago: the Eastern parts to the Turk and to his
Alcoron, and ye Western parts to the Romish Antechrist and his superstition.
It is not good for us to put in adventure our salvation with the most and
multitude, unless we would perish with them: it behooves us to beware and be
pure from their distaste of the truth, from their carelessness and hypocrisy,
least God in his justice forsaking us, we fall into the like calamities and
miseries both spiritual and bodily.

Use. 2. Hereby are highly reproved all those that run to riot and swagger and
swear it out, and live so loosely as though hell were broken loose, and God
had dispensed with his justice, and granted a general indulgence to sin and
rebel against him, and yet those men bear themselves in hand that they shall
never be moved or see evil. These men have no feeling of Gods judgments, Ezekiel.
9. V. 9.
they are hidden from their eyes and therefore they abuse the Gospel to all
carnal liberty, Psalm. 50. V. 21.
and do and speak what they list. Psalm. 10. V. 5.
But the euer-watching eye of Gods justice ever looks upon them, he will
one day summon them to judgment and, accordingly, if they amend not, measure
out and execute judgment against them.

Behold therefore the bountifulness and soueritie of God: toward them which
are falue, severity: but toward thee bountifulness, if thou continue in his
bountifulness, or else thou shall be cut of. Ver. 23.
And they also if they abide not still in unbelief shall be graffed in, for God
is able to graft them in again.

Ver. 2 4.
For if thou wast cut of the Olive tree, which was wild by nature, and wast
grafted contrary to nature in a right Olive, how much more shall they that are
grafted by nature, be grafted in their own Olive tree.

Paraph.
Behold.i. Consider O thou believing Gentile, whosoever thou art, the
bountifulness and severity of God. Viz. in the reprobation and casting off of
the Jews, and the election and calling of the Gentiles, that thou may be
preserved thereby in Gods fear; toward them truly that have fallen, that is
toward the Jews that have Stumbled at Christ, the stone of offense, and are
become unbelievers, and cut from the Church: severity, but toward thee
bountifulness, which thou shall enjoy always: if thou shall continue in his
bountifulness, namely in the favor of God and in faith, and thou do not by
thine unbelief and other heinous offenses, make him unto thee of a most kind
father a severe Judge: Or else thou shall be cut off.i. from ye Olive tree of
the Church and Gods people.

Ver. 23.
And they also.i. the Jews are cut from the Olive by unbelief shall be
graffed, in the Church of Christ: for God is able to graft them in again,
Object.
and to enlarge his Church by their addition.

For if thou, that had been a Gentile in times past, was cut out. Ver. 24.
Viz. as a graft out of the Olive tree wild by nature.i. out of the wild and
undressed Olive, and wast graft into a right Olive, a garden and trimmed Olive,
from whose nature in respect of especial promises made to them, and in regard
of their holy Ancestors, thy nature much differed, how much more shall they
which are by nature.i. have great affinity with the Patriarchs, and who in
respect of their beginning did sometime (by reason of the promises) belong to
Gods people: be grafted in.i. again by faith: in their own Olive.i. the
Church of GOD wherein the holy Patriarchs the Jews fathers and Ancestors
have the first parts and places.

Behold Gods bountifulness and Gods severity.
Ques. Is not God changeable in his promises and covenant seeing that he cast
of the Jews whom formerly he chose and loved?

Ans. No, for first he speaks of the nation in general, which were his
people only by outward profession, and not by secret election.

Secondly they were grafted in the Church, but never predestinate to life
eternal, for then they could not have fallen away: 2 Timothy 2.19.
Eor the Election of God is a firm foundation and all the gates and powers of
hell cannot shake it, much less prevail against it.

Toward thee bountifulness, Ver. 22.
if thou continue in his bounty.
Ques. Seeing that continuance and perseverance in grace and faith seems to
consist in our own power and will, which is weak and changeable, cannot the
elect and regenerate loose faith and so wholly fall away from God?

Ans. No, for first, constancy and perseverance does not consist in our own
power and will, but it is an effect of Gods election, and an especial mark of
a man regenerate. 1. John 2.22.

Secondly by this manner of speaking, the holy Ghost intends to correct pride
and presumption in men, and to stir them up to a godly indeauor, to maintain
and cherish their faith and to be workers and instruments of their own
salvation by using all the good means that God has sanctified for that
purpose.

Thirdly faith, albeit the flame and outward effects of it, may be quenched for
a time, yet ye fire was never put out, but at the least blast of Gods word and
spirit it is kindled again, and breaks forth into a bright flame. Lastly,
that regeneration and the gift of faith is never wholly lost, it is most clear
and manifest by many testimonies of scripture, God puts his fear into their
hearts that they can never depart from him.

Luke 8. v. 15
They have the seed of grace and of faith remaining in them, and they always
keep it.
Ioh 4.14 Luke 22.32 Ioh. 14.15
The grace of God, in them is a Well of water springing up into everlasting
life, Christ is always a mediator for them, and prays for them effectually;
the comforter does abide with them for ever, God does never cast them off and
they shall never perish. Ioh. 6. and 10.

They if they abide not still in unbelief shall be grafted in.
Q. How can predestination be eternal and certain, seeing that it depends
upon man's belief or unbelief?

An. Our belief or unbelief depends upon predestination, for they that are
elected to eternal life, believe. Act. 13.48. and they that are eternal
refused, cannot believe nor obey the Gospel. Ioh. 8. and therefore
predestination depends not on it, for the second causes hang on the first,
that is the decree of God and not the first on the second.

Secondly our engrafting into the Church depends not upon our own power and
free will, but only upon the power of God and his mercy.

Thirdly, we must distinguish of the times. The Jews that live in one time or
age, may be generally rejected, but not so in another, (especially) when their
fullness shall (as we daily expect and pray for) come into the Church, and
they be by faith Abahams children.

Fourthly, the Apostle speaks not of every particular but of the people and
nation in general. Lastly, their duty is showed us that they ought not to
please themselves in their ignorance and unbelief, but to desire to come to
true understanding and faith.

V. 22. Behold the bountifulness and severity of God. The whole world is but a
Theater of Gods mercy and judgments, Doct.
for whatsoever, is done in it, he does it either as the efficient cause, if
it be good, and so far forth as it is good: or, if it be evil, he
effectually permiteth it, Psalm. 97. v. 1 2 3, 4.
and most wisely, and to good ends, orders and governs it, and that always
without any fault of his, as here we have an instance in the Jews reiection,
and in the election of the Gentiles. Psalm. 115.

The reason hereof is, first because God is almighty, and therefore nothing is
or can be done in the world, but by his decree and knowledge, effectual
working, or (at least) by his effectual permissio^: secondly God sits not
idle in heaven, (as Epicures and others vainly imagine) but always works and
does care for and order the things of men, preparing and propounding rewards to
the Godly, and reserving and providing punishments for the wicked. Genesis 6.5.6.
Genesis 22.1. Deuteronomy. 8.2. and 13.3. Isa. 4, 1.20.21.22.23.

Use. Let us attribute and ascribe nothing to chance or fortune, but ascribe
all to Gods holy providence, who decrees and fore-seeth, governs orders
and directs all things, even the least and most vile things, and that, in a
most excellent manner, and to most excellent ends, and if nature nihil facit
frustra, then the God of nature, who is wisdom it self does nothing but to
excellent purpose.

Toward them which have fallen, severity.
We by other men's sins and falls must be humbled and stand in fear, Doctr.
least by our unbelief and other sins that flow from it, we draw Gods anger
and judgments upon us. We have infinite spectacles hereof in scripture, as
against the old world, yt in the days of Noah was drowned: against the
Sodomits yt were destroyed with fire and brimston from heaven: of many thousand
Israelits yt perished and were destroyed in the wilderness, for murmuring for
rebellion, 1 Cor. 10 v 6 7.8.9.10.1 Romans 15. v. 4
for fornication, for idollatry, and for tempting of God. Iud. Epist. v. 7. of
the Jews exiled their own country and led once and again into captivity, and
many other both general and particular judgments, recorded in scripture, both
in the old testament and also in the new, yea all ages and our own experience
yield us store and variety of examples.

The reason hereof is, because God is merciful unto us, and would not have us
perish, 2 Pet. 3.9
but to come to the knowledge of the truth and to repentance and so to
salvation. Secondly. God is just and hates sins alike in all, and if we will
not take warning by others, God will censure and punish us sharply.

Use 1. Let us pity and commiserate their woeful condition that have provoked
Gods indignation against them, let us commend them to God in our prayers, and
do out uttermost endeavor to recover them.

Use 2. Let us mark and meditate upon Gods severity against the Hungarians and
the Greeks and other places of Europe, that have been captiuated and
inthralled to the Godless and barbarous Turks, together with Asia and Africa.

Let us also consider the great and long Apostasy of Spain, Italy and other
countries in the West part of the world, from Christ to the Romish Antichrist,
and withal behold Gods incomparable mercies so long and so strangely
continued, unto us and our nation.

Let us acknowledge our own unworthiness, and be always thankful unto God,
for so great mercies, and beware least we contemn the riches of his goodness
and patience, that leads and provoke us to repentance, and take heed yt,
that be not found in us which we tax and condemn in others, least God receive
them again into favor, and withal disclaim and cast us off.

But toward thee bountifulness.
Doct.
Here we may observe Gods gentleness and facility toward his children, he is
a most indulgent father to them; most sensitive of their miseries, and one that
is most ready and willing to help them (that truly serve him) in all their
needs and extreamities And whereas he being debtor to no man, might neglect,
yea reject all, yet he amongst many chooses some (albeit of themselves
altogether unworthy and strangers from God and his covenant) who may both
temporally and eternally, enjoy his goodness, and always praise and magnify
him for it.

The particulars hereof appear toward the elect, and evidence themselves
especially in Gods constant love toward them through Christ, Romans 8. v. 30.
in their effectual calling, in their justification, and sanctification, in
disposing and directing all things, Psalm. 73.1,
yea even their afflictions, Romans 8.28. yea their very sins to their good,
Isa. 57. v. 1.2.
and by advancing them in the time appointed to everlasting salvation and
happiness.

1. Use. Seeing that God is so good and bountiful to his elect, we that serve
so good a Lord and master, must be ashamed to offend him, and we must think
it an intolerable matter to requite his goodness with evil. And when God
shall either in his justice correct us for our offenses, or else chastise us
(thereby to produce and work some greater good) we must never repine and
grudge against him; for he in wisdom and mercy manageth all things for our
good and salvation, Hebr, 12.7. and 10. Romans 8.28.

2. We must acknowledge that we receive all good things from God alone, we
must admire and esteem them, and repose our whole trust and affiance in God
for his goodness and bounty, and seek and sue unto him by prayer and
supplications in all our distresses and distractions; then will he delight to
do us good, and be a present succor and shelter unto us in time of need.
Psalm. 46. v. 1. Hebr. 4. v. 16.

3. Use. Lastly, we must day and night, publicly and privately, sound and set
forth his mercies toward us, that whereas he might have made us and left us to
be unbelieving Jews, or blinded and idolatrous Papists or ignorant Atheists,
or profane and godless Painims, he has vouchsafed us the glorious light of
his saving truth, and has taught us both outwardly and inwardly how to walk
before him and so to attain unto everlasting rest and blessedness.

If thou shall continue in his bountifulness.
Doctr.
It suffices not once to have entertained the grace and Gospel of God, to have
made a gay and goodly profession of it, and to have gotten credit and esteem
by it, except with a perpetual tenor we follow our vocation, Heb. 3.14.
except we keep a settled and continued course in godliness and hold fast the
beginning of our substance whereby we are vpholden unto the end, Luke 9.2.
having set our hand to the plowgh, we must not once look back, we must
persevere unto the end, Math. 24.13.
if we will be saved: If we would win and wear the Crown of
righteousness, we must with blessed Paul fight a good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7.8.
finish our course, and keep the faith.

The reasons hereof, are (especially) these; first God is a bountiful Lord and
unchangeably good, therefore we must serve him willingly and with all our
hearts, and that for ever if we would be rewarded by him. Secondly except we
persist and abide in Gods love, truth and service, all our former labor is but
lost, al our righteousness shall be forgotten; Ezech. 18.24.
if we fall and part away from God, we are the instruments of our own
destruction, and shall die and be damned in our sins.

Use. 1. Seeing that many that only in show and never in good earnest embraced
Gods goodness and his promises, are justly deprived of them, let us while we
have time and means, labor and contend to go forward in piety and religion to
the end, and to make our election sure (unto us) by good works. 2. Pet. 1.10.

Use. 3. Here are justly reproved those yt serve GOD only by star^s and brunts,
by account of days, years and months, and so are soon whot and soon cold,
soon ripe, soon rotten, their zeal and religion vanishes away like a cloud
or a morning dew. Hosea. 6. V. 4.

Us. 3. We must not in this heavenly course consult with flesh and blood, Gal.
1 V. 16.
nor bring a fleshly mind to religion, nor any worldly respect and sinister
aims of procuring honor, authority, credit, riches, praise: for when we speed
of our desire, then our religion determines and ends, and when our ends
fail, then our godliness goes away with them, or if the sincerity of the
gospel shall condemn and cross us in our vices and vanities, profits and
pleasures, then we bid adewe to religion, and will desire it to depart out of
our coasts as the Garge^its did our Savior. Wherefore we must always be
advised by Gods word, we must love it and delight in it and with all our
souls, serve the Lord of heaven: then shall we continue in Gods goodness and
never be confounded.

Or else thou shall be cut of.i. because thou art unthankful, or but an
Hipocrite, God will take his kingdom and Gospel from thee, Doctr.
or he will leave thee to thy self, or give thee over to Satan, for to be
seduced and hardened by him.

It is expedient and necessary for the ministers and preachers of the word
sometimes, (especially) in time of a general security, and corruption of
manners when they see and espy there people and hearers to grow secure and
proud, Esa. 58. Heb. 6.10. 1. Cor. 10.11.12.
to contemn other, and to rest only in titles shows and outward appearances
to use argumen^ts, of terror and to denounce the heavy judgments of God that
hang over their heads, Heb. 6.10. 1. Cor. 10.11. 2, Tim 4.2.3.4. Iud. 23.

The first reason hereof is, because without this rough dealing, the conceited
Hipocrite, the glosing Gospeller, and the drowsy professor cannot possibly be
thoroughly couninced, much less awaked and converted.

Secondly there is often in the best Christians a kind of be-nummednesse, a
kind of worldly drowsinesse, and a kind of spiritual pride and conceitednesse,
therefore for the finding out and redress of these infirmities and faults they
have need of daily and sound admonition, Apoc. 3 17.
and the more that faith is corrupted and men's manners infected, the more need
to plye them with admonitions.

1. Use. Let us labor and endeavor to serve God in singleness of heart, and
in godly sincerity, without any by respects or sinister aims; for then shall
we clear our selves from hypocrisy, and in the time of distress and in the
agony of death, find and feel everlasting and unspeakable comfort.

2. Use. It behooves us, if we would approve the soundness of our conscience,
or be raised from the sleep and slumber of negligence and security, and be
kept from Apostacy, and the custom and sway of sin, to endure and admit of
wholesome reprehensions and sharp admonitions. If we do so, they will be but
warnings unto us, nay, purgations to purge us of many superfluous humors, of
pride; false opinions, and evil conversation, yea and a notable restoratiue to
recover us, and a preservative to keep us in good plight, being once cured and
recovered.

They shall be grafted in.
We learn here not to deny all hope of pardon, even to men that fall and
offend most grievously, but to put them in some hope of obtaining mercy, Acts.
8. v. 22. Dan. 4 24. Ephesians. 2.
so long as they do not by manifest signs declare themselves to be altogether
desperate and incorrigible. Amos. 5. But it must be so propounded, that still
their sin may be beaten down, their security removed, and their mind (in
sense of their damnable downfall, into which they are cast) more stirred up to
seek the face and favor of God.

Reasons. For, first Gods power is infinite, and his mercies bottomless, and
therefore he can and may convert them. Secondly, if there be no hope and comfort
left of mercy and forgiveness, men will never seek to be reconciled unto
God, by true repentance, but either will be swallowed up of despair, or else
persist and proceed on in their obstinacy and blindness.

Use. This meets with the error of the Donatists and Nouatians, who did deny
repentance, and receiving in again into the fellowship of the Church to those
that shrunk from the profession of faith in time of persecution, or fell into
manifest offenses after Baptism, whereas the word of God is flatly against it
in many places, Ier. 3.1. John. 21.5.10.17.
and in many particulers, 2. Cor. 2. v. 6 7.8. Math. 18.22.

2. Use. Let no man (albeit he have been never so great a sinner, or never so
often fallen and offended) despair of Gods mercy, but only acknowledge and
bewail his sins before God, labor and resolve to forsake his sins, and to
lead a new life, and wholly and perfectly rely himself upon Gods mercies in
Christ, and by the hand of faith apply them continually to his soul, and then
though his sins were as crimson, Isay. 1. v. 18.
they shall he as white as snow: though they were as red as Scarlet they
shall be as wool, for Christ his satisfaction is of infinite validity and
virtue: our sins finite, but his mercies are infinite.

For God is able to graft them in again.
Seeing that God is omnipotent, and that nothing is impossible unto him, of
those things which he will, that his power does in nothing more shine out,
then in the justification and saving of men: Doctr.
we must not rashly despair of a man's conversion, nor deny pardon to those
that have fallen, or debar them of the means of sal^^uation, for the very
Jews shall be grafted in again, when they shall return unto the Lord, 2.
Cori. 3.1^.
Luke 21.24. and when by faith they shall embrace the Messiah.

1. Reason. For God oftentimes conuerteth the most wicked, Luke 23. v. 30.
and of whom (in man's judgment) there is none or the least hope. Examples
hereof we have in Manasses, the Ninevites, Apoc. 3.9.
Mary Magdaline, Paul, and the Thief upon the cross, and of those of the
Synagogue of Satan in Saint John's time* Secondly, we shall hereby much detract
and derogate from Gods greatness and goodness, and foster an uncharitable
opinion of others, whereas charity must hope and believe all things. 1. Cor.
13.
Thirdly, Gods power is not idle and included in heaven, but active, effectual
and showing his effects in all places, and in all persons.

1. Use. Let us by this doctrine be humbled and give the glory unto God; for
that recovery and conversion comes from his power and mercy only, and
other-wise man in matters of his salvation, wanting faith, can do no more then
a boughe or branche broken off can grow green before that it be by the
Gardiners or Planters hand grafted into the Tree.

2. Use. Let us in all dangers, all outward difficulties and impossibilities,
and in the performance of all Gods promises build upon his power and
omnipotency, ( viz. so far forth as it stands with his revealed will) and
this will notably stay and support our faith in all temptations and trial.
Job. 19.25.26. Math. 22.29. Romans 4. v. 20. Dan. 3.17.

Verse. 24.
How much more shall they that are by nature be grafted in their own Olive tree.
Doctr.
We must hope well of their conversion and salvation, that yet remain in the
covenant of God, and be of the blessed seed, albeit they for the times past,
and the present instant (generally) remain in unbelief and contempt of
Christ. Psalm. 8.9. v. 33 and 34.


The first reason hereof is, because Gods covenant with his elect is
perpetual, unchangeable, and extends it self to a thousand generations, and
therefore must needs be accomplished in them. Psalm. 103.17. and 18. The second
reason is drawn from the power and practice of God, in effecting and bringing
to pass greater and more unlikely things, such as was the conversion of the
Gentiles who never were Gods peculiar people and nation, nor the sons of
Abraham (before their conversion to Christ) nor chosen of God, as the Jews
were: and therefore much more can he and will (in his good time) bring home the
erring and wandering Jews, his own peculiar people.

Use. Let us by due contemplation and pondering of the works of Gods
omnipotency in greater matters, not doubt of it in ye performance of lesser
matters. As for example, can and could God make all ye world of nothing? could
he destroy Senacheribs army in one night by one Angel, and cannot he in time
when he pleases, confound and destroy Romish Babell, by his Almighty power,
and by such an infinite host of his creatures which he has always ready at
command?

The first part of division of the Chapt. v. 25. ad. 33.

For I would not Brethren that ye should be ignorant of this secret (least
ye should be wise in your selves) that partly obstinacy i^ ^ome to Israel,
25. verse.
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.

And so shall all Israel be saved, as it is written, the deliverer shall come
out of S^ion, 26. verse.
and shall turn away (defections) or ungodliness from Jacob.

And this is my covenant to them, 27. verse.
when I shall take away their sins.

I would not have you ignorant of this mystery: Paraph.
id est, of this secret and hidden thing; which hitherto has been incredible
to the Jews, I will bring it now into your remembrance: least you should be
wise in your selves. i. least you be wise in your own eyes, and so proud and
arrogant, that partly: in respect of some persons, and for a time and in a
sort, but not altogether: obstinacy, i. hardness of heart and unbelief: is
come to Israel, to the Jews or people of Israel, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in. i. as it were the whole body of the Gentiles. So that no
nation shall be left out, and though they be never so barbarous, as they of
America, amongst whom it is to be thought, that some of the Apostles Disciples
preached or (at the least) that the same and sound of the Gospel might easily
be brought to them from other famous and populous places, or else if so be
that not so much as the fame and sound of the holy Gospel has come unto these
barbarous people and countries, yet it is agreeable to Christ's general
promise. Math. 24.14. that they shall in succession of time hear of it and
have it, especially when other parts of the world have declared themselves
unthankful for it and unworthy of it (as all the Eastern parts have done, and
therefore have justly lost the Gospel) which shall not successively, and (at
least for a time) embrace the Gospel, shall enter into the Church and be
converted. And so when the fulness of the Gentiles and Jews are entered into
the church, ^ll Israel. i. all the Elect, or the whole body of the people of
Israel then living or the fullness of them, as verse 12. that is the greatest
part of them, shall be saved. i. by the preaching of the Gospel be effectually
called, and justified by faith in Christ. The deliverer shall come out of Sion,
2 Corint. 3. v. 16.
the Redeemer and Messiah shall open the eyes of their understanding, and take
away from them the veil of Moses, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
i. shall forgive pardon, and justify by faith the posterity of Jacob.

Ver. 27
This is my covenant to them. i. this shall be my covenant, I will receive them
again into my covenant, from which before through unbelief they had fallen,
when I shall take away their sins. i. I shall pardon them all their sins
for Christ his sake, and adopt them to be my sons, and so they shall testify
their thankfulness to the Son of God, by confession of his name and by true
Godliness.

Verse 25.
Q. When is likely to be the time of the Jews conversion, before ye sacking
and burning of Rome or afterward?

A. In all probability it is like to follow the burning and destruction of
Rome, for then the stumbling blocks yt the Papists offer them, by their
imagery, invocation of Saints, Latin service, and abominable and most
senseless transubstantiation, shall be removed and taken away.

Secondly (as it apeareth in the 18. and 20. cap. of John's Apocalips, (there
shall be some reasonable distance of time between the burning of Rome and the
end of the world, in which it is most consonant to truth that the Jews shall be
called, for their conversion in the last general sign and forerunner of
Christ's second coming so far forth as the scripture reuealeth unto us.

2. Q. Whether shall the Jews recover the holy land again or not, and be all
converted and dwell their; seeing that it is said their deliverer shall come
out of Sion; or must we think rather they shall be converted in the Countries
in which they dwell, and into which they are dispersed or shall then be found
inhabiting?

Ans. They are likely never to recover it, for they have no such promise,
neither have they any possiblity of means to compass it. Secondly Christ's
coming unto them shall not be visible but spiritual, not from the Earthly
Sion, which long sithence has been made desolate, but from his spiritual Sion
of his Catholic Church.

Lastly it is most probable and likely that they shall be converted in those
countries into which they are dispersed, and in which they have their residence.

For first we have some small beginnings (here and there) of it. Secondly they
shall better and sooner by by their zeal and example revive the faith of ye
Gentiles being mixed and conversant with them, and living amongst them there,
then if they should dwell and be contained all in one country.

What is meant by the fullness of the Gentiles? Verse. 25.
What that the whole world shall at one time ever be enlightened and converted,
or that only th^se countries, that formerly either had not the Gospel at all,
or (at least) in very small measure shall be called?

Ans. It cannot be understood of an universal inlightning of the whole world
at the time of the Jews conversion: Act. 1.8. Colos. 1.6. Romans 10.18.
For in the Apostles times the Gospel was generally preached unto all the
known and inhabited nations of the world. Colos. 1.23.

But that the Gospel should now the second time be divulged and published
over the whole world, we have neither reason, Scripture, nor commission, for
it. For first Apostolical callings and gifts (which are necessary for so great
a work) are many hundred years sithence ceased. Secondly at Christ's coming
there shall be almost no faith that is sound Doctrine and zeal left upon the
earth, Luke 18. v* 8.
and yet Christ's coming will follow soon after the calling of the Jews.
Thirdly it may be, that the Gospel may be reulued in many kingdoms and
countries where it was planted long before, and especially in and nearer the
places wherein the Jews have and shall have there residence and habitation at
there general calling, but it shall not be general, much less universal.
They therefore that look for an universal preaching, many sooner behold
Christ coming in the clouds, then have their expectation satisfied.

Que^. Is the fullness of the Gentiles yet come in?

Ans. Albeit diverse think so, and especially because they see no conversion of
any other countries of late times, nor any certain probability of it: yet it
is much to be hoped for, and not without rashness to be presumed, Kecker^nan,
sist. theol. page 104.105.106.
that the Gospel remains in his season to be preached to America, seeing
that it is the greatest part of the world, and never in times past had nor
heard of it, and seeing that the very Jesuits that are sent thither make
(perhaps) some entrance and passage, for more sincere peaching and doctrine to
be published and spread there, by such sund protestants, whether English, Dutch
or others, that use to travel thither and back again with most prosperous
nauigations. Likewise it is to be thought that the Gospel shall be preached to
the East Indies (if they never heard of it before,) or else at least revived as
it has been in diverse other countries and kingdoms sucessiuely. For (albeit)
some of the ancient have both reported and recorded that S. Thomas and S.
Bartholome^ the Apostles preached there; yet no monument, signs and
remembrances of it are now there extant or remaining.

What is meant by all Israel.
Whether the whole body of ye Jews (as many take it) or ye Catholic Church to
be gathered of Jews and Gentiles

Ans. Specially and properly here is meant the whole body of the Jews in
general, and of whom the Apostle directly speaks, but not every several and
singular person of them.

Secondly it is opposed to a remnant or part, therefore it must needs signify
the greatest number or a very great multitude.

Qu^. The deliverer shall come to Sion (as in the Hebrew context) or The
deliverer shall come out of Sion or from Sion, as Paul applies it) how can or
may these two scriptures be reconciled?

Ans. We must distinguish of the times unto which the Prophet Isaiah and the
Apostle Paul had respect, and so we shall more easily clear the difference:
Iunius in Paralle^is.
Isaiah points at the very moment of the time that was then to come, but Paul
passing from Christ his coming unto other things that follow it, says, he
shall come from Sion.i. out of his Church for the good and comfort of it. So
that Paul does not take upon him the office of an interpreter, but applies it
to his time, and who can dislike or gainsay it?

Ques. Shall this coming be corporal or spiritual.

Ans. It cannot now be corporal, for the heavens must contain him until the
days of judgment, Acts. 3.2^.
ergo it must needs be spiritual, by the Preaching of the Gospel.

Obi. But salvation came not to the Jews at the first coming of Christ
therefore he must needs come to conue^t them at his second coming, visibly?

Ans. Salvation came by his first coming, but not altogether at one time and
in one age, but in diverse successions of times and ages, for he must save his
people to the worlds end.

I would not have you ignorant of this mystery.
Mystery here imports a thing unknown unto men or not sufficiently
understood of them.

The Doctrine then is this, Doctr. Math. 16.17.
that flesh and blood cannot understand Gods counsels (as appears in the
Jews that thought that because they were borne of Abraham's seed, therefore
the blessing and benefits of the Messiah did belong to them alone) neither can
Carnal wisdom or men's natural conceit, Math. 11.25.
know and understand God and heavenly things. 1. Cor. 2.14.

The reason hereof is because the knowledge and apprehension hereof is
supernatural, and proceeds only from the illumination of the holy spirit
which is often called by Saint Paul^ the Revelation of the mystery. Rom:
16.25. Ephesians. 3 V. 3.9.

Use. 1. The use hereof is first to teach us (if we would find out and know
divine mysteries) to deny our selves and our own natural wisdom, and submit
and subject our selves and senses to be taught and instructed by the word and
spirit of God, for God hides the knowledge of his secrets from the wise and
prudent of the world, and reuealeth them to Babes, and so it is his good
pleasure. Math: 11.25.

Use. 2. We must use all holy means, as dilligent search, attention,
comparing place with place, consulting the Original, conference with our
Pastors and godly brethren, hearing and reading, earnest and continual prayer.
For then if the matter directly concern our salvation, God will reveal it
unto us, or if it be not so necessary, if God reveal it not ^ we must be
content, and reverence that we know not, and rest until GOD give farther
knowledge and understanding.

That you should not be wise in your own conceit.
Doctr.
The cause of stubbornness and obstinacy which breeds and begets absurd
and rebellious opinions in us, is, that men will be wise of themselves, and
will not seek to understand and know heavenly mysteries by dilligent search
and examination of the Scriptures, and by revelation of Gods spirit, which is
the only mean to understand them, but they either wholly neglect them, John.
3.4.
or else measure them by their sense and imagination which is shallow and will
deceive them. Isai. ^.21. 1 Cor. 2.14.

The reason hereof is, because they want GODS spirit and humility to guide and
direct them, without which all other means are vain and without force. Psalm.
25.9.


Use. 1. The first use hereof, serves to condemn the badnes and madness of
many not only Papists, but others in many countries, who because they will not
be thought to err, will stiffly maintain gross, false and absurd opinions,
as we have many Lutherans, Schismatikes; Sectaries, temporising flatterers for
instances.

1. Use. Let us not measure this mystery of the Jews conversion by sense and
reason, but by faith, and seeing it is a mystery yet that it is (in respect of
the form and manner of their conversion) not common or ordinary; let us not
be curious to diue and descend farther into particulars then Gods word, or (at
least) very probable arguments, not contrarying the same will warrant, but rest
in expectation until the time come, and in the interim help them by our
prayers, and further them by our zealous and holy example.

Obstinacy is partly come to Israel, that is, it is not universal nor
perpetual: and so all Israel shall be saved.
SEeing that the Jews are not altogether rejected, but that there is always a
remnant remaining, as appears by the first member, and the experience of all
ages justifies: and especially seeing yt al Israel.i. the greatest part and
number of that nation, are to be called and converted, we must not rashly
either contemn, much less condemn the Jews, Doctr.
nor expel them out of our Coasts and countries, but hope well of them, pray
for them, and labor to win them by our holy zeal and Christian example.

The first reason hereof is, there are some of them called and converted in all
ages, which are a preludium and forerunner of the conversion of the rest.

Secondly they are the faithful keepers and preseruers of the old Testament.
Rom: 9.4. Rom: 3. V. 2.

Thirdly they in respect of the time past: Viz: since Christ his ascension
until this day, do (in a sort) confirm the Christian faith, seeing that the
judgment of God is come upon many of them to the full, 1. These. 2.15.16.
and that they suffer those things which the Prophets threatened to the enemies
of the Messiah.

Fourthly, amongst us Christians scarce one of a hundred answers his holy
profession, and therefore we have little reason to insult over the Jews, that
are so faulty our selves.

Lastly, the great plenty and exceeding number of them: for in Asia and Africa
(to omit diverse places of Europe) there are infinite numbers of them, who when
they shall be converted, shall both in respect of themselves and us Gentiles be
the reviving and the resurrection of the world, must keep us from rash
censuring of them.

Use. Christian Princes and Potentates, must take order that the Jews amongst
them, may by degrees be taught true religion, yea they should force them to
hear the Gospel, and not leave the miserable souls in perpetual darkness,
that they every day grow worse, and more wilful in their error.

Secondly they must by severity of laws and punishment curb and moderate
their unmeasurable vsuries, whereby they much damnifie and impouerish Christian
men.

Use 2. Let the people amongst whom these Jews live and dwell, beware least by
their pride and cruelty they do not hinder their conversion, for were it not
for this, doubtlesly in many places many more Jews then now are, would be
moved and drawn to embrace the Gospel.

As it is written.
Doct. Isay 9. ve. 6. and 7.
All the great and memorable works of God, such as is the incarnation of
Christ, his life, Doctrine, miracles, death, the reiection of the Jews, the
calling of the Gentiles, the rising revealing and fall of Antichrist, the
general persecution and state of the last times, the resurrection of the body,
the last judgment, are foretold of God in holy scripture. Ezekiel. 11.37. Romans 9.
Romans 15.4. Ioh. 20.31. Apoc. 9. and 17.18.

The reason hereof is, because they are very necessary for the confirmation of
our faith, and direction of our lives, and therefore God would not have us in
any wise ignorant of them, much less to doubt of the truth of them.

Secondly, God would hereby show and declare the sufficiency of the scriptures,
and so (consequently) warn and lesson us that we give no credit to be ruled
by any fained revelation or human traditions in matter of salvation, but only
consult and search the scriptures, which contain a plain, perfect and all
sufficient doctrine, both for faith manners and for saving of our souls.

Use 1. The first use is to condemn, partly, the supine and merueilous
negligence, and extreme slothfulness of them that know not such necessary
and fundamental points, and principal conclusions so evidently and so
oftentimes spoken of, and urged in the sacred scriptures, or the inexcusable
unbelief and Atheism of those that will not believe such plain places and
proofs of Gods word, but say or (at least) think that the scriptures are
untrue, the fables or the politic inventions of men to keep and r^taine men
in some fear and awe. These are the Marchiuillians (matchless in evil) of our
times.

Use. 2. We must never stagger (...), or doubt of them, neither at any time call
the certainty and accomplishment thereof in question, 2 Timothy 3.16.17. Ioh. 20.31
but rest in them, and repair, strengthen and quicken our faith by them, for
to this end were they given.

As it is written.
Ministers and preachers must le^rne hence, Doctr.
not to broach and utter their own conceits, or the inventions of men, Ier.
23.2^
but to speak and preach the holy and wholesome word of God only. Luk 4.11.20.
Isa. 8.20. Act. 26.22.

Reasons hereof are, first God so requires and commands. Ioh. 4. Isa. 8.20.
Ier. 2.

Secondly the word of God is for all and in all points that concerns faith and
good life, of and in it self perfectly sufficient 2. Tim. 3.16. and 17. so
that it neither admits addition nor detraction.

Thirdly we have for our light and direction the continual practice of all the
Prophets and men of God in the old Testament: Luke 24 27. Acts. 26.22.
and of Christ, the Apostles and Evangelists in the new.

Fourthly, the often and unsavory and unfruitful blending and addition of
human vanities, does but darken and diminish the power, purity and efficacy
of Gods word. 2. Cor. 2.16.


Use 1. Hereby are condemned first the Papists, that will not admit and allow
the Scripture to be the sole and all sufficient rule and touchstone of
Doctrine and faith, but add and equal to it their decretalls, traditions etc.

Luke. 8.18.
Secondly, the hearers must take heed how and what they hear, they must try the
spirits and doctrines by the touchstone of Gods word and spirit, and then
retain the good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
and if ought be dissonant from the sacred scripture they must refuse and
reject it.

The Deliverer shall come out of Sion: Christ the Redeemer.
Doct^.
Seeing that the Jews, and so all we Gentiles have need off and have given unto
us of God, not only for our temporal, but especially for our eternal
deliverance and salvation, a Deliverer and a Redeemer, we see what wretched and
miserable sinners we are by nature, Titus. 3. v. 3.
children of wrath, lost sheep. Math. 15.24. Vassals, captives and slaves
under sin and Satan. Luke 4. V. 18. Lying and living in the shadow and point
of death. Ephesians. 2.2. and for fear of the second or eternal death, al our
life subject to bondage. Hebr. 2.15.

The reason hereof is, for that all men without this Deliverer and Redeemer (to
omit their temporal miseries and malladies) are in far worser estate then
any brute beast or ugly toad, or any other vilde creature, for when it dies,
his life and woe ends together with it: but the death of man without a
Redeemer, and without faith in him, is but the beginning of incessant and
everlasting terror and torment.

Use. Let us labor to feel and find our selves to be thus wretched and
miserable, and acknowledge that without Christ his suffering and obedience we
everlastingly perish, Daniel 9.6 1 Timothy 1. v. 15
we must from a touched heart acknowledge that shame and confusion belongs
unto us, that of sinners we are the greatest, and therefore we must entreat
the Lord to be merciful unto us, and to receive us into his grace and favor.
And therefore it stands us in hand carefully to labor and endeavor that
Satan do not fore-stall, bewitch and possess our hearts with his deceites
and illusions, Isay 55. v. 2
and so take all sense of our miseries from us wherein they must needs pine
and perish that seek any other by-waies or shifting euasions.

Use 2. We must in time seek unto Christ only for help, for pardon of
sins and for salvation, he has eternal life in himself, and is author of
eternal salvation, to all that obey him, and for our better direction herein,
we must crave and desire the instructions, Ca^^^. ^. v. 1.2
advise and assistance, not only of our pastors and ministers, but also of our
Christian and beloved friends and acquaintance.

And shall turn away (desections) and ungodliness from Jacob.
It is the proper office of Christ Jesus to reconcile the reuolting Jews, and
by consequence all the elect in the world to God his Father. 1 Ioh. 2.1. and 2.
R^m. 5.8.9.10. Ioh. 1.29, Romans 4. v. 25
Act. 4.12. The form and manner is by his death and passion to make payment
and satisfaction to Gods justice for their sins. 1 Ioh. 1.7. 1. Pet. 1.18.

Secondly by not imputing sin unto his elect, Psa. 32.1 Phil. 3.9
and by imputing his own righteousness unto them, 2. Cor. 5. ver. 21. Thirdly
by abating and weakening the multitude and might of sin in them by the power of
his word and efficacy of his spirit. Romans 6. ver. 3 4.5.6.

Lastly by quite abolishing and removing them at the hour of death and at the
day of judgment. Apoc. 14.13. Hebr. 9. ver. 28. Act. 3.19.

The reason hereof as, Genesis 2^. ve. 1^
he is the blessed seed in whom all nations are blessed, and he is the root
and foundation on which all Gods promises depend, 2 Cor. 1. v. 20
and in whom they are, yea, and Amen. Finally God has sanctified, sent and
sealed him alone to be Savior and Mediator of the world. Ioh. 5, 8^. Apoc* 19*
v. 14 Heb. v. 14


Use 1. Therefore we must seek for salvation in none else but in Christ and in
his only merits, righteousness and sufferings, for he alone trod down the
wine press of Gods wrath, and by his death and obedience made satisfaction to
his divine justice.

And this is my covenant to them.
Doctr.
Gods covenant with his people is certain, sure, perpetual and always kept on
Gods part, Psalm. 89, v. 33.34
Act. 3.15. It is the foundation of salvation. The reason hereof is, because it
is ratified and confirmed by Christ his death (as no human covenant can be
for they only last whiles ye parties live,) Secondly it is (in time) sealed in
the hearts of Gods children by faith. Ephe. 1.13. as also renewed and confirmed
by the sacraments both in the old and new testament. 1. Cor. 11.24. et 21.

Use 1. It teaches us first, not to despise the poor Jews unto whom this
covenant was first made, and in some, of whom it is always verified and
accomplished.

Use 2. We must by faith apply unto our selves Christ and al his saving
benefits, that the covenant and testament may be firm and good in us and unto
us, for without application there is no benefit and comfort felt and enjoyed of
meat, drink, apparel, physic, weapon, so much loss of Gods promises.

When I shall take away their sins.
Doct.
It is proper to God alone to forgive and take away sin (as here in this place
God takes from the Jews security and unbelief. Exodus 34, 7 Isa. 45, 25
) Math. 6. Mark. 2.7. 2. Sam. 12.10.

The reasons hereof are first, for that sin is committed only against the
majesty and law of God, and as for the offense or sin committed against any man
or creature, it is no more in it self but an injury wrong, Math. 6, v. 14 et 15
or trespass.

Let hereunto be added that the breach of man's commandment, is no sin, unless
it do withal imply and include ye transgression of Gods commandment, that
commands obedience thereunto in all things where it does not contradict his
law. Secondly God takes away not only the punishment, (as men in outward
punishments partly can do) but also remoueth ye gilt and corruption of nature
which none else can do. Ps. 51. ver. 2. and 7. Thirdly, Gods power and authority
is most absolute and altogether independent, and therefore he cannot be hindered
or prevented by any other, from granting and giving pardon unto his children,
as the lame creple in John's Gospel was for 38. years.

Use 1. Seeing that the Lord has made a promise of forgiveness of sins to the
Jews, and to reconcile them by the covenant of grace, we must not despair of
their conversion, much less vex and revile them, least God when he receives
them again into favor, he deservedly exclude and cast out us, for our
contempt and unthankfulness.

Use 2. Hereby also are checked and confuted al superstitious persons,
Idolaters, Hypocrites, proud persons, Pharisees and Papists, who seek for
righteousness of a sinner before God, and for pardon and remission of sins not
from Gods mercy alone in Christ, but from human satisfactions, indulgences,
purgatory and prayers for the dead, and human merits.

Use 3. Seeing that God alone does take away sin, and that from them that
seek and sue for it, we must use all the means to obtain it, and namely,
humbly confess our sins unto God, and cry unto Heaven for pardon. For here in
ye saying is chiefly verified, spare to speak, spare to speed.

Their sins.
The glory of our redemption by Christ, Doctr.
and of the testament of God, and the peculiar prerogative of the Catholic
Church chiefly consists in the forgiveness of all our sins, Isa. 23.24
Psa. 32. v. 12 Ioh. 8, v. 21. and Romans 4, 7
and when they are not imputed unto us, and the punishments of them is removed.
Math. 1.21 Luke 1.77. Act 3.19. Psa. 103. ver. 3. and 12.

1. Re. For it belongs only unto the believers and repentant. John 3.16.
Act. 3.19. but all unbelievers and vnpenite^t persons are excepted, Isa. 62, ^^
24.
for they albeit he bears long with them (herein delaying their punishment,)
yet God pardons not them, but they receive the end of it, Ioh. 3. v. 21 and 24
damnation.

The reason hereof is, because without forgiveness of sins, we are more
miserable then all creatures, for when we end this miserable life, then we
begin that intolerable torment that shall never have end nor ease.

Psa. 32, 1, 2 Psa. 38, 4
Secondly of all burdens it is most heavy and most presses down the
conscience, as David by experience felt: for he pronounces him blessed, that
is eased of the burden of his sin. Thirdly it is a principal article of faith,
and a specia^l prerogative of the Chruch, who believes the forgiveness of her
sins and is eased thereof.

Fourthly, it is the cause (only) of our righteousness before God, and the
gate of everlasting happiness, and therefore they are only blessed that rely
upon Gods free mercy for the pardon of their sins.

Use 1. Ministers must learn hence in their sermons not to propound and offer
remission of sins to all men indifferently, and without condition (as the
Papists do, who absolve whore-mongers, murderers, drunkards, traitors,
blasphemers whom God does not absolve,) but only to those that believe and
truly repent.

Use 2. They hence are known to err and to be deceived who think that
remission of sins, is but the beginning of righteousness and happiness, whereas,
seeing that in ye faithful and dear servants of God there are so many faults,
defects and errors, it suffices not once to have entered the way of
blessedness, unless the same grace do follow us, unto the term and end of our
life.

Use 3. Here are condemned ye heathen Philosophers, who being ignorant of true
blessedness and the means to attain unto it, sought it in honors, pleasures,
speculation, authority, moral actions, and not in Christ by faith, of whom
they were altogether ignorant. Secondly Jews, who albeit (in some sort) they
apprehended and understood tru^ blessedness yet they fought to be partakers of
it, by their own works* and by the ceremonies of the law, and not by
forgiveness of sins through Christ only, Romans 9, v. 31 and 32
and hence they stumbled at the stumbling stone.

Lastly Papists who will be saved by their own works and satisfactions and be
hereby justified before God.

Use. Seeing that the remission of sins is so excellent and singular a
privilege of the Church, we must (if need be) purchase this treasure and
this pearl with the loss of all that we have, Math, 13. V. 44.45.
and having once obtained it, we must always and from our hearts give God
thanks for it.

Use. Lastly desiring to be assured of the pardon of our sins, we must not
willingly and wittingly sin against the light of our conscience and offend ye
divine Majesty, but hate, leave and forsake them, otherwise sin unrepented off,
is never forgiven. John 8.21.24. Luke 13. V. 3.5.

As concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sake, Ver. 28.
but as touching the election, they are beloved for the Fathers sakes.

For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Sense. As concerning
the Gospel.i. so far forth as they resist and persecute it, they are enemies.

1. Hateful to God, they are enemies unto God, and he unto them, for your
sake.i. you by occasion hereof, may be received into their room, and because
they hate, distaste and persecute you for the profession of the Gospel. But as
touching the election.i. in regard that very many in this nation are chosen for
eternal life, they are beloved.i. dear unto God: for the fathers sake.i. for
by reason of ye promise made to the holy Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

For the gifts of God.i. his free promises which of his grace he does promise,
Ver. 29*
offer and bestow upon men: and calling of God.i. that whereby he already has
and yet does call ^ome of the Jews, to the knowledge of Christ, and whereby he
does determine in his due time to call ye rest: are without repentance.i. they
are irreuocable, constant, and such as he cannot repent off, for his decree if
unchangeable.

Questions.
Enemies for our sake. Beloved for the fathers sake.
1. Qu. Can one and the same person be an enemy and a friend unto God, beloved
and hated of him, at one and the same time, especially seeing that the
affirmation hereof seems to imply a flat contradiction?

Answ. Yes, thus Paul before his conversion, was a friend of God in regard of
his election, albeit an enemy before; and thus our Savior Christ, is said to
give his life for his friends. John. 15.13. But in Romans 5.10. Christ is said to
reconcile us unto his Father by his death, whiles we were yet sinners, and when
we were enemies: as that all the Elect are by nature children of wrath, and
enemies unto God, but they are also friends and beloved even before their
calling and sanctification, because by the grace and mercy of God, they are
from all eternity chosen and beloved in Christ, Romans 9.11.13 and because God
will and does in time call them to faith, knowledge and obedience.

Secondly, we, for the clearing of the Text answer, that the Jews in Paul's
time, and sithence were and are enemies unto God, in regard that the greatest
multitude of them were reprobates and so cast off, but yet both then and ever
since, they are beloved of God, so many of them, as are elected, which albeit
they then and hitherto have bin but few, yet at their general calling, it will
appear that they are very many.

Beloved for the Fathers sake.
Quest. If any one be loved (as here we have a particular instance) for his
Fathers sake, then a man may be called and converted by reason of and for his
fathers merits? and so every man shall not live by his own faith?

John. 1. v. 13.
Ans. The argument follows not. For first, faith and regeneration comes not
by natural succession, but proceeds altogether from grace* Ezekiel. 18.20.
Secondly the children of the faithful, are not for their parents faith,
accepted to eternal life, Abac. 2. v. 4.
but they must believe themselves, and live and be saved by their own faith.

Lastly, 2. S^m. 7.14. and 15.
in that the Jews are beloved for their Fathers sake (as Solomon was never
wholly deprived of Gods spirit and favor for David's sake) it proceeds not
from their works or persons, but only from Gods gracious and everlasting
covenant, the fountain and root of it. Ier^m. 31.33
The sum of the covenant is, that God will be their God and the God of their
seed, and therefore there must be some to whom the covenant must be made good
and fulfilled, and these are loved for the covenant sake.

The gifts and calling of God are without repentance.
Quest. Touching the graces of God if they be never taken away, why does God
so often deprive men of them, that formerly had them?

Ans. First* Deuteronomy. 19.27.28 Isa 3.1.2.3 Deuteronomy. 32.21
they are common and temporal gifts, either of nature, policy, or else of
illumination and outward profession only, that are common to Gods children
with reprobates, these God does strip and deprive men of many times for their
unthankfulness, and to discover their unsoundness and hypocrisy.

Secondly, Math. 13, 19* 25, 2^, ^^.
because men (who are commonly Reprobates) always neglect, contemn, and abuse
them, and thus they quench and put out the holy spirit, and what light soever
was offered unto them, and whatsoever knowledge and grace of God was bestowed
upon them, it dies in them by little and little: for God in his justice takes
his tallent from them, as he did from Saul and Judas. But for those peculiar
endowments of Gods elect which are linked and chained unseperably together,
such as are predestination, Romans ^.3^.
vocation, justification, and glorification, these are given to the Godly in
fe^ simple, and are never taken away from them.

The calling of God without Repentace.
Quest. Why then did God repent that he created man, and that he made Saul
King, and why does he many times reuoake his promise and his threarnings?

Ans. This is spoken figuratively and improperly, for the change is not in his
Gods will and decree, but only in the things or event, and that as the
conditions in men employed and understood, are changeable.

Secondly, by this kind of speech God would show how heinous and horrible were
man's sins, and natural corruption, proceeding partly from his rebellious
will, and partly from the Devil.

Thirdly, God declares that he, in respect of the outward work and act, will
do that which men when they repent, use to do, namely destroy his work: Thus
he drowned the whole world in Noah his time, and in fight caused Saul to be
slain.

Genesis 6.6.7 8. Ier. 18. v. 7.8.9.10.
Lastly, God has purposed and ordained at once, by his steadfast decree, that he
will so often ratify this change of the effects of his anger and mercies, as
often as any just cause comes between, Ezekiel. 24.25. Math. 18.35. Romans 2.6.
which inter-current cause if it be evil, God decreed the permission and
ordering of it only, but if it be good, God decreed to work it, and does in
time bring it into act and effect.

As concerning the Gospel they are enemies.
Doctr. Seeing that the Jews oppugning the preaching of the Gospel, and
refusing to admit of it, are said to be enemies unto God, we draw this
general Theoreme, viz. that all men, during the time that they receive not the
word of God, Luke 19.27. Apoc. 11.7. and 10.
but resist and with-stand the course and preaching of it, are Gods enemies and
hated of them, Apoc. 12. v. 4. and 17. 1. These. 2.15.16. 2. Tim. 4.15.

Reas. The reason hereof is, because the Preaching and ministry of the word is
Christ's golden Scepter, under which all his subjects must be ranged, and his
easy yoke that all his people must bear, Math. 11. v. 29.30.

1. Use. This serves to condemn Jews, Turks, Papists, false brethren, and
all underminers and persecutors of the Church, who, howsoever they slatter
themselves in their sins, errors and Idolatry, and think they do God
service, yet in very truth, they are nothing else then Gods flat enemies, and
they that refuse to be sworn to, and acknowledge his supremacy over their
souls and bodies.

2. Use. Secondly we must take heed, that we make no leagues of amity, or of
unnecessary traffic, with them, least (in fine) by our overmuch sociablenes
and familiarity with them we learn their works and pollute our selves with
their sins, Psa. 106 35
and abominations. 2. Cor. 6.16.

They are nothing but pitch, poison and contagious leapers, by whose
familiarity we may soon be defiled and infected.

Use 3. We must not by our dissimulation, hypocrisy and ill life harden and
confirm them in their sins and heresies, but (to the uttermost extent and
strain of our ability) endeavor both by life and doctrine, to gain and win
them.

Use 4. We must remember how God has for these many hundred years punished
their contempt and contumacy both with spiritual and bodily punishment and
captivity, and forasmuch as we profess our selves to be Christ's subjects and
servants, to suffer no evil lusts and concupiscences to rule and reign in us,
but to permit Christ by his word and his spirit to guide and govern us,
otherwise we shall be bruised with an Iron rod, slain before Christ his face,
and shall never enter into his rest, the heavenly Canaan and the heavenly
Jerusalem. Ps. 2. v. 9. Lu. 19.27. Heb. 3. v. 18. and 19.

But they are beloved for the Fathers sake.
God in his elect does not consider what they deserve, nor always respect the^
according to their present unbelief, but regards what he has promised to
Abraham and his seed, and therefore he will not change his purpose, but in time
vouchsafes them his savor, albeit for the present (by reason of their
unbelief, and impenitency) he frown upon them and seem to disfauor and
renounce them. The reason hereof is first, because God is good and full of
goodness, mercy and truth, upon the communication of which, he (upon men's
conversion) expects and requires all the praise, honor and glory to be
yielded and ascribed unto him only. Secondly God by showing mercy to ye
degenerate Jews, will at length get him far greater glory and renown of his
mercy and power then before.

Use 1. Let us not our selves despair of Gods mercy by reason of our former
and present errors and enormities (be they never so many and mighty,) for our
salvation depends not upon our own works and deserts, but only upon Gods
unchangeable decree, but let us truly and unfeignedly repent of them and
forsake them, and then undoubtedly we shall live and die in the love and favor
of God.

2. Use
Let us not despise the Jews, nor doubt of their conversion and salvation, but
in respect of Gods covenant, wish well unto them, pray for them, and further
their salvation.

3. Use. If God love the Jews for their Fathers sake and for his covenant made
with them, and not for any thing wherein they could pleasure or profit him, we
must herein follow and imitate the Lords example, and not love true Christians
in by respects, namely because they be our kindred only, 1. Pet. 3 8. 2. John
1. Romans 12.9
or because we reap some commodity by them, or that they serve our turn, but
in the spirit and for the truth sake only, for this is right love and that
which God requires, commends and rewards.

The calling and gifts of God are without repentance.
From the perpetuity and constancy of Gods calling and his saving gifts and
promises in his elect, I gather that none of Gods elect can wholly or finally
fall or possibly be damned. Doctr.
Romans 8.1.2. Tim. 2.19.

For first God is without change and alteration in his nature, Ioh. 5.24. Lam.
3 22.
decree, covenant, promises, and never wholly reuoketh and abolisheth his work
in them.

Secondly his mercies toward them fail not, but always stream forth to
their continual comfort; for God is truth and will always perform his
promises.

Lastly, God is almighty and cannot be hindered (much less over ruled by any
creature) neither can any disanull that which God has ratified, or condemn
those whom he will save. Romans 8.33.34.

This doctrine checketh the corrupt and presumptuous opinion of the Papists,
that teach constancy and salvation to reside in our own power and potency,
whereas it consists wholly in the covenant and promises of God.

2. Use. The second use is, for comfort, and that is if we once perceive and
find in our selves some pawnes and Printes of Gods love and favor, Phil. 1.6.
we may and must assure our selves, Luke 14.29.30
of the perpetuity of it, without doubting, for God is constant in his gifts
and never retracteth them though men do often) and having begun a good work,
he will finish and perfect it, he is not like him that in us, begins to build
a goodly house and cannot finish it, but he will make every one of his Saints
an holy and perfect temple in the Lord Ephe. 2.21.

3. Use. Seeing that God is no changeling unto us, but his bounty always
continues, and his promises are in their time duly accomplished, let us first
learn hence to cleave fast unto him, and sincerely and incessantly to serve
and fear him all the days of our life. Secondly let us (in our words, deeds,
covenants and promises) not deal hollowly and deceiptfully with men, but
truly, justly and simply, for he that halteth with men, is no better then an
Hipocrite before God, and his religion is only formal and fruitless Psa.
15.2.

30. Verse. For even as ye in times have not believed God yet have now obtained
mercy through their unbelief.

31. Verse. Even so now have they not believed, that by your mercy they may also
obtain mercy.

32. Verse. For GOD has shut up all in unbelief that he might have mercy on
all.

Sense: For even as ye in times past.i. before Christ his incarnation, have
not believed in.i. obeyed the word of God and his commandments nor
acknowledged Christ Jesus for the son of GOD and your redeemer, yet have now
obtained mercy, i. God has called you effectually, and endewed you with the
true and saving knowledge of God and his Gospel, through their unbelief.i. by
the occasion that the Jews would not receive the Gospel, nor the Messiah
offered unto them, but refuse both the one and the other.

Even so now they.i. the Jews have not, believed viz. the Gospel, that by your
mercy.i. by the mercy of God offered unto you in your effectual calling and in
your sincere profession and intertainment of the Gospel may be provoked and
inflamed by an holy emulation to follow and affect you.

They may also obtain mercy.
That is through Gods mercy, may be partakers of faith, remission of sins and
salvation, that so it may be apparent both to the Jews and Gentiles that both
are saved by his mercy and grace only. For God has shut up.i. tied bound and
imprisoned together: all.i. all his elect both of Jews and Gentiles, under
unbelief.i. sin and has kept them under his power and custody like a number
and sort of malefactors shut up into one prison, and so convinced them, that
they can by no means escape and find ease and enlargement, that he might have
mercy.i. have an occasion to inlighten and save, all.i. all his chosen,
whether Jews or Gentiles, and so might actually and perfectly save them by his
mercy and favor, and not for any merit or worth of theirs.

Ver. 30. Have obtained mercy through their unbelief.

Ques. Can evil be cause of good, and one man's unbelief be cause of an other
man's believing and conversion?

Ans. No (to speak properly) for like cause, like effect, but it may be
indirectly and by accident, as we see how that of evil manners are made good
laws. Now evil manners and enormities are no causes of enacting wholesome
laws, but only occasions and accidental motives.

Secondly no sin does more kindle Gods indignation, and enrage his majesty
against us, then infidellitie, and therefore it can be ye working cause of no
good, but God who by his omnipotent wisdom draws light out of darkness,
knows how to direct ye unbelief of some, to be a means and way for mercy to
be showed upon others. And thus when one Nation, City or Town, refuses the
Gospel of Christ, and will not suffer themselves to be ranged under it, God
takes it from them and bestows (by occasion) upon others that will bring
forth more and better fruit in their season.

God has shut up all under unbelief.
Verse 32.
Qu. Is man's incredulity and unbelief to be assigned to God, or is he the
cause, author, or work of it?

A. No: God is not the efficient cause of it, but the accuser and condemner of
it, he does not infuse Infidelity, but finding men in it, does leave and
forsake them, so that he is rather deficiens quam efficiens causa.

Secondly, God does by the ministry of the law and by his judgments, so
convince and attaint men of sin, that they shall (or may) see and
acknowledge, that there is no mean, merit, or cause to justify and save
them, but his mercy in Christ only.

Thirdly, God would have all men subject to his judgment, and that they laying
aside and disclaiming all conceit of their own merits and worthiness, should
expect salvation from him alone.

All, that is, Jews and Gentiles under unbelief.
Qu. Are all men by nature, both Jews and Gentiles, equal in sin and alike
guilty in Gods sight?

Ans. Yes, there is no difference, for all have sinned and are deprived of the
glory of God. Psalm. 51. v. 5.
Romans 3.23. There is none that (naturally) does good, no not one, and we are
all borne and conceived in iniquity.

Secondly, there is no merit, or desert, either in Jew or Gentile, Romans 3. v.
23.
why one should be preferred before an other: for they all are alike guilty of
damnation, Ephesians. 2.3.

Qu. If one man by nature be not better then another, how then do they differ?

A. In men mere natural and unconverted, God, for the upholding and
preserving of Commonwealths and human societies, bestows general and
restraining grace more upon one then another.

Secondly, Romans 3.1.2.
they do or may differ in outward dignity and privileges, as the Jews much
excelled the Gentiles; but otherwise the special grace and mercy of our God,
makes the maine difference between the Elect and the Reprobate.

For the one has in time renewing and saving grace communicated unto him; but
the other is utterly denied it.

That he might have mercy one all.
Quest. Is there then no particular election, or is it only universal? Math.
22.14. Romans 9 22.


Ans. Election is not of all, but of some, for he that makes choice of any
thing, singleth out some, and leaves the rest.

Secondly, many be called, but few are chosen.

Thirdly, there be vessels of wrath whom God has prepared to destruction, as
well as there be vessels of mercy, whom he has prepared for glory.

Lastly, either all should be saved, which the Scripture in many places
refelleth, or else Gods predestination, which is a sure and certain foundation
should be shaken and alterable.

Might have mercy on all.
Quest. Will God save all (none excepted) or can it be soundly gathered hence,
that he will save the greatest part of men in the world?

Ans. No, for the greatest number is rejected; Christ's flock is but a little
flock, a remnant, an handful, a tenth, a gleaning in comparison of them that
perish, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many go that
way, but narrow is the way that leads to life and few find it. But the
meaning of the Apostle here is, that God will have mercy in some, of all
ranks, states, orders and conditions, and that he will have it notified that
all that are saved, are saved by his mercy only.

Quest. If God will not show special mercy on all men, but does reserve it
only for the elect; why does he by preaching offer it to all men in many
Countries and Kingdoms, and other particular Cities and places, and hereby
allure and inuit them to faith and repentance?

Ans. The more to convince them, and to leave them without all excuse in the
day of the Lord, because they do not, nor will not admit or receive it
being offered. John. 9, 39. and 41. Romans 2. verse 6. John. 15. verse 24. Romans 9.


Secondly, all cannot receive it, because they are not vessels of mercy.

As ye have obtained mercy,
So now they -- may obtain mercy.
From this sampling, Doctr.
and paralleling of both places and members together this doctrine naturally
arises. In the order of salvation the Jews and Gentiles are like and equal,
and by nature children of wrath, and enemies to God, but they by grace and
mercy only, and not any merit of their own, are called, converted and saved.
Ephe. 2. v. 3. 1 Pet. 2. v. 25.

For first, God in saving and converting all, is one and the same, without
change and alteration, and the ministry of his law for conuincement and
direction, and the Gospel for faith and conversion is always one, and the
same. Finally the spirit that is promised to both is one and the same, the
doctrine of the old and new Testament one and the same, and so the Church one
and the same. Secondly, Gods works are semblable, and one serve for the
illustration and demonstration of the other.

Use. Let us not despair of the Jews conversion, or of the calling and
salvation of any, but hope well of it, pray for it, 1. Cor. 13.7.
and labor to further it, seeing that without Gods mercy and grace none is
better then others, and that Gods mercy which has been vouchsafed unto us,
may extend it self in good time unto others, yea unto those that we have
least hope of. Titus 3. v. 3.4. and that are last called and furthest off, Luke
13. v. 30.

V. 31. So now they -- by your mercy may obtain mercy. Here we see a notable
effect and end of good zeal in godly men, namely, that by the example and
president thereof, others be stirred up to emulation and to follow them. For
here we see that the calling of the Gentiles and their zeal and holy example
are so far from preiudicing or hindering the Jews salvation, that God shall
take an occasion hence, to provoke them to follow the Gentiles, and to embrace
the Gospel, so that they shall not perish, but at length be converted and
saved. How much zeal and good examples of godliness, kindness, liberality,
courage and constancy, may provoke and profit others, as by many other
examples, so by these following it is most manifest and demonstrable in Joshua
and the Elders of his time, who by their authority and example retained the
people all their days in Gods sincere service. Joshua, 24.31.

In the woman of Samaria, who by her example and rereport induced and provoked
many of the Samaritans to hear and believe in Christ. Ioh. 4. V. 29.30. Acts
18.8.
In Crisp^^ the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, who by his faith, and by the
sweet perfume of his family, moved many of the Corinthians to hear, believe
and receive the Gospel.

2. Corinthians. 8.
Lastly, the Macedonians (albeit otherwise in affliction and extreme poverty)
by their free and willing contribution and collection for the relief of other
distressed Saints, provoked the Corinthians to do the like.

1 Use Hereby let us learn and be admonished what should be the scope of our
doctrine life, and zeal, namely that it may be a motive and prouokement unto
others to resemble us in good things, that are pleasing and acceptable in Gods
sight. Let us then breake-off and surcease from envy, spites and all contempt,
for hereby we rather kill them, then convert them, and harden them then help
them forward.

2. Use. Here is condemned the ill zeal and example of Papists, Turks,
Anabaptists, Schismatikes and the like, who hereby seduce and scandallize
others, and if they do not destroy their faith, yet they much impair and
weaken it: woe to these that give and raise great offenses; better it were for
them (if they repent not) that they had never been borne. Luk 17. v, 1.2.


For that God has shut up all in unbelief.
In that God has shut up all.i. Convinced them by his law and word, and
declared them thus to be captiuated and enclosed in the prison of their sins,
that it might appear and be there notified to all men, that the pardon of
sin and their salvation proceeds only from Gods mercy, we learn this
instruction, viz: Doct.
That all men are sinners and unrighteous, prone unto evil, and slow unto
good, yea, and unfit and unable to it, and are hereof attainted and convinced
by the law of God, in so much that they are in no better estate before God
then guilty and condemned persons and malefactors, who trembling and astonished
look for nothing but death. Psalm. 6. V. 3.7. Psalm. 130. V. 3. Psalm. 143. V. 2.

Thus must Paul (before that God show mercy upon him) be convinced and proved
to be a blasphemor and persecutor, an oppressor, Mary Magdalen to be an impure
and filthy liver, Peter to have denied Christ his Lord and Savior three
times, and that, with cursing and swearing: that it might appear that
salvation consists only in gods free mercy and not in man's worthynesse or
works.

1. Use. Let us not please our selves in nobility, stocks, gentry, wit,
wealth, privileges, for God respects not these, but the heart and the work
of the spirit, much less let us think not hardly, or despair of others
(especially of the Jews) for we deserve no more at Gods hands then they, but
are alike conceived and borne in sin and by nature the children of wrath as
well as they. Ephesians, 2.3.

2. Use. Here are condemned those that justify themselves before God, and
that will be saved by their own works, and so presumptiously and proudly
either deminish or deny the grace and free mercy of God, then which nothing
can be imagined more injurious and disglorious to the divine goodness and
clemency.

3. Use. We must learn with sorrow and grief to confess and lay open our
sins before God, yea to be abashed, ashamed and confounded in regard of them,
Ezech. 16.5.8.
and withal flee to the throne of grace, and supplicate for mercy and
forgiveness For the more miserable we find our selves to be, and the more we
depend upon Gods help and goodness, the more favor we shall obtain, and
the sooner procure mercy at his hands. That he might have mercy on all.

That is, of all sorts both amongst Jews and Gentiles.

Doct.
In the matter of our justification, vocation, salvation, Gods mercy is only
seen, and neither Jew nor Gentile are saved otherwise then by his favor and
mercy. Titus, 3. v. 4.5. Ephesians. 2. v. 3.4.5. Romans 3. v. 20.8.7.24.12.

The reason hereof is, first, because Jews and Gentiles are alike guilty
before Gods judgment seat, as it has been before proved.

Secondly, God is bound and beholding to none, for who has given him any
thing, but it shall be recompensed? And therefore al whom he saves, he saves
by his mere mercy and grace, and not for any matter or merit yt he could find
in them.

1. Use. Here is condemned the gross and palpable error of those which think
that (in the process of time) all shall be saved, yea the very devils, as
Origin dotingly dreamed. Whereas the fewest are elected, called, justified, and
none shall be saved but they, and this will the last judgment make manifest
to all the world.

2 Use. It serves also to overthrow and refute the fond and false opinion of
al man's merits, for we receive all things from Gods mere mercy, and there is no
place for men's deserts and merits.

3. Use. Thirdly, we must not abuse and pervert GODS mercies, to the lust and
liberty of the flesh, for his mercy is proper and reserved for them that
fear him and are displeased in themselves for their sins, and not for such
lewd and presumptious minded Libertines that have no fear of God before their
eyes.

Lastly, though with the Saints of God in Scripture we sometimes (through
Satan's suggestion and our own frailty and negligence) fall into many great
and grievous sins, yet we must never despair of Gods mercies, but repent
whiles we have time, and by faith apply them to our selves. For they are
bottomless, most plentious, and never fail them that truly repent and
believe.

The sixth part of the Chapter.
V. 33. O the deepenesse of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his judgments and his ways pass finding out!

V. 34. For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who was his Counsailer?

V. 35. Or, who has given unto him first, and he shall be reco^pensed.

V. 36. For of him, and through him, and for him, are all things: to him be
glory for ever Amen.

Sense. O the deepnes of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God.i.
the riches of his deepnes, or O the deep plentiful and Ocean Sea that can
never be drawn dry of these attributes of Gods knowledge and wisdom, whereby
God knows his, and when he will call them, and most wisely and justly
determines of them, and disposes and governs all men and all actions
(albeit our poor and shallow understanding cannot apprehend it, and many times
judges amiss.) How unsearchable are his judgments? i. his means and manner
both in choosing and refusing, in shutting up all under sin, in saving and
condemning men, cannot possibly be sounded and found out by man's reason, and
his ways past finding out.i. no man can find out his secret purposes and
disseignes, for they are not revealed in the Scriptures.

V. 34. For who has known the mind of the Lord? Sense. Viz. Who has known
his purpose and counsels and secret judgments that are not disclosed and
declared in the word? Ephesians. 3. v. 16.11.
Or who was his Counsailer? In the creation and preservation of the world, in
the redemption, government and salvation of his Church, he needed not man's
advise and counsel, but performed all by counsel of his own will.

V. 35. Or who has given to him first? i. Who has bestowed any benefit or
blessing upon God and so has made him a debpter unto him, and he shall be
recompensed.i. he will repay and requite him. For of him and from him are al
things, they have their being and beginning from god, and through him al things
are adiministred and governed by him, and for him.i. they are created and
ordained, to set forth his glory, To him be glory for ever Amen.i. Let al
human and worldly glory cease and vanish away, and let al ye glory of
goodness, mercy wisdom, and justice be ascribed only unto God, of us and of
al creatures for ever Amen.

I believe it shall be so, and I pray that it may be so.

Ques. How unsearchable are Gods judgments?

Ans. If Gods ways and judgments be unsearchable, why are we commanded to
search the Scriptures, or the Israelites taxed and reproved for being ignorant
of Gods ways? Ioh. 5. v. 38. Psalm. 95. v. 10. Math. 22. v 29.

Gods ways and judgments in this place are taken for his secret will, which
he reserueth to himself, and which no man is to inquire into, for it is
bottomless gulf, and will drown them, and a flame that may not be come unto
but will burn them, it is the Arc that may not be looked into. But for his
revealed will which he has manifested in Scripture, all sorts of people are
commanded to search, learn and know: provided that they keep them within the
bounds of sobriety, and do not measure mystical and supernatural things by
the scantling and shallowness and human reason.

Who has known the mind of the Lord?
Ob. In the knowledge of God consists man's salvation, therefore God has
revealed it unto men, and to Prophets and Apostles especially.

A. First indeed in the knowledge of Gods revealed will consists man's
salvation, and this every man is commanded and bound to know; Deuter. 29. ver.
29.
for here we have whatsoever serves for our instruction, but for hidden
things and these which God has not revealed, whereof the Apostle speaks, we
cannot know (but by the event) neither must we desire it, but conteyne our
selves within the limits and lists of Gods word.

Secondly, if it were granted (as it must not) that the Apostle spoke here of
mysteries and secrecies contained in the Scripture, we answer that no mortal
man can by his own sense and reason understand them, Math. 19. v. 17. Ioh.
3.5. v. 4.9.10.
for it judges falsely and preposterously of them. 1. Cor. 2.14. therefore we
must reverently and soberly follow the direction and guidance of Gods good
spirit.

Thirdly the godly by the illumination and teaching of gods spirit understand
al things, yt are simply, necessary for their salvation. Lastly albeit the
regenerate know the mind of the Lord and his revealed will in holy scriptures;
yet but by degrees and in part, and some more, some less, according to their
(...) mortification etc.

Q. How can we, or why are we commanded to give and ascribe glory to God,
seeing that we can by our praises add nothing to his renown and perfection?

An. Albeit, we cannot add any thing to Gods nature and perfection and glory,
yet we are bound by his commandment and it is our duty to acknowledge him to
be, as he is, and as he has revealed himself in holy scripture viz. most holy,
perfect, and glorious. Secondly, we must show forth, testify and declare his
name, nature, attributes and works unto men, that they hereby may be informed
better of him, and stirred up to glorify him, and thus we hallow and sanctify
Gods name.

O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God!
It is proper to the Godly and their office and (...) to think, Doctr.
speak and consider of, yea to admire the w^rkes and counsels of God, and to
brast forth into holy exclamations and to stir and exite others so to do. Psa.
118. v. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Psalm. 8. v. Psalm. 92. ver. 5. Psalm. 119. ver. 18. Psalm. 46. v. 7. Cant. 5. a
verse 10. ad. 17. The reason hereof is, they alone being taught of God, know
(above al other persons) the incomparable excellency and order of them, and
therefore for skill, know best how, and how far to judge of them. Secondly,
they must be instruments and trumpets, to sound and proclaim the praises and
wonders of the Lord, for the satisfaction of their own consciences, and to
affect and gain others so to do.

Use 1. Let ministers (especially) and also others labor and strive to affect
and possess others with the rareness, excelency, and admirablenes of Gods
works and proceedings, for so did David in many places. Psa. 48. v. 2.3.4.5.6.
and Psa. 8. v. 1.

Use 2. As often as our reason is offended with the doctrine and depth of
predestination (albeit so evidently and expressly set forth in scripture) let us
renounce reason, and give glory unto God, and with most humble reverence admire
that deep wisdom which with the eye of our understanding, we cannot pierce
into. Thus did Christ. Math. 11.25.26.

3. Use. It serves to condemn and argue all that repine at, murmr at,
reprehend gods proceedings, and especially in the decree and matter of
reprobation, whereas Gods is most wise, just and of absolute power and
authority, and therefore always does and cannot but order, rule and dispose
of all things rightly, albeit our weak apprehension cannot attain unto the
reason of it.

The wisdom and knowledge of God.
The doctrine, that we learn hence is that God being most wise, and knowing
all things does not only see and contemplate them, as they are, or may be, but
does contriue them with singular reason and counsel, and dispose them in most
goodly form, weight, number and measure, so that nothing in his works may
seem to be wanting or disordered, nothing superfluous or over much, but all in
an excellent temper and symetry. And hence God is said, to be wise in heart.
Job. 9.4. nay only wise. Romans 16.27. 1. Tim. 1.17. For he alone by himself is
infinitely wise, needing no man's instruction or information. Isa. 40. ver. 12,
13, 14. Pro. 8.12. Job. 28. cap. ^3. etc. Now this wisdom of God shines forth
chiefly in the principal works of God, namely in the creation, preservation
and government of the world, in the governing and ordering of mankind. Ier.
51.15. Isa. 40.28. But most evidently in the predestination of men and in the
wonderful manner of everlasting salvation purchased by Christ. Ephesians. 3. v. 10.
in so much that the very Angels desire thoroughly to behold it. 1. Pet. 1.12.

Use 1. Here are justly condemned those men that mutter and murmur against Gods
proceedings, and find fault with and condeme any work or judgment of God, as
though it were not wisely ordained, but we must reverence, adore and admire
his excellent wisdom appearing in them and especially in the mystery of
eternal salvation, even then when our blind and imperfect reason espieth and
perceives no reason of it. Touching the mysteries contained in Gods revealed
will, let us by humble and earnest prayer beseech and entreat the Lord that he
would more clearly day by day, open them unto us, Psalm. 73. ver. 17. Psalm.
119. ver. 18. Ephe* 1.17. by the ministry of his word and spirit.

O the deepenesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge etc.
Doctr.
We must in the hidden mysteries and secrecies of almighty God, not be curious
to know impossibilities, much less, to object and except against the manner of
Gods proceeding herein; but contain our selves within the precincts and
limmits of his word, and adore and admire the secret counsels of God, and not
vainly and rashly attempt to find and search them out. Psalm. 36. ver. 6.

The first reason hereof is, for that the infinite wisdom and glory of God
appears in this, that his judgments and secrets, (especially in matters of
predestination and reprobation, and of particular events and of the moments and
times thereof) are conceiled and kept from us. 2 Chapter 32. v. 21
God will not (as Ezechias foolishly and vainly did show all his riches and
treasures to the Babilonish ambassadors) God I say will not in this world
impart and communicate his in-most counsels to any but by the event only.

The second reason is, because God in dispensing of matters, has hidden
contraries as it were under contraries. viz. contrary ends under contrary
means, life under death, glory under shame, riches under poverty. 2 Cor.
6.8.9.10. Hebr. 2.25. Thirdly the Apostle Paul, could not, nor durst search
them, much less we that are so much inferior unto him and have no
Apostolical gifts.

Use 1. This doctrine refuteth and condemns all curious, frivolous, and
unnecessary questions such as these following: why did God creat man apt to
fall? Curious questions.
why did not God prevent, or keep him from falling? why does God elect some
and refuse others? why does not God cause his word to be preached in one and
the same age, in all places of the world? why does God condemn men for
unbelief; seeing that no man can possibly believe, unless God confer faith
upon him? why does God not convert all; seeing that he can do it? why has God
and yet still does, suffer the greatest part of the world, to remain in error
and blindness? why does he at one time call more then at another? Is not God
unjust and cruel to predestnat men to condemnation before they have done good
or evil? Use 2. As often as in the confusion and disorders yt seem to be in
the world our faith begins to waver, let us remember yt Gods judgment in the
whole government of ye world, Psalm. 36.7.
is most deservedly compared to a uast huge deep, yt fills heaven and earth:
and yt which by they eye of our judgment we cannot pierce into, let us rather
reverently submit our selves unto, then curiously to pry and diue into it. How
unsearchable are his ways and his judgments past finding out.

Who has known the mind of the Lord?

We must not be curious, Doctr.
inquisitiue or desirous to know, any thing of God and his ways, and of his
course, and order, that he observes in disposing and managing universal and
particular things, Deuteronomy. 29. v. 29
which he has not revealed in holy scripture. Act. 1.6. where God has no
mouth to speak we must have no ears to hear, and where he cease
directing, we must cease enquiring. Math. 12.22. wicked therefore is the
practice of those that by Astrology and other indirect means seek to know the
day of men's death, and calculate issues of particular intendments. The first
reason hereof is, for that they are deeper and more profound, then that man's
reason can find out, and if we busy and trouble our selves herein, we shall at
length be oppressed with the brightness of Gods majesty and confounded in our
own vain imaginations. Secondly, they that are curious and inquisitiue
herein, fall (through Gods just judgment) into such intricate laborinthes,
that they can never recover themselves out of, and plunge themselves into such
a bottomless gulf, out of which they shall never arise. Thirdly we have
matter and employment sufficient, and that for our souls health, to bestow and
busy our selves in all the days of our life, in serching out, musing upon,
and in laboring to bring into ure and practice, Gods will revealed, which
contains that which is abundantly sufficient for salvation, we can never in
this mortality sound out the depth of it, muchlesse follow and obey it: ergo,
what vanity and folly is it, to omit and leave undone that which God has
commanded and which so highly concerns us, Mich. 6, 8 Romans 12.22
and preposterously and unprofitably to busy our selves to know things
impossible and unlawful for us to know, and the knowledge thereof would be
hurtful unto us?

Use 1. Let us leave and bid adue to all vain speculations, wherein we do
nothing but offend God, weary and wast our wits, and trifle out our times
vnprofitablely, much rather let us exercise our selves and senses in serching
the holy scripture and then labor chiefly to know and practice these things
that concern our faith, sanctification and salvation; herein we shall find
employment enough though we have the wisdom of Solomon and could live as long
as Methusala did.

2 Use. It must teach us to rest contented in Gods counsels and subscribe to
his will, and when we see many things to cross our expectation and
judgment; we must not accuse God of injustice and want of wisdom.

For he alone knows what to do and how to determine of all things and
persons, and what is most agreeable to his divine Majesty, and whatsoever he
does is always good (in regard of himself) and nothing could be done more
wisely and in better order: and therefore we must rather with all reverence
adore these hidden secresies, then any way carpe or cauell at them.

3 Use. We are admonished hereby to be thankful to God for his wisdom and
manner of disposing and governing all things, Job. 1. v. 27.
even then when his judgments and corruptions inflicted upon our selves, seem
bitter, harsh and intolerable.

who was his Counsailer? Doct.

Doctr. God in the decreeing and disposing al things, and in procuring man's
salvation needs no counsel, uses no man's advice, but does all things
according to his own good pleasure, and after the counsel of his own will,
Psalm. 115 v. 3. Ephesians. 1. v. 5.9.

The reason hereof is, because he is omnipotent, most wise, and God all
sufficient vndependent of any other, and of whom all persons, and things, have
their being and dependence.

Secondly, GOD does act and put in execution nothing in time but that which he
purposed and decreed before all times, Pro. 8.
for otherwise he could not be wisdom it self, neither could the Son of
God, his wisdom be, begotten before the Creation of the world.

1 Use. Therefore let us not murmr, or repine against any of his creatures
and his works, neither let us measure them after our own shallow reason and
understanding, for the reason and beginning of it cannot be comprehended; Job
38.29.40.41. Psa. 39.17.18.
it surmounteth all men's wits and capacities, and if Gods wisdom in the least
creatures be past finding out, how much more in the mattter, and mystery of
man's predestination and redemption?

Or who has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed?
God is debtor and beholding unto no man, and no man can allege any service
work or study whereby he binds God to himself, Doctr.
or should move him to elect, preserve and redeem and glorify him. Isa. 16.2.
Luke. 17.9 10.

Psa. 8.4.
Reason hereof. No man can ad any thing to God, for all that we have, we receive
it only from Gods mercy, and we depend upon his goodness for it Psa. 16.2.23.

2. Reason: Gods power, will and decree, is free and absolute and has no
respect or relation to any thing from without his essence whatsoever. Romans 9.15.

1. Use. If God should (for our correction or trial) deprive and bereave us of
wife, children, health, liuelihood, goods, houses (as he did his good servant
Job) we must stay and comfort our selves herein, Math* 20.15.
for all these things are Gods, they were given us by him, and therefore they
are not ours, and he alone may justly do with his own what seems good to
his divine will and pleasure.

2. Use. Here all human merits and foreseen works in the patriarchs and
forefathers and their posterity, are debarred from any moving or procuring
cause of GODS favor and mercy, declared unto Jew or Gentile: for of
themselves men can do nothing that is good, and therefore all proceeds from
Gods mere mercy.

Secondly in matter of reprobation none has cause to be offended with God or
to complain of his proceedings, for his power and authority is free, and
absolute, and he supreme of al creatures, and he may dispose of them as best
seems good unto his heavenly wisdom, and he is not to render any reason of
his doings to any.

Lastly the very Reprobates are ordained in Gods decree and (touching the
event) to show forth GODS glory as well as others, Rom: 9.22.
for the glory of his Justice shall be manifested in and upon them.

For of him are all things.
In that all things have their being, Doctr.
creation and preservation from God only, and so are of him directed, ordered,
and governed, we learn that he is God all sufficient both for himself and all
his people and servants, and that not only for their temporal life and
happiness, but much more for their regeneration, redemption and eternal
salvation. Genesis 17.1.

He is our Shepherd how then can we want any thing? He has Heaven and Earth
at command and how then can his be destitute of that which is good for them?
he was perfect and complet in himself before the creation, and therefore his
works ad nothing to his own nature and essence: and (to conclude) he works
all things both in wordly and spiritual matters according to the pleasure of
his own will only, without any let or restraint.

Let us therefore in no danger, temptation and necessty be daunted and
discouraged, Psalm. 23.1.
for our God whom we serve is able to save and deliver us, he knows how to
proceed, and he is a most faithful creator and an indulgent father unto us,
only let us betrust him with the ordering of our affairs, and commend and
betake our selves, lives maintenance and affairs unto his gracious
disposition, and he will never fail, nor forsake us.

For him are all things.
Seeing that all things, Doctr.
yea the very reprobate and all the works and wonders of GOD, are ordained to
set forth the glory either of Gods mercy, or of his justice we must not in
hidden things dispute and repine and expostulate with GOD but patiently submit
all to his good will and Pleasure, give him the glory in all things Psa. 115.2.
Luke 17.16. 2. Cor. 10.17. Dan. 9.7. Apoc. 14.6. Ioh. 5 44.

For hereby we declare and testife our obedience, Romans 9.22.
duty and thankfulness. God has created us to this end and requires this
tribute and sacriace at our hands.

Secondly, the title and interest in all things, and the power whereby they are.

Ioh. 5. v, 44. Ioh. 12. v. 43.
1 Use. Hereby are met withal, and encountered all that seek their own
glory (as the Rulers in Christ his time) and seek not Gods glory at all.

Secondly all Pharisees, Iustitiaries and Papists, who boast and brag of their
own merits, and look to be saved (in part) by their own deeds and works,
and not by Gods mercy and Christ Jesus his satisfaction and mediation only.

2 Use. We must be wary and careful, that we never vsurp or diminish any part
of Gods glory, for God is most jealous of his honor, and cannot endure that it
should in any wise be impaired or impugned.

3 Use. We must in all our words and works, consultations and actions,
acknowledge, praise and honor God as the chief good and the most excellent
cause of all things, and constantly maintain and advance his glory: otherwise
if we honor not him he will never honor us here, much less gloryfie us in the
life to come.

(...).

Faults escaped in printing.
Page 11. l. 1. as these. page 14 l. 18. auoy ded page 22 l. 18. and drawn.
such. page 25. l 7. this consequence was but page, 27. l. 12. yielded n^ page
29. l. 33. Night, page 36. l. 2. by good means. page 50 l. 13. Remainders,
page 51. l. 14. an occasion. page 54. l. 1. read 1. Pet. 1. 13. page 58. l. 30.
attendance, page 59. ^. al we Gentiles, page 62. l. 13. World, page 69. li. 9.
is holy, and 19. God offers and ibid. l. 28. and discern them.


