THE SECOND PART, OR A CONTINVANCE OF POLYOLBION FROM THE EIGHTEENTH SONG.

Containing all the Tracts, Rivers, Mountains, and Forests:

Intermixed with the most remarkable Stories, Antiquities, Wonders, Rarities,
Pleasures, and Commodities of the East, and Northern parts of this Isle, lying
betwixt the two famous Rivers of THAMES, and TWEED.

By MICHAEL DRAYTON, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes for John Marriott, John Grismand, and
Thomas Dew.

1622.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, CHARLES Prince of WALES.
THE first Part of this Poem (most Jllustrious Prince) I dedicated to your
deceased Brother of most famous Memory, whose princely Bounty, and usage of
me, gave me much encouragement to go on with this second Part, or Continuance
thereof; which now as his Successor, J owe to your Highness. If means and
time fail me not, being now arrived at Scotland, I trust you shall see me
crown her with no worse Flowers, then J have done her two Sisters, England,
and Wales: and without any partiality, as I dare be bold, to make the Poets
of that Kingdom my Judges therein. If I ariue at the Orcades, without sinking in
my flight, your Highness cannot but say, that I had no ill Perspectiue that
gave me things so clearly, when I stood so far off.

To your Highness most humbly devoted. MICHAEL DRAYTON.

To any that will read it.
WHen I first undertook this Poem, or as some very skillful in this kind,
have pleased to term it, this Herculean labor. I was by some virtuous
friends persuaded, that I should receive much comfort and encouragement
therein; and for these Reasons: First, that it was a new, clear way, never
before gone by any; then, that it contained all the Delicacies, Delights, and
Rarities of this renowned Isle, interwouen with the Histories of the Britanes,
Saxons, Normans, and the later English: And further that there is scarcely any
of the Nobility, or Gentry of this land, but that he is some way or other, by
his Blood interressed therein. But it has fallen out otherwise; for instead of
that comfort, which my noble friends (from the freedom of their Spirits)
proposed as my due, I have met with barbarous Ignorance, and base Detraction;
such a cloud has the Devil drawn over the Worlds Judgment, whose opinion is
in few years fallen so far below all Ballatry, that the Lethargy is
incurable; nay some of the Stationers, that had the Selling of the first part
of this Poem, because it went not so fast away in the Sale, as some of their
beastly and abominable Trash, (a shame both to our Language and Nation) have
either despightfully left out, or at least carelessely neglected the Epistles
to the Readers, and so have cousoned the Buyers with unperfected Books; which
these that have undertaken the second Part, have been forced to amend in the
first, for the small number that are yet remaining in their hands. And some of
our outlandish, unnatural English, (I know not how otherwise to express them)
stick not to say, that there is nothing in this Island worthy studying for,
and take a great pride to be ignorant in any thing thereof; for these, since
they delight in their folly, I wish it may be hereditary from them to their
posterity, that their children may be begged for Fools to the fifth
Generation, until it may be beyond the memory of man to know that there was
ever any other of their Families: neither can this deter me from going on
with Scotland, if Means and Time do not hinder me, to perform as much as I
have promised in my first Song:

Till to the sleepy Maine, to Thuly I have gone,
And seen the Frozen Isles, the cold Deucalidon,
Amongst whose Iron Rocks, grim Saturn yet remains,
Bound in (...) gloomy Caves with Adamantine Chains.
And as for those Cattle whereof I spoke before, Odi profanum vulgus and
arceo, of which I account them, be they never so great, and so I leave them.
To my friends, and the lovers of my Labors, I wish all happiness.

Michael Drayton.

To my Honored Friend Mr. DRAYTON.
ENglands brave Genius, raise thy head; and see,
We have a Muse in this mortality
Of Virtue yet suruiues; All met not Death,
When we intoomb'd our dear Elizabeth.
Immortal Sydney, honored Colin Clout,
Presaging what we feel, went timely out.
Then why lives Drayton, when the Times refuse,
Both Means to live, and Matter for a Muse?
Only without Excuse to leave us quite,
And tell us, Durst we act, he durst to write.
Now, as the people of a famished Town,
Receiving no Supply, seek up and down
For moldy Corn, and Bones long cast aside,
Wherewith their hunger may be satisfide:
(Small store now left) we are enforced to pry
And search the dark Leaves of Antiquity
For some good Name, to raise our Muse again,
In this her Crisis, whose harmonious strain
Was of such compass, that no other Nation
Durst ever venture on a sole Translation;
Whilst our full language, Musical, and hie,
Speaks as themselves their best of Poesy.
Drayton, amongst the worthi'st of all those,
The glorious Laurel, or the Cyprian Rose
Have ever crowned, does claim in every Line,
An equal honor from the sacred Nine:
For if old Time could like the restless Maine,
Roll himself back into his Spring again,
And on his wings bear this admired Muse,
For Ovid, Virgil, Homer, to peruse.
They would confess, that never happier Pen,
Sung of his Loves, his Country, and the Men.
WILLIAM BROWN.

To his Noble Friend, MICHAEL DRAYTON, Esquire, upon his Topo-chrono-graphicall
POEM.
FRom CORNWAL'S Foreland to the Cliffs of DOVER,
Over hilly CAMBRIA, and all ENGLAND over,
Thy Muse has borne me; and (in four days) shown
More goodly Prospects, then I could have known
In four years Travails; If I had not thus
Been mounted, on thy winged PEGASVS.
The famous Rivers, the delight some Fountains;
The fruitful Valleys, the steepe-rising Mountains;
The new built Towers, the ancient-ruin'd Walls;
The wholesome Baths, the bedds of Mineralls;
The nigh-worne Monuments of former Ages;
The Works of Peace, the Marks of Ciuill-rages;
The Woods, the Forests, and the open Plains,
With whatsoever this spacious Land contains,
For Profit, or for Pleasure: Io're-looke,
(As from one Station) when I read thy Book.
Nor do mine eyes from thence behold alone,
Such Things, as for the present there are done;
(Or Places, as this day, they do appear)
But Actions past, and Places as they were
A hundred Ages since, as well as now:
Which, he that wearies out his feet to know,
Shall never find, nor yet so cheap attain
(With so much ease and profit) half that gain.
Good-speed be fall Thee; who have waged a Task,
That better Censures, and Rewards does ask,
Then these Times have to give. For, those that should
The honor of true POESY uphold,
Are (for the most part) such as do prefer
The fawning Lines of every Pamphleter,
Before the best-writ POEMS. And their sight
Or cannot, or else dares not, eye the Flight
Of freeborn NVMBERS; least bright VIRTVE'S fame,
Which flies in those, reflect on Them, their shame.
It Is well; thy happy Judgment, could devise,
Which way, a man this Age might Poetize,
And not write SATYRS: Or else, so to write
That escape thou may, the clutches of Despite.
For, through such Woods, and Rivers, trips thy MUSE,
As, will or loose, or drown him, that pursues.
Had my Invention (which I know too weak)
Enabled been, so brave a Flight to make;
(Should my unlucky Penn have over gone
So many a Province, and so many a Town)
Though I to no man's wrong had gone astray,
I had been pounded on the Kings hye way.
But thou have better Fortune, and have chose
So brave a PATRON, that thou can not lose
By this Adventure. For, in Him, suruiues
His Brother HENRIE'S Virtues: and he lives
To be that Comfort to thy MUSE, which He
Had nobly (e're his death) begun to be.
Yet, over much presume not, that these Times,
Will therefore value thy Heroic Rymes,
According to their Merit. For, although,
He, and some few, the worth of them shall know:
This is their FATE. (And some unborn, will say,
I spoke the Truth; what e're men think to Day)
Ages to come, shall hugg thy POESY,
As we our dear Friends Pictures, when they dye.
Those that succeed us, DRAYTONS Name shall love,
And, so much this laborious PIECE approve;
That such as write beereafter, shall to trim
Their new Inventions, pluck it limb from limb.
And our great-Grandsonnes Childrens-children may,
(Yea shall) as in a Glass, this ISLE suruay,
As we now see it: And as those did to,
Who lived many hundred years ago.
For, when the Seas shall eat away the Shore,
Great Woods spring up, where Plains were heretofore;
High Mountains leueld with low Vallyes lie;
And Rivers run where now the ground is dry:
This POEM shall grow famous, And declare
What old-Things stood, where new-Things shall appear.
And hereunto his NAME subscribeth He,
Who shall by this PRaeDICTION, live with Thee.
George Wither.

To my Worthy Friend MICHAEL DRAYTON, Esquire. An Acrosticke Sonnet upon his
Name.
MVst Albion thus be Stellified by thee,
In her full pomp, that her the world may praise,
Cheerful, Brave Isle, yea shall I live to see
Him thus to deck, and crown thy Front with Bays,
And shall I not in Zeal, and Merit too
Express to thee my Joy, my Thanks to him;
Less (sure) then this I may not, will not do.
Drayton, (...) still Parnassus thou do clime,
Right like thy self, whose Heauen-inspired Muse,
As does the Phoenix still her self renewing,
Ye into other the like life infuse;
Thou his rich Subject, he thy Fame pursuing.
Ohadst thou loved him, as (...) thee has done,
No Land such Honor, (to all times) had won.
JOHN REYNOLDS.





POLY-OLBION.
The nineteenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse, now over Thames makes forth,
Upon her Progress to the North,
From Cauney with a full carrere,
She up against the stream does bear;
Where Waltham Forests pride expressed,
She points directly to the East,
And shows how all those Rivers strain
Through Essex, to the German main;
When Stoure, with Orwels aid prefers,
Our British brave Sea-voyagers;
Half Suffolk in with them she takes,
Where of this Song an end she makes.
Bear bravely up my Muse, the way thou went before, An Island lying in the
Thames, on Essex side.

And cross the kingly Thames to the Essexian shore,
Stem up his tyde-full stream, upon that side to rise, Albion fained to be the
son of Neptune, going over into France to fight with Hercules, by whom he was
vanquished, is supposed to leave his children, the Isles of Thanet, (...),
Greane, and this Cauney, lying in the mouth of (...), to the (...) of Neptune
their grand father. See to the latter end of the 18. Song.

Where * Cauncy, Albions child in-Iled richly lies,
Which, though her lower site does make her seem but mean,
Of him as dearly loved as Shepey is or Greane,
And him as dearly loved; for when he would depart,
With Hercules to fight, she took it so to heart,
That falling low and flat, her blubberd face to hide,
By Thames she welneere is (...) every tide:
And since of worldly State, she never takes keep,
But only gives her self, to tend, and milk her sheep.
But Muse, from her so low, divert thy high-set song
To London-wards, and bring from Lea with thee along
The Forests, and the Floods, and most exactly show,
How these in order stand, how those directly flow:
For in that happy soil, does pleasure ever won,
Through Forests, where clear Rills in wild Meanders run;
Where dainty Summer Bowers, and Arborets are made,
Cut out of Busshy thicks, for coolness of the shade.
Fools gaze at painted Courts, to the country let me go,
To climb the easy hill, then walk, the valley low;
No gold-embossed Roofes, to me are like the woods;
No Bed like to the grass, nor liquor like the floods:
A Citie's but a sink, gay houses gaudy graves,
The Muses have free leave, to starve or live in caves:
But Waltham Forest still in prosperous estate,
The brave situation of Waltham (...).
As standing to this day (so strangely fortunate)
Above her neighbor Nymphs, and holds her head aloft;
A turfe beyond them all, so sleeke and wondrous soft,
Upon her setting side, by goodly London graced,
Upon the North by Lea, her South by Thames embraced.
Upon her rising point, she chanced to epsy,
A dainty Forrest-Nymph of her society.
Fair Hatfield, which in height all other did surmount,
Hatfield Forest lying lower toward the East between Stortford and Dunmovv.
And of the Dryades held in very high account;
Yet in respect of her stood far out of the way,
Who doubting of her self, by others late decay,
Her sisters glory viewed with an astonished eye,
Whom Waltham wisely thus reprooueth by and by.
Dear Sister rest content, nor our declining rue,
What thing is in this world (that we can say) is new;
The Ridge and Furrow shows, that once the crooked Plow,
Turned up the grassy turfe, where Oaks are rooted now:
And at this hour we see, the Share and Coulter tear
The full corne-bearing gleabe, where sometimes forests were;
And those but Caitifes are, which most do seek our spoil,
Who having sold our woods, do lastly sell our soil;
It Is virtue to give place to these ungodly times,
When as the fostred ill proceeds from others crimes;
Against Lunatiks, and fools, what wife (...) spend their force;
For folly headlong falls, when it has had the course:
And when God gives men up, to ways abhorred and vile,
Of understanding he depriues them quite, the while
They into error run, confounded in their sin,
As simple Fowls in lyme, or in the Fowlers gynne.
And for those pretty Birds, that wont in us to sing,
They shall at last forbear to welcome in the Spring,
When wanting where to perch, they sit upon the ground,
And curse them in their Notes, who first did woods confound.
Dear Sister Hatfield, then hold up thy drooping head,
We feel no such decay, nor is all succor fled:
For Essex is our dower, which greatly does abound,
With every simple good, that in the I Will is found:
And though we go to wrack in this so general waste,
This hope to us remains, we yet may be the last.
When Hatfield taking heart, where late she sadly stood,
Sends little Roding forth, her best-beloued Flood; Many Towns that stand on
this River, have (...) name as an addition: as Kythorp Roding, LeadenKoding,
with many other.

Which from her Crystal Fount, as to enlarge her fame,
To many a Village lends, her clear and noble name,
Which as she wandreth on, through Waltham holds her way,
With goodly Oken wreaths, which makes her wondrous gay;
But making at the last into the warry Marsh,
Where though the blady grass unwholesome be and harsh,
Those wreaths away she casts, which bounteous Waltham gave,
With Bulrush, Flags, and Reed, to make her wondrous brave,
And her selves strength diuides, to sundry lesser streams,
So wantoning she falls into her Sovereign Thames.
From whose vast Beechy banks a rumor straight resounds,
Which quickly ran it self through the Essexian grounds,
That Crouch amongst the rest, a Rivers name should seek,
As scorning any more the nickname of a Creek,
Well furnished with a Stream, that from the fill to fall,
Wants nothing that a Flood should be adorned withal. The fruitfulst Hundred
of Essex.

On Anciently called (...) where these ominous signs foreran that great
overthrow given to the Roman Co. lony by the Britans. See the 8. Song.
Benge's Batfull side, and at her going out,
With Walnot, Foulness fair, near watered round about.
Two Isles for greater state to stay her up that stand,
Thrust far into the Sea, yet fixed to the land;
As Nature in that sort them purposely had placed,
That she by Sea and Land, should every way be graced.
Some Sea-Nymphs and besides, her part (there were) that took,
As angry that their Crouch should not be called a Brook;
And bad her to complain to Neptuns of her wrong.
But whilst these grievous stirs thus happened them among,
Choice Chelmer comes along, a Nymph most neatly clear,
Which welneere through the midst does cut the wealthy Sheere,
By Dunmow gliding down to Chelmsford hold her chase, Chelmsfoid (abruptly
(...)) as much to say, as the Ford upon the River Che'mer.

To which she gives the name, which as she does embrace
Clear Can comes tripping in, and does with Chelmer close:
With whose supply (though small as yet) she greater grows.
She for old Anciently called (...) where these ominous signs foreran that
great overthrow given to the Roman Colony by the Britans. See the 8. Song.
Maldon makes, where in her passing by,
She to remembrance calls that Roman Colony,
And all those ominous signs her fall that did foregoe,
As that which most expres'd their fatal overthrow;
Crowned Victory reuerst, fell down whereas she stood,
And the vast greenish Sea, discolored like to blood.
Shreeks heard like peoples cries, that see their deaths at hand;
The pourtratures of men imprinted in the sand.
When Chelmer scarce arriues in her most wished Bay,
But Blakwater comes in, through many a crooked way,
Which Pant was called of yore; but that, by Time exild,
She Froshwell after hight, then Blakwater instil'd,
But few, such titles have the British Floods among.
When Northey near at hand, and th'Ile of Ousey rung
With shouts the Sea-Nymphs gave, for joy of their arrive,
As either of those Isles in courtesy do strive,
To Tethis Darlings, which should greatest honor do;
And what the former did, the latter adds thereto.
But Colne, which frankly lends fair Colechester her name,
(On all the Essexian shore, the Town of greatest fame)
Perceiving how they still in Courtship did contend,
Quoth she, wherefore the time thus idly do you spend?
What is there nothing here, that you esteem of worth,
That our big-bellied Sea, or our rich land brings forth?
Think you our Oysters here, unworthy of your praise?
Pure * Walfleet, which do still the daintiest pallats please:
Walfleet Oysters
As excellent as those, which are esteemed most.
The Cizic shells, or those on the Lucrinian coast;
Cizicum is a city of Bythinia. Lucrinia is a city of Apulia upon the
Adriatic Sea; the Oysters of which places, were reckoned for great delicates
with the Romans.
Or Cheese, which our fat soil to every quarter sends;
Whose tacke the hungry Clown, and Plowman so commends.
If you esteem not these, as things above the ground,
Look under, where the Vrnes of ancient times are found:
The Roman Emp'rours Coins, often dig'd out of the dust,
And warlike Weapons now consumed with cankring rust:
The huge and massy Bones, of mighty fearful men,
To tell the worlds full strength, what creatures lived then;
When in her height of youth, the lusty fruitful earth
The bones of Gyantlike people found in those parts.
Brought forth her big-limb'd brood, even Giants in their birth.
Thus spoke she, when from Sea they suddenly do hear
A strong and horrid noise, which struck the land with fear:
For with their crooked Trumps, his Tritons, Neptune sent,
To warn the wanton Nymphs, that they incontinent
Should straight repair to Stour, in Orwells pleasant Road;
For it had been divulged the Ocean all abroad,
That Orwell and this Stour, by meeting in one Bay,
Two, that each others good, intended every way,
Prepared to sing a Song, that should precisely show,
That Medway for her life, their skill could not out-goe:
Medvvay in the 18. Song, recites the Catalogue of the English Warriors.
For Stour, a dainty flood, that duly does divide
Fair Suffolk from this Shire, upon her other side;
By Clare first coming in, to Sudbury does show,
The even course she keeps; when far she does not flow,
But Breton a bright Nymph, fresh succor to her brings:
Yet is she not so proud of her superfluous Springs,
But Orwell coming in from Ipswitch thinks that she,
Should stand for it with (...), and lastly they agree,
That since the Britans hence their first Discoueries made,
And that into the East they first were taught to trade.
Besides, of all the Roads, and Havens of the East,
This Harbor where they meet, is reckoned for the best.
Our Voyages by Sea, and brave discoueries known,
Their argument they make, and thus they sing their own;
In Seuerns late tuned lay, that Empress of the West, See the 4. Song.

In which great Arthurs acts are to the life expressed:
His Conquests to the North, who Norway did invade,
Who Groneland, Iseland next, then Lapland lastly made
His awful Empires bounds, the Britans acts among,
This God-like Heroes deeds exactly have been sung:
His valiant people then, who to those Countries brought,
Which many an age since that, our great'st discoueries thought.
This worthiest then of ours, our * Argonauts shall lead. Sea-voyages.

Next Malgo, who again that Conquerors steps to tread,
Succeeding him in Reign, in conquests so no less,
Plowed up the frozen Sea, and with as fair success,
By that great Conquerors claim, first Orkney ouerran;
Proud Denmark then subdued, and spacious Norway wan,
Ceasd Iseland for his own, and Goteland to each shore,
Where Arthurs full-saild Fleet had ever touched before.
And when the Britans Reign came after to decline,
And to the Cambrian hills their fate did them confine,
The Saxon swaying all, in Alfred, powerful reign,
Our English Octer put a Fleet to Sea again,
Of th'uge Norwegian Hills, and news did hither bring,
Whose tops are hardly wrought in twelve days travailing.
But leaving Norway then a Sterboard, forward kept,
And with our English Sails that mighty Ocean swept,
Where those stern people won, whom hope of gain does call,
In Hulkes with grapling hooks, to hunt the dreadful Whall;
And great Duina down from her first springing place, The great river of
Russia.

Does roll her swelling waves in churlish Neptunes face.
Then Woolstan after him discovering Dansig found,
Where Wixels mighty mouth is powrd into the Sound, The greatest river of
Danske.

And towing up his stream, first taught the English Oars,
The useful way of Trade to those most gainefull shores.
And when the Norman Stem here strong and potent grew,
And their successful sons, did glorious acts pursue,
One Nicholas named of Lyn, where first he breathed the air,
Though Oxford taught him Art, and well may hold him dear;
In The Mathematics learnd, (although a Friar professed)
To see those Northern Climes, with great desire possessed,
Himself he thither shipped, and skillful in the Globe,
Took every several height with his true Astrolobe;
The Whirlpooles of the seas, and came to understand, The greatest wonder of
Nature.

From the four Card'nall winds, four indraughts that command;
Int'any of whose falls, if th'wandring Barque does light,
It hurried is away with such tempestuous flight,
Into that swallowing gulf, which seems as it would draw
The very earth it self into the infernal maw.
Four such Immeasur'd Pooles, Philosophers agree,
Ith four parts of the world undoubtedly to be;
From which they have supposd, Nature the winds does raise,
And from them to proceed the flowing of the Seas.
And when our Civil wars began at last to cease,
And these late calmer times of Oliue-bearing Peace,
Gave leisure to great Minds, far Regions to descry;
That brave aduentrous Knight, our Sir Hugh Willoughby,
Shipped for the Northren Seas, among those congealed Piles,
Fashioned by lasting Frosts, like Mountains, and like Isles,
(In all her fearefulst shapes saw Horror, whose great mind,
In lesser bounds then these, that could not be confined,
Adventured on those parts, where Winter still does keep;
When most the Icy cold had chaind up all the Deep)
In Bleake Arzina's Road his death near Lapland took,
Where Kegor from her site, on those grim Seas does look.
Two others follow then, eternal fame that won,
Our Chancellor, and with him, compare we Ienkinson:
For Russia both imbarqu'd, the first ariuing there,
Entering Duina's mouth, up her proud stream did steer
To Volgad, to behold her pomp, the Russian State,
Moscouia measuring then; the other with like Fate,
Both those vast Realms suruay'd, then into Bactria past,
To Boghors bulwarkt walls, then to the liquid wast,
Where Oxus roleth down twixt his far distant shores,
And over the Caspian Maine, with strong vntyred Oars,
Adventured to view rich Persias wealth and pride,
Whose true report thereof, the English since have tried.
With Fitch, our Eldred next, deseru'dly placed is;
Both travailing to see, the Syrian Tripolis.
The first of which (in this whose noble spirit was shown)
To view those parts, to us that were the most unknown,
On thence to Ormus set, Goa, Cambaya, then,
To vast Zelabdim, thence to Echubar, again
Crossed Ganges mighty stream, and his large banks did view,
To Baccola went on, to Bengola, Pegu;
And for Mallaccan then, Zeiten, and Cochin cast,
Measuring with many a step, the great East-Indian wast.
The other from that place, the first before had gone,
Determining to see the broad-wald Babylon,
Crossed Euphrates, and rowed against his mighty stream;
Licia, and Gaza saw, with great Jerusalem,
And our dear Saviors seat, blessed Bethlem did behold,
And Iourdan, of whose waves, much is in Scriptures told.
Then Macham, who (through love to long adventures led)
Mederas wealthy Isles, the first discovered,
Who having stolen a maid, to whom he was affi'd,
Yet her rich parents still her marriage rites denied,
Put with her forth to Sea, where many a danger past,
Upon an I Will of those, at length by tempest cast;
And putting in, to give his tender Love some ease,
Which very ill had brook'd, the rough and boystrous Seas;
And lingering for her health, within the quict Bay,
The Mariners most false, fled with the Ship away,
When as it was not long, but she gave up her breath;
When he whose tears in vain bewayld her timelesse death:
That their deserved Rites her Funeral could not have,
A homely Altar built upon her honored grave.
When with his folk but few, not passing two or three,
There making them a Boat, but rudely of one Tree, The wonderful Adventure of
Macham.

Put forth again to Sea, where after many a flaw,
Such as before themselves, scarce Mortal ever saw;
Nor miserable men could possibly sustain,
Now swallowed with the waves, and then spu'd up again;
At length were on the coast of Sunburned Afric thrown:
T'amaze that further world, and to amuse our own.
Then Windham who new ways, for us and ours to try,
For great Morrocco made, discovering Barbary.
Lock, Towerson, Fenner next, vast Guiney forth that sought,
And of her Iuory, home in great abundance brought.
The East-Indian Voy'ger then, the valiant Lancaster,
To Buona Esperance, Comara, Zanziber,
To Nicuba, as he to Gomerpolo went,
Till his strong Bottom struck Molluccos Continent;
And sailing to Brazeel another time he took
Olynda's chiefest Town, and Harbor Farnambuke,
And with their precious Wood, Sugar, and Cotton fraught,
It by his safe return, into his Country brought.
Then Forbosher, whose fame flew all the Ocean o'r,
Who to the Northwest sought, huge China's wealthy shore,
When nearer to the North, that wandering Seaman set,
Where he in our hotst Mon'ths of June and July met
With Snow, Frost, Hail, and Sleet, and found stern Winter strong,
With mighty Isles of Ice, and Mountains huge and long.
Where as it comes and goes, the great eternal Light,
Makes half the year still day, and half continual night.
Then for those Bounds unknown, he bravely set again, Meta Incognita.

As he a Sea-god were, familiar with the Maine.
The Noble Fenton next, and lackman we prefer,
Both Voyagers, that were with famous Forbosher.
And Dauies, three times forth that for the Northwest made;
Still striving by that course, t'inrich the English Trade:
And as he well deserved to his eternal fame.
There by a mighty Sea, Imortaliz'd his Name. (...) Dauisium.

With noble Gilbert next, comes Hoard who took in hand
To clear the course scarce known into the Newfound Land,
And viewed the plenteous Seas, and fishfull Havens, where
Our neighboring Nations since have stored them every year.
Then Globe-engirdling Drake, the Nauall Palm that won,
Who strove in his long Course to emulate the Sun:
Of whom the Spaniard used a Prophecy to tell,
That from the British Isles should rise a Dragon fell,
That with his armed wings, should strike the Iberian Maine,
And bring in after time much horror upon Spain.
This more then man (or what) this Demie-god at Sea,
Leaving behind his back, the great America,
Upon the surging Maine his wel-stretch't Tacklings flewd,
To forty three Degrees of North'ly (...);
Unto that Land before to the Christian world unknown,
Which in his Countries right he named New Albion;
And in the Western Inde, spite of the power of Spain,
He Saint Iago took, Domingo, Cartagene:
And leaving of his prowess, a mark in every Bay,
Saint Augustins surpised, in Terra Florida.
Then those that forth for Sea, Industrious Rawleigh wrought,
And them with every thing, fit for discovery fraught;
That Amadas, (whose Name does scarsely English sound)
With Barlow, who the first Virginia thoroughly found.
As Greenvile, whom he got to undertake that Sea,
Three sundry times from hence, who touched Virginia.
(In his so rare a choice, it well approou'd his wit;
That with so brave a Spirit, his turn so well could fit.
O Greenvile, thy great Name, for ever be renowned,
And borne by Neptune still, about this mighty Round;
Whose Nauall Conflict wanne thy Nation so much fame,
And in the Iberians bred fear of the English name.
Nor should Fame speak her low'dst, Of Lane, she could not lie,
Who in Virginia left, with The English Colony,
Himself so bravely bare, amongst our people there,
That him they only loved, when others they did fear.
And from those Barbarous, brute, and wild Virginians wan
Such reverence, as in him there had been more then man.
Then he which favored still, such high attempts as these,
Rawleigh, whose reading made him skilled in all the Seas,
Imbarqu'd his worthy self, and his aduenturous crew,
And with a prosperous Sail to those fair Countries flew,
Where O renoque, as he, on in his course does roll,
Seems as his greatness meant, grim Neptune to control;
Like to a puisant King, whose Realms extend so far,
That many a potent Prince his Tributaries are.
So are his Branches Seas, and in the rich Guiana,
A Flood as proud as he, the broad-brim'd Orellana:
And on the spacious firm Manoas mighty seat,
The land (by Natures power) with wonders most repleat.
So Leigh, Cape Briton saw, and Rameas Isles again;
As Tompson undertook the Voyage to New-Spaine:
And Hawkins not behind, the best of these before,
Who hoysing sail, to seek the most remotest shore,
Upon that new named Spain, and Guinny sought his prize,
As one whose mighty mind small things could not suffice,
The son of his brave Sire, who with his furrowing Keele,
Long ere that time had touched the goodly rich Brazeel.
Courageous Candish then, a second Neptune here,
Whose fame filled every mouth, and took up every ear.
What man could in his time discourse of any Seas,
But of brave Candish talked, and of his voyages;
Who through the South Seas past, about this earthly Ball,
And saw those Stars, to them that only rise and fall,
And with his silken sails, stayn'd with the richest Ore,
Dared any one to pass where he had been before.
Count Cumberland, so hence to seek the Asores sent,
And to the Westerne-Inde, to Porta Ricco went,
And with the English power it bravely did surprise.
Sir Robert Dudley then, by sea that sought to rise,
Hoyst Sails with happy winds to th'Iles of Trinidado:
Paria then he past, the Islands of Granado;
As those of Sancta Cruz, and Porta Ricco: then
Amongst the famous rank of our Sea-searching men,
Is Preston sent to Sea, with Summers forth to find,
Adventures in the parts upon the Westerne-Inde;
Port Santo who surpised, and Coches, with the Fort
Of Coro, and the Town, when in submissiue sort,
Cumana ransom craved, Saint James of Le on sacked;
Iamica went not free, but as the rest they wracked.
Then Sherley, (since whose name such high renown has won)
That Voyage undertook, as they before had done:
He Saint Iago saw, Domingo, Margarita,
By Terrafirma sailed to th'Ilands of Iamica,
Up Rio Dolce rowed, and with a prosperous hand,
Returning to his home, touched at the New Foundland,
Where at Iamicas Isles, courageous Parker met
With Sherley, and along up Rio Dolce set,
Where bidding him adue, on his own course he ran,
And took Campeches Town, the chief'st of Iucatan.
A Freegate, and from thence did home to Britan bring,
With most strange Tribute fraught, due to that Indian King,
At mighty Neptunes beck, thus ended they their Song,
When as from Harwich all to Louing-land along,
Great claps and shouts were heard resounding to the shore,
Wherewith the Essexian Nymphs applaud their loved Stour,
From the Suffolcean side yet those which Stour prefer
Their princely Orwell praise, as much as the other her:
For though clear Briton be rich Suffolkes from her spring,
Which Stour upon her way to Harwich down does bring,
Yet Deben of her self a stout and steadfast friend,
Her succor to that Sea, near Orwels Road does send.
When Waueney to the North, rich Suffolks only mere,
As Stour upon the North, from Essex parts this Sheere; Suffolk bounded on the
South and North.

Lest Stour and Orwell thus might steal her Nymphs away,
In Neptunes name commands, that here their force should stay:
For that her self and Yar in honor of the Deep,
Were purposed a Feast in Louing-land to keep.




The twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse that part of Suffolk sings,
That lies to Norfolk, and then brings
The bright Norfolcean Nymphs, to ghest
To Louing-land, to Neptunes Feast;
To Ouze the less then down she takes,
Where she a Flight at River makes:
And thence to Marsh-land she descends,
With whose free praise this Song she ends.
FRom Suffolk rose a sound, through the Norfolcean shore
That ran it self, the like had not bin heard before:
For he that does of Sea the powerful Trident weld,
His Tritons made proclaim, a * Nymphall to be held A meeting, or Feast os
Nymphs.

In honor of himself, in Louing-land, where he
The most selected Nymphs appointed had to be.
Those Seamayds that about his secret (...) do dwell,
Which tend his mighty herds of Whales, and Fishes fell,
As of the Rivers those, amongst the Meadows rank,
That play in every Foar'd, and sport on every bank,
Were summoned to be there, in pain of Neptunes hate:
For he would have his Feast, observed with god-like state,
When those Suffolcean Floods, that sided not with Stoure,
Their streams but of themselves into the Ocean power,
As Or, through all the coast a Flood of wondrous fame,
Whose honored fall begets a * Haven of her name. (...) Haven.

And Blyth a dainty Brook, their speedy course do cast,
For Neptune with the rest, to Louing-land to have:
When Waueney in her way, on this Septentriall side,
That these two Eastern Shires does equally divide,
From * Laphamford leads on, her stream into the East, The place of her Spring.

By Bungey, then along by Beckles, when possessed
Of Louing-land, 'bout which her limber Arms she throws,
With Neptune taking hands, betwixt them who enclose,
And her an Island make, famed for her site so far.
But leave her Muse awhile, and let us on with Yar,
Which Gariena some, some Hier, some Yar do name; At Gatesend not far thence.

VVhorising from her spring not far from Walsingham,
Through the Norfolcean fields seems wantonly to play,
To Norwich comes at length, toward Yarmouth on her way,
Where Wentsum from the South, and Bariden do bear
Up with her, by whose wealth she much is honored there,
To intertaine her Yar, that in her state does stand,
With Towns of highest account, the fourth of all the land: (...), in place
the 4. city of England.

That hospitable place to the Industrious Dutch,
Whose skill in making Stuffes, and workmanship is such,
(For refuge hither come) as they our aid deserve, The Dutch a most industrious
people.

By labor sore that live, whilst often the English starve;
On Roots, and Pulse that feed, on Beef and Mutton spare,
So frugally they live, not gluttons as we are.
But from my former Theme, since thus I have digrest,
I Will borrow more of Time, until my Nymphs be dressed:
And since these Foods fall out so fitly in my way,
A little while to them I will convert my Lay.
The Colewort, Colifloure, and Cabidge in their season, Roots and Garden.
fruits of this Island.

The Rouncefall, great Beans, and early ripening Peason;
The Onion, Scallion, Leeke, which Housewiues highly rate;
Their kinsman Garlic then, the poor man's Mithridate;
The sauory Parsnip next, and Carret pleasing food;
The Skirret (which some say) in Sallats stirs the blood;
The Turnip, tasting well to Clownes in VVinter weather.
Thus in our verse we put, Roots, Herbs, and Fruits together.
The great moist Pumpion then, that on the ground does lie,
A purer of his kind, the sweet Muske-million by;
Which dainty pallats now, because they would not want,
Have kindly learnt to set, as yearly to transplant:
The Radish somewhat hot, yet urine does provoke;
The Cucumber as cold, the heating Artichoke;
The Citrons, which our soil not easly does affourd;
The Rampion rare as that, the hardly gotten Gourd.
But in these triuiall things, Muse, wander not too long,
But now to nimble Yar, turn we our active Song,
Which in her winding course, from Norwich to the Main,
By many a stately seat lasciuiously does strain,
To Yarmouth till she come, her only christened Town, So called by the falling
of Yar into the Sea.

Whose fishing through the Realm, does her so much renown,
Where those that with their nets still haunt the boundles lake,
Her such a sumptuous feast of salted Herrings make,
As they had robbed the Sea of all his former store,
And past that very hour, it could produce no more.
Her own selves Harbor here, when Yar does hardly win,
But kindly she again, saluted is by Thrin,
A fair Norsolcean Nymph, which gratifies her fall.
Now are the * Tritons heard, to Louing-land to call,
Which Neptunes great commands, before them bravely bear, Supposed to be
Trumpeters to Neptune.

Commanding all the Nymphs of high account that were,
Which in fat Holland lurk amongst the queachy plashes,
Or play them on the sands, upon the fomy washes,
As all the watery brood, which haunt the German deepes,
Upon whose briny Curles, the dewy morning weeps,
To Louing-land to come, and in their bestattires,
That meeting to observe, as now the time requires.
When Erix, Neptunes son by Venus, to the shore
To see them safely brought, their Herault came before,
And for a Mace he held in his huge hand, the horn
Of that so much esteemed, sea-honoring Unicorn.
Next Proto wondrous swift, led all the rest the way, The vertuall properties
incident to waters, as well Seas, as Rivers, expressed by their name in the
persons of Nymphs, as has bin used by the Ancients.

Then she which makes the calmes, the mild Cymodice,
With god-like Dorida, and Galatea fair,
With dainty Nets of pearl, cast o'r their braided hair:
Analijs which the Sea does salt, and seasoned keep;
And Batheas, most supreme and sovereign in the deep,
Brings Cyane, to the waves which that green color gives;
Then Atmis, which in Fogs and mistie vapors lives:
Phrinax, the Billows rough, and surges that bestrides,
And Rothion, that by her on the wild waters rides;
With Icthias, that of Frye the keeping does retain,
As Pholoe, most that rules the Monsters of the Maine:
Which brought to bear them out, if any need should fall,
The Dolphin, Seahorse, Gramp, the Wherlpoole, and the Whall.
An hundred more besides; I readily could name,
With these as Neptune wil'd, to Louing-land that came.
These Nymphs tricked up in tyers, the Sea-gods to delight:
Of Currall of each kind, the black, the red, the white; The delicacies of the
Sea.

With many sundry shells, the Scallop large, and fair;
The Cockle small and round; the Periwinkle spare,
The Oyster, wherein often the pearl is found to breed,
The Mussell, which retains that dainty Orient seed:
In Chains and Bracelets made, with linkes of sundry twists,
Some worn about their wastes, their necks, some on the wrists.
Great store of Amber there, and Ieat they did not miss;
Their lips they sweetened had with costly Ambergris.
Scarcely the * Neriad's thus arrived from the Seas, Sea-Nymphs.

But from the fresher streams the brighter * Niades, Nymphs of Rivers.

To Louing-land make haste with all the speed they may,
For fear their fellow-Nymphes should for their coming stay.
Glico the running Streams in sweetness still that keeps,
And Clymene which rules, when they surround their deepes.
Spio, in hollow banks, the waters that does hide:
With Opis that does bear them backward with the Tide.
Semaia that for sights does keep the water clear:
Zanthe their yellow sands, that makes to appear,
Then Drymo for the Oaks that shadow every bank,
Phylodice, the boughs for Garlands fresh and rank.
Which the clear Naiades make them * Anadems withal,
When they are called to daunse in Neptunes mighty hall. Coronets of Flowers.

Then Ligea, which maintains the Birds harmonious lays,
Which fing on Rivers banks amongst the slender sprayes,
With Rhodia, which for them does nurse the Roseat sets,
Ioida, which preserues the azure Violets.
Anthea, of the flowers, that has the general charge,
And Syrinx of the Reeds, that grow upon the Marge.
Some of these lovely Nymphs wore on their flaxen hair
Fine Chaplets made of Flaggs, that fully flowred were:
With Water-cans again, some wantonly them dight,
Whose larger leaf and flower, gave wonderful delight
To those that wistly viewed their Beauties: some again,
That sovereign places held amongst the watery train,
Of Cat-tayles made them Crowns, which from the Sedge does
Which neatly wouen were, and some to grace the show, (grow,
Of Lady-smocks most white, do rob each neighboring Mead,
Wherewith their looser locks most curiously they breyd.
Now thus together com'n, they friendly do devise,
Some of light toys, and some of matters grave and wise.
But to break off their speech, her reed when Syrinx sounds,
Some cast themselves in Rings, and fell to Hornepipe rounds:
They ceasing, as again to others turns it falls,
They lusty Galiards tread, some others Iiggs, and Braules.
This done, upon the bank together being set,
Proceeding in the cause, for which they thus weremet,
In mighty Neptunes praise, these Sea-borne Virgins sing: The Song of the
SeaNymphs in praise of Neptune.

Let earth, and air, say they with the high praises ring,
Of Saturn by his Ops, the most renowned * Son,
From all the gods but Jove, the Diadem that won,
Whose offspring wise and strong, dear Nymphs let us relate,
On mountains of vast waves, know he that sits in state,
And with his Trident rules, the universal stream,
To be the only sire of mighty Polypheme.
On fair Thoofa got old (...) loved child,
Who in a fained shape that god of Sea beguild.
Three thousand princely sons, and lovely Nymphs as we,
Were to great Neptune borne, of which we sparing be:
Some by his goodly Queen, some in his Lemmans bed;
Chryasor grim begot, on stern Medusas head.
Swart Brontes, for his own so mighty Neptune takes,
One of the Cyclops strong, Jove's Thunderbolts that makes.
Great Neptune, Nelius got, (if you for wisdom seek)
Who was old Nestors sire, the grau'st and wisest Greek.
Or from this King of waves, of such thou love to hear,
Of famous Nations first, that mighty Founders were;
Then Cadmus, who the plot of ancient Thebes contrived,
From Neptune God of Sea, his Pedigree derived,
By Agenor his old Syer, who ruled Phenicia long:
So Inachus, the chief of Argiues great and strong
Claimed kindred of this King, and by some beauteous Niece,
So did Pelasgus too, who peopled ancient Greece.
A world of mighty Kings and Princes I could name,
From our god Neptune sprung; let this suffice, his fame
Incompasseth the world; those Stars which never rise,
Above the lower South, are never from his eyes:
As those again to him do every day appear,
Continually that keep the Northern Hemisphere;
Who like a mighty King, does cast his Watched robe,
Far wider then the land, quite round about the Globe.
Where is there one to him that may compared be,
That both the Poles at once continually does see;
And Gyant-like with heaven as often makes wars;
The Islands (in his power) as numberless as Stars,
He washes at his will, and with his mighty hands,
He makes the even shores, often mountainous with Sands:
Whose creatures, which observe his wide Imperial seat,
Like his immeasured self, are infinite and great.
Thus ended they their Song, and off the assembly brake,
When quickly toward the west, the Muse her way does take;
Whereas the swelling soil, as from one bank does bring
This * Wauency sung before, and * Ouse the less, whose spring The fountains
of these rivers, not far asunder, vet one running Northward, the other to the
East.

Toward Ouse the greater points, and down by Thetford glides,
Where she clear Thet receives, her glory that diuides,
With her new-named Town, as wondrous glad that she,
For frequency of late, so much esteemd should be:
Where since these confluent Floods, so fit for Hauking lie,
And store of Foul entice skilled Falkoners there to fly.
Now of a flight at Brook shall my description be: A description of a flight
at River.

What subject can be found, that lies not fair to me.
Of simple Shepherds now, my Muse exactly sings,
And then of courtly Loves, and the affairs of Kings.
Then in a Buskind strain, the warlike spear and shield,
And instantly again of the disports of Field;
What can this I Will produce, that lies from my report,
Industrious Muse, proceed then to thy Hawking sport.
When making for the Brook, the Falkoner does epsy
On River, Plash, or Mere, where store of Foul does lie:
Whence forced over land, by skillful Falconers trade:
A fair convenient flight, may easily be made.
He whistleth off his Hawks, whose nimble pincons straight,
Do work themselves by turns, into a stately height:
And if that after * check, the one or both do go, After Pigeons, Crows, or
such like.

Sometimes he them the Lure, sometimes does water show;
The trembling Foul that hear the Iigging Hawk-bels ring,
And find it is too late, to trust then to their wing,
Lie flat upon the flood, whilst the high-mounted Hawks,
Then being lords alone, in their etheriall walks,
Aloft so bravely stir, their bells so thick that shake;
Which when the Falkoner sees, that scarce one * plane they make: When they
sore as Kites do.

The gallant'st Birds says he, that ever flew on wing,
And swears there is a Flight, were worthy of a King.
Then making to the Flood, to force the Fowls to rise,
The fierce and eager Hawks, down thrilling from the Skies,
Make sundry * Canceleers ever they the Foul can reach, Crossing the air in
their downe-come.

Which then to save their lives, their wings do lively stretch.
But when the whizzing Bells the silent air do cleave,
And that their greatest speed, them vainly do deceive;
And the sharp cruel Hawks, they at their backs do view,
Themselves for very fear they instantly * ineawe. Lay the Fowls again into
the water.

The Hawks get up again into their former place;
And ranging here and there, in that their ayery race:
Still as the fearful Foul attempt to escape away,
With many a stouping brave, them in again they lay.
But when the Falkoners take their Hawking-poles in hand,
And crossing of the Brook, do put it over land:
The Hawke gives it a souse, that makes it to rebound,
Well near the height of man, sometime above the ground;
Often takes a leg, or wing, often takes away the head,
And often from neck to tail, the back in two does shread.
With many a Woe ho ho, and iocond Lure again,
When he his quarry makes upon the grassy plain.
But to my Floods again: when as this Ouze the less
Has taken in clear Thet, with far more free access
To Ouze the great she goes, her Queen that comes crowned,
As such a River fits, so many miles renowned;
And poynting to the North, her Crystal front she dashes
Against the swelling sands of the surrounded Washes;
And Neptune in her Arms, so amply does embrace,
As she would rob his Queen, fair Thetis of her place.
Which when rich Marsh-land sees, least she should loose her state,
With that fair River thus, she gently does debate.
Disdain me not, dear Flood, in thy excessive pride,
There Is scarcely any soil that sits by thy side,
Whose Turfe so batfull is, or bears so deep a swath;
Nor is there any Marsh in all Great Britain, has
So many goodly seats, or that can truly show
Such Rarities as I: so that all Marshes owe
Much honor to my name, for that exceeding grace,
Which they receive by me, so sovereign in my place.
Though Rumney, as some say, for finenesse of her grass,
And for her dainty site, all other does surpass:
Yet are those Seas but poor, and Rivers that confine
Her greatness but mean Rills, be they compared with mine.
Nor hardly does she tyth th'aboundant Foul and Fish,
Which Nature gives to me, as I my self can wish.
As Amphitrite often, calls me her sweet and fair,
And sends the Northrene winds to curle my braided hair,
And makes the * Washes stand, to watch and ward me still, The Washes, lying
between Marsh-land, and the Sea.

Lest that rough god of Sea, on me should work his will.
Old Wisbitch to my grace, my circuit sits within,
And near my banks I have the neighborhood of Lyn.
Both Towns of strength and state, my profits still that vent:
No Marsh has more of Sea, none more of continent.
Thus Marsh-land ends her speech, as one that thoroughly knew,
What was her proper praise, and what was Ouzes due.
With that the zealous Muse, in her Poetique rage,
To Walsingham would needs have gone a Pilgrimage,
To view those farthest shores, whence little Niger flows
Into the Northrene Maine, and see the gleabe where grows
That Saffron, (which men say) this land has not the like,
All Europe that excels: but here she sail does strike.
For that Apollo plucked her easly by the ear;
And told her in that part of Norfolk, if there were
Ought worthy of respect, it was not in her way,
When for the greater Ouze, her wing she does display.




The one and twentieth Song.
The Argument.
Now from New market comes the Muse,
Whose spacious Heath, she wistly viewes,
Those Ancient Ditches and surueyes,
Which our first Saxons here did raise:
To Gogmagog then turns her tale,
And shows you Ring-tailes pleasant vale.
And to do Cambridge all her Rites,
The Muses to her Town inuites.
And lastly, Elies praise she sings,
An end which to this Canto brings.
BY this our little rest, thus having gotten breath,
And fairly in our way, upon Newmarket-Heath:
That great and ancient * Ditch, which us expected long, The Devils Ditch.

Inspired by the Muse, at her arrival song:
O Time, what earthly thing with thee it self can trust,
When thou in thine own course, art to thy self unjust!
Do thou contract with death, and to oblivion give
Thy glories, after them, yet shamefully dare live?
O Time, had thou preserved, what laboring man has done,
Thou long before this day, might to thy self have won
A Deity with the gods, and in thy Temple placed,
But sacriligious thou, have all great works defaced;
For though the things themselves have suffered by thy theft,
Yet with their Ruins, thou, to ages might have left,
Those Monuments who reared, and not have suffered thus The great ditch cutting
Nevvmarket. Heath, begins at Rech, and ends at Covvlidge.

Posterity so much, to abuse both thee and us.
I, by the East Angles first, who from this Heath arose,
The long'st and largest Ditch, to check their Mercian foes;
Because my depth, and breadth, so strangely does exceed,
Men's low and wretched thoughts, they constantly decreed,
That by the Devils help, I needs must raised be,
Wherefore the Deuils-Ditch they basely named me:
When ages long before, I bare Saint Edmonds name,
Because up to my side, (some have supposed) came
The Liberties bequeathed to his more sacred Shrine.
Therefore my fellow Dykes, ye ancient friends of mine,
That out of earth were raisd, by men whose minds were great,
It is no marvel, though Oblivion do you threat.
First, * Flemditch next my self, that art of greatest strength, Alias, Seven
mile ditch, being so much in length from the East side of the river (...) to
Balsham. From Hinxston to Horsheath five miles. From Melburne to Fulmer, the
shortest of the four.

That do extend thy course full seven large mile in length:
And thou the * Fiuemile called, yet not less dear to me;
With * Brenditch, that again is shortest of the three,
Can you suppose your selves at all to be respected,
When you may see my truth's belied, and so neglected:
Therefore dear Heath, live still in prosperous estate,
And let thy wel-fleec'd Flocks, from morn to evening late,
(By careful Shepherds kept) rejoice thee with their praise;
And let the merry Lark, with her delicious lays,
Give comfort to thy plains, and let me only lie,
(Though of the world contemned) yet gracious in thine eye.
Thus said, these ancient Dykes neglected in their ground,
Through the sad aged earth, sent out a hollow sound,
To gratulate her speech; when as we met again,
With one whose constant heart, with cruel love was slain:
Old Gogmagog, a Hill of long and great renown,
Which near to Cambridge set, o'rlookes that learned Town.
Of Balshams pleasant hills, that by the name was known,
But with the monstrous times, he rude and barbarous grown,
A Giant was become; for man he cared not,
And so the fearful name of Gogmagog had got:
Who long had borne good will to most delicious Grant:
But doubting lest some god his greatness might supplant.
For as that dainty Flood by Cambridge keeps her course,
He found the Muses left their old Beotian source,
Resorting to her banks, and every little space,
He saw bright Phoebus gaze upon her Crystal face,
And through th'exhaled Fogs, with anger looked red,
To leave his loved Nymph, when he went down to bed.
Wherefore this Hill with love, being foully ouergone:
And one day as he found the lovely Nymph alone,
Thus wooes her; Sweeting mine, if thou mine own wilt be,
C'haue many a pretty gaud, I keep in store for thee.
A nest of broad-fac'd Owls, and goodly Vrchins too;
Nay Nymph take heed of me, when I begin to woo:
And better yet then this, a Bulchin two years old,
A curld-pate Calfe it is, and often could have been sold:
And yet beside all this, c'haue goodly Beare-whelps two,
Full dainty for my Joy, when she is disposed to play,
And twenty Sowes of Lead, to make our wedding Ring;
Bezides, at Sturbridge Fair, chill buy thee many a thing:
Chill zmouch thee every morn, before the Sun can rise,
And look my manly face, in thy sweet glaring eyes.
Thus said, he smug'd his Beard, and stroked up his hair,
As one that for her love he thought had offered fair:
Which to the Muses, Grant did presently report,
Wherewith they many a year shall make them wondrous sport.
When Ringdale in her self, a most delicious Dale, The Vale of Ringdale, of
the vulgar falsely called Ringtaile.

Who having heard too long the barbarous Mountains tale,
Thus thinks in her self, Shall I be silenced, when
Rude Hills, and Ditches, dug by discontented men,
Are aided by the Muse; their Mind's at large to speak:
Besides my sister Vales supposing me but weak,
Judge meanly of my state, when she o longer stayed,
But in her own behalf, thus to the other said.
What though betwixt two Sheeres, I be by Fortune thrown, This Vale stands
part in (...), part in Cambridgeshire.

That neither of them both can challenge me her own,
Yet am I not the less, nor less my Fame shall be:
Your Figures are but base, when they are set by me;
For Nature in your shapes, notoriously did err,
But skillfull was in me, cast pure Orbiculer.
Nor can I be compared so like to any thing,
By him that would express my shape, as to a Ring:
For Nature bent to sport, and various in her trade,
Of all the British Vales, of me a circle made:
For in my very midst, there is a swelling ground,
About which Ceres Nymphs dance many a wanton Round.
The frisking Fairy there, as on the light air borne,
Often run at Barley-breake upon the ears of Corn;
And catching drops of dew in their lascivious chases,
Do cast the liquid pearl in one another faces.
What they in largeness have, that bear themselves so hie,
In my most perfect form, and delicacie, I,
For greatness of my grain, and finenesse of my grass;
This Ilc scarce has a Vale, that Ringdale does surpass.
When more she would have said, but suddenly there sprung,
A confident report, that through the Country rung,
That Came her daintiest Flood, long since entitled Grant,
Whose fountain Ashwell crowned, with many a upright plant. A famous Village
in the confines of Hartfordshire.

In sallying on for Ouze, determined by the way,
To intertaine her friends the Muses with a Lay.
Wherefore to show her self er'e she to Cambridge came,
Most worthy of that Town to which she gives the name,
Takes in her second head, from Linton coming in,
By Shelford having slid, which straightway she does win:
Then which, a purer Stream, a delicater Brook,
Bright Phoebus in his course, does scarcely ouerlooke.
Thus furnishing her banks; as sweetly she does glide
Toward Cambridge, with rich Meads laid forth on either side;
And with the Muses often, did by the way converse:
Wherefore it her behooues, that something she rehearse,
The Sisters that concerned, who whispered in her ear,
Such things as only she, and they themselves should hear,
A wondrous learned Flood; and she that had been long,
(Though silent, in her self, yet) vexed at the wrong
Done to Apollo's Priests, with heavenly fire infused,
Often by the worthless world, unworthily abused:
With whom, in their behalf, hap ill, or happen well,
She meant to have a bout, even in despite of Hell,
When humbly lowting low, her due obedience done,
Thus like a Satyr she, deliberatly begun.
My Inuectiue, thus quoth she, I only aim at you,
(Of what degree soe'r) ye wretched worldly crew,
In all your brainlesse talk, that still direct your drifts
Against the Muses sons, and their most sacred gifts,
That hate a Poets name, your vileness to advance,
For ever be you damned in your dull ignorance.
Slave, he whom thou do think, so mean and poor to be,
Is more then half divine, when he is set by thee.
Nay more, I will avow, and justify him then,
He is a god, compared with ordinary men.
His brave and noble heart, here in a heaven does dwell,
Above those worldly cares, that sinks such sots to hell:
A caitife if there be more viler then thy self,
If he through baseness light upon this worldly pelf,
The Chimney-sweepe, or he that in the dead of night,
Does empty loathsome vaults, may purchase all your right;
When not the greatest King, should he his treasure rain,
The Muses sacred gifts, can possibly obtain;
No, were he Monarch of the universal earth,
Except that gift from heaven, be breathed into his birth.
How transitory be those heaps of rotting mud,
Which only to obtain, ye make your chiefest good?
Perhaps to your fond sons, your ill-got goods ye leave,
You scarcely buried are, but they your hopes deceive.
Have I not known a wretch, the purchase of whose ground,
Was valued to be sold, at threescore thousand pound;
That in a little time, in a poor threed-bare coat,
Has walked from place to place, to beg a silly groat?
When nothing has of yours, or your base broods been left,
Except poor widows cries, to memorize your theft.
That curse the Serpent got in Paradise for hire,
Descend upon you all, from him your deuillish Sire,
Groueling upon the earth, to creep upon your breast,
And lick the loathsome dust, like that abhorred beast.
But leave these hateful herds, and let me now declare,
In the Helliconian (...), who rightly christened are:
Not such as basely sooth the Humor of the Time,
And slubberingly patch up some slight and shallow Rhyme,
Upon Pernassus top, that strive to be instal'd,
Yet never to that place were by the Muses called.
Nor yet our Mimick Apes, out of their bragging pride,
That feign would seem to be, what nature them denide;
Whose Verses hobling run, as with disioynted bones,
And make a viler noise, then carts upon the stones;
And these forsooth must be, the Muses only heirs,
When they but Bastards are, and foundlings none of theirs,
Enforcing things in Verse for Poesy unfit,
Mere filthy stuff, that breaks out of the sores of wit:
What Poet reckes the praise upon such Anticks heaped,
Or enuies that their lines, in Cabinets are kept?
Though some fantastic fool promoue their ragged Rymes,
And do transcribe them o'r a hundred several times,
And some fond women winnes, to think them wondrous rare,
When they lewd beggary trash, nay very gibbrish are.
Give me those Lines (whose touch the skillful ear to please)
That gliding flow in state, like swelling Euphrates,
In which things natural be, and not in falsely wrong:
The Sounds are fine and smooth, the Sense is full and strong,
Not bumbasted with words, vain ticklish ears to feed;
But such as may content the perfect man to read.
What is of Paynters said, is of true Poets rife,
That he which does express things nearest to the life,
Does touch the very point, nor needs he add thereto:
For that the utmost is, that Art does strive to do.
Had Orpheus, whose sweet Harp (so musically strung)
Intised Trees, and Rocks, to follow him along:
Th'moralitie of which, is that his knowledge drew
The stony, blockish rout, that naught but rudeness knew,
T'imbrace a civil life, by his enticing Lays.
Had he composed his lines, like many of these days,
Which to be understood, do take in it disdain:
Nay, Oedipus may fail, to know what they would mean.
If Orpheus had so played, not to be understood,
Well might those men have thought the Harper had been wood;
Who might have fit him down, the trees and rocks among,
And been a veryer block, then those to whom he sung.
O noble Cambridge then, my most beloved Town,
In glory flourish still, to heighten thy renown:
In woman's perfect shape, still be thy Emblem right, The Emblem of Cambridge.

Whose one hand holds a Cup, the other bears a Light.
Phocis bedewed with drops, that from Pernassus fall,
Let Cirrha seek to her, nor be you least of (...),
Ye fair Beotian Thebes, and Thespia still to pay
My Cambridge all her Rites: Cirrhea send this way.
O let the thrice-three Maids, their dewes upon thee rain,
From Aganippa's fount, and hoofe-plow'd Hyppocrene.
Mount Pindus, thou that art the Muses sacred place
In Thessaly; and thou, O Pimpla, that in Thrace
They chose for their own hill, then thou Pernassus hye,
Upon whose by-clift top, the sacred company
About Apollo sit; and thou O Flood, with these
Pure Hellicon, beloved of the Pierides.
With Tempe, let thy walks, and shades, be brought to her,
And all your glorious gifts upon my Town confer.
This said, the lovely Grant glides easily on along,
To meet the mighty Ouze, which with her watery throng,
The Cantabrigian fields had entered, taking in
Th'in-Iled Elies earth, which strongly she does win
From Grants soft-neighbouring grounds, when as the fruitful I Will,
Much wondering at her self, thought surely all this while,
That by her silence she had suffered too much wrong.
Wherefore in her self praise, lo thus the Island sung.
Of all the Marshland Isles, I Ely am the Queen:
For Winter each where sad, in me looks fresh and green.
The Horse, or other beast, o'rway'd with his own mass,
Lies wallowing in my Fennes, hid over head in grass:
And in the place where grows rank Fodder for my Neat;
The Turffe which bears the Hay, is wondrous needful Peat: Fuel cut out of
the earth in squares, like Brickes.

My full and batning earth, needs not the Plowmans pains;
The Rils which run in me, are like the branched veins
In humane Bodies seen; those Ditches cut by hand,
From the surrounding Meres, to win the measured land,
To those choice waters, I most fitly may compare,
Wherewith nice women use to blanch their Beauties rare.
Has there a man been borne in me, that never knew
Of Watersey the Leame, or the other called the New. Famous Ditches, or
Waterdraughts in the (...).

The Frithdike neer'st my midst, and of another sort,
Who ever fished, or fowl'd, that cannot make report
Of sundry Meres at hand, upon my Western way,
As Ramsey mere, and Vg, with the great Whittelsey:
Of the abundant store of Fish and Foul there bred,
Which whilst of Europes Isles Great Britain is the Head.
No Meres shall truly tell, in them, then at one draught,
More store (...) either kinds has with the Net been caught:
Which though some petty Isles do challenge them to be
Their own, yet must those Isles likewise acknowledge me
Their sovereign. Nor yet let that Islet Ramsey shame,
Although to (...). Mere she only gives the name; Though Ely be in part of
Cambridge Shire, yet are these Meres for the most part in (...) Shire.

* Nor Huntingdon, (...) me though she extend her grounds,
Twit me that I at all usurp upon her Bounds.
Those Meres may well be proud, that I will take them in,
Which otherwise perhaps forgotten might have bin.
Besides my towred Phane, and my rich Citied seat,
With Villages, and Dorpes, to make me most complete. The Town and Church of
Ely.

Thus broke she off her speech, when as the Muse awhile,
Desirous to repose, and rest her with the I Will,
Here consumates her Song, and does fresh courage take,
With war in the next Book, the Muses to awake.




The two and twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse, Ouze from her Fountain brings
Along by Buckingham, and sings:
The Earth that turns wood to stone,
And t'holy Wells of Harlweston:
Then shows wherefore the Fates do grant,
That she the Civil wars should chant:
By Huntingdon she Waybridge meets,
And thence the German Ocean greetes.
Invention as before, thy high-pitcht pinions rouse,
Exactly to set down how the far-wandring Ouze, The Progress of the River of
Ouze to the German Sea.

Through the Bedfordian fields deliciously does strain,
As holding on her course, by Huntingdon again,
How bravely she her self betwixt her Banks does bear,
Ever Ely she in-Ile, a Goddess honored there;
From Brackley breaking forth, through soiles most heavenly sweet,
By Buckingham makes on, and crossing Watling-Street,
She with her lesser Ouze, at Newport next does twin,
Which from proud Chiltern near, comes easily ambling in.
The Brook which on her bank does boast that earth alone:
(Which noted) of this I Will, conuerteth wood to stone.
That little Aspleyes earth we anciently instile, One of the wonders of this
Island.

Among sundry other things, A wonder of the I Will:
Of which the lesser Ouze often boasts in herway,
As she her self with Flowers does gorgeously array. After this river has
entered Bedford Shire, there is scarce any River in this Island, that runs
with so many intricate Gyres and turnings as this Ouze.

Ouze having Ouleney past, as she were waxed mad,
From her first stayder course immediately does gad;
And in Meandred Gyres does whirle herself about,
That, this way, here, and there, back, forward, in, and out,
And like a wanton Girl, often doubling in her gate,
In Labyrinth-like turns, and twinings intricate,
Through those rich fields does run, till lastly in her pride,
The Shires Hospitious town, she in her course divide,
Where she her spacious breast in glorious breadth displayes;
And varying her clear form a thousand sundry ways,
Streakes through the verdant Meads; but far she has not gone,
When I vell a clear Nymph from Shefford sallying on,
Comes deftly dancing in through many a dainty Slade,
Crowned with a goodly Bridge, arrived at Bickleswade,
Encouraged the more her Mistress to pursue,
In whose clear face the Sun delights himself to view:
To mix her self with Ouze, as on she thus does make,
And lovingly at last has hapt to overtake;
She in her Crystal Arms her sovereign Ouze does cling,
Which Flood in her Allie, as highly glorying,
Shoots forward to Saint Neots, into those nether grounds,
Toward Huntingdon, and leaves the loved Bedfordian bounds.
Scarce is she entered yet upon this second Sheere,
Of which she sovereign is, but that two Fountains clear, The holy Springs
of Harlvveston.

At Harlweston near hand, the one salt, the other sweet,
At her first entrance, thus her greatness gently greet.
Once were we two fair Nymphs, who fortunatly proved,
The pleasures of the Woods, and faithfully beloved
Of two such Syluan gods, by hap that found us here;
For then their Syluan kind most highly honored were,
When this whole Countries face was Forresty, and we
Lived loosely in the Weilds, which now thus peopled be.
Often interchang'd we sighs, often amorous looks we sent,
Often whispering our dear loves, our thoughts often did we vent
Amongst the secret shades, often in the groves did play,
And in our sports our joys, and sorrows did bewray.
Often cunningly we met, yet coyly then embraced,
Still languish'd in desire, yet lived we ever chaste.
And quoth the saltish Spring, as one day mine and I,
Set to recount our loves, from his more tender eye
The brinish tears dropped down, on mine impearced breast,
And instantly therein so deeply were impressed,
That brackish I became: he finding me deprived
Of former freshness quite, the cause from him derived,
On me bestowed this gift, my sweetness to requite,
That I should ever cure the dimnesse of the sight.
And, quoth the fresher Spring, the Wood-god me that wooed,
As one day by my brim, surpised with love he stood,
On me bestowed this gift, that ever after I
Should cure the painful Itch, and loathsome Leprosy.
Held on with this discourse, she on not far has run,
But that she is ariu'd at goodly Huntingdon;
Where she no sooner viewes her darling and delight,
Proud Portholme, but became so ravished with the sight, A little Island made by
this River, lying near Huntingdon.

That she her limber arms lasciuously does throw
About the Islets waste, who b'ing embraced so,
Her Flowery bosom shows to the inamored Brook;
On which when as the Ouze amazedly does look
On her brave Damask'd breast, bedecked with many a flower
(That grace this goodly Mead) as though the Spring did power
Her full abundance down, whose various dies so thick,
Are intermixed as they by one another stick,
That to the gazing eye that stands far, they show
Like those made by the Sun in the Celestial Bow.
But now t'aduaunce this Flood, the Fates had brought to pass,
As she of all the rest the only River was:
That but a little while before that fatal war,
Twixt that divided Blood of York and Lancaster,
Near Harleswood, above in her Bedfordian trace,
By keeping back her stream, for near three furlongs space, Prodigious
signs fores running the wars betwixt the houses of Lancaster and York in this
River of Ouze.

Laying her Bosom bare unto the public view,
Apparently was proved by that which did ensue,
In her Prophetique self, those troubles to foresee:
Wherefore (even as her due) the Destinies agree,
She should the glory have our civil fights to sing,
When swelling in her banks, from her abundant Spring,
Her sober silence she now resolutely breaks,
In language fitting war, and thus to purpose speaks.
With that most fatal field, I will not here begin,
Where Norman William first the Conqueror, did win
The day at * Hastings, where the valiant Harold slain,
Resigned his Crown, whose soil the color does retain, In Sussex, near the
Sea.

Of The English blood there shed, as the earth still kept the skarre:
Which since not ours begot, but an inuasiue war,
Amongst our home-fought fields, has no description here:
In Normandy nor that, that same day forty year,
That Bastard William brought a Conquest on this I Will,
Twixt Robert his eld'st son, and Henry, who the while,
His Brothers warlike tents in Palestine were pight,
In England here usurped his eld'st borne brothers right;
Which since it foreign was, not struck within this land,
Amongst our civil fights here numbered shall not stand.
But Lincoln Battle now we as our first will lay, The Battle at Lincoln.

Where Maud the Empress stood to try the doubtful day,
With Stephen, when he here had welneere three years reigned,
Where both of them their right courageously maintained,
And marshalling their Troops, the King his person put,
Into his well-arm'd Maine, of strong and valiant Foot:
The Wings that were his Horse, in the one of them he placed
Young Alan that brave Duke of Britain, whom he graced
With th'Earles of Norsolke, and Northampton, and with those,
He Mellent in that wing, and Warren did dispose.
The other no whit less, that this great day might sted;
The Earl of Aubemerle, and valiant Ipres led.
The Empress powers again, but in two Squadrons were:
The Vaward Chester had, and Gloucester the Rear;
Then were there valiant Welsh, and desperate men of ours,
That when supplies should want, might reinforce their powers.
The Battles join, as when two adverse Seas are dashed
Against each others waves, that all the plains were washed
With showers of sweltring blood, that down the furrows ran,
Ere it could be discerned which either lost or wan.
Earl Baldwin, and Fitzvrse those valiant Knights, were seen
To charge the Empress Horse, as though dread Mars had been
There in two sundry shapes; the day that beauteous was,
Twinckled as when you see the Sunne-beames in a glass,
That nimbly being stirred, flings up the trembling flame
At once, and on the earth reflects the very same.
With their resplendent swords, that glistred against the Sun;
The honor of the day, at length the Empress won.
King Stephen prisoner was, and with him many a Lord,
The common Soldiers put together to the sword.
The next, the Battle near Saint Edmundsbury fought, The Battle at Saint
Edmunds Bury. Henry the second.

By our * Fitz-Empresse force, and Flemings hither brought
By The Earl of Leister, bent to move intestine strife,
For young King Henry's cause, crowned in his fathers life;
Which to his kingly Sire much care and sorrow bred,
In whose defiance then that Earl his Ensigns spread,
Backed by Hugh Bigots power, the Earl of Norfolk then,
By bringing to his aid the valiant Norfolk men.
Against Bohun, Englands great high Constable that swayd
The Royal forces, joined with Lucy for his aid
Chief Justice, and with them the German powers, to expel
The Earls of Cornwall came, Gloucester, and Arundell,
From Bury, that with them Saint Edmonds Banner bring,
Their Battles in array; both wisely ordering
The Armies chanced to meet upon the Marshy ground,
Betwixt Saint Edmunds town, and Fornham (fitly found)
The bellowing Drums beat up a thunder for the charge,
The Trumpets rend the air, the Ensigns let at large,
Like wauing flames far off, to either host appear:
The bristling Pykes do shake, to threat their coming near;
All clouded in a mist, they hardly could them view,
So shaddowed with the Shafts from either side that flew.
The Wings came wheeling in, at joining of whole forces,
The either part were seen to tumble from their horses,
Which empty put to rout, are paunch'd with Gleaues and Pyles,
Lest else by running loose, they might disranke their (...).
The Bilmen come to blows, that with the cruel thwacks,
The ground lay strewn with Male, and shreds of tatterd Iacks:
The playnes like to a shop, looked each where to behold.
Where limbs of mangled men on heaps lay to be sold;
Stern discontented War did never yet appear
With a more threatening brow, then it that time did there.
O Leicester (alas) in ill time wast thou won
To aid this graceless youth, the most ungrateful son
Against his natural Sire, who crowned him in his days,
Whose ill requited love did him much sorrow raise,
As Le'ster by this war against King Henry showed,
Upon so bad a cause, O courage ill bestowed;
Who had thy quarrel been, as thou thy self was skild
In brave and martial feats, thou evermore had filled
This I Will with thy high deeds, done in that bloody field:
But Bigot and this Lord, enforced at length to yield
Them to the other part, when on that fatal plain,
Of the English and the Dutch, ten thousand men lay slain.
As for the second Fight at Lincoln, betwixt those
Who sided with the French, by seeking to depose
Henry the son of John, then young, and to advance
The Daulphin Jews, son to Philip King of France,
Which Lincoln Castle, then most straightly did besiege;
And William Marshall Earl of Pembroke for his Liege,
(Who led the faithful Lords) although so many there,
Or in the conflict slain, or taken prisoners were;
Yet for but a surprise, no field appointed fight,
Among our set Battles here, may no way claim a right,
The Field at Jews then, by our third Henry fought, The Battle of Jews.

Who Edward his brave son unto that Conflict brought;
With Richard then the King of Almaine, and his son
Young Henry, with such Lords as to his part he won,
With him their Sovereign Liege, their lives that durst engage.
And the rebellious league of the proud Barronage,
By Simon Mounford Earl of Le'ster their chief Head,
And The Earl of Gloucester, Clare, against King Henry led;
For the ancient Freedoms here that bound their lives to stand,
The Aliens to expulse, who troubled all the land,
Whilst for this dreadful day, their great designs were meant;
From Edward the young Prince, defiances were sent
To Mountfords valiant sons, Lord Henry, Sim, and Guy,
And calling unto him a Herald, quoth he, Fly
To The Earl of Leisters Tents, and publicly proclaim
Defiance to his face, and to the Montfords name,
And say to his proud sons, say boldly thus from me;
That if they be the same, that they would seem to be,
Now let them in the field be by their Band roules known,
Where as I make no doubt, their valor shall be shown.
Which if they dare to do, and still uphold their pride,
There will we vent our spleenes, where swords shall it decide.
To whom they thus replide, Tell that brave man of Hope,
He shall the Mountfords find in t'head of all their Troop,
To answer his proud braues; our Bilbowes be as good
As his, our Arms as strong; and he shall find our blood
Sold at as dear a rate as his; and if we fall,
Tell him we will hold so fast, his Crown shall go withal.
The King into three fights his forces does divide,
Of which his princely * son the Vaward had to guide: Prince Edward after
called Edward the first.

The second to the King of Almaine, and his son,
Young Henry he betook, in the third Legion
Of Knights, and Men of Arms, in person he appears.
Into four several Fights, the desperate Barons theirs.
In The first those valiant youths, the sons of Leister came,
Of leading of the which, Lord Henry had the name:
The Earl of Gloucester brought the second Battle on,
And with him were the Lords Mountchency, and Fitz-Iohn:
The third wherein alone the Londoners were placed,
The stout Lord Segraue led; the greatest, and the last,
Brave Leicester himself, with courage undertook.
The day upon the host affrightedly does look,
To see the dreadful shocke, their first encounter gave,
As though it with the rore, the Thunder would out-braue.
Prince Edward all in gold, as he great Jove had been:
The Mountfords all in Plumes, like Estriges were seen,
To beard him to his teeth, toth' work of death they go;
The crowds like to a Sea seemd wauing to and fro.
Friend falling by his friend, together they expire:
He breathed, does charge afresh; he wounded, does retire.
The Mountfords with the Prince vye valor all the day,
Which should for Knightly deeds excel, or he, or they,
To them about his head, his glistring blade he throws,
They waft him with their swords, as long with equal shows:
Now Henry, Simon then, and then the youngest Guy,
Kept by his brothers back, thus stoutly does reply,
What though I be but young, let death me ouerwhelme,
But I will break my sword upon his plumed helm.
The younger Bohun there, to high atchiuements bent,
With whom two other Lords, Lucy, and Hastings went,
Which charging but too home, all sorely wounded were,
Whom living from the field, the Barons strove to bear,
Being on their party fixd; whilst still Prince Edward spurs;
To bring his Forces up to charge the Londoners,
T'whom cruel hate he bare, and joining with their Force,
Of heauy-armed Foot, with his light Northern Horse,
He putting them to flight, four miles in chase them slew:
But ere he could return, the conquest wholly drew
To the stout Barons side: his father fled the field,
Into the Abbay there, constrained thence to yield.
The Lords Fitz-warren slain, and Wilton that was then
Chief Justice (as some say) with them five thousand men;
And Bohun that great Earl of Her'ford overthrown,
With Bardolfe, Somery, Patshull, and Percie known.
By their Coat-armours then, for Barons, prisoners ta'n;
Though Henry ware the Crown, great Le'ster yet did reign.
Now for the Conflict next, at Chesterfield that chanced
Against Robert that proud Earl of Darby, who advanced
His Ensigns against the King, (contrary to his oath)
Upon the Barons part, with the Lord Deuell, both
Surpised by Henry Prince of Almain with his power,
By coming at so strange an unexpected hour:
And taking them unarmed; since merely a defeat,
With our well-ordered fights, we will not here repeat.
The fatal Battle then at fertile Eusham struck, The Battle at Eusham.

Though with the self same hands, not with the self same luck:
For both the King and Prince at Jews prisoners taken,
By fortune were not yet so utterly forsaken;
But that the Prince was got from Le'ster, and does gather
His friends, by force of Arms yet to redeem his father;
And The Earl of Glo'ster won, who through the Mountfords pride
Disgraced, came with his power to the Imperial side.
When now those Lords, which late at Jews won the day,
The Sacrament received, their Arms not down to lay,
Until the King should yield the old Charter to maintain.
King Henry and his son Prince Edward swore again,
They would repeal those Laws that were at Oxford made,
Or through this bloody war to their destruction wade.
But since the King remained in puissant Lei'sters power,
The remnant of his friends, whom death did not devour
At Jews Battle late, and durst his part partake.
The Prince excites again, an Army up to make,
Whom Roger Bigot, Earl of Norfolk does assist,
Englands high Marshall then, and that great Martialist,
Old Henry Bohun, Earl of Her'ford, in this war,
Gray, Basset, and Saint-Iohn, Lisle, Percie, Latimer,
All Barons, which to him their utmost strengths do lay,
With many a Knight for power their equal every way;
And William Valence, Earl of Pembroke, who had fled
From Jews field, to France, thence with fresh succor sped.
Young Humphrey Bohun still, does with great Le'ster go,
Who for his Countries cause becomes his fathers foe.
Fitz-Iohn, Gray, Spencer, Strange, Rosse, Segraue, Vessey, Gifford,
Wake, Lucy, Vipount, Vaux, Clare, Marmion, Hastings, Clifford.
In that black night before his sad and dismal day,
Were apparitions strange, as drad Heaven would bewray
The horrors to ensue, O most amazing fight!
Two Armies in the Air, discerned were to fight,
Which came so near to earth, that in the morn they found
The prints of horses feet remaining on the ground,
Which came but as a show, the time to entertain,
Till the angry Armies joined, to act the bloody Scene.
Shrill shouts, and deadly cries, each way the air do fill,
And not a word was heard from either side, but kill:
The father against the son, the brother against the brother,
With Gleaues, Swords, Bills, and Pykes, were murdering one another.
The full luxurious earth, seems surfitted with blood,
Whilst in his Uncles gore th'vnnaturall Nephew stood;
Whilst with their charged Staves, the desperate horsemen meet,
They hear their kinsmen groan under their Horses feet.
Dead men, and weapons broke, do on the earth abound;
The Drums bedash'd with brains, do give a dismal sound.
Great Le'ster there expired, with Henry his brave son,
When many a high exployt they in that day had done.
Scarce was there noble House, of which those times could tell,
But that some one thereof, on this, or that side fell;
Amongst the slaughtered men, that there lay heaped on pyles:
Bohuns, and Beauchamps were, Basets, and Mandeviles:
Segraues, and Saint-Iohns seek, upon the end of all,
To give those of their names their Christian burial.
Ten thousand on both sides were ta'n and slain that day:
Prince Edward gets the gole, and bears the Palm away.
All Edward Long shankes time, her civil wars did cease,
Who strove his Countries bounds by Conquest to increase. The Conflicts at
Burton and Borough Bridge in the second Barons wars

But in th'insuing reign of his most riotous son,
As in his fathers days, a second war begun;
When as the stubborn heirs of the stout Barons dead,
Who for their Countries cause, their blood at Eusham shed,
Not able to endure the Spencers hateful pride,
The father and the son, whose counsels then did guide
Th'inconsiderate King, conferring all his graces,
On them who got all gifts, and bought and sold all places,
Them raising, to debase the Baronage the more
For Gauaston, whom they had put to death before.
Which urged too far, at length to open Arms they brake,
And for a speedy war, they up their powers do make.
Upon King Edwards part, for this great Action bent,
His brother Edmund came, the valiant Earl of Kent,
With Richmount, Arundell, and Pembroke, who engage,
Their powers, (three powerful Earls) against the Baronage.
And on the Barons side, great master of the war,
Was Thomas (of the Blood) the Earl of Lancaster,
With Henry Bobun, Earl of Hereford, his Peer,
With whom (of great command and Martialists) there were
Lyle, Darcy, Denvile, Teis, Beach, Bradburne, Bernvile, Knovile,
With Badlesmer, and Bercks, Fitz-william, Leyburne, Louell,
Tuchet, and Talbot stout, do for the Barons stand,
Mandute, and Mowbray, with great Clifford that command
Their Tenants to take Arms, that with their Landlords run;
With these went also Hugh, and Henry Willington;
Redoubted Damory, as Audley, Elmesbridge, Wither,
Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquiers, embodied all together,
At Burton upon Trent who having gathered head,
Toward them with all his power the King in person sped;
Who at his near approach (upon his March) discri'd,
That they against his power the Bridge had fortified:
Which he by strong assault, assayes from them to win,
Where as a bloody fight does instantly begin,
When he to beat them off, assayes them first by shot;
And they to make that good, which they before had got,
Defend them with the like, like Haylestones from the sky,
From Crosse-bowes, and the Long, the light-wingd arrows fly:
But friended with the Flood, the Barons hold their strength,
Forcing the King by Boats, and pyles of wood at length,
T'attempt to land his force upon the other side.
The Barons, that the more his stratagems defide,
Withstand them in the stream, when as the troubled flood,
(With in a little time) was turned all to blood;
And from the Boats and Bridge, the mangled bodies feld,
The poor affrighted Fish, their watery walks expeld.
While at the Bridge the fight still strongly does abide,
The King had learnt to know, that by a skillful guide,
He by a Fourd not far might pass his power of Horse,
Which quickly he performs, which drove the Barons force
From the defended Bridge, t'affront th'approching foe,
Imbattelling themselves, when to the shocke they go,
(On both sides so assaild) till th'water, and the shore
Of one complexion were, distaind with equal gore.
Often forced to change their fights, being driven from their ground,
That when by their much loss, too weak themselves they found,
The Afflicted Barons fly, yet still together keep.
The King his good success, not suffering so to sleep,
Pursues them with his power, which Northward still do bear;
And seldom scapes a day, but he does charge their Rear:
Till come to Borough Bridge, where they too soon were staid
By Andrew Herckley, Earl of Carleill, with fresh aid
Being lately thither come, King Edwards part to take.
The Barons range their fights, still good their ground to make;
But with long Marches tyerd, their wearied breath they draw,
After the desperat'st fight the Sun yet ever saw,
Brave Bohun there was slain, and Lancaster forsaken
Of Fortune, is surpised; the Barons prisoners taken.
For those Rebellions, Stirs, Commotions, Vprores, here
In Richard Bordeaux reign, that long so usual were; Richard the second,
borne at Burdeux.

As that the first by Straw, and Tyler, with their Rout
Of Rebels brought from Kent, most insolent and stout,
By entering London, thought the the Island to subdue:
* The first of which, the Mayor of London bravely slew; Jack Straw, killed by
the Mayor of London with his dagger. John Litstar, 2 Dyer of Norwich.

Walworth, which won his name much honor by the deed:
As they of Suffolk next, those Rascals that succeed,
By * Litster led about, their Captain who enstil'd
Himself the Commons King, in hope to have exiled
The Gentry from those parts, by those that were his own,
By that brave Bishop (then) of Norwitch overthrown. Henry Spencer, the
warlike Bishop of Norwich. At Hatfield.

By such unruly Slaves, and that in Essex raised
By Thomas that stout Duke of Glo'ster, strongly * ceaz'd,
As that at Radcot bridge, where the last named Peer,
With four brave * Earls his friends, encountered Robert Vere
Then Duke of Ireland called, by Richard so created, VVarvvicke, Darby, Arnndell,
and Nottingham.

And against those Lords maintained, whom they most deadly hated;
Since they but Garboyles were, in a deformed mass,
Not ordered fitting war, we lightly ouerpasse.
I choose the Battle next of Shrewsbury to chant, The Battle of Shrevv: bury.

Betwixt Henry the fourth, the son of John of Gant,
And the stout Percies, Henry Hotspurre and his Eame
The Earl of Wor'ster, who the rightful Diadem
Had from King Richard reft, and heau'd up to his Seat
This Henry, whom (too soon) they found to be too great,
Him seeking to depose, and to the Rule prefer
Richards proclaimed Heir, their cosen Mortimer,
Whom Owen Glendour then in Wales a prisoner staid,
Whom to their part they won, and thus their plot they laid,
That Glendour should have Wales, along as Seuerne went,
The Percies all the North, that lay beyond the Trent;
And Mortimer from thence the South to be his share;
Which Henry having heard, does for the war prepare,
And down to Cheshire makes, (where gathering powers they were)
At Shrewsbury to meet, and does affront them there:
With him his peerless son, the princely Henry came,
With The Earl of Stafford, and of Gentlemen of name,
Blunt, Shyrley, Clifton, men that very powerful were,
With Cockayne, Caluerly, Massy, and Mortimer,
Gausell, and Wendsley, all in Friends and Tenants strong,
Resorting to the King still as he past along;
Which in the open field before the ranged fights,
He with his warlike Son, there dubbed his Maiden Knights.
Th'Eatle Dowglasse for this day does with the Percies stand,
To whom they Berwicke gave, and in Northumberland
Some Seigniories and Holds, if they the Battle got,
Who brought with him to Field full many an angry Scot,
At Holmdon Battle late that being overthrown,
Now on the King and Prince hoped to regaine their own;
With almost all the power of Cheshire got together,
By Venables, (there great) and Vernon mustred thither.
The Vaward of the King, great Stafford took to guide.
The Vaward of the Lords upon the other side,
Consisted most of Scots, which joining, made such spoil,
As at the first constrained the English to recoyle,
And almost brake their Ranks, which when King Henry found,
Bringing his Battle up, to reinforce the ground,
The Percies bring up theirs, again to make it good.
Thus whilst the either Host in opposition stood,
Brave Dowglasse with his spurs, his furious Courser struck, The high courage
of Dovvglasse wan him that addition of Doughty Dovvglasse, which after grew to
a Proverb.

His Lance set in his rest, when desperately he brake
In, where his eye beheld th'Emperiall Ensign pight,
Where soon it was his chance, upon the King to light,
Which in his full carreere he from his Courser threw;
The next Sir Walter Blunt, he with three other slew,
All armed like the King, which he dead sure accounted;
But after when he saw the King himself remounted:
This hand of mine, quoth he, four Kings this day has slain,
And swore out of the earth he thought they sprang again,
Or Fate did him defend, at whom he only aimed.
When Henry Hotspurre, so with his high deeds inflamed,
Does second him again, and through such dangers press,
That Dowglasse valiant deeds he made to seem the less,
As still the people cried, A Percy Espirance.
The King which saw then time, or never to advance
His Battle in the Field, which near from him was won,
Aided by that brave Prince, his most courageous son,
Who bravely coming on, in hope to give them chase,
It chanced he with a shaft was wounded in the face;
Whom when out of the fight, his friends would bear away,
He strongly it refused, and thus was heard to say,
Time never shall report, Prince Henry left the field,
When Harry Percy staid, his traytrous sword to weeld.
Now rage and equal wounds, alike inflame their bloods,
And the maine Battles join, as do two adverse floods
Met in some narrow Arm, shouldring as they would shoue
Each other from their path, or would their banks remove.
The King his traytrous foes, before him down does hew,
And with his hands that day, near forty persons slew:
When conquest wholly turns to his victorious side,
His power surrounding all, like to a furious tide;
That Henry Hotspurre dead upon the cold earth lies,
Stout Wor'ster taken was, and doughtie Douglasse flies.
Five thousand from both parts left dead upon the ground,
Among who^ the kings fast friend, great Staffords coarse was found;
And all the Knights there dubbed the morning but before,
The euenings Suune beheld there sweltred in their gore.
Here I at Bramham More, the Battle in should bring,
Of which Earl Percie had the greatest managing,
With the Lord Bardolfe there, against the Counties power,
Fast cleaving to his friend, even to his utmost hour:
In Flanders, France, and Wales, who having been abroad
To raise them present powers, intending for a Road
On England, for the hate he to King Henry bore;
His son and brothers blood augmenting it the more,
Which in his mighty spirit still rooted did remain,
By his too much default, whom he imputed slain
At Shrewsbury before, to whom if he had brought
Supplies, (that bloody field, when they so bravely fought)
They surely it had won; for which to make amends,
Being furnished with men, amongst his foreign friends,
By Scotland entered here, and with a violent hand
Upon those Castles ceaz'd within Northumberland
His Earldom, (which the King, who much his truth did doubt,
Had taken to himself, and put his people out)
Toward Yorkshire coming on, where (soon repaid his own)
At Bramhams fatal More, was fowly overthrown:
Which though it were indeed a long and mortal fight,
Where many men were maimed, and many slain outright:
Where that courageous Earl, all hopes there seeing past,
Amongst his murdered troops (even) fought it to the last:
Yet for it was atchieu'd by multitudes of men,
Which with Ralfe Roksby rose, the Shreefe of Yorkshire then,
No well proportioned fight, we of description quit,
Amongst our famous fields; nor will we here admit
That of that Rakehel Cades, and his rebellious crew,
In Kent and Sussex raisd, at Senok fight that slew
The Staffords with their power, that thither him pursued,
Who twice upon Black heath, backed with the Commons rude,
Encamped against the King: then goodly London took,
There ransoming some rich, and up the prisons broke,
His sensual beastly will, for Law that did prefer,
Beheaded the Lord Say, then Englands Treasurer,
And forced the King to flight, his person to secure,
The Muse admits not here, a rabble so impure.
But brings that Battle on of that long dreadful war, The first Battle of
Saint Albans.

Of those two Houses named of York and Lancaster,
In fair Saint Albans fought, most fatally betwixt
Richard then Duke of York, and Henry called the sixth,
For that ill-gotten Crown, which him his * Grandsire left, Henry the fourth.

That likewise with his life, he from King Richard reft,
When underhand the Duke does but promoue his claim,
Who from the elder son, the Duke of Clarence came,
For which he raised Arms, yet seemed but to abet
The people, to pluck down the Earl of Somerset,
By whom (as they gave out) we Normandy had lost,
And yet he was the man that only ruled the roast.
With Richard Duke of York, (into his faction won)
Salsbury and Warwick came, the father and the son;
The Neuils nobler name, that have renowned so far.
So likewise with the King in this great action are,
The Dukes of Somerset, and Buckingham, with these
Were thrice so many Earls, their stout accomplices,
As Pembroke great in power, and Stafford with them stand
With Devonshire, Dorset, Wilt, and fierce Northumber land,
With Sidley, Bernes, and Rosse, three Barons with the rest,
When Richard Duke of York, then marching from the west;
Toward whom, whilst with his power King Henry forward set,
Unluckily as't hapt, they at Saint Albans met;
Where taking up the Street, the buildings them enclose,
Where Front does answer Front, and strength does strength oppose;
Whilst like two mighty walls, they each to other stand,
And as one sinketh down under his enemies hand,
Another thrusting in, his place does still supply,
Betwixt them whilst on heaps the mangled bodies lie:
The Staules are overthrown with the unwieldy thrust,
The windows with the shot, are shiuered all to dust.
The Winters Sleet or Hayle was never seen so thick,
As on the houses sides the bearded arrows stick,
Where Warwicks courage first most Comet-like appeard,
Who with words full of Spirit, his fighting Soldiers cheerd;
And ever as he saw the slaughter of his men,
He with fresh forces filled the places up again.
The valiant * Marchmen thus the battle still maintain, Men brought out of
the Marches of Wales.

That when King Henry found on heaps his Soldiers slain,
His great Commanders calls, who when they sadly saw,
The honor of the day would to the Yorkists draw,
Their persons they put in, as for the last to stand;
The Duke of Somerset, Henry Northumberland,
Of those brave warlike Earls, the second of that name,
The Earl of Stafford, son to the Duke of Buckingham,
And John Lord Clifford then, which shed their noble gore
Under the Castles sign, (of which not long before,
A Prophet bad the Duke of Somerset beware)
With many a valiant Knight, in death that had his share:
So much great English blood, for others lawless guilt,
Upon so little ground before was never spilt.
Proud York has got the gole, the King of all forfaken,
Into a cottage got, a woeful prisoner taken.
The Battle of Blore-heath, the place does next supply, The Battle of (...)
heath.

Twixt Richard Neuill, that great Earl of Salisbury,
Who with the Duke of York, had at Saint Albans late,
That glorious Battle got with uncontrolled Fate:
And James Lord Audley stirred by that reuengefull Queen,
To stop him on his way, for the inueterate spleen
She bare him, for that still he with the Yorkists held,
Who coming from the North, (by sundry wrongs compeld
To parley with the King) the Queen that time who lay
In Staffordshire, and thought to stop him on his way,
That valiant Tuchet stirred, in Cheshire powerful then,
T'affront him in the field, where Cheshire Gentlemen
Divided were, the one part made valiant Tuchet strong,
The other with the Earl rose as he came along,
Incamping both their powers, divided by a Brook,
Whereby the prudent Earl, this strong advantage took:
For putting in the field his Army in array,
Then making as (with speed) he meant to march away,
He caused a flight of Shafts to be discharged first.
The enemy who thought that he had done his worst,
And cowardly had fled in a disordred Rout,
Attempt to wade the Brook, he wheeling (soon) about,
Set fiercely on that part, which then were passed over;
Their Friends then in the Rear, not able to recover
The other rising bank, to lend the Vaward aid.
The Earl who found the plot take right that he had laid,
On those that forward pressed, as those that did recoyle,
As hungry in revenge, there made a ravenous spoil:
There Dutton, Dutton kills; A Done does kill a Done;
A Booth, a Booth; and Leigh by Leigh is overthrown;
A Venables, against a Venables does stand;
And Troutbeck fights with a Troutbeck hand to hand;
There Molineux does make a Molineux to die,
And Egerton, the strength of Egerton does try.
O Chesshire were thou mad, of thine own native gore
So much until this day thou never shedst before!
Above two thousand men upon the earth were thrown,
Of which the greatest part were naturally thine own.
The stout Lord Audley slain, with many a Captain there;
To Salsbury it sorts the Palm away to bear.
Then fair Northampton next, thy Battle place shall take, The Battle of
Northampton.

Which of th'Emperiall war, the third fought Field does make,
Twixt Henry called our sixth, upon whose party came
His near and dear Allies, the Dukes of Buckingham,
And Somerset, the Earl of Shrewsbury of account,
Stout Vicount Beaumount, and the young Lord Egremount,
Against Edward Earl of March, son to the Duke of York,
With Warwick, in that war, who set them all at work,
And Falkonbridge with him, not much unlike the other;
A Neuill nobly borne, his puisant fathers brother,
Who to the Yorkists claim, had evermore been true,
And valiant Bourcher, Earl of Essex, and of Eau.
The King from out the town, who drew his Foot and Horse,
As willingly to give full field-roomth to his Force,
Does pass the River Nen, near where it down does run
From his first fountains head, is near to Harsington,
Advised of a place, by Nature strongly wrought,
Does there encampe his power: the Earl of March who sought
To prove by dint of sword, who should obtain the day,
From Tawcester traynd on his powers in good array.
The Vaward Warwick led, (whom no attempt could fear;
The Middle March himself, and Falkonbridge the Rear.
Now July entered was, and ere the restless Sun,
Three hours ascent had got, the dreadful fight begun
By Warwick, who a straight from Vicount Beaumont took,
Defeating him at first, by which he quickly brook
In, on th'Emperiall host, which with a furious charge,
He forced upon the field, it self more to enlarge.
Now English Bows, and Bills, and Battle-axes walk,
Death up and down the field in ghastly sort does stalk.
March in the flower of Youth, like Mars himself does bear;
But Warwick as the man, whom Fortune seemed to fear,
Did for him what he would, that wheresoere he goes,
Down like a furious storm, before him all he throws:
So Shrewsbury again of Talbots valiant strain,
(That fatal Scourge of France) as stoutly does maintain,
The party of the King, so princely Somerset,
Whom the others knightly deeds, more eagerly does whet,
Bears up with them again: by Somerset opposd
At last King Henry's host being on three parts enclosd,
And ayds still coming in upon the Yorkists side,
The Summer being then at height of all her pride,
The Husbandman, then hard upon his Harvest was:
But yet the cocks of Hay, nor swaths of new-shorne grass,
Strewn not the Meads so thick, as mangled bodies there,
When nothing could be seen, but horror every where:
So that upon the bancks, and in the stream of * Nen,
Ten thousand well resolved, stout, native English men The River running by
Northampton.

Left breathless, with the rest great Buckingham is slain,
And Shrewsbury whose loss those times did much complain,
Egremont, and Beaumont, both found dead upon the Field,
The miserable King, enforced again to yield.
Then Wakefield Battle next, we in our Bedroule bring, The Battle of
Wakefield.

Fought by Prince Edward, son to that oft-conquered King,
And Richard Duke of York, still struggling for the Crown,
Whom Salsbury assists, the man with whose renown,
The mouth of Fame seemed filled, there having with them then
Some few selected Welsh, and Southern Gentlemen:
A handful to those powers, with which Prince Edward came;
Of which amongst the rest, the men of noblest name,
Were those two great-borne Dukes, which still his right prefer
His cosen Somerset, and princely Excester,
The Earl of Wiltshire still, that on his part stuck close:
With those two valiant Peers, Lord Clifford, and Lord Rosse,
Who made their March from York to Wakefield, on their way
To meet the Duke, who then at Sandall Castle lay,
Whom at his (very) gate, into the Field they dared,
Whose long expected powers not fully then prepared,
That March his valiant son, should to his succors bring.
Wherefore that puissant Lord, by speedy mustring
His Tenants and such friends, as he that time could get,
Five thousand in five days, in his Battalion set
Against their twice doubled strength; nor could the Duke be stayed,
Till he might from the South be seconded with aid;
As in his martial pride, disdaining his poor foes,
So often used to win, he never thought to lose.
The Prince, which still prouok'd the incensed Duke to fight,
His maine Battalion ranged in Sandals lofty sight,
In which he, and the Dukes, were seen in all their pride:
And as Yorkes powers should pass, he had on either side
Two wings in ambush laid, which at the place assigned
His Rereward should enclose, which as a thing diuin'd,
Just caught as he forecast; for scarce his army comes
From the descending banks, and that his rattling Drums
Excites his men to charge; but Wiltshire with his force,
Which were of light-armed Foot, and Rosse with his light Horse,
Came in upon their backs, as from a mountain thrown,
In number to the Dukes, by being four to one.
Even as a Rout of wolves, when they by chance have caught
A Beast out of the Heard, which long time they have sought;
Upon him all at once courageously do set,
Him by the Dewlaps some, some by the flank do get:
Some climbing to his ears, do never leave their hold,
Till falling on the ground, they have him as they would,
With many of his kind, which, when he used to wend,
What with their horns and hoofes, could then themselves defend.
Thus on their foes they fell, and down the Yorkists fall;
Red Slaughter in her arms encompasseth them all.
The first of all the fights in this unnatural war,
In which blind Fortune smild on woeful Lancaster.
Here Richard Duke of York, down beaten, breathed his last,
And Salsbury so long with conquest still that past,
Enforced was to yield; Rutland a younger son
To the deceased Duke, as he away would run,
(A child scarce twelve years old) by Clifford there surpised,
Who whilst he thought with tears his rage to have suffiz'd,
By him was answered thus, Thy father has slain mine,
And for his blood (young Boy) I Will have this blood of thine,
And stabbed him to the heart: thus the Lancastrians reign,
The Yorkist in the field on heaps together slain.
The Battle at that Cross, which to this day does bear The Battle at
MortimersCrosse

The great and ancient name of the English Mortimer,
The next shall hear have place, betwixt that Edward fought,
Entitled Earl of March, (reuengefully that sought
To wreake his fathers blood, at Wakefield lately shed
But then he Duke of York, his father being dead)
And Jasper Tudor Earl of Pembroke, in this war,
That stood to underprop the House of Lancaster,
Half brother to the King, that strove to hold his Crown,
With Wiltshire, whose high prowess had bravely beaten down
The Yorkists swelling pride in that successful war
At Wakefield, whose greatst power of Welsh and Irish are.
The Dukes were Marchers most, which still stuck to him close,
And meeting on the plain, by that forenamed Cross;
As either General there for his advantage found,
(For wisely they surueyd the fashion of the ground)
They into one maine sight their either Forces make,
When to the Duke of York (his spirits as to awake)
Three sons at once appeared, all severally that shone,
Which in a little space were joined all in one.
Auspicious to the Duke, as after it fell out,
Who with the weaker power, (of which he seemed to doubt)
The proud Lancastrian part had quickly put to chase,
Where plainly it should seem, the Genius of the place,
The very name of March should greatly favor there,
A Title to this Prince derived from Mortimer:
To whom this Trophy reared, much honored had the soil.
The Yorkists here enriched with the Lancastrian spoil,
Are Masters of the day; four thousand being slain,
The most of which were those, there standing to maintain
The title of the King. Where Owen Tudors lot
Was to be taken then; who this young Earl begot
On Katherin the bright Queen, the fifth King Henry's Bride,
Who too untimely dead, this Owen had affide.
But he a Prisoner then, his son and Ormond fled,
At Hereford was made the shorter by the head;
When this most warlike Duke, in honor of that sign,
Which of his good success so rightly did divine,
And thankful to high heaven, which of his cause had care,
Three Suns for his device still in his Ensign bare.
Thy second Battle now, Saint Albans I record,
Struck twixt Queen Margrets power, to ransom back her Lord, The second
Battle of Saint Albans.

Ta'n prisoner at that town, when there those factions fought,
Whom now the part of York had thither with them brought,
Whose force consisted most of Southern men, being led
By Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and the head
Of that proud faction then, stout Warwick still that swayd,
In every bloody field (the Yorkists only aid)
When eithers power approch'd, and they themselves had fixed,
Upon the South and North, the town them both betwixt,
Which first of all to take, the Yorkists had forecast,
Putting their Vaward on, and their best Archers placed
The Market-sted about, and them so fitly laid,
That when the foe camevp, they with such terror played
Upon them in the Front, as forced them to retreit.
The Northern mad with rage upon the first defeat,
Yet put for it again, to enter from the North,
Which when great Warwick heard, he sent his Vaward forth,
To Oppose them in what place so ere they made their stand,
Where in too fit a ground, a Heath too near at hand,
Adjoining to the town, unluckily they light,
Where presenly began a fierce and deadly fight.
But those of Warwicks part, which scarce four thousand were,
To th'Vaward of the Queens, that stood so stoutly there,
Though still with fresh supplies from her maine Battle fed;
When they their courage saw so little them to sted,
Deluded by the long expectance of their aid,
By passages too straight, and close ambushments stayed:
Their succors that forslow'd, to flight themselves betake,
When after them again, such speed the Northern make,
Being followed with the force of their maine Battle strong,
That this disordred Rout, these breathless men among,
They entered Warwicks Host, which with such horror struck
The Southern, that each man began about to look
A way how to escape, that when great Norfolk cried,
Now as you favor York, and his just cause, abide.
And Warwick in the Front even offered to have stood,
Yet neither of them both, should they have spent their blood,
Could make a man to stay, or look upon a foe:
Where Fortune it should seem, to Warwick meant to show,
That she this tide of his could turn, when ere she would.
Thus when they saw the day was for so little sold;
The King, which (for their ends) they to the field had brought,
Behind them there they leave, but as a thing of naught,
Which served them to no use: who when his Queen and son,
There found in Norfolkes tent, the Battle being done,
With many a joyful tear, each other they embrace;
And whilst blind Fortune looked with so well pleased a face:
Their swords with the warm blood of Yorkists so inbrude,
Their foes but lately fled, courageously pursude.
Now follows that black Scene, borne up so wondrous hie, The Battle of
Tovvton.

That but a poor dumb show before a Tragedy,
The former Battles fought, have seemed to this to be;
O Towton, let the blood Palme-Sunday spent on thee,
Affright the future times, when they the Muse shall hear,
Deliver it so to them; and let the ashes there
Of forty thousand men, in that long quarrel slain,
Arise out of the earth, as they would live again,
To tell the manlike doeds, that bloody day were wrought
In that most fatal field, (with various fortunes fought)
Twixt Edward Duke of York, then late proclaimed King,
Fourth of that royal name, and him accompanying,
The Nevills, (of that war maintaining still the stream)
Great Warwick, and with him his most courageous Eame,
Stout Falconbridge, the third, a firebrand like the other,
Of Salisbury surnamed, that Warwicks bastard brother.
Lord Fitzwater, who still the Yorkists power assists,
Blount, VVenlock, Dinham, Knights approved Martialists.
And Henry the late King, to whom they still durst stand,
His true as powerful friend, the great Northumberland,
With Westmerland, his claim who ever did prefer
His kinsman Somerset, his cosen Excester,
Dukes of the Royal line, his faithful friends that were,
And little less then those, the Earl of Devonshire,
Th'Lord Dacres, and Lord Wels, both wise and warlike wights,
With him of great command, Neuill and Trolop, Knights.
Both armies then on foot, and on their way set forth,
King Edward from the South, King Henry from the North.
The later crowned King does preparation make,
From Pomfret (where he lay) the passage first to take
O'r Aier at Ferybridge, and for that service sends
A most selected troop of his well-chosen friends,
To make that passage good, when instantly began
The dire and ominous signs, the slaughter that foreran.
For valiant Clifford there, himself so bravely quit,
That coming to the Bridge (ere they could strengthen it)
From the Lancastrian power, with his light troop of Horse,
And early in the morn defeating of their force,
The Lord Fitzmater slew, and that brave Bastard son
Of Salsbury, themselves who into danger run:
For being in their beds, suspecting naught at all;
But hearing sudden noise, supposed some broyle to fall
Among their misgouern'd troops, unarmed rushing out,
By Cliffords Soldiers soon encompassed about,
Were miserably slain: which when great Warwick hears,
As he had felt his heart transpersed through his ears,
To Edward mad with rage, imediatly he goes,
And with distracted eyes, in most stern manner shows
The slaughter of those Lords; this day alone, quoth he,
Our utter ruin shall, or our sure rising be.
When soon before the Host, his glittering sword he drew,
And with relentlesse hands his springly Courser slew.
Then stand to me (quoth he) who means not to fly;
This day shall Edward win, or here shall Warwick die.
Which words by Warwick spoke, so deeply seemed to sting
The much distempered breast of that courageous King,
That straight he made proclaimed, that every fainting heart,
From his resolved host had license to depart:
And those that would abide the hazard of the fight,
Rewards and titles due to their deserved right:
And that no man, that day, a prisoner there should take;
For this the vpshot was, that all must mar or make.
A hundred thousand men in both the Armies stood,
That native English were: O worthy of your Blood
What conquest had there been? But Ensigns fly at large,
And trumpets every way sound to the dreadful charge.
Upon the Yorkists part, there flew the irefull Bear:
On the Lancastrian side, the Cressant wauing there.
The Southern on this side, for York a Warwick cry,
A Percy for the right, the Northern men reply.
The two maine Battles join, the four large Wings do meet;
What with the shouts of men, and noise of horses feet,
Hell through the troubled earth, her horror seemed to breath;
A thunder heard above, an earthquake felt beneath:
As when the Evening is with darkness ouerspread,
Her Star-befreckled face with Clouds inuelloped,
You oftentimes behold, the trembling lightning fly,
Which suddenly again, but turning of your eye,
Is vanished away, or does so swiftly glide,
That with a trice it touch t'Horizons either side;
So through the smoke of dust, from ways, and fallowes raisd,
And breath of horse and men, that both together ceasd
The air one every part, sent by the glimmering Sun,
The splendour of their Arms does by reflection run:
Till heaps of dying men, and those already dead,
Much hindered them would charge, and let them that fled.
Beyond all wonted bounds, their rage so far extends,
That sullen night begins, before their fury ends.
Ten hours this fight endured, whilst still with murdering hands,
Expecting the next morn, the weak'st unconquered stands;
Which was no sooner come, but both begin again
To wrecke their friends dear blood, the former evening slain.
New Battles are begun, new fights that newly wound,
Till the Lancastrian part, by their much lesning found
Their long expected hopes were utterly forlorn,
When lastly to the foe, their recreant backs they turn.
Thy Channel then, O * Cock, was filled up with the dead, A little Riuilet near
to Tovvton, running into VVharfe.

Of the Lancastrian side, that from the Yorkists fled,
That those of Edwards part, that had the Rear in chase,
As though upon a Bridge, did on their bodies pass.
That Wharfe to whose large banks thou contribut'st thy store,
Had her more Crystal face discolored with the gore
Of forty thousand men, that up the number made,
Northumberland the great, and Westmerland there laid
Their bodies: valiant Wels, and Dacres there do leave
Their carkases, (whose hope too long) did them deceive.
Trolop and Neuill found massacred in the field,
The Earl of Wilsthire forced to the stern foe to yield.
King Henry from fair York, upon this sad mischance
To Scotland fled, the Queen sayld over into France,
The Duke of Somerset, and Excester do fly,
The rest upon the earth together breathless lie.
Muse, turn thee now to tell the Field at Hexam struck, The (...) at Hexam.

Upon the Yorkists part, with the most prosperous luck
Of any yet before, where to themselves they gained
Most safety, yet their powers least damage there sustained,
Twixt John Lord Mountacute, that Neuill, who to stand
For Edward, gathered had out of Northumber land
A sort of valiant men, consisting most of Horse,
Which were again supplied with a most puisant force,
Sent thither from the South, and by King Edward brought
In person down to York, to aid if that in ought
His General should have need, for that he durst not trust
The Northern, which so often to him had been unjust:
Whilst he himself at York, a second power does hold,
To hear in this rough war, what the Lancastrians would.
And Henry with his Queen, who to their powers had got,
The lively daring French, and the light hardy Scot,
To enter with them here, and to their part do get,
Their faithful loved Allie, the Duke of Somerset,
And Sir Ralfe Percie, then most powerful in those parts,
Who had been reconciled to Edward, but their hearts
Still with King Henry stayed, to him and ever true,
To whom by this revolt, they many Northern drew:
Sir William T aylboys, (called of most) the Earl of Kime,
With Hungerford, and Rosse, and Mullins, of that time
Barons of high account, with Neuill, T unstall, Gray,
Hussy, and Finderne, Knights, men bearing mighty sway.
As forward with his force, brave Mountacute was set,
It hap'd upon his way at Hegly More he met
With Hungerford, and Rosse, and Sir Ralph Percy, where,
In sign of good success (as certainly it were)
They and their utmost force were quickly put to slight;
Yet Percy as he was a most courageous Knight,
Never boudg'd till his last breath, but in the field was slain.
Proud of this first defeat, then marching forth again,
Toward Liuells, a large Waste, which other plains out-braues,
Whose Verge fresh * Dowell still is watring with her waves,
Whereas his posting Scouts, King Henry's power discri'd, A little River near
Hexam.

Toward whom with speedy march, this valiant General hied,
Whose haste there likewise had such prosperous event,
That lucklesse Henry yet, had scarcely cleared his Tent,
His Captains hardly set his Battles, nor enlarged
Their Squadrons on the field, but this great Neuill charged:
Long was this doubtful fight on either side maintained,
That rising whilst this falls, this loosing whilst that gained:
The ground which this part got, and there as Conquerors stood,
The other quickly gain, and firmly make it good,
To either as blind Chance, her favors will dispose;
So to this part it eb'd, and to that side it flows.
At last, till whether 'twere that sad and horrid sight,
At Saxton that yet did their fainting spirits affright,
With doubt of second loss, and slaughter, or the aid
That Mountacute received; King Henry's power dismayed:
And giving up the day, dishonourably fled,
Whom with so violent speed the Yorkists followed,
That had not Henry spurred, and had a Courser swift,
Besides a skillful guide, through woods and hills to shift,
He sure had been surpised, as they his Hench-men took,
With whom they found his Helm; with most disastrous luck,
To save themselves by flight, never more did any strive,
And yet so many men never taken were alive.
Now Banbury we come thy Battle to report,
And show th'efficient cause, as in what wondrous sort The (...) of Banbury.

Great VVarmicke was wrought in to the Lancastrian part,
When as that wanton King so vexed his mighty heart:
Whilst in the Court of France, that Warrior he bestowed,
(As potent here at home, as powerful else abroad)
A marriage to entreat with Bona bright and sheene,
Of the Sauoyan Blood, and sister to the Queen,
Which whilst this noble Earl negotiated there,
The widow Lady Gray, the King espoused here.
By which the noble Earl in France who was disgraced,
(In England his revenge does but too quickly have)
T'excite the Northern men does secretly begin,
(With whom he powerful was) to rile, that coming in,
He might put in his hand, (which only he desired)
Which rising before York were likely to have fierd The City of (...) to have
bin (...) by (...) faction.

The City, but repulsed, and Holdorn them that led,
Being taken, for the cause made shorter by the head.
Yet would not they disist, but to their Captains drew
Henry the valiant son of John the Lord Fitzhugh,
With Coniers that brave Knight, whose valor they prefer,
With Henry Neuill, son to the Lord Latimer,
By whose Allies and friends, they every day grew strong,
And so in proud array toward London march along.
Which when King Edward saw the world began to side
With Warwick, till himself he might of power provide,
To noble Pembroke sends, those Rebels to withstand.
Six thousand valiant We sh, who mustring out of hand,
By Richard (...) (...), his brother them does bring,
And for their greater strength (appointed by the King)
Th'Lord Stafford (of his house) of Powick named then,
Eight hundred Archers brought, the most selected men
The Marches could make out: these having Seuerne crossed,
And up to Cotswould clome, they heard the Northern host,
Being at Northampton then, it self toward Warwick wayd,
When with a speedy march, the Harberts that forlayd
Their passage, charged their Rear with near two thousand horse,
That the Lancastrian part suipecting all their force
Had followed them again, their army bring about,
Both with such speed and skill, that (...) the Welsh got out,
By having charged too far, some of their Vaward lost,
Beat to their (...) back; thus as these Legions coast,
On Danemore they are met, indifferent for this war,
Whereas three easy hills that stand Trianguler,
Small Edgcoat ouerlooke; on that upon the West
The Welsh encampe themselves; the Northern them possessed
Of that upon the South, whilst, (by wars strange event)
Young Neuill, who would brave the Harberts in their Tent,
Leading a troop of Youth, (upon that fatal plain)
Was taken by the Welsh, and miserably slain,
Of whose untimely death, his friends the next day took
A terrible revenge, when Stafford there forsook
The army of the Welsh, and with his Archers bad
Them fight that would for him; for that proud Pembroke had
Displaced him of his Inn, in Banbury where he
His Paramore had lodged; where since he might not be,
He back ward shapes his course, and leaves the Harberts there,
To Abide the brunt of all: with outcries every where
The clamorous Drums and Fifes to the rough charge do sound,
Together horse and man come tumbling to the ground:
Then limbs like boughs were lop'd, from shoulders arms do fly;
They fight as none could escape, yet escape as none could die.
The ruffling Northern Lads, and the stout Welshmen tried it;
Then Head-pieces hold out, or brains must sore abide it.
The Northern men Saint George for Lancaster do cry:
A Pembroke for the King, the lusty Welsh reply;
When many a gallant youth does desperately assay,
To do some thing that might be worthy of the day:
Where Richard Harbert bears into the Northern prease,
And with his Poleaxe makes his way with such success,
That breaking through the Ranks, he their maine Battle past,
And quit it so again, that many stood aghast,
That from the higher ground beheld him wade the crowd,
As often ye behold in tempests rough and proud,
O'rtaken with a storm, some Shell or little Crea,
Hard laboring for the land, on the high-working Sea,
Seems now as swallowed up, then floating light and free
O'th top of some high wave; then think that you it see
Quite sunk beneath that waste of waters, yet does clear
The Maine, and safely gets some Creek or Harbor near:
So Harbert cleared their Host; but see the event of war,
Some Spialls on the hill discerned had from far
Another Army come to aid the Northern side,
When they which Claphams craft so quickly not espide,
Who with five hundred men about Northampton raisd,
All discontented spirits, with Edwards rule displeasd,
Displaying in the field great (...) dreaded Bear:
The Welsh who thought the Earl in person had been there,
Leading a greater power (disheartened) turn the back
Before the Northern host, that quickly go to wrack.
Five thousand valiant Welsh are in chase o'rthrowne,
Which but an hour before had thought the day their own.
Their Leaders (in the flight) the high-borne Harberts t'ane,
At Banbury must pay for Henry Neuill slain.
Now Stamford in due course, the Muse does come to tell, The Battle of
Stamford, or Loose: coat feld.

Of thine own named field, what in the fight befell,
Betwixt brave youthful Wells, from Lincolnshire that led
Near twenty thousand men, towered London making head,
Against the Yorkists power, great Warwick to abet,
Who with a puisant force prepared forth to set,
To join with him in Arms, and jointly take their chance.
And Edward with his friends, who likewise do advance
His forces, to refell that desperate daring foe;
Who for he durst himself in open Arms to show,
Nor at his dread command them down again would lay.
His father the Lord Wells, who he supposed might sway
His so outrageous son, with his loved law-made brother,
Sir Thomas Dymock, thought too much to rule the other,
He strangely did to die, which so incensed the spleen
Of this courageous youth, that he to wreake his teene
Upon the cruel King, does every way excite
Him to an equal field, that com'n where they might smite
The Battle: on this plain it chanced their Armies met:
They ranged their several fights, which once in order set,
The loudly-brawling Drums, which seemed to have feared
The trembling air at first, soon after were not heard,
For outcries, shreekes, and showts, whilst noise does noise confound.
No accents touch the ear, but such as death do sound:
In thirsting for revenge, whilst fury them does guide:
As slaughter seems by turns to sease on either side.
The Southern expert were, in all to war belong,
And exercise their skill, the Marchmen stout and strong,
Which to the Battle stick, and if they make retreat,
Yet coming on again, the foe they back do beat,
And Wels for Warwick cry, and for the rightful Crown;
The other call a York, to beat the Rebels down:
The worst that war could do, on either side she shows,
Or by the force of Bills, or by the strength of Bows,
But still by fresh supplies, the Yorkists power increase:
And Wels, who sees his troops so ouerborne with prease,
By hazarding too far into the boystrous throng,
Encouraging his men the adverse troops among,
With many a mortal wound, his wearied breath expired:
Which sooner known to his, then his first hopes desired,
Ten thousand on the earth before them lying slain,
No hope left to repair their ruined state again,
Cast off their Countries coats, to have their speed away,
(Of them) which Loose-coat field is called (even) to this day.
Since needsly I must stick upon my former text, The Battle of Barnet.

The bloody Battle fought, at Barnet follows next,
Twixt Edward, who before he settled was to reign,
By Warwick hence expuls'd; but here ariu'd again,
From Burgundy, brought in munition, men and pay,
And all things fit for war, expecting yet a day.
Whose brother * George came in, with Warwick that had stood, George Duke of
clarence.

Whom nature wrought at length t'adhere to his own blood:
His brother Richard Duke of Gloucester, and his friend;
Lord Hastings, who to him their utmost powers extend;
And Warwick, whose great heart so mortal hatred bore
To Edward, that by all the Sacraments he swore,
Not to lay down his Arms, until his sword had rac'd,
That proud King from his Seat, that so had him disgraced:
And Marquess Mountacute, his brother, that brave stem
Of Neuils noble Stock, who joined had to them,
The Dukes of Somerset, and Excester, and take
The Earl of Oxford in; the Armies forward make,
And meeting on the plain, to Barnet very near,
That to this very day, is called Gladmore there.
Duke Richard to the field, does Edwards Vaward bring;
And in the middle came that most courageous King,
With Clarence his reclaimed, and brother then most dear;
His friend Lord (...) had the guiding of the Rear,
(A man of whom the King most highly did repute.)
On puisant Warwicks part, the Marquess Mountacute
His brother, and his friend the Earl of Oxford led
The right wing; and the left which most that day might sted,
The Duke of Excester; and he himself do guide
The middle fight (which was the Armies only pride)
Of Archers most approved, the best that he could get,
Directed by his friend, the Duke of Somerset.
O Sabbath ill bestowed, O drery Easter day,
In which (as some suppose) the Sun does use to play,
In honor of that God for sinful man that died,
And rose on that third day, that Sun which now does hide
His face in foggy mists; nor was that morning seen,
So that the space of ground those angry hosts between,
Was ouershadowed quite with darkness, which so cast
The armies on both sides, that they each other past,
Before they could perceive advantage, where to fight;
Besides the envious mist so much deceived their sight,
That where eight hundred men, which valiant Oxford brought,
Ware Comets on their coats: great Warwicks force which thought
They had King Edwards been, which so with Suns were dressed,
First made their shot at them, who by their friends distressed,
Constrained were to fly, being scattered here and there.
But when this direful day at last began to clear,
King Edward then beholds that height of his first hopes,
Whose presence gave fresh life to his oft-fainting troops,
Prepared to scourge his pride, there daring to defy
His mercy, to the host proclaiming publicly
His hateful breach of faith, his perjury, and shame,
And what might make him vile; so Warwick heard that name
Of York, which in the field he had so often advanced,
And to that glorious height, and greatness had inhanc'd,
Then cried against his power, by those which often had sled,
Their swist pursuing foc, by him not bravely led,
Upon the enemies back, their swords bathed in the gore
Of those from whom they (...), like heartlesse men before,
Which Warwicks nobler name injuriously defide,
Even as the irefull host then joined side to side.
Where cruel Richard charged the Earls maine battle, when
Proud Somerset therein, with his approved men
Stood stoutly to the shocke, and flang out such a flight
Of shafts, as welneere seem'dt'eclipse the welcomed light,
Which forced them to fall off, on whose retreit again,
That great Battalion next approaches the fair plain,
Where in the King himself in person was to try,
Proud VVarwicks utmost strength: when Warwick by and by,
With his left wing came up, and charged so home and round,
That had not his light horse by disuantagious ground
Been hindered, he had struck the heart of Edwards host:
But finding his defeat, his enterprise so lost,
He his swift Currers sends, to will his valiant brother,
And Oxford, in command being equal to the other,
To charge with the right wing, who bravely up do bear;
But Hastings that before raught thither with his Rear,
And with King Edward joined, the host too strongly armed.
When every part with spoil, with rape, with fury charmed,
Are prodigal of blood, that slaughter seems to swill
It self in humane gore, and every one cries kill.
So doubtful and so long the battle does abide,
That those, which to and fro, twixt that and London ride,
That Warwick winnes the day for certain news do bring,
Those following them again, said certainly the King,
Until great Warwick found his army had the worse,
And sore began to faint, alighting from his horse,
In with the foremost puts, and wades into the throng;
And where he saw death stern'st, the murdered troops among,
He ventures, as the Sun in a tempestuous day,
With darkness threatened long, yet sometimes does display
His cheerful beams, which scarce appear to the clear eye,
But suddenly the clouds, which on the winds do fly,
Do muffle him again within them, till at length,
The storm (prevailing still with an unusual strength)
His cleerenesse quite does close, and shut him up in night:
So mighty Warwick fares in this outrageous fight.
The cruel Lions thus enclose the dreaded Bear,
Whilst Montacute, who strives (if any help there were)
To rescue his beloved and valiant brother, fell:
The loss of two such spirits at once, time shall not tell;
The Duke of Somerset, and The Earl of Oxford fled,
And Excester being left for one amongst the dead,
At length recovering life, by night escaped away,
York never safely sat, till this victorious day.
Thus Fortune to his end this mighty Warwick brings
This puisant setter up, and plucker down of Kings.
He who those battles won, which so much blood had cost,
At Barnets fatal fight, both Life and Fortune lost.
Now Tewksbury it rests, thy storry to relate,
Thy sad and dreadful fight, and that most direful Fate The Battle at
Tevvxbury.

Of the Lancastrian Line, which happened on that day,
Fourth of that fatal Month, that still-remembred May:
Twixt Edmund that brave Duke of Somerset, who fled
From Barnets bloody field, (again there gathering head)
And Marquess Dorset bound in blood to aid him there,
With Thomas Courtney Earl of powerful Devonshire:
With whom King Henry's son, young Edward there was seen,
To claim his doubtless right, with that undaunted Queen
His mother, who from France with succors came on land
That day, when Warwick (...) at (...), which now stand,
Their fortune yet to try, upon a second fight.
And Edward who employed the utmost of his might,
The poor Lancastrian part (which he does easily feel,
By VVarwicks mighty fall, already faintly reele)
By Battle to subvert, and to extirpe the Line;
And for the present act, his army does assign
To those at Barnet field so luckily that sped;
As Richard late did there, he here the Vaward led,
The Maine the King himself, and Clarence took to guide;
The Rearward as before by Hastings was supplide.
The Army of the Queen, into three Battles cast,
The first of which the Duke of Somerset, and (fast
To him) his brother John do happily dispose;
The second, which the Prince for his own safety chose
The Barons of Saint John, and Wenlocke; and the third,
To Courtney that brave Earl of Devonshire referd.
Where in a spacious field they set their Armies down;
Behind, hard at their backs, the Abbey, and the Town,
To whom their foe must come, by often banks and steep,
Through quickset narrow Lanes, cut out with ditches deep,
Repulsing Edwards power, constraining him to prove
By thundering Cannonshot, and Culuering to remove
Them from that chosen ground, so tedious to assail;
And with the shot came shafts, like stormy showers of Hayle:
The like they sent again, which beat the other sore,
Who with the Ordnance strove the Yorkists to outrore,
And still make good their ground, that whilst the Pieces play,
The Yorkists hasting still to hand-blowes, do assay,
In strong and boystrous crowds to scale the combrous Dykes;
But beaten down with Bills, with Poleaxes, and Pykes,
Are forced to fall off; when Richard there that led
The Vaward, saw their strength so little them to sted,
As he a Captain was, both politic and good,
The stratagems of war, that rightly understood,
Does seem as from the field his forces to withdraw.
His sudden, strange retire, proud Somerset that saw,
(A man of haughty spirit, in honor most precise;
In action yet far more aduenturous then wise)
Supposing from the field for safety he had fled,
Straight gives him the chase; when Richard turning head,
By his encounter let the desperate Duke to know,
It Was done to train him out, when soon began the show
Of slaughter every where; for scarce their equal forces
Began the doubtful fight, but that three hundred horses,
That out of sight this while on Edwards part had stayed,
To see, that near at hand no ambushes were laid,
Soon charged them on the side, disordring quite their Ranks,
Whilst this most warlike King had won the climing Banks,
Upon the equal earth, and coming bravely in
Upon the adverse power, there likewise does begin
A fierce and deadly fight, that the Lancastrian side,
The first and furious shocke not able to abide
The utmost of their strength, were forced to bestow,
To hold what they had got; that Somerset below,
Who from the second force, had still expected aid,
But frustrated thereof, even as a man dismayed,
Scarce shifts to save himself his Battle overthrown;
But faring as a man that frantique had been grown,
With Wenlock hap'd to meet (preparing for his flight)
Vpbraiding him with terms of baseness and despite,
That cow'rdly he had faild to succor him with men:
Whilst Wenlock with like words requiteth him again,
The Duke (to his stern rage, as yielding up the raines)
With his too pondrous Axe pasht out the Barons brains.
The party of the Queen in every place are killed,
The Ditches with the dead, confusedly are filled,
And many in the flight, in the neighboring Rivers drowned,
Which with victorious wreaths, the conquering Yorkists crowned.
Three thousand of those men, on Henry's part that stood,
For their presumption paid the forfeit of their blood.
John Marquess Dorset dead, and Devonshire that day
Drew his last vital breath, as in that bloody fray,
Delues, Hamden, Whittingham, and Leuknor, who had there,
Their several brave commands, all valiant men that were,
Found dead upon the earth. Now all is Edwards own,
And through his enemies tents he marched into the town,
Where quickly he proclaims, to him that forth could bring
Young Edward, a large Fee, and as he was a King,
His person to be safe. Sir Richard Crofts who thought
His prisoner to disclose, before the King then brought
That fair and goodly Youth; whom when proud York demands,
Why thus he had presumed by help of traytrous hands
His kingdom to disturb, and impiously displayed
His Ensigns: the stout Prince, as not a jot dismayed,
With confidence replies, To claim his ancient right,
Him from his Grandsires left; by tyranny and might,
By him his foe usurped: with whose so bold reply,
Whilst Edward thoroughly vexed, does seem to thrust him by;
His second brother George, and Richard near that stood, The murder of Prince
Ed. ward.

With many a cruel stab let out his princely blood;
In whom the Line direct of Lancaster does cease,
And Somerset himself surprised in the prease;
With many a worthy man, to Gloucester prisoners led,
There forfeited their lives: Queen Margaret being fled
To a religious Cell, (to Tewksbury, too near)
Discouerd to the King, with sad and heavy cheer,
A prisoner was conuey'd to London, woeful Queen,
The last of all her hopes, that buried now had seen.
But of that outrage here, by that bold Bastard son
Of Thomas Neuill, named Lord Falkonbridge, which won A brief passage of the
Bastard Falkonhridge his Rebellion.

A rude rebellious Rout in Kent and Essex raised,
Who London here besieged, and Southwarke having seas'd,
Set fire upon the Bridge: but when he not preuaild,
The Suburbs on the East he furiously assayl'd;
But by the Cities power was lastly put to flight:
Which being no set Field, nor yet well ordered fight,
Amongst our Battles here, may no way reckoned be.
Then Bosworth here the Muse now lastly bids for thee,
Thy Battle to describe, the last of that long war, The Battle of (...).

Entit'led by the name of York and Lancaster;
Twixt Henry Tudor Earl of Richmond only left
Of the Lancastian Line, who by the Yorkists reft
Of liberty at home, a banished man abroad,
In Britany had lived; but late at Milford Road,
Being prosperously ariu'd, though scarce two thousand strong,
Made out his way through Wales, where as he came along.
First Griffith great in Blood, then Morgan next does meet
Him, with their several powers, as offi ing at his feet
To lay their Lands, and lives; Sir Rice ap Thomas then,
With his brave Band of Welsh, most choice and expert men,
Comes lastly to his aid; at Shrewsbury ariu'd,
(His hopes so faint before, so happily revived)
He on for England makes, and near to Newport town,
The next ensuing night setting his Army down,
Sir Gilbert Talbot still for Lancaster that stood,
(To Henry near Allied in friendship as in Blood)
From The Earl of Shrewsbury his Nephew (under age)
Came with two thousand men, in warlike Equipage,
Which much his power increased; when easily setting on,
From Lichfield, as the way leads forth to Atherston,
Brave Bourcher and his friend stout Hungerford, whose hopes
On Henry long had lain, stealing from Richards troops,
(Wherewith they had been mixed) to Henry do appear,
Which with a high resolve, most strangely seemed to cheer,
His oft-appauled heart, but yet the man which most,
Gave sail to Henry's self, and fresh life to his host,
The stout Lord Stanley was, who for he had affide
The mother of the Earl, to him so near allide:
The King who feared his truth, (which he to have, compeld)
The young Lord Strange his son, in hostage strongly held,
Which forced him to fall off, till he fit place could find,
His son in law to meet; yet he with him combinde
Sir William Stanley, known to be a valiant Knight,
T'assure him of his aid. Thus growing toward his hight,
A most selected Band of Chesshire Bow-men came,
By Sir John Savage led, besides two men of name:
Sir Brian Sanford, and Sir Simon Digby, who
Leaving the tyrant King, themselves expressly show
Fast friends to Henry's part, which still his power increast:
Both Armies well prepared, toward Bosworth strongly preast,
And on a spacious Moore, lying Southward from the town;
Indifferent to them both, they set their Armies down
Their Soldiers to refresh, preparing for the fight:
Where to the guilty King, that black fore-running night,
Appear the dreadful ghosts of Henry and his son, Richards fearful
Dreams the night before the Battle.

Of his own brother George, and his two nephews done
Most cruelly to death; and of his wife and friend,
Lord Hastings, with pale hands prepared as they would rend
Him peece-meale; at which often he roreth in his sleep.
No sooner began the dawne out of the East to peep,
But Drums and Trumpets chide, the Soldiers to their Arms,
And all the neighboring fields are covered with the swarms
Of those that came to fight, as those that came to see,
(Contending for a Crown) whose that great day should be.
First, Richmond ranged his fights, on Oxford, and bestows
The leading, with a Band of strong and Sinewy Bows
Out of the Army picked; the Front of all the field,
Sir Gilbert Talbot next, he wisely took to weeld,
The right Wing, with his strengths, most Northern men that were.
And Sir John Savage, with the power of Lancashire,
And Chesshire (Chief of men) was for the left Wing placed:
The Middle Battle he in his fair person graced,
With him the noble Earl of Pembroke, who commands
Their Contrymen the Welsh, (of whom it mainly stands,
For their great numbers found to be of greatest force)
Which but his guard of Gleaues, consisted all of Horse.
Into two several fights the King contrived his strength,
And his first Battle cast into a wondrous length,
In fashion of a wedge, in point of which he set
His Archery, thereof and to the guidance let
Of John the noble Duke of Norfolk, and his son
Brave Surrey: he himself the second bringing on,
Which was a perfect square; and on the other side,
His Horsemen had for wings, which by extending wide,
The adverse seemed to threat, with an unequal power.
The utmost point ariu'd of this expected hour,
He to Lord Stanley sends, to bring away his aid;
And (...) him by an Oath, if longer he delayed
His eldest son young Strange imediatly should die,
To whom stout Stanley thus does carelessely reply:
Tell thou the King I Will come, when I fit time shall see,
I love the Boy, but yet I have more sons then he.
The angry Armies meet, when the thin air was rent,
With such re-ecchoing shouts, from eithers Soldiers sent,
That flying o'r the field the Birds down trembling dropped.
As some old building long that has been underpropped,
When as the Timber fayles, by the unwieldy fall,
Even into powder beats, the Roof, and rotten wall,
And with confused clouds of smouldring dust does choke
The streets and places near; so through the mistie smoke,
By Shot and Ordnance made, a thundering noise was heard.
When Stanley that this while his succors had deferd,
Both to the cruel King, and to the Earl his son,
When once he does perceive the Battle was begun,
Brings on his valiant Troops, three thousand fully strong,
Which like a cloud far off, that tempest threatened long,
Falls on the Tyrants host, which him with terror struck,
As also when he sees, he does but vainly look
For succors from the great Northumberland, this while,
That from the Battle scarce three quarters of a mile,
Stood with his power of Horse, nor once was seen to stir:
When Richard (that the event no longer would defer,
The two maine Battles mixed, and that with wearied breath,
Some labored to their life, some labored to their death,
(There for the better fought) even with a Spirit elate,
As one that inly scorned the very worst that Fate
Could possibly impose, his Lance set in his Rest,
Into the thick'st of Death, through threatening peril pressed,
To where he had perceived the Earl in person drew,
Whose Standard-(...) he, Sir William Brandon slew,
The pile of his strong staff into his arme-pit sent;
When at a second shocke, down Sir John Cheney went,
Which scarce a Lances length before the Earl was placed,
Until by Richmonds Guard, environed at last,
With many a cruel wound, was through the body gride.
Upon this fatal field, John Duke of Norfolk did;
The stout Lord Ferrers fell, and Ratcliffe, that had long
Of Richards counsels been, found in the field among
A thousand Soldiers that on both sides were slain,
O Red-more, it then seemed, thy name was not in vain,
When with a thousands blood the earth was colored red.
Whereas th'Emperiall Crown was set on Henry's head,
Being found in Richards Tent, as he it there did win,
The cruel Tyrant stripped to the bare naked skin,
Behind a Herald trussed, was back to Le'ster sent,
From whence the day before he to the Battle went.
The Battle then at Stoke, so fortunatly struck, The Battle of Stoke.

(Upon King Henry's part, with so successful luck,
As never till that day he felt his Crown to cleave
Unto his temples close, when Mars began to leave
His fury, and at last to sit him down was brought)
I come at last to sing, twixt that seventh Henry fought;
With whom, to this brave Field the Duke of Bedford came,
With Oxford his great friend, whose praise did him inflame
To all Atchieuements great, that fortunate had bin
In every doubtful fight, since Henry's coming in,
With The Earl of Shresbury, a man of great command,
And his brave son Lord George, for him that firmly stand.
And on the other side, John Duke of Suffolks son,
( John Earl of Lincoln called) who this stern war begun,
Subborning a lewd Boy, a false Imposter, who
By Simonds a worse Priest, instructed what to do;
Upon him took the name of The Earl of Warwick, heir
To George the murdered Duke of Clarence, who (for fear
Lest some that favored York, might under hand maintain)
King Henry in the Tower, did at that time detain.
* Which practice set on foot, this Earl of Lincoln sayld
To Burgundy, where he with Margaret preuayld, The Duchess of Burgundy was
sister to Edward the 4, and so was this Earls mother.

Wife to that warlike Charles, and his most loved Aunt,
Who vexed that a proud Lancastrian should supplant
The lawful Line of York, whence she her blood derived;
Wherefore for Lincolnes sake she speedily contrived,
And Louell, that brave Lord, before him sent to land The Lord Francis Louell.

Upon the same pretense, to furnish them a Band
Of Almanes, and to them for their stout Captain gave
The valiant Martin Swart, the man thought scarce to have
His match for Martial feats, and sent them with a Fleet
For Ireland, where she had appointed them to meet,
With Simonds that lewd Clerk, and Lambert, whom they there
The Earl of Warwick called, and published every where
His title to the Crown, in Diuelin, and proclaim
Him Englands lawful King, by the fifth Edwards name:
Then joining with the Lord Fitzgerald, to their aid The Lord Thomas Geraldine

Who many Irish brought, they up their Ankres wayd,
And at the rocky Pyle of * Fowdray put to shore On the coast of (...).

In Lancashire; their power increasing more and more,
By Soldiers sent them in from Broughton (for supply) Sir Thomas Broughton.

A Knight that long had been of their confederacy;
Who making thence, direct their marches to the South.
When Henry saw himself to far in dangers mouth,
From Couentry he came, still gathering up his Host,
Made greater on his way, and does the Country coast,
Which way he understood his enemies must pass:
When after some few days (as if their Fortunes was)
At Stoke, a village near to Newarke upon Trent,
Each in the others sight pitched down their warlike Tent.
Into one Battle soon, the Almans had disposd
Their Army, in a place upon two parts inclosd
With Dells, and fenced Dykes, (as they were expert men.)
And from the open fields King Henry's Host again,
In three fair several fights came equally divided;
The first of which, and fitst, was given to be guided
By Shrewsbury, which most of Soldiers choice consisted:
The others placed as Wings, which ever as they listed,
Came up as need required, or fell back as they found
Just cause for their retire; when soon the troubled ground,
On her black bosom felt the thunder, which awooke
Her Genius, with the shock that violently shook
Her intrayles; this sad day when there ye might have seen
Two thousand Almains stand, of which each might have been
A Leader for his skill, which when the charge was hot,
That they could hardly see the very Sun for shot,
Yet they that motion kept that perfect Soldiers should;
That most courageous Swart there might they well behold,
With most unusual skill, that desperate fight maintain,
And valiant De la Poole, most like his princely strain,
Did all that courage could, or noblesse might befit;
And Louell that brave Lord, behind him not a whit,
For martial deeds that day: stout Broughton that had stood
With York (even) from the first, there lastly gave his blood
To that well-foughten Field: the poor Trowz'd Irish there,
Whose Mantles stood for Mayle, whose skinns for Corslets were,
And for their weapons had but Irish Skaines and Darts,
Like men that scorned death, with most resolved hearts,
Give not an inch of ground, but all in pieces hewn,
Where first they fought, they fell; with them was overthrown
The Leader Geralds hope, amidst his men that fought,
And took such part as they, whom he had thither brought.
This of that field be told, There was not one that fled, A Field bravely
fought.

But where he first was placed, there found alive or dead.
If in a foughten field, a man his life should loose,
To dye as these men did, who would not gladly choose,
Which full four thousand were. But in this tedious Song,
The too laborious Muse has tarried all too long.
As for the Black-Smiths Rout, who did together rise,
Encamping on Blackheath, t'annull the Subsidies Michael Joseph with the
Cornisb Rebels.

By Parliment then given, or that of Cornwall called,
Enclosures to cast down, which overmuch enthrald The Rebellion of Cornwall,
in the third year of Edward the sixth.

The Subject: or proud Kets, who with the same pretense
In Norfolk raised such stirs, as but with great expense
Of blood was not appeased; or that begun in Lent
By Wyat and his friends, the Marriage to prevent,
That Mary did intend with Philip King of Spain: Sir Thomas Wyatt.

Since these but Ryots were, nor fit the others strain,
She here her Battles ends: and as She did before,
So traveling along upon her silent shore,
Waybridge a neighboring Nymph, the only remnant left
Of all that Forest kind, by Times injurious theft
Of all that tract destroyed, with wood which did abound,
And former times had seen the goodliest Forest ground,
This Island ever had: but she so left alone,
The ruin of her kind, and no man to bemoane.
The deep intranced Flood, as thinking to awake,
Thus from her shady Bower she silently bespake.
O Flood in happy plight, which to this time, remainst,
As still along in state to Neptunes Court thou strainst;
Revive thee with the thought of those forepassed hours,
When the rough Wood-gods kept, in their delightful Bowers
On thy embroydered banks, when now this Country filled,
With villages, and by the laboring plowman tild,
Was Forest, where the Fur, and spreading Poplar grew.
O let me yet the thought of those past times renew,
When as that woody kind, in our vmbragious Wyld,
Whence every living thing save only they exild,
In this their world of wast, the sovereign Empire swayd.
O who would ere have thought, that time could have decayed
Those trees whose bodies seemed by their so massy weight,
To press the solid earth, and with their wondrous height
To climb into the Clouds, their Arms so far to shoot,
As they in measuring were of Acres, and their Root,
With long and mighty spurns to grapple with the land,
As Nature would have said, that they should ever stand:
So that this place where now this Huntingdon is set,
Being an easy hill where mirthfull Hunters met,
From that first took the name. By this the Muse ariues
At Elies Iled Marge, by having past Saint Ives,
Unto the German Sea she hastes her along,
And here she shuts up her two and twentieth Song,
In which she quite has spent her vigor, and must now,
As Workmen often use, a while sit down and blow;
And after this short pause, though lesning of her height,
Come in another Key, yet not without delight.




The three and twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
From (...) Fights Invention comes,
Deafned with noise of rattling Drums,
And in the Northamptonian bounds,
Shows Whittlewoods, and Sacies grounds;
Then to Mount Hellidon does go,
(Whence Charwell, Leame, and Nen do (...)
The Surface, which of England sings,
And Nen down to the Washes brings;
Then whereas Welland makes her way,
Shows Rockingham, her rich array:
A Course at Kelmarsh then she takes,'
Where she Northamptonshire for sakes.
ON tow'ds the Mid-lands now, the industrious Muse does make,
The Northamptonian earth, and in her way does take;
As fruitful every way, as those by Nature, which
The Husbandman by Art, with Compost does enrich,
This boasting of her self; that walk her Verge about,
And view her well within, her breadth, and length throughout:
The worst foot of her earth, is equal with their best,
With most abundant store, that highliest think them blessed.
When Whittlewood betime th'vnwearied Muse does win
To talk with her awhile; at her first coming in,
The Forest thus that greets: With more successful Fate,
Thrive then thy fellow Nymphs, whose sad and ruinous state
We every day behold, if any thing there be,
That from this general fall, thee happily may free,
It Is only for that thou do naturally produce
More Under wood, and Brake, then Oak for greater use:
But when this ravenous Age, of those has us bereft,
Time wanting this our store, shall sease what thee is left.
For what base Auerice now inticeth men to do,
Necessity in time shall strongly urge them too;
Which each divining Spirit most clearly does foresee.
Whilst at this speech perplexed, the Forest seemed to be,
A Water-nymph, near to this goodly Wood-nymphs side,
(As toward her sovereign Ouze, she softly down does slide)
Tea, her delightsome stream by Tawcester does lead;
And sporting her sweet self in many a dainty Mead,
She has not sallied far, but Sacy soon again
Salutes her; one much graced amongst the Syluan train:
One whom the Queen of Shades, the bright Diana often
Has courted for her looks, with kisses smooth and soft,
On her fair Bosom leaned, and tenderly embraced,
And called her, her Dear heart, most loved, and only chaste:
Yet Sacie after Tea, her amourous eyes does throw,
Till in the banks of Ouze the Brook her self bestow.
Where in those fertile fields, the Muse does hap to meet
Upon that side which sits the West of VVatling-street,
With * Helidon a Hill, which though it be but small, A hill not far From
Dauentry

Compared with their proud kind, which we our Mountains call;
Yet has three famous Floods, that out of him do flow,
That to three several Seas, by their assistants go;
Of which the noblest, Nen, to fair Northampton hies,
By Owndle sallying on, then Peterborough plyes
Old * Medhamsted: where her the Sea-mayds intertaine, The anclent name of
Peterborough.

To lead her through the Fen into the German Maine,
The second, Charwell is, at Oxford meeting Thames,
Is by his King conuayd into the * Celtick streams.
Then Leame as least, the last, to mid-land Auon hasts, The French Sea.

Which Flood again it self, into proud Seuerne casts:
As on * the Iberian Sea, her self great Seuerne spends; The Spanish Sea.

So Leame the Dower she has, to that wide Ocean lends.
But Helidon waxed proud, the happy Sire to be
To so renowned Floods, as these forenamed three,
Besides the Hill of note, near Englands midst that stands,
Whence from his Face, his back, or on his either hands,
The Land extends in breadth, or lays it self in length.
Wherefore, this Hill to show his state and natural strength,
The surface of this part determines to show,
Which we now England name, and through her tracts to go.
But being plain and poor, professes not that hight,
As Falkon-like to sore, till lesning to the sight.
But as the (...) soyles, his style so altring often,
As full expressions fit, or Verses smooth and soft,
Upon their several Scites, as naturally to strain,
And wishes that these Floods, his tunes to entertain,
The air with Halcion calmes, may wholly have possessed,
As though the rough winds tyerd, were easily laid to rest.
Then on the worth'est tract up toward the mid-dayes Sun,
His undertaken task, thus Hellidon begun.
From where the kingly Thames his stomach does discharge, A description of the
Surface of the sundry Tracts of England.

To Devonshire, where the land her bosom does enlarge;
And with the Inland air, her beauties does relieve,
Along the Celtick Sea, called oftentimes the Sleeue:
Although upon the coast, the Downs appear but bare,
Yet naturally within the Countries woody are.
Then Cornwall creeps out into the western Maine,
As (lying in her eye) she poynted still at Spain:
Or as the wanton soil, disposd to lustful rest,
Had laid her self along on Neptunes amorous breast.
With Denshire, from the firm, that Beak of land that fills,
What Landscape lies in Vales, and often rising hills,
So placed betwixt the French, and the Sabrinian Seas,
As on both sides adorned with many harborous Bays,
Who for their Trade to Sea, and wealthy Mines of Tin,
From any other Tract, the praise does clearly win.
From Denshire by those shores, which Seuerne often Surrounds,
The Soil far lower sits, and mightily abounds
With sundry sort of Fruits, as well-growne Grass and Corn,
That Somerset may say, her batning Mores do scorn
Our Englands richest earth, for burden should them stain;
And on the self same Tract, up Seuerns stream again,
The Vale of Eusham lays her length so largely forth,
As though she meant to stretch her self into the North,
Where still the fertile earth depressed lies and low,
Till her rich Soil it self to Warwickshire do show.
Hence somewhat South by East, let us our course incline,
And from these setting shores so merely Maratine,
The Isles rich Inland parts, lets take with us along,
To set him rightly out, in our well-ordred Song;
Whose prospects to the Muse their sundry scites shall show,
Where she from place to place, as free as air shall flow,
Their superficies so exactly to desery,
Through Wilsthire, poynting how the Plain of Salisbury
Shootes forth her self in length, and lays abroad a train
So large, as though the land served scarsely to contain
Her vastness, North from her, himself proud Cotswould vaunts,
And casts so stern a look, about him that he daunts,
The lowly Vales, remote that sit with humbler eyes.
In Barckshire, and from thence into the Orient lies
That most renowned Vale of VVhite-horse, and by her,
So Buckingham again does Alsbury prefer,
With any English Earth, along upon whose pale,
That mounting Country then, which makes her a Vale,
The chaulky Chilterne, runs with Beeches crowned about,
Through Bedfordshire that bears, till his bald front he shoot,
Into that foggy earth toward Ely, that does grow
Much Fenny, and surrounds with every little flow.
So on into the East, upon the Inland ground,
From where that Crystal Colne most properly does bound, The River running by
Vxbridge, falling into the Thames at Colebrooke.

Rough Chilterne, from the soil, where in rich London sits,
As being fair and flat it naturally befits
Her greatness every way, which holds on along
To the Essexian earth, which likewise in our Song,
Since in one Tract they lie, we here together take,
Although the several Shires, by sundry soyles do make
It different in degrees, for Middlesex of Sands
Her soil composeth has; so are the Fssexian lands,
Adjoining to the same, that sit by Isis side,
Which London ouer-lookes: but as she waxes wide,
So Essex in her Tides, her deepe-growne Marshes drownds,
And to Enclosures cuts her drier vpland grounds,
Which lately woody were, whilst men those woods did prize;
Whence those fair Countries lie, upon the pleasant rise,
(Betwixt the mouth of Thames, and where Ouze roughly dashes
Her rude unweildy waves, against the queachy Washes)
Suffolk and Norfolk near, so named of their Scites,
Adorned every way with wonderful delights,
To the beholding eye, that every where are seen,
Abounding with rich fields, and pastures fresh and green,
Fair Havens to their shores, large Heaths within them lie,
As Nature in them (...) to show variety.
From Ely all along upon that Eastern Sea,
Then Lincolneshire her self, in state at length does lay,
Which for her fatning Fennes, her Fish, and Foul may have
Pre-eminence, as she that seems to out-braue
All other Southern Shires, whose head the Washes feels,
Till wantonly she kick proud Humber with her heels.
Up toward the Navel then, of England from her Flank,
Which Lincolneshire we call, so leuelled and lanke.
Northampton, Rutland then, and Huntingdon, which three
Do show by their full Soyles, all of one piece to be,
Of Nottingham a part, as Lester them is lent,
From Beuers batning Vale, along the banks of Trent.
So on the other side, into the Set again,
Where Seuerne toward the Sea from Shrewsbury does strain,
Twixt which and Auons banks (where Arden when of old,
Her bushy curled front, she bravely did uphold, See to the 13. Song.

In state and glory stood) now of three several Shires,
The greatest portions lie, upon whose earth appears
That mighty Forests foot, of Worftershire a part,
Of Warwickeshire the like, which sometime was the heart
Of Arden that brave Nymph, yet woody here and there,
Often intermixed with Heaths, whose Sand and Gravel bear,
A Turfe more harsh and hard, where Stafford does partake,
In quality with those, as Nature strove to make
Them of one self same stuff, and mixture, as they lie,
Which likewise in this Tract, we here together tie.
From these recited parts to th'North, more high and bleake,
Extended ye behold, the Mooreland and the Peake,
From eithers several site, in eithers mighty waste,
A sterner lowering eye, that every way do cast
On their beholding Hills, and Countries round about;
Whose soyles as of one shape, appearing clean throughout.
For Moreland which with Heath most naturally does bear,
Her Winter livery still, in Summer seems to wear;
As likewise does the Peake, whose dreadful Cauerns found,
And Lead-mines, that in her, do naturally abound,
Her superficies makes more terrible to show:
So from her natural fount, as Seuerne down does flow,
The high Sallopian hills lift up their rising sails;
Which Country as it is the near'st allied to Wales,
In Mountains, so it most is to the same alike.
Now toward the Irish Seas a little let us strike,
Where Cheshire, (as her choice) with Lancashire does lie
Along th'vnleuel'd shores; this former to the eye,
In her complexion shows black earth with gravel mixed,
A Wood-land and a plain indifferently betwixt,
A good fast-feeding grass, most strongly that does breed:
As Lancashire no less excelling for her seed,
Although with Heath, and Fin, her upper parts abound;
As likewise to the Sea, upon the lower ground,
With Mosses, Fleets, and Fells, she shows most wild and rough,
Whose Turfe, and square cut Peat, is fuel good enough.
So, on the North of Trent, from Nottingham above,
Where Sherwood her curld front, into the cold does shoue,
Light Forest land is found, to where the floting Don,
In making toward the Maine, her Doncaster has won,
Where Torkshire's laid abroad, so many a mile extent,
To whom preceding times, the greatest circuit lent,
A Province, then a Shire, which rather seems: so
It incidently most variety does show.
Here stony (...) grounds, there wondrous fruitful fields,
Here Champaine, and there Wood, it in abundance yields:
The West Riding, and North, be mountainous and high,
But toward the German Sea the East, more low does lie.
This I Will has not that earth, of any kind elsewhere,
But on this part or that, epitomized here.
Toward those Scotch-Irish Isles, upon that Sea again,
The rough Virgiuian called, that tract which does contain
Cold Cumberland, which yet wild Westmerland excels,
For roughness, at whose point lies rugged Fournesse Fells,
Is filled with mighty Mores, and Mountains, which do make
Her wild superfluous waste, as Nature sport did take
In Heaths, and high-cleeu'd Hills, whose threatening fronts do dare
Each other with their looks, as though they would out-stare
The Starry eyes of heaven, which to outface they stand.
From these into the East, upon the other hand,
The Bishopric, and fair Northumberland do bear
To Scotlands bordering Tweed, which as the North elsewhere,
Not very fertile are, yet with a lovely face
Upon the Ocean look; which kindly does embrace
Those Countries all along, upon the Rising side,
Which for the Batfull Gleabe, by nature them denide,
With mighty Mines of Cole, abundantly are blessed,
By which this Tract remains renowned above the rest:
For what from her rich womb, each habourous Road receives.
Yet Hellidon not here, his loved description leaves,
Though now his darling Springs desired him to desist;
But say all what they can, he will do but what he list.
As he the Surface thus, so likewise will he show,
The Clownish Blazons, to each Country long ago,
Which those unlettered times, with blind devotion lent,
Before the Learned Mayds our Fountains did frequent,
To show the Muse can shift her habit, and she now
Of Palatins that sung, can whistle to the Plow;
And let the curious tax his Clownry, with their skill
He recks not, but goes on, and say they what they will.
Kent first in our account, does to it self apply,
(Quoth he) this Blazon first, Long Tails and Liberty. Here follow the
Blazons of the Shires.

Suffex with Surrey say, Then let us lead home Logs.
As Hamfhire long for her, has had the term of Hogs.
So Dorsetshire of long, they Dorsers vsd to call.
Cornwall and Devonshire cric, We Will wrestle for a Fall.
Then Somerset says, Set the Bandog on the Bull.
And Glostershire again is blazoned, Weigh thy Wool.
As Barkshire has for hers, Lets to it and toss the Ball.
And Wiltshire will for her, Get home and pay for all.
Rich Buckingham does bear the term of Bread and Beef,
Where if you beat a Bush, it is ods you start a Thief.
So Hartford blazoned is, The Club, and clowted Shoone,
Thereto, I Will rise betime, and sleep again at Noone.
When Middlesex bids, Up to London let us go,
And when our Markets done, we will have a pot or two.
As Essex has of old been named, Calves and Styles,
Fair Suffolk, Mayds and Milk, and Norfolk, Many Wyles.
So Cambridge has been called, Hold Nets, and let us win;
And Huntingdon, With (...) we will stalk through thick and thin.
Northamptonshire of long has had this Blazon, Love,
Below the girdle all, but little else above.
An outcrie Oxford makes, The Scholars have been here,
And little though they paid, yet have they had good cheer.
Quoth warlike Warwickshire, I Will bind the sturdy Bear.
Quoth Worstershire again, And I will squirt the Pear.
Then Staffordshire bids Stay, and I will Beet the Fire,
And nothing will I ask, but good will for my hire.
Bean belly Lestershire, her attribute does bear.
And Bells and Bag-pipes next, belong to Lincolneshire.
Of Malt-horse, Bedfordshire long since the Blazon wan.
And little Rutlandshire is termed Raddleman.
To Darby is assigned the name of Wool and Lead.
As Nottinghams, of old (is common) Ale and Bread.
So Hereford for her says, Give me Woofe and Warpe.
And Shropshire says in her, That Shinnes be ever sharp,
Lay wood upon the fire, reach hither me my Harp,
And whilst the black Bowl walks, we merrily will carpe.
Old Chesshire is well known to be the Chief of Men.
Fair Women does belong to Lancashire again.
The lands that over Ouze to Berwicke forth do bear,
Have for their Blazon had the Snaffle, Spur, and Spear.
Now Nen extremely grieved those barbarous things to hear,
By Helidon her sire, that thus delivered were:
For as his eld'st, she was to passed ages known,
Whom by Aufona's name the Romans did renown.
A word by them derived of Auon, which of long,
The Britans called her by, expressing in their tongue
The full and general name of waters; wherefore she
Stood much upon her worth, and jealous grew to be,
Lest things so low and poor, and now quite out of date,
Should happily impair her dignity and state.
Wherefore from him her sire imediatly she hasts;
And as she forth her course to Peterborough casts,
She falls in her way with Weedon, where it is said,
Saint VVerburge princely borne, a most religious Maid,
From those peculier fields, by prayer the Wild-geese drove,
Thence through the Champaine she lasciuiously does roue
Toward fair Northampton, which, whilst Nen was Auon called,
Resumed that happy name, as happily instald
Upon her * Northern side, where taking in a Rill, Northimpton, for
North(...)avonton, the town upon the North of Auon.

Her long impouerish'd banks more plenteously to fill,
She flourishes in state, along the fruitful fields;
Where whilst her waters she with wondrous pleasure yields,
To * Wellingborough comes, whose Fountains in she takes, So called of his
many wells or Fonntaines.

Which quickening her again, imediately she makes
To Owndle, which receives contractedly the sound
From Auondale, to express that Rivers lowest ground:
To Peterborough thence she makes forth her way,
Where Welland hand in hand, goes on with her to Sea;
When Rockingham, the Muse to her fair Forest brings,
Thence lying to the North, whose sundry gifts she sings.
O dear and dainty Nymph, most gorgeously arayd,
Of all the Driades known, the most delicious Maid,
With all delights adorned, that any way beseem
A Syluan, by whose state we verily may deem
A Deity in thee, in whose delightful Bowers,
The Fawnes and Fayries make the longest days, but hours,
And ioying in the Soil, where thou assum'st thy seat,
Thou to thy Handmaid have, (thy pleasures to awayt)
Fair Benefield, whose care to thee does surely cleave,
Which bears a grass as soft, as is the dainty sleaue,
And thrum'd so thick and deep, that the proud Palmed Dear,
Forsake the closser woods, and make their quiet leyre
In beds of platted fogge, so easily there they sit.
A Forest and a Chase in every thing so fit
This Island hardly has, so near allide that be,
Brave Nymph, such praise belongs to Benefield and thee.
Whilst Rockingham was heard with these Reports to ring,
The Muse by making on toward Wellands ominous Spring,
With * Kelmarsh there is caught, for coursing of the Hare, A place in the
North part of Northomtonshire, excellent for coursing with Greyhonnds.

Which scorns that any place, should with her Plains compare:
Which in the proper Terms the Muse does thus report;
The man whose vacant mind prepares him to the sport,
The * Finder sends out, to seek out nimble Wat,
Which crosses in the field, each furlong, every Flat, The Harefinder.

Till he this pretty Beast upon the Form has found,
Then viewing for the Course, which is the fairest ground, A description of a
Course at the Hare.

The Greyhounds forth are brought, for coursing then in case,
And choycely in the Slip, one leading forth a brace;
The Finder puts her up, and gives her Coursers law.
And whilst the eager dogs upon the Start do draw,
She rises from her seat, as though on earth she flew,
Forced by some yelping * Cute to give the Greyhounds view, A Curre.

Which are at length let slip, when gunning out they go,
As in respect of them the swiftest wind were slow,
When each man runs his Horse, with fixed eyes, and notes
Which Dog first turns the Hare, which first the other * coats, When one
Greyhound outstrips the other in the Course.

They wrench her once or twice, ere she a turn will take,
What Is offered by the first, the other good does make;
And turn for turn again with equal speed they ply,
Bestirring their swift feet with strange agilitie:
A hardened ridge or way, when if the Hare do win,
Then as shot from a Bow, she from the Dogs does spin,
That strive to put her off, but when he cannot reach her,
This giving him a Coat, about again does fetch her
To him that comes behind, which seems the Hare to bear;
But with a nimble turn she casts them both arrere:
Till often for want of breath, to fall to ground they make her,
The Greyhounds both so spent, that they want breath to take her.
Here leave I whilst the Muse more serious things attends,
And with my Course at Hare, my Canto likewise ends.




The four and twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
The fatal Welland from her Springs,
This Song to th'Ile of Ely brings:
Our ancient English Saints reuiues,
Then in an oblique course contriues,
The Rarities that Rutland shows,
Which with this Canto she does close.
THis way, to that fair Fount of Welland has us led,
At * Nasby to the North, where from a second head The Fountain of VVelland.

Runs Auon, which along to Seuerne shapes her course,
But pliant Muse proceed, with our new-handled sourse,
Of whom from Ages past, a prophecy there ran,
(Which to this ominous flood much fear and reuerance wan)
That she alone should drown all Holland, and should see An ancient Prophecy
of the (...) of VVelland.

Her Stamford, which so much forgotten seems to be;
Renowned for Liberal Arts, as highly honored there,
As they in Cambridge are, or Oxford ever were;
Whereby she in her self a holiness supposed,
That in her scantled banks, though wandering long enclosed,
Yet in her secret breast a Catalogue had kept
Of our religious Saints, which though they long had slept,
Yet through the chrystned world, for they had won such fame
Both to the British first, then to the English name,
For their abundant Faith, and sanctimony known,
Such as were hither sent, or naturally our own,
It much her Genius grieud, to have them now neglected,
Whose piety so much those zealous times respected.
Wherefore she with her self resolved, when that she
To Peterborough came, where much she longed to be,
That in the wished view of Mcdhamsted, that Town,
Which he the greatst of Saints does by his Name renown,
She to his glorious Phane an Offering as to bring,
Of her dear Countries Saints, the Martyrologe would sing:
And therefore all in haste to Harborough she hy'd,
Whence Lestershire she leaves upon the Northward side,
At Rutland then ariu'd, where Stamford her sustaines,
The conrse of VVellana to the Sea.
By Deeping drawing out, to Lincolneshire she leanes,
Upon her Bank by North, against this greater throng,
Northamptonshire to South still lies with her along,
And now approaching near to this appointed place,
Where she and Nen make show as though they would embrace;
But only they salute, and each holds on her way,
When holy Welland thus was wisely heard to say.
I sing of Saints, and yet my Song shall not be fraught
With Miracles by them, but feigned to be wrought,
That they which did their lives so palbably belie,
To times have much impeached their holiness thereby:
Though fools (I say) on them, such poor impostures lay,
Have scandal'd them to ours, far foolisher then they,
Which think they have by this so great advantage got
Their venerable names from memory to blot,
Which truth can never permit; and thou that art so pure,
The name of such a Saint that no way can endure;
Know in respect of them to recompense that hate,
The wretchedst thing, and thou have both one death and date:
From all vain worship too; and yet am I as free
As is the most precise, I pass not who he be.
Antiquity I love, nor by the worlds despite,
I can not be remoou'd from that my dear delight.
This spoke, to her fair aid her sister Nen she winnes,
When she of all her Saints, now with that man begins.
The first that ever told Christ crucified to us,
(By Paul and Peter sent) just Aristobulus,
Saints in the Primitive British Church.
Renowned in holy Writ, a Labourer in the word,
For that most certain Truth, opposing fire and sword,
By the Britans murdered here, so unbelieving then.
Next holy Joseph came, the mercifulst of men,
The Savior of mankind, in Sepulcher that laid,
That to the Britans was The Apostle; in his aid
Saint Duvian, and with him Saint Fagan, both which were
His Scollers, likewise left their sacred Relics here:
All Denizens of ours, t'aduaunce the Christian state,
At Glastenbury long that were commemorate.
When Amphtball again our Martyrdom began
In that most bloody reign of Dioclesian:
This man into the truth, that blessed Alban led
(Our Proto-Martyr called) who strongly discipled
In Christian Patience, learnt his tortures to appease:
His fellow-Martyrs then, Stephen, and Socrates,
At holy Albans Town, their Festival should hold;
So of that Martyr named, (which Ver'lam was of old.)
A thousand other Saints, whom Amphiball had taught,
Flying the Pagan foe, their lives that strictly sought,
Were slain where Lichfield is, whose name does rightly sound,
(There of those Christians slain) Dead field, or burying ground.
Then for the Christian faith, two other here that stood,
And teaching, bravely sealed their Doctrine with their blood:
Saint Ialius, and with him Saint Aron, have their room,
At Carleon suffering death by Dioclesians doom;
Whose persecuting reign tempestuously that raged,
Against those here for the Faith, their utmost that engaged,
Saint Angule put to death, one of our holiest men,
At London, of that See, the godly Bishop then
In that our Infant Church, so resolute was he.
A second Martyr too grace Londons ancient See,
Though it were after long, good Voadine who reprou'd
Proud Vortiger his King, unlawfully that loved
Another wanton wife, and wronged his Nuptial bed;
For which by that stern Prince unjustly murdered,
As he a Martyr died, is Sainted with the rest.
The third Saint of that See (though only he confessed)
Was Guithelme, unto whom those times that reverence gave,
As he a place with them eternally shall have.
So Melior may they bring, the Duke of Cornwalls son,
By his false brothers hands, to death who being done
In hate of Christian faith, whose zeal lest time should taint,
As he a Martyr was, they justly made a Saint.
Those godly Romans then (who as mine Author says)
Wanne good King Lucius first t'imbrace the Christian faith,
Fugatius, and his friend Saint Damian, as they were
Made Denizens of ours, have their remembrance here:
As two more (near that time, Christ Jesus that confessed,
And that most lively faith, by their good works expressed)
Saint Eluan with his pheere Saint Midwin, who to win
The Britans, (com'n from Rome, where Christened they had bin)
Converted to the Faith then thousands, whose dear grave,
That Glastenbury graced, there their memorial have.
As they their sacred Bones in Britain here bestowed,
So Britain likewise sent her Saints to them abroad: Britain sends her holy
men to other countries.

Marsellus that just man, who having gathered in
The scattered Christian Flock, instructed that had bin
By holy Joseph here; to congregate he wan
This justly named Saint, this neuer-wearied man,
Next to the Germans preached, till (void of earthly fear)
By his courageous death, he much renowned Treuere.
Then of our Native Saints, the first that di'd abroad;
Beatus, next to him shall fitly be bestowed,
In Switzerland who preached, whom there those Paynims slew,
When greater in their place, though not in Faith, ensue
Saint Lucius (called of us) the primer christened King,
Of the ancient Britons then, who led the glorious ring
To all the Saxon Race, that here did him succeed,
Changing his regal Robe to a religious Weed,
His rule in Britain left, and to Heluetia hied,
Where he a Bishop lived, a Martyr lastly died.
As Constantine the Great, that godly Emperor,
Here first the Christian Church that did to peace restore,
Whose ever blessed birth, (as by the power divine)
The Roman Empire brought into the British Line,
Constantinoples Crown, and the ancient Britans glory.
So other here we have to furnish up our Story,
Saint Melon welneere, when the British Church began,
(Even early in the reign of Romes Valerian)
Here leuing us for Rome, from thence to Roan was called,
To preach unto the French, where soon he was instauld
Her Bishop: Britain so may of her Gudwall vaunt,
Who first the Flemmings taught, whose feast is held at Gaunt.
So others forth she brought, to little Britain vowed,
Saint Wenlocke, and with him Saint Sampson, both (...)
Apostles of that place, the first the Abbot sole
Of Tawrac, and the last sat on the Sea of Dole:
Where dying, Maglor then, thereof was Bishop made,
Sent purposely from hence, that people to persuade,
To keep the Christian faith: so Goluin gave we thither,
Who sainted being there, we set them here together.
As of the weaker Sex, that ages have enshrined
Amongst the British Dames, and worthily diuin'd:
The finder of the Cross Queen Helena does lead,
Who tough Rome set a Crown on her Imperial head,
Yet in our Britain borne, and bred up choicely here.
Emerita the next, King Lucius sister dear,
Who in Heluetia with her martyred brother di'd;
Bright Vrsula the third, who undertook to guide
Th'eleuen thousand Mayds to little Britain sent,
By Seas and bloody men devoured as they went:
Of which we find these four have been for Saints preferred,
(And with their Leader still do live incalenderd)
Saint Agnes, Cordula, Odillia, Florence, which
With wondrous sumptuous shrines those ages did enrich
At Cullen, where their Lives most clearly are expressed,
And yearly Feasts observed to them and all the rest.
But when it came to pass the Saxon powers had put
The Britans from these parts, and them o'r Seuerne shut, The Cambro British
Saints.

The Christian Faith with her, then Cambria had alone,
With those that it received (from this now England) gone,
Whose Cambrobritans so their Saints as duly brought,
T'aduance the Christian Faith, effectually that wrought,
Their David, (one derived of th'royall British blood)
Who against Palagius false and damned opinions stood,
And turned Menenias name to David's sacred See,
Th Patron of the Welsh deserving well to be:
With Cadock, next to whom comes Canock, both which were
Prince Brechans sons, who gave the name to Brecnocksheere;
The first a Martyr made, a Confessor the other.
So Clintanck, Brecknocks Prince, as from one self same mother,
A Saint upon that sear, the other does ensue,
Whom for the Christian Faith a Pagan Soldier slew.
So Bishops can she bring, which of her Saints shall be,
As Asaph, who first gave that name unto that See;
Of Bangor, and may boast Saint David which her wan
Much reverence, and with these Owdock and Telean,
Both Bishops of Landaff, and Saints in their Succession;
Two other following these, both in the (...) profession,
Saint Dubric whose report old Carleon yet does carry,
And Elery in Northwales, who built a Monastery,
In which himself became the Abot, to his praise,
And spent in Alms and Prayer the remnant of his days.
But leaving these Diuin'd, to Decuman we come,
In Northwales who was crowned with glorious Martyrdom.
Justinian, as that man a Sainted place deserved,
Who still to feed his soul, his sinful body steru'd:
And for that height in zeal, whereto he did attain,
There by his fellow Monks most cruelly was slain.
So Cambria, Beno bare; and Gildas, which does grace
Old Bangor, and by whose learned writings we embrace,
the knowledge of those times; the fruits of whose just pen,
Shall live for ever fresh, with all truth-searching men:
Then other, which for hers old Cambria does auerre,
Saint Senan, and with him we set Saint Deiferre,
Then Tather will we take, and Chyned to the rest,
With Brauk, who so much the I Will of Bardsey blessed
By his most powerful prayer, to solitude that lived,
And of all worldly care his zealous Soul deprived.
Of these, some lived not long, some wondrous aged were,
But in the Mountains lived, all Hermits here and there.
O more then mortal men, whose Faith and earnest prayers,
Not only bare ye hence, but were those mighty stayres
By which you went to heaven, and God so clearly saw,
As this vain earthly pomp had not the power to draw
Your elevated souls, but once to look so low,
As those depressed paths, wherein base worldlings go.
What mind does not admire the knowledge of these men?
But zealous Muse return unto thy task again.
These holy men at home, as here they were bestowed,
So Cambria had such too, as famous were abroad.
Sophy King Gulicks son of Northwales, who had seen
The Sepulcher three times, and more, seven times had been
On Pilgrimage at Rome, of Beniuentum there
The painful Bishop made; by him so place we here,
Saint Mackloue, from Northwales to little Britain sent,
That people to convert, who resolutely bent,
Of Athelney in time the Bishop there became,
Which her first title changed, and took his proper name.
So she her Virgins had, and vowed as were the best:
Saint Keyne Prince Brechans child, (a man so highly blessed,
That thirty borne to him all Saints accounted were.)
Saint Inthwar so apart shall with these other bear,
Who out of false suspect was by her brother slain.
Then VVinifrid, whose name yet famous does remain,
Whose Fountain in Northwales entitled by her name,
For Moss, and for the Stones that be about the same,
Is sounded through this I Will, and to this latter age
Is of our Romists held their latest Pilgrimage.
But when the Saxons here so strongly did reside,
And surely seated once, as owners to abide;
When nothing in the world to their desire was wanting,
Except the Christian Faith, for whose substantial planting,
Saint Augustine from Rome was to this Island sent;
Those that came from foreign parts into this I Will, and were canonized here for
Saints.
And coming through large France, ariuing first in Kent,
Converted to the faith King Ethelbert, till then
Unchristened that had lived, with all his Kentishmen,
And of their chiefest Town, now Canterbury called,
The Bishop first was made, and on that See instauld.
Four other, and with him for knowledge great in name,
That in this mighty work of our conversion came,
Lawrence, Melitus then, with Iustus, and Honorius,
In this great Christian work, all which had been laborious,
To venerable age, each coming in degree,
Succeeded him again in Canterbury See,
As Peter borne in France, with these and made our own,
And Pauline whose great zeal, was by his Preaching shown.
The first to Abbots state, wise Austen did prefer,
And to the latter gave the Sea of Rochester;
All canonized for Saints, as worthy sure they were,
For establishing the Faith, which was received here.
Few Countries where our Christ had ere been preached then,
But sent into this I Will some of their godly men.
From Persia led by zeal, so Iue this Island sought,
And near our Eastern Fennes a fit place finding, taught
The Faith: which place from him the name alone deriues,
And of that sainted man since called is Saint-Iues;
Such reverence to her self that time Devotion wan.
So Sunburned Afric sent us holy Adrian,
Who preached the Christian Faith here nine and thirty year,
An Abbot in this Isle, and to this Nation dear,
That in our Country two Provincial Synods called,
T'reforme the Church that time with Heresies enthrald.
So Denmark Henry sent t'encrease our holy store,
Who falling in from thence upon our Northern shore
In th'Isle of * Cochet lived, near to the mouth of Tyne, An Islet upon the
coast of Scotland, in the German Sea.

In Fasting as in Prayer, a man so much divine,
That only thrice a week on homely cates he fed,
And three times in the week himself he silenced,
That in remembrance of this most abstenious man,
Upon his blessed death the English men began,
By him to name their Babes, which it so frequent brings, How the name of Henry
came so frequent among the English.

Which name has honored been by many English Kings.
So Burgundy to us three men most reverent bare,
Amongst our other Saints, that claim to have their share,
Of which was Felix first, who in th'East-Saxon reign,
Converted to the faith King Sigbert: him again
Ensues Anselme, whom Augusta sent us in,
And Hugh, whose holy life, to Christ did many win,
By * Henry th'Empresse son help hither, and to have Henry the second.

Him wholly to be ours, the Sea of Lincoln gave.
So Lumbardy to us, our reverent Lanfranck lent,
For whom into this land King William Conqueror sent,
And Canterburies See to his wise charge assigned.
Nor France to these for hers was any whit behind,
For Grimbald she us gave (as Peter long before,
Who with Saint Austen came, to preach upon this shore)
By Alsred hither called, who him an Abbot made,
Who by his godly life, and preaching did persuade,
The Saxons to believe the true and quickening word:
So after long again she likewise did afford,
Saint O smond, whom the Sea of Salsbury does own,
A Bishop once of hers, and in our conquest known,
When hither to that end their Norman William came,
Remigius then, whose mind, that work of ours of fame,
Rich Lincoln Minster shows, where he a Bishop sat,
Which (it should seem) he built for men to wonder at.
So potent were the powers of Churchmen in those days.
Then Henry named of Bloys, from France who crossed the Seas,
Native English (...) into (...) parts, canonized.
With Stephen Earl of Bloys his brother, after King,
In VVinchesters rich See, who him establishing,
He in those troublous times in preaching took such pain,
As he by them was not canonized in vain.
As other Countries here, their holy men bestowed;
So Britain likewise sent her Saints to them abroad,
And into neighboring France, our most religious went,
Saint Clare that native was of Rochester in Kent,
At Volcasyne came vowed the French instructing there,
So early ere the truth amongst them did appear,
That more then half a God they thought that reverent man.
Our Iudock, so in France such fame our Nation wan,
For holiness, where long an Abbots life he led
At Pontoyse, and so much was honored, that being dead,
And after threescore years (their latest period dated)
His body taken up, was solemnly translated.
As Ceofrid, that sometime of Wyremouth Abbot was,
In his return from Rome, as he through France did pass,
At Langres left his life, whose holiness even yet,
Upon his reverent grave, in memory does sit.
Saint Alkwin so for ours, we English boast again,
The Tutor that became to mighty Charlemaigne,
That holy man, whose heart was so with goodness filled,
As out of zeal he wan that mighty King to build
That Academy now at Paris, whose Foundation
Through all the Christian world has so renowned that Nation,
As well declares his wealth, that had the power to do it,
As his most lively zeal, persuading him unto it.
As Simon called the Saint of Burdeux, which so wrought,
By preaching there the truth, that happily he brought
The people of those parts, from Paganism, wherein
Their unbelieving souls so long had nuzled bin.
So in the Norman rule, two most religious were,
Amongst ours that in France dispersed here and there,
Preached to that Nation long, Saint Hugh, who borne our own,
In our first Henry's rule sat on the Sea of Roan,
Where (...) he was long. Saint Edmund so again,
Who banished from hence in our third Henry's reign,
There led an Hermits life near Pontoyse, where before,
Saint Iudock did the like) whose honor to restore,
Religious Jews there interred with wondrous cost,
Of whose rich Funeral France deservedly may boast.
Then Main we add to these, an Abbot here of ours,
To little Britain sent, employing all his powers
To bring them to the Faith, which he so well effected,
That since he as a Saint has ever been respected.
As these of ours in France, so had we those did show
In Germany, as well the Higher, as the Low,
Their Faith: In Freezeland first Saint Boniface our best,
Who of the Sea of Mentz, whilst there he sat possessed,
At Dockum had his death, by faithless Frizians slain,
Whose Anniuersaries there did after long remain.
So Wigbert full of faith, and heavenly wisdom went
Unto the self same place, as with the same intent;
With Eglemond a man as great with God as he;
As they agreed in life, so did their ends agree,
Both by Radbodius slain, who ruld in Frizia then:
So in the sacred roll of our Religious men,
In Freeze that preached the faith we of Saint Lullus read,
Who in the (...) of Mentz did Boniface succeed;
And Willihad that of Bren, that sacred Seat supplide,
So holy that him there, they halfely deifide;
With Marchelme, and with him our Plechelme, holy men,
That to the Freezes now, and to the Saxons then,
In Germany abroad the glorious Gospel spread,
Who at their lives depart, their bodies gathered,
Were at old-Seell enshrined, their Obijts yearly kept:
Such as on them have had as many praises heaped,
That in their lives the truth as constantly confessed,
As the other that their Faith by Martyrdom expressed.
In Freeze, as these of ours, their names did famous leave,
Again so had we those as much renowned in Cleave;
Saint Swibert, and with him Saint Willick, which from hence,
To Cleeue-land held their way, and in the Truths defense
Pawned their religious lives, and as they went together,
So one and self same place allotted was to either:
For both of them at Were in Cleaueland seated were,
Saint Swibert Bishop was, Saint Willick Abbot there.
So Guelderland again shall our most holy bring,
As Edilbert the son of Edilbald the King
Of our South-Saxon Rule, incessantly that taught
The Guelders, whose blessed days unto their period brought,
Unto his reverent Corpse, old Haerlem harbor gave;
So Werensrid again, and Otger both we have,
Who to those people preached, whose praise that country tells.
What Nation names a Saint, for virtue that excels
Saint German who for Christ his Bishopric forsook,
And in the Netherlands most humbly him betook,
From place to place to pass, the secrets to reveal,
Of our dear Saviors death, and last of all to seal
His doctrine with his blood: In Belgia so abroad,
Saint (...) in like sort, his blessed time bestowed,
Whose relics Wormshault (yet) in Flanders has reserved,
Of these, th'rebellious (...) (to win them heaven) that starved.
Saint Menigold, a man, who in his youth had been
A Soldier, and the French, and German wars had seen,
A Hermit last became, his sinful soul to save,
To whom good Arnulph, that most godly Emperor gave
Some ground not far from Leedge, his Hermitage to set,
Whose floor when with his tears, he many a day had wet,
He for the Christian faith upon the same was slain:
So did the Erwaldi there most worthily attain
Their Martyrs glorious Types, to Ireland first approou'd,
But after (in their (...)) as need required remoou'd,
They to Westphalia went, and as they brothers were,
So they, the Christian faith together preaching there,
The Old Pagan Saxons slew, out of their hatred deep
To the true Faith, whose shrines brave Cullen still does keep.
So Adler one of ours, by England set apart
For Germany, and sent that people to convert,
Of Erford Bishop made, there also had his end.
Saint Liphard like wise to our Martyraloge shall lend,
Who having been at Rome on Pilgrimage, to see
The Relics of the Saints, supposed there to be,
Returning by the way of Germany, at last,
Preaching the Christian faith, as he through Cambray past,
The Pagan people slew, whose Relics Huncourt has;
These others so we had, which trod the self same path
In Germany, which she most reverently embraced.
Saint John a man of ours, on Salzburgs See was placed;
Saint Willibald of Eist the Bishop so became,
And Burchard English borne, the man most great of name,
Of Witzburg Bishop was, at Hohemburg that reard
The Monastery, wherein he richly was interd.
So Mastreight unto her Saint Willibord did call,
And seated him upon her See Episcopal,
As two Saint Lebwins there amongst the rest are brought;
The One o'r Isells banks the ancient Saxons taught:
At over Isell rests, the other did apply,
The Gueldres, and by them interd at Deuentry.
Saint Wynibald again, at Hidlemayne enjoyed
The Abbacy, in which his godly time employed
In their Conversion there, which long time him withstood.
Saint Gregory then, with us sprung of the Royal blood,
And son to him whom we the elder Edward style,
Both Court and Country left, which he esteemed vile,
Which Germany received, where he at Myniard led
A strict Monastic life, a Saint alive and dead.
So had we some of ours for Italy were pressed,
As well as these before, sent out into the East.
King Inas having done so great and wondrous things,
As well might be supposed the works of sundry Kings,
Erecting beauteous Phanes, and Monuments so fair,
As Monarchs have not since been able to repair,
Of many that he built, the least, in time when they
Have (by weak men's neglect) been fallen into decay:
This Realm by him enriched, he poverty professed,
In Pilgrimage to Rome, where meekly he deceast.
As Richard the dear son to Lothar King of Kent,
When he his happy days religiously had spent;
And feeling the approach of his declining age,
Desirous to see Rome in holy Pilgrimage,
Into thy Country com'n at Leuca, left his life,
Whose miracles there done, yet to this day are rife.
The Patron of that place, so Thusoany in thee,
At fair Mount-flascon still the memory shall be
Of holy Thomas there most reverently interd,
Who sometime to the Sea of Hereford preferred;
Thence travailing to Rome, in his return bereft
His life by sickness, there to thee his body left.
Yet Italy gave not these honors all to them
That visited her Rome, but from Jerusalem,
Some coming back through thee, and yielding up their spirits,
On thy rich earth received their most deserved merits.
O Naples, as thine own, in thy large Territory,
Though to our Countries praise, yet to thy greater glory,
Even to this day the Shrines religiously do keep,
Of many a blessed Saint which in thy lap does sleep!
As Eleutherius, com'n from visiting the Tomb,
Thougau'st to him at Arc in thy Apulia room
To set his holy Cell, where he an Hermit died,
Canonized her Saint; so have thou glorifide
Saint Gerrard, one of ours, (above the former graced)
In such a sumptuous Shrine at Galinaro placed;
At Sancto Padre so, Saint Fulke has ever fame,
Which from that reverent man't should seem derived the name,
His Relics there reserved; so holy Ardwins Shrine
Is at Ceprano kept, and honored as divine,
For Miracles, that there by his strong faith were wrought.
Among these selected men, the Sepulcher that sought,
And in thy Realm arrived, their blessed souls resigned:
Our Bernards body yet at Arpine we may find,
Until this present time, her patronizing Saint.
So Countries more remote, with ours we did acquaint,
As Richard for the fame his holiness had won,
And for the wondrous things that through his Prayers were done,
From this his native home into Calabria called,
And of Saint Andrews there the Bishop was instauld,
For whom she has professed much reverence to this land:
Saint William with this man, a parallel may stand,
Through all the Christian world accounted so divine,
That traveling from hence to holy Palestine,
Desirous that most blessed Jerusalem to see,
(In which the Saviors self so often vouchsaft to be)
Priour of that holy house by Suffrages related,
To th'Sepulchre of Christ, which there was dedicated;
To Tire in Syria thence removed in little space,
And in less time ordained Archbishop of that place;
That God inspired man, with heavenly goodness filled,
A Saint amongst the rest deservedly is held.
Yet Italy, nor France, nor Germany, those times
Imployd not all our men, but into colder Clymes,
They wandered through the world, their Countries that forsook.
So Sigfrid sent fromhence, devoutly undertook
Those Pagans wild and rude, of Gothia to convert,
Who having labored long, with danger often ingirt,
Was in his reverent age for his deserved fee,
By Olaus King of Goths, set on Vexouia's See.
To Norway, and to those great North-East Countries far;
So Gotebald gave himself holding a Christian war
With Paynims, nothing else but Heathenish Rites that knew.
As Suethia to her self these men most reverent drew,
Saint Vlfrid of our Saints, as famous there as any,
Nor scarcely find we one converting there so many.
And Henry in those days of Oxsto Bishop made,
The first that Swethen King, which cuer did persuade,
On Finland to make war, to force them by the sword,
When nothing else could serve to hear the powerful word;
With Eskill thither sent, to teach that barbarous Nation,
Who on the Passion day, there preaching on the Passion,
To Express the Saviors love to mankind, taking pain,
By cruel Paynims hands was in the Pulpit slain,
Upon that blessed day Christ dyed for sinful man,
Upon that day for Christ, his Martyrs Crown he wan.
So David drawn from hence into those farther parts,
By preaching, who to pearce those Paynims hardened hearts,
Incessantly proclaimed Christ Jesus, with a cry
Against their Heathen gods, and blind Idolatry.
Into those colder Clymes to people beastly rude,
So others that were ours courageously pursude,
The planting of the Truth, in zeal three most profound,
The relish of whose names by likelinesse of sound,
Both in their lives and deaths, a likelinesse might show,
As Vnaman we name, and Shunaman that go,
With Wynaman their friend, which martyred gladly were
In Gothland, whilst they taught with Christian patience there.
Nor those from us that went, nor those that hither came
From the remotest parts, were greater yet in name,
Then those residing here on many a goodly See,
(Great Bishops in account, now greater Saints that be)
Some such selected ones for piety and zeal,
As to the wretched world, more clearly could reveal,
How much there might of God in mortal man be found
In charitable works, or such as did abound,
Which by their good success in aftertimes were blessed,
Were then related Saints, as worthier then the rest.
Of Canterbury here with those I will begin, Bishops of this land canonized
Saints.

That first Archbishops See, on which there long has bin
So many men devout, as raised that Church so high,
Much reverence, and have won their holy Hierarchy:
Of which he first that did with goodness so inflame
The hearts of the devout (that from his proper name)
As one (even) sent from God, the souls of men to save
The title unto him, of Deodat they gave.
The Bishops Brightwald next, and Tatwin in we take,
Whom time may say, that Saints it worthily did make
Succeeding in that See directly even as they,
Here by the Muse are placed, who spent both night and day
By doctrine, or by deeds, instructing, doing good,
In raising them were fallen, or strengthening them that stood.
Then Odo the Severe, who highly did adorn
That See, (yet being of unchristened parents borne,
Whose Country Denmark was, but in East England dwelt)
He being but a child, in his clear bosom felt
The most undoubted truth, and yet vnbaptiz'd long;
But as he grew in years, in spirit so growing strong:
And as the Christian faith this holy man had taught,
He likewise for that Faith in Sundry bartels fought.
So Dunstan as the rest arose through many Sees,
To this Arch-type at last ascending by degrees,
There by his power confirmed, and strongly credit won,
To many wondrous things, which he before had done.
To whom when (as they say) the Devil once appeared,
This man so full of faith, not once at all afeard,
Strong conflicts with him had, in miracles most great.
As Egelnoth again much graced that sacred seat,
Who for his godly deeds surnamed was the Good,
Not boasting of his birth, though com'n of Royal blood:
For that, nor at the first, a Monks mean Cowle despised,
With winning men to God, who never was sufficed.
These men before expressed; so Eadsine next ensues,
To propagate the truth, no toil that did refuse;
In Haralds time who lived, when William Conqueror came,
For holiness of life, attained unto that fame,
That Soldiers fierce and rude, that pity never knew,
Were suddenly made mild, as changed in his view.
This man with those before, most worthily related
Arch-saints, as in their Sees Archbishops consecrated.
Saint Thomas Becket then, which Rome so much did hery,
As to his Christened name it added Canterbury;
There to whose sumptuous Shrine the near succeeding ages,
So mighty offerings sent, and made such Pilgrimages,
Concerning whom, the world since then has spent much breath,
And many questions made both of his life and death:
If he were truly just, he has his right; if no,
Those times were much to blame, that have him reckond so.
Then these from York ensue, whose lives as much have graced
That See, as these before in Canterbury placed:
Saint Wilfrid of her Saints, we then the first will bring,
Who twice by Egfrids ire, the stern Northumbrian King,
Expulst his sacred Seat, most patiently it bare,
The man for sacred gifts almost beyond compare.
Then Bosa next to him as meek and humble hearted,
As the other full of grace, to whom great God imparted
His mercies sundry ways, as age upon him came.
And next him follows John, who like wise bare the name,
Of Beuerley, where he most happily was borne,
Whose holiness did much his native place adorn,
Whose Vigils had by those deuouter times bequests
The Ceremonies due to great and solemn Feasts.
So Oswald of that seat, and Cedwall sainted were,
Both reuerenc'd and renowned Archbishops, living there
The former to that See, from Worcester transferred,
Deceased, was again at Worcester interred:
The other in that See a sepucher they chose,
And did for his great zeal amongst the Saints dispose,
As William by descent com'n of the Conquerors strain,
Whom (...) ruling here did in his time ordain
Archbishop of that See, among our Saints does fall,
Deria'd from those two Seats, styld Archiepiscopall.
Next these Arch Sees of ours, now London place does take,
Which had those, of whom time Saints worthily did make.
As Ceda, (brother to that reverent Bishop Chad,
At Lichfield in those times, his famous seat that had)
Is Sainted for that See amongst our reverent men,
From London though at length remoou'd to Lestingen,
A monastery, which then he richly had begun.
Him Erkenwald ensues The East English Offa's son,
His fathers kingly Court, who for a Crosiar sled,
Whose works such fame him won for ho linesse, that dead,
Time him enshrined in Paul's, (the mother of that See)
Which with Revenues large, and Privileges he
Had wondrously endowed; to goodness so affected,
That he those Abbayes great, from his own power erected
At Chertsey near to Thames, and Barking famous long.
So Roger has a room in these our Sainted throng,
Who by his words and works so taught the way to heaven,
As that great name to him sure was not vainly given.
With Winchester again proceed we, which shall store
Us with as many Saints, as any See (or more)
Of whom we yet have sung, (as Hcada there we have)
Who by his godly life, so good instructions gave,
As teaching that the way to make men to live well,
Example us assured, did Preaching far excel.
Our Swithen then ensues, of him why ours I say,
Is that upon his Feast, his dedicated day,
As it in Harvest haps, so Plow-men note thereby,
The Ensuing forty days be either wet or dry,
As that day falls out, whose Miracles may we
Believe those former times, he well might sainted be.
So Frithstan for a Saint incalendred we find,
With Brithstan not a whit the holiest man behind,
Canonized, of which two, the former for respect
Of virtues in him found, the latter did elect
To sit upon his See, who likewise dying there,
To Ethelbald again succeeding did appear,
The honor to a Saint, as challenging his due.
These formerly expressed, then Elpheg does ensue;
Then Ethelwald, of whom this Almes-deed has been told,
That in a time of dearth his Churches plate he sold,
T'releeue the needy poor; the Churches wealth (quoth he)
May be again repayr'd, but so these cannot be.
With these before expressed, so Britwald forth she brought,
By faith and earnest prayer his miracles that wrought,
That such against the Faith, that were most stony-hearted,
By his religious life, have lastly been converted.
This man, when as our Kings so much decayed were,
As'twas suppos d their Line would be extinguished here,
Had in his Dream reueald, to whom All-doing heaven,
The Scepter of this land in aftertimes had given;
Which in Prophettick sort by him delivered was,
And as he stoutly spoke, it truly came to pass.
So other Southern Sees, here either less or more,
Have likewise had their Saints, though not alike in store.
Of Rochester, we have Saint Ithamar, being then
In those first times, first of our native English men
Residing on that Seat; so as an aid to her,
But singly Sainted thus, we have of Chichester,
Saint Richard, and with him Saint Gilbert, which do stand
Enrold amongst the rest of this our Mytred Band,
Of whom such wondrous things, for truths delivered are,
As now may seem to stretch (...) strait belief too far.
And Cimbert, of a Saint had the deserved right,
His yearly Obijts long, done in the Isle of Wight;
A Bishop, as some say, but certain of what See,
It scarcely can be proou'd, nor is it known to me.
Whilst Sherburne was a See, and in her glory shone,
And Bodmin likewise had a Bishop of her own,
Whose Diocese that time contained Cornwall; these
Had as the rest their Saints, derived from their Sees:
The first, her Adelme had, and Hamond, and the last
Had Patrock, for a Saint that with the other past;
That were it fit for us but to examine now
Those former times, these men for Saints that did allow,
And from our reading urge, that others might as well
Related be for Saints, as worthy every deal.
This scruteny of ours, would clear that world thereby,
And show it to be void of partiality,
That each man holy called, was not canonized here,
But such whose lives by death had trial many a year.
That See at Norwich now established (long not stird)
At Eltham planted first, to Norwich then transferd
Into our bedroule here, her Humbert in does bring,
(A Counselor that was to that most martyred King
Saint Edmund) who in their rude massacre then slain,
The title of a Saint, his Martyrdom does gain.
So Hereford has had on her Cathedral Seat,
Saint Leofgar, a man by Martyrdom made great,
Whom Griffith Prince of Wales, that sown which did subdue,
(O most unhallowed deed) unmercifully slew.
So Worster, (as those Sees here sung by us before)
Has likewise with her Saints renowned our native shore:
Saint Egwin as her eld'st, with Woolstan as the other,
Of whom she may be proud, to say she was the Mother,
The Churches Champions both, for her that stoutly stood.
Lichfield has those no whit less famous, nor less good:
The first of whom is that most reverent Bishop Chad,
In those religious times for holiness that had,
The name above the best that lived in those days,
That Stories have been stuffed with his abundant praise;
Who on the Sea of York being formerly instauld,
Yet when back to that place Saint Wilfrid was recald,
The Seat to that good man he willingly resigned,
And to the quiet Closse of Lichfield him confined.
So Sexvlfe after him, then Owen did supply,
Her Trine of reverent men, renowned for sanctity.
As Lincoln to the Saints, our Robert Grosted lent,
A perfect godly man, most learned and eloquent,
Then whom no Bishop yet walked in more upright ways,
Who durst reprove proud Rome, in her most prosperous days,
Whose life, of that next age the Justice well did show,
Which we may boldly say, for this we clearly know,
Had Innocent the fourth the Churches Suffrage led,
This man could not at Rome have been Canonized.
Her sainted Bishop John, so Ely adds to these,
Yet never any one of all (...) several Sees
Northumber land like thine, have to these times been blessed,
Which sent into this Isle so many men professed,
Whilst Hagustald had then a Mother-Churches style,
And Lindisferne of us now called the Holy-Ile,
Was then a See before that Durham was so great,
And long ere Carleill came to be a Bishops seat.
Aidan, and Finan both, most happily were found
Northumber land in thee, even whilst thou did abound
With Paganism, which them thy Oswin that good King,
His people to convert did in from Scotland bring:
As Etta likewise hers, from Malrorse that arose,
Being Abbot of that place, whom the Northumbers chose
The Bishopric of Fern, and Hagustald to hold.
And Cuthbert of whose life such Miracles are told,
As Story scarcely can the truth thereof maintain,
Of the old Scotch-Irish Kings descended from the strain,
To whom since they belong, I from them here must swerue,
And till I thither come, their holiness reserve,
Proceeding with the rest that on those Sees have shown,
As Edbert after these borne naturally our own.
The next which in that See Saint Cuthbert did succeed,
His Church then built of wood, and thatched with homely reed,
He builded up of stone, and covered sayre with Lead,
Who in Saint Cuthberts Grave they buried being dead,
As his sad people he at his departing wild.
So Higbald after him a Saint is likewise held,
Who when his proper See, as all the Northren Shore,
Were by the Danes destroyed, he not dismayed the more,
But making shift to get out of the cruel flame,
His Clergy carrying forth, preached wheresoere he came.
And Alwyn who the Church at Durham now, begun,
Which place before that time was strangely ouerrun
With shrubs, and men for corn that plot had lately eard,
Where he that goodly Phane to after ages reard,
And thither his late Seat from * Lindisferne translated,
An Isle near to Scotland, lying into the German Ocean, since that called Holy
Island, as you may read in the next page following.
Which his Cathedral Church by him was consecrated.
So Acca we account among those which have been called
The Saints of this our See, which sat at Hagenstald,
Of which he Bishop was, in that good age respected,
In Calenders preserved, in th'Catalogues neglected,
Which since would seem to show the Bishops as they came:
Then Edilwald, which some (since) Ethelwoolph do name,
At Durham by some men supposed to reside
More rightly, but by some at Carleill iustifide,
The first which ruled that See, which * Beauclerke did prefer,
Much gracing him, who was his only Confessor.
Henry the first.
Nor were they Bishops thus related Saints alone;
Northumberland, but thou (besides) have many a one,
Religious Abbots, Priests, and holy Hermits then,
Canonized as well as thy great Mytred men:
Two famous Abbots first are in the rank of these,
Whose Abbayes touched the walls of thy two ancient Seas.
Thy Roysill (in his time the tutillage that had
Of Cuthbert that great Saint, whose hopes then but a lad,
Expressed in riper years how greatly he might merit)
The man who had from God a prophesying Spirit,
Foretelling many things; and growing to be old,
His very hour of death, was by an Angel told.
At Malroyes this good man his Sainting well did earne,
Saint Oswald his again at holy Lindisferne,
With Ine a godly Priest, supposd to have his lere
Of Cuthbert, and with him was Herbert likewise there
His fellow-pupill long, (who as mine Author says)
So great opinion had, of Cuthbert and his faith,
That at one time and place, he with that holy man,
Desired of God to dye, which by his prayer he wan.
Our venerable Bede so forth that Country brought,
And worthily so named, who of those ages sought
The truth to understand, impartially which he
Delivered has to time, in his Records that we,
Things left so far behind, before us still may read,
Among our canonized sort, who called is Saint Bede.
A sort of Hermits then, by thee to light are brought,
Who lived by Alms, and Prayer, the world respecting naught.
Our Edilwald the Priest, in Fern (now holy I Will)
Which stands from the firm to Sea nine English mile,
Sat in his reverent Cell, as Godrick thou can show;
His head and beard as white as Swan or driven Snow,
At Finchall threescore years, a Hermits life to lead;
Their solitary way in thee did Alrick tread,
Who in a Forest near to Carleill, in his age,
Bequeathed himself to his more quiet Hermitage.
Of Wilgusse, so in thee Northumberland we tell,
Whose most religious life has merited so well,
(Whose blood thou boasts to be of thy most royal strain)
That Alkwin, Master to that mighty Charlemaigne,
In Verse his Legend writ, who of our holy men,
He him the subject chose for his most learned pen.
So Oswyn, one of thy dear Country thou can show,
To whom as for the rest for him we likewise owe
Much honor to thy earth, this godly man that gave,
Whose Relics that great house of Lesting long did save,
To sinders till it sanke: so Benedict by thee,
We have amongst the rest, for Saints that reckoned be,
Of Wyremouth worshipped long, her Patron buried there,
In that most goodly Church, which he himself did rear.
Saint Thomas so to us Northumberland thou lent'st,
Whom up into the South, thou from his Country sent'st;
For sanctity of life, a man exceeding rare,
Who since that of his name so many Saints there are,
This man from others more, that times might understand,
They to his christened name added Northumberland.
Nor in one Country thus our Saints confined were,
But through this famous Isle dispersed here and there:
As Yorkshire sent us in Saint Robert to our store,
At Knarsborough most known, whereas he long before
His blessed time bestowd; then one as just as he,
(If credit to those times attributed may be)
Saint Richard with the rest deserving well a room,
Which in that Country once, at Hampoole had a toombe.
Religious Alred so, from Rydall we receive,
The Abbot, who to all posterity did leave,
The fruits of his staid faith, delivered by his Pen.
Not of the least desert amongst our holiest men,
One Eusac then we had, but where his life he led,
That doubt I, but am sure he was Canonized,
And was an Abbot too, for sanctity much famed.
Then Woolsey will we bring, of Westminster so named,
And by that title known, in power and goodness great;
And meriting as well his Sainting, as his Seat.
So have we found three John's, of sundry places here,
Of which (three reverent men) two famous Abbots were.
The first Saint Albans showed, the second Jews had,
Another godly John we to these former add,
To make them up a Trine, (the name of Saints that wonn)
Who was a Yorkshire man, and Prior of Berlington.
So Biren can we boast, a man most highly blessed
With the title of a Saint, whose ashes long did rest
At Dorchester, where he was honored many a day;
But of the place he held, books diversely dare say,
As they of Gilbert do, who founded those Divines,
Monasticks all that were, of him named Gilbertines:
To which his Order here, he thirteen houses built,
When that most thankful time, to show he had not spilt
His wealth on it in vain, a Saint has made him here,
At Sempringham enshrined, a town of Lincolneshire.
Of sainted Hermits then, a company we have,
To whom deuouter times this veneration gave:
As Gwir in Cornwall kept his solitary Cage,
And Neoth by Hunstock there, his holy Hermitage,
As Guthlake, from his youth, who lived a Soldier long,
Detesting the rude spoils, done by the armed throng,
The mad tumultuous world contemptibly forsook,
And to his quiet Cell by Crowland him betook,
Free from all public crowds, in that low Fenny ground.
As Bertiline again, was near to Stafford found:
Then in a Forest there, for solitude most fit,
Blessed in a Hermits life, by there enjoying it.
An Hermit Arnulph so in Bedfordshire became,
A man austere of life, in honor of whose name,
Time after built a Town, where this good man did live,
And did to it the name of Arnulphsbury give.
These men, this wicked world respected not a hair,
But true Professors were of poverty and prayer.
Amongst these men which times have honored with the Style
Of Confessors, (made Saints) so every little while,
Our Martyrs have com'n in, who sealed with their blood,
That faith which the other preached, against them that it withstood;
As (...), who had lived a Herdsman, left his Seat,
Though in the quiet fields, whereas he kept his Neat,
And leaving that his Charge, he left the world withal,
An Anchorite and became, within a Cloystred wall,
Enclosing up himself, in prayer to spend his breath,
But was too soon (alas) by Pagans put to death.
Then Woolstan, one of these, by his own kinsman slain
At Eusham, for that he did zealously maintain
The verity of Christ. As Thomas, whom we call
Of Dover, adding Monk, and (...) therewithal;
For that the barbarous Danes he bravely did withstand,
From ransacking the Church, when here they put on land,
By them was done to death, which rather he did choose,
Then see their Heathen hands those holy things abuse.
Two Boys of tender age, those elder Saints ensue,
Of Norwich William was, of Lincoln little Hugh,
Whom (...) Jews (rebellious that abide)
In mockery of our Christ at Easter ciucifi'd,
Those times (...) every one should their due honor have,
His freedom or his life, for Jesus Christ that gave.
So Wiltshire with the rest her Hermit Vlfrick has
Related for a Saint, so famous in the Faith,
That (...) ages since, his Cell have sought to find,
At Hasselburg, who had his Obijts him assigned.
So (...) we many Kings most holy here at home, Saxon Kings canonized for
Saints.

As (...) of meaner rank, which have attaind that room:
Northumberland, thy seat with Saints did us supply
Of thy (...) Kings; of which high Hierarchy
Was Edwin, for the Faith by Heathenish hands inthrald,
Whom Penda which to him the Welsh Cadwallyn called,
Without all mercy slew: But he alone not did
By that proud Mercian King, but Penda yet beside,
Just Oswald likewise slew, at Oswaldstree, who gave
That name unto that place, as though time meant to save
His memory thereby, there suffering for the Faith,
As one whose life deserved that memory in death.
So likewise in the Roll of these Northumbrian Kings,
With those that Martyrs were, so forth that Country brings
Th'annoynted Oswin next, in Deira to ensue,
Whom Osway that bruit King of wild Bernitia slew:
Two kingdoms, which whilst then Northumberland remained
In greatness, were within her larger bounds contained;
This Kingly Martyr so, a Saint was rightly crowned.
As Alkmond one of hers for sanctity renowned,
King Alreds Christened son, a most religious Prince,
Whom when the Heathenish here by no means could convince,
(Their Paganism a pace declining to the wane)
At Darby put to death, whom in a goodly Phane,
Called by his glorious name, his corpse the Christians laid.
What fame deserved your faith, (were it but rightly wayd)
You pious Princes then, in godliness so great;
Why should not full-mouthd Fame your praises often repeat?
So (...) her King, Northumbria notes again,
In (...) the next, though not the next in reign,
Whom his false Subjects slew, for that he did deface
The Heathenish Saxon gods, and bound them to embrace
The lively quickening Faith, which then began to spread.
So for our Savior Christ, as these were martyred:
There other holy Kings were likewise, who confessed,
Which those most zealous times have Sainted with the rest,
King Alfred that his Christ he might more surely hold,
Left his Northumbrian Crown, and soon became encould,
At Malroyse, in the land, whereof he had been King.
So Egbert to that Prince, a Parallel we bring,
To Oswoolph his next heir, his kingdom that resigned,
And presently himself at Lindisferne confined,
Contemning Courtly state, which earthly fools adore:
So Ceonulph again as this had done before,
In that religious house, a cloystred man became,
Which many a blessed Saint has honored with the name.
Nor those Northumbrian Kings the only Martyrs were,
That in this seuen-fold Rule the scepters once did bear,
But that the Mercian reign, which Pagan Princes long,
Did terribly infest, had some her Lords among,
To the true Christian Faith much reverence which did add
Our Martyrologe to help: so happily she had
Rufin, and Vlfad, sons to Wulphere, for desire
They had t'imbrace the Faith, by their most cruel Sire
Were without pity slain, long ere to manhood grown,
Whose tender bodies had their burying Rites at * Stone.
A Town in (...).
So Kenelme, that the King of Mercia should have been,
Before his first seven years he fully out had seen,
Was slain by his own Guard, for fear lest waxing old,
That he the Christian Faith undoubtedly would hold.
So long it was ere truth could Paganism expel.
Then Fremund, Offa's son, of whom times long did tell,
Such wonders of his life and sanctity, who fled
His fathers kingly Court, and after meekly led
An Hermits life in Wales, where long he did remain
In Penitence and prayer, till after he was slain
By cruel Oswayes hands, the most inueterate foe,
The Christian faith here found: so Etheldred shall go
With these our martyred Saints, though only he confessed,
Since he of Mercia was, a King who highly blessed,
Fair Bardncy, where his life religiously he spent,
And meditating Christ, thence to his Savior went.
Nor our West Saxon reign was any whit behind
Those of the other rules (their best) whose zeal we find,
Amongst those sainted Kings, whose fames are safeliest kept;
As Cedwall, on whose head such praise all times have heapt,
That from a Heathen Prince, a holy Pilgrim turned,
Repenting in his heart against the truth to have spurned,
To Rome on his bare feet his patience exercised,
And in the Christian faith there humbly was baptized.
So Ethelwoolph, who sat on Cedwalls ancient Seat,
For charitable deeds, who almost was as great,
As any English King, at Winchester enshrined,
A man amongst our Saints, most worthily deuin'd.
Two other Kings as much our Martyrologe may sted,
Saint Edward, and with him comes in Saint Ethelred,
By Alfreda, the first, his Stepmother was slain,
That her most loved son young Ethelbert might reign:
The other in a storm, and deluge of the Dane,
For that he Christened was, received his deadly bane;
Both which with wondrous cost, the English did interre,
At Wynburne this first Saint, the last at Winchester,
Where that West Saxon Prince, good Alfred buried was
Among our Sainted Kings, that well deserves to pass.
Nor were these Western Kings of the old Saxon strain,
More studious in those times, or stoutlier did maintain
The truth, then these of ours, the Angles of the East,
Their neer'st and deer'st Allies, which strongly did invest
The * Island with their name, of whose most holy Kings, A people of the
Saxons, who gave the name to England, of Angles land.

Which justly have deserved their high Canonizings,
Are Sigfrid, whose dear death him worthily has crowned,
And Edmund in his end, so wondrously renownd,
For Christ's sake suffering death, by that blood-drowning Dane,
To whom those times first built that City and that Phane, Saint Edmunsbury.

Whose ruins Suffolk yet can to her glory show,
When she will have the world of her past greatness know.
As Ethelbert again alur'd with the report
Of more then earthly pomp, then in the Mercian Court,
From the East Angles went, whilst mighty Offa reigned;
Where, for he christened was, and Christian-like abstained
To Idolatrize with them, fierce Quenred, Offa's Queen
Most treacherously him slew out of th'inueterate spleen
She bare unto the Faith, whom we a Saint adore.
So Edwald brother to Saint Edmund, sang before,
A Confessor we call, whom past times did interre,
At Dorcester by Tame, (now in our Calender.)
Amongst those kingdoms here, so Kent account shall yield
Of three of her best blood, who in this Christian Field
Were mighty, of the which, King Ethelbert shall stand
The first; who having brought Saint Augustine to land,
Himself first christened was, by whose example then,
The Faith grew after strong amongst his Kentishmen.
As Ethelbrit again, and Ethelred his pheere,
To Edbald King of Kent, who natural Nephews were,
For Christ there suffering death, assume them places hye,
Amongst our martyred Saints, commemorate at Wye.
To these two brothers, so two others come again,
And of as great descent in the (...) strain:
Arwaldi of one name, whom ere King Cedwall knew
The true and lively Faith, he tyranously slew:
Who still amongst the Saints have their deserved right,
Whose Vigils were observed (long) in the Isle of Wight.
Remembered too the more, for being of one name,
As of the East-Saxon line, King Sebba so became
A most religious Monk, at London, where he led
A strict retired life, a Saint alive and dead.
Related for the like, so Edgar we admit,
That King, who over eight did soly Monarch sit,
And with our holiest Saints for his endowments great,
Bestowed upon the Church. With him we likewise seat
That sumptuous shrined King, good Edward, from the rest
Of that renowned name, by Confessor expressed.
To these our sainted Kings, remembered in our Song,
Holy women Canonized Saints.
Those Mayds and widdowed Queens, do worthily belong,
Incloystred that became, and had the self same style,
For Fasting, Alms, and Prayer, renowned in our Isle,
As those that forth to France, and Germany we gave,
For holy charges there; but here first let us have
Our Mayd-made-Saints at home, as Hilderlie, with her
We Theorid think most fit, for whom those times auerre,
A Virgin strictlyer vowed, has hardly lived here.
Saint Wulfshild then we bring, all which of Barking were,
And reckoned for the best, which most that house did grace,
The last of which was long the Abbess of that place.
So Werburg, Wulpheres child, (of Mercia that had been
A persecuting King) (...) Ermineld his Queen,
At Ely honored is, where her dear mother late,
A Recluse had remained, in her sole widdowed state:
Of which good Audry was King Ina's daughter bright,
Reflecting on those times so clear a Vestall light,
As many a Virgin-breast she fired with her zeal,
The fruits of whose strong faith, to ages still reveal
The glory of those times, by liberties she gave,
By which those Eastern Shires their Privileges have. Saint Audries Liberties.

Of holy Audries too, a sister here we have,
Saint VVithburg, who her self to Contemplation gave,
At Deerham in her Cell, where her due hours she kept,
Whose death with many a tear in Norfolk was bewept.
And in that Isle again, which bears Elies name,
At Ramsey, Merwin so a Vayled Maid became
Amongst our Virgin-Saints, where (...) is enrold,
The daughter that is named of noble Ethelwold,
A great East-Anglian Earl, of Ramsey Abbas long,
So of our Mayden-Saints, the Female sex among.
With Milburg, Mildred comes, and Milwid, daughters dear,
To Meruald, who did then the Mercian Scepter bear.
At VVenlock, Milburg died, (a most religious maid)
Of which great Abbay she the first foundation laid:
And Thanet as her Saint (even to this age) does herye
Her Mildred. Milwid was the like at Canterbury.
Nor in this utmost Isle of Thanet may we pass,
Saint Eadburg Abbess there, who the dear daughter was,
To Ethelbert her Lord, and Kents first Christened King,
Who in this place most first we with the former bring,
Translated (as some say) to Flanders: but that I,
As doubtful of the truth, here dare not justify.
King Edgars sister so, Saint Edith, place may have
With these our Maiden-Saints, who to her Powlsworth gave
Immunities most large, and goodly livings laid.
Which Modwen, long before, a holy Irish maid,
Had founded in that place, with most devout intent.
As Eanswine, Eadwalds child, one of the Kings of Kent,
At Foulkston found a place (given by her father there)
In which she gave her self to abstinence and prayer.
Of the West Saxon rule, borne to three several Kings,
Four holy Virgins more the Muse in order brings:
Saint Ethelgiue the child to Alfred, which we find,
Those more deuouter times at Shaftsbury enshrined.
Then Tetta in we take, at Winburne on our way,
Which Cuthreds sister was, who in those times did sway
On the West Saxon Seat, two other sacred Mayds,
As from their Cradels vowed to bidding of their beads.
Saint Cuthburg, and with her Saint Quinburg, which we here
Succeedingly do set, both as they Sisters were,
And Abbesses again of Wilton, which we gather,
Our Virgin-Band to grace, both having to their father
Religious Ina, red with those which ruld the West,
Whose mothers sacred womb with other Saints was blessed,
As after shall be showed: an other Virgin vowed,
And likewise for a Saint amongst the rest allowed;
To the elder Edward borne, bright Eadburg, who for she,
(As five related Saints of that blessed name there be)
Of Wilton Abbasse was, they her of Wilton styled:
Was ever any Maid more merciful, more mild,
Or sanctimonious known: But Muse, on in our Song,
With other princely Mayds, but first with those that sprung
From Penda, that great King of Mercia; holy Tweed,
And Kinisdred, with these their sisters, Kinisweed,
And Eadburg, last not least, at Godmanchester all
Incloystred; and to these Saint Tibba let us call,
In solitude to Christ, that set her whole delight,
In Godmanchester made a constant Anchorite.
Amongst which of that house, for Saints that reckoned be,
Yet never any one more graced the (...) then she.
Derived of royal Blood, as the other Elfled than
Niece to that mighty King, our English Athelstan,
At Glastenbury shrin'd; and one as great as she,
Being Edward Out-lawes child, a Maid that lived to see
The Conqueror enter here, Saint Christian (to us known)
Whose life by her clear name divinely was foreshowne.
For holiness of life, that as renowned were,
And not less nobly borne, nor bred, produce we here;
Saint Hilda, and Saint Hien, the first of noble name,
At Strenshalt, took her vow, the other sister came
To Colchester, and graced the rich Effexian shore:
Whose Relics many a day the world did there adore.
And of our sainted Mayds, the number to supply,
Of Eadburg we allow, sometime at Alsbury,
To Redwald then a King of the East Angles borne,
A Votresse as sincere as she thereto was sworn.
Then Pandwine we produce, whom this our native Isle,
As foreign parts much prized, and higher did instyle,
The holiest English Maid, whose Vigils long were held
In Lincolneshire; yet not Saint Frideswid excelled,
The Abbess of an house in Oxford, of her kind
The wonder; nor that place, could hope the like to find.
Two sisters so we have, both to devotion plite,
And worthily made Saints; the elder Margarite,
Of Katsby Abbess was, and Alice, as we read,
Her sister on that seat, did happily succeed,
At Abington, which first received their living breath.
Then those Northumbrian Nymphs, all vayld, as full of Faith,
That Country sent us in, to increase our Virgin-Band,
Fair Elfled, Oswalds child, King of Northumberland,
At Strenshalt that was vaild. As among those many there,
O Ebba, whose clear fame, time never shall out-weare,
At Coldingham, far hence within that Country placed;
The Abbess, who to keep thy vayled Virgins chaste,
Which else thou fearst the Danes would ravish, which possessed
This Isle; first of thy self and then of all the rest,
The Nose and upper Lip from your fair faces keru'd,
And from pollution so your hallowed house preserved.
Which when the Danes perceived, their hopes so far deluded,
Setting the house on fire, their Martyrdom concluded.
As Leofron, whose faith with others rightly wayd,
Shall show her not out-match'd by any English Maid:
Who likewise when the Dane with persecution stormed,
She here a Martyrs part most gloriously performed.
Two holy Mayds again at Whitby were renowned,
Both Abbesses thereof, and Confessors are crowned;
Saint Ethelfrid, with her Saint Congill, as a pair
Of Abbesses therein, the one of which by prayer
The Wild-geese thence expeld, that Island which annoyed,
By which their grass and grain was many times destroyed,
Which fall from off their wings, nor to the air can get Wild. geese falling
down, if they fly over the place.

From the forbidden place, till they be fully set.
As these within this Isle in Cloisters were inclosd:
So we our Virgins had to foreign parts exposd;
As Eadburg, Ana's child, and Sethred borne our own,
Were Abbesses of Bridge, whose zeal to France was known:
And Ercongate again we likewise thither sent,
(Which Ercombert begot, sometime a (...) of Kent)
A Prioresse of that place; Burgundosora bare,
At Eureux the chaste rule, all which renowned are
In France, which as this Isle of them may freely boast,
So Germany some graced, from this their native coast.
Saint Walburg here extract from th'royall English Line,
Was in that Country made Abbess of Heydentine.
Saint Tecla to that place at Ochenford they chose:
From Wynburne with the rest (in Dorsetshire) arose
Chaste Agatha, with her went Lioba along.
From thence, two not the least these sacred Mayds among,
At Biscopsen, by time encloystred and became.
Saint Lewen so attayn'd an everliving name
For Martyrdom, which she at (...) wan,
Mayds seeming in their Sex t'exceed the holiest man.
Nor had our Virgins here for sanctity the prize,
But widdowed Queens as well, that being godly wise,
Forsaking second beds, the world with them forsook,
To strict retired lives, and gladly them betook
To Abstinence and Prayer, and as sincerely lived,
As when the Fates of life King Ethelwold deprived,
That o'r the East Angles reigned, bright Heriswid his wife,
Betaking her to lead a strait Monasticke life,
Departing hence to France, received the holy Veil,
And lived many a day incloystred there at Kale.
Then Keneburg in this our Sainted front shall stand,
To Alfred the loved wife, King of Northumberland,
Daughter to Penda King of Mercia, who though he
Himself most Heathenish were, yet lived that age to see
Four Virgins and this Queen, his children, consecrated
Of Godmanchester all, and after Saints related.
As likewise of this Sex, with Saints that does us store,
Of the Northumbrian Line so have we many more;
Saint Eanfled widdowed left, by Osway reigning there,
At Strenshalt took her Veil, as Ethelburg the pheere
To Edwin, (rightly named) the holy, which possessed
Northumbers sacred seat, her self that did inuest
At Lymming far in Kent, which Country gave her breath.
So Edeth as the rest after King Sethricks death,
Which had the self same rule of Wilton Abbess was,
Where two VVest-Saxon Queens for Saints shall likewise pass,
Which in that self same house, Saint Edeth did succeed,
Saint Ethelwid, which here put on her hallowed weed,
King Alreds, worthy wife, of VVestsex; so again
Did Wilfrid, Edgars Queen, (so famous in his reign)
Then Eadburg, Ana's wife, received as the other,
Who as a Saint her self, so likewise was she mother
To two most holy Mayds, as we before have showed
At Wilton, (which we say) their happy time bestowed,
Though she of Barking was, a holy Nun professed,
Who in her husbands time, had reigned in the West:
The East-Saxon Line again, so others to us lent,
As Sexburg sometime Queen to Ercombert of Kent,
Though Ina's loved child, and Audryes sister known,
Which Ely in those days did for her Abbess own.
Nor to Saint O since we less honor ought to give,
King Sethreds widdowed Queen, who (when death did deprive
The Essexian King of life) became enrould at Chich,
Whose Shrine to her there built, the world did long enrich.
Two holy Mercian Queens so widdowed, Saints became,
For sanctity much like, not much unlike in name.
King Wulpheres widdowed Pheere, Queen Ermineld, whose life
At Ely is renowned, and Ermenburg, the wife
To Meruald reigning there, a Saint may safely pass,
Who to three Virgin-Saints the virtuous mother was,
The remnant of her days, religiously that bare,
Immonastred in Kent, where first she breathed the air.
King Edgars mother so, is for a Saint preferred,
Queen Algyue, who (they say) at Shipston was interd.
So Edward Outlawes wife, Saint Agatha, we bring,
By Solomon begot, that great Hungarian King;
Who when she saw the wrong to Edgar her dear son,
By cruel Harold first, then by the Conqueror done,
Deprived his rightful crown, no hope it to recover,
A Vestall habit took, and gave the false world over.
Saint Maud here not the least, though she be set the last,
And scarcely ouer-matcht by any that is past,
Our Beauclearks Queen, and borne to Malcolme King of Scots,
Whose sanctity was seen to wipe out all the spots
Were laid upon her life, when she her Cloister fled,
And chastely gave her self to her loved husbands bed,
Whom likewise for a Saint those reverend ages chose,
With whom we at this time our Catalogue will close.
Now Rutland all this time, who held her highly wron'g,
That she should for the Saints thus strangely be prolonged,
As that the Muse such time upon their praise should spend,
Sent in her ambling Wash, fair VVelland to attend
At Stamford, which her Stream does easily overtake,
Of whom her Mistress Flood seems wondrous much to make;
For that she was alone the darling and delight
Of Rutland, ravished so with her beloved sight,
As in her only child's, a mothers heart may be:
Wherefore that she the least, yet fruitfulst Shire should see,
The honorable rank she had amongst the rest,
The euer-labouring Muse her Beauties thus expressed.
Love not thy self the less, although the least thou art,
What thou in greatness wantst, wise Nature does impart
In goodness of thy soil; and more delicious mould,
Suruaying all this Isle, the Sun did nere behold.
Bring forth that British Vale, and be it never so rare,
But Catmus with that Vale, for richness shall compare:
What Forrest-Nymph is found, how brave so ere she be,
But Lyfield shows her self as brave a Nymph as she?
What River ever rose from Bank, or swelling Hill,
Then Rutlands wandering VVash, a delicater Rill?
Small Shire that can produce to thy proportion good,
One Vale of special name, one Forest, and one Flood.
O Catmus, thou fair Vale, come on in Grass and Come;
That Beuer never be said thy sister-hood to scorn,
And let thy Ocham boast, to have no little grace,
That her they pleased Fates, did in thy bosom place,
And Lyfield, as thou art a Forest, live so free,
That every Forrest-Nymph may praise the sports in thee.
And down to Wellands course, O Wash, run ever clear,
To honor, and to be much honored by this Shire.
And here my Canto ends, which kept the Muse so long,
That it may rather seem a Volume, then a Song.




The five and twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
Toward Lincolnshire our Progress laid,
We through deep Hollands Ditches wade,
Fowling, and Fishing in the Fen;
Then come we next to Kestiuen,
And bringing Wytham to her fall,
On Lindsey light we last of all,
Her Site and Pleasures to attend,
And with the Isle of Axholme end.
NOw in upon thy earth, rich Lincolnshire I strain, (draine,
At Deeping, from whose Street, the plentious Ditches
Hemp bearing Hollands Fen, at Spalding that do fall
Together in their Course, themselves as emptying all
Into one general Sewer, which seems to divide, Holland divided into two
parts, the Lower, and the Higher.

Low Holland from the High, which on their Eastern side
Th'in bending Ocean holds, from the Norfolcean lands,
To their more Northern point, where * Wainfleet drifted stands, The iength of
Holland by the Sea shore from the coast of Norsolke to VVainfleet.

Do shoulder out those Seas, and Lindsey bids her stay,
Because to that fair part, a challenge she does lay.
From fast and firmer Earth, whereon the Muse of late,
Trod with a steady foot, now with a slower gate,
Through * Quicksands, Beach, and Ouze, the Washes she must wade, The
Description of the VVashes.

Where Neptune every day does powerfully invade
The vast and queachy soil, with Hosts of wallowing waves,
From whose impetuous force, that who himself not saues,
By swift and sudden flight, is swallowed by the deep,
When from the wrathful Tides the foming Surges sweep,
The Sands which lay all naked, to the wide heaven before,
And turns all to Sea, which was but lately Shore,
From this our Southern part of Holland, called the Low,
Where Crowlands ruins yet, (though almost buried) show
Her mighty Founders power, yet his more Christian zeal,
She by the Muses aid, shall happily reveal
Her sundry sorts of Foul, from whose abundance she
Above all other Tracts, may boast her self to be
The Mistress, (and indeed) to sit without compare,
And for no worthless soil, should in her glory share,
From her moist seat of Flags, of Bulrushes and Reed,
With her just proper praise, thus Holland does proceed.
Ye Acherusian Fens, to mine resign your glory,
Hollands Orztion
Both that which lies within the goodly Territory
Of Naples, as that Fen Thesposia's earth upon,
Whence that infernal Flood, the smutted Acheron
Shoues forth her sullen head, as thou most fatal Fen,
Of which Hetruria tells, the watery Thrasimen,
In History although thou highly seemst to boast,
That Haniball by thee o'rthrew the Roman Host.
I scorn the Egyptian Fen, which Alexandria shows,
Proud Mareotis, should my mightiness oppose,
Or Scythia, on whose face the Sun does hardly shine,
Should her Meotis think to match with this of mine,
That covered all with Snow continually does stand.
I stinking Lerna hate, and the poor Libian Sand.
* Marica that wise Nymph, to whom great Neptune gave
A Nymph supposed to have the charge of the Shore.
The charge of all his Shores, from drowning them to save,
Abides with me still upon my service pressed,
And leaves the looser Nymphs to wayt upon the rest:
In Summer giving earth, from which I sqare my * Peat,
Fuel cut out of the Marsh.
And faster feedings by, for Dear, for Horse, and Neat.
My various * Fleets for Foul, O who is he can tell,
Brooks and Pooles worn by the water, into which the rising floods have
recourse.
The species that in me for multitudes excel!
The Duck, and Mallard first, the Falconers only sport,
(Of Riuer-flights the chief, so that all other sort,
They only Greene-Fowle term) in every Mere abound,
That you would think they sat upon the very ground,
Their numbers be so great, the waters covering quite,
That raised, the spacious air is darkened with their flight;
Yet still the dangerous Dykes, from shot do them secure,
Where they from Flash to Flash, like the full Epicure
Waft, as they loved to change their Diet every meal;
And near to them ye see the lesser dibling Teale
In * Bunehes, with the first that fly from Mere to Mere,
The word in Palconry, for a company of Teale.
As they above the rest were Lords of Earth and Air.
The Gossander with them, my goodly Fennes do show
His head as Ebon black, the rest as white as Snow,
With whom the Widgeon goes, the Golden-Eye, the Smeath,
And in odd scattred pits, the Flags, and Reeds beneath;
The Coot, bald, else clean black, that whiteness it does bear
Upon the forehead star'd, the Water-Hen does wear
Upon her little tail, in one small feather set.
The VVater-woosell next, all over black as Ieat,
With various colors, black, green, blew, red, russet, white,
Do yield the gazing eye as variable delight,
As do those sundry Fowls, whose several plumes they be.
The diuing Dob-chick, here among the rest you see,
Now up, now down again, that hard it is to prove,
Whether under water most it lives, or above:
With which last little Foul, (that water may not lack;
More then the Dob-chick does, and more does love the * brack) Salt water.

The Puffin we compare, which coming to the dish,
Nice pallats hardly judge, if it be flesh or fish.
But wherefore should I stand upon such to yes as these,
That have so goodly Fowls, the wandering eye to please.
Here in my vaster Pooles, as white as Snow or Milk,
(In water black as Stix) swimmes the wild Swanne, the Ilke,
Of Hollanders so termed, no niggard of his breath,
(As Poets say of Swannes, which only sing in death)
But often as other Birds, is heard his tons to roat,
Which like a Trumpet comes, from his long arched throat,
And toward this watery kind, about the Flashes brimme,
Some clouen-footed are, by nature not to swim.
There stalks the stately Crane, as though he marched in war,
By him that has the Herne, which (by the Fishy Carre)
Can fetch with their long necks, out of the Rush and Reed,
Snigs, Fry, and yellow Frogs, whereon they often feed:
And under them again, (that water never take,
But by some Ditches side, or little shallow Lake
Lie dabling night and day) the pallat-pleasing Snite,
The Bidcocke, and like them the Redshanke, that delight
Together still to be, in some small Reedy bed,
In which these little Fowls in Summers time were bred.
The Buzzing Bitter sits, which through his hollow Bill,
A sudden bellowing sends, which many times does fill
The neighboring Marsh with noise, as though a Bull did roar;
But scarcely have I yet recited half my store:
And with my wondrous flocks of Wild-geese come I then,
Which look as though alone they peopled all the Fen,
Which here in Winter time, when all is ouerflow'd,
And want of sollid sward inforceth them abroad,
The Abundance then is seen, that my full Fennes do yield,
That almost through the Ifle, do pester every field.
The Barnacles with them, which wheresoere they breed,
On Trees, or rotten Ships, yet to my Fennes for feed
Continually they come, and chief abode do make,
And very hardly forced my plenty to forsake:
Who almost all this kind do challenge as mine own,
Whose like I dare auerre, is elsewhere hardly known.
For sure unless in me, no one yet ever saw
The multitudes of Foul, in Mooting time they draw:
From which to many a one, much profit does accrue.
Now such as flying feed, next these I must pursue;
The Sea-meaw, Sea-pye, Gull, and Curlew here do keep,
As searching every Shole, and watching every deep,
To find the floating Fry, with their sharpe-pearcing sight,
Which suddenly they take, by stouping from their height.
The Cormorant then comes, (by his devouring kind)
Which flying o'r the Fen, imediatly does find
The Fleet best stored of Fish, when from his wings at full,
As though he shot himself into the thickened skull,
He under water goes, and so the Shoale purfues,
Which into Creeks do fly, when quickly he does choose,
The Fin that likes him best, and rising, flying feeds.
The Ospray often here seen, though seldom here it breeds,
Which over them the Fish no sooner do epsy,
But (betwixt him and them, by an antipathy)
Turning their bellies up, as though their death they saw,
They at his pleasure lie, to ftuffe his glutt'nous maw.
The toyling Fisher here is tewing of his Net:
The Fowler is imployd his lymed twigs to set. The pleasures of the Fennes.

One underneath his Horse, to get a shoot does stalk;
Another over Dykes upon his Stilts does walk:
There other with their Spades, the Peats are squaring out,
And others from their Carres, are busily about,
To draw out Sedge and Reed, for Thatch and Stouer fit,
That whosoever would a Landscape rightly hit,
Beholding but my Fennes, shall with more shapes be stored,
Then Germany, or France, or Thuscan can afford:
And for that part of me, which men high Holland call,
Where Boston seated is, by plenteous Wythams fall,
I peremptory am, large Neptunes liquid field,
Does to no other tract the like abundance yield.
For that of all the Seas inuironing this Isle,
Our Irish, Spanish, French, how ever we them enstyle,
The German is the great'st, and it is only I,
That do upon the same with most advantage lie.
What Fish can any shore, or British Sea-towne show,
That Is eatable to us, that it does not bestow
Abundantly thereon? the Herring king of Sea,
The faster feeding Cod, the Mackrell brought by May,
The dainty Sole, and Plaice, the Dabb, as of their blood;
The Conger finely sous'd, hot Summers coolest food;
The Whiting known to all, a general wholesome Dish;
The Gurnet, Rochet, Maid, and Mullet, dainty Fish;
The Haddock, Turbet, Bert, Fish nourishing and strong;
The Thornback, and the Scate, prouocatiue among:
The Weauer, which although his prickles venom be,
By Fishers cut away, which Buyers seldom see:
Yet for the Fish he bears, it is not accounted bad;
The Sea-Flounder is here as common as the Shad;
The Sturgeon cut to Keggs, (too big to handle whole)
Gives many a dainty bit out of his lusty Iole.
Yet of rich Neptunes store, whilst thus I Idely chat,
Think not that all betwixt the Wherpoole, and the Sprat,
I go about to name, that were to take in hand,
The Atomy to tell, or to cast up the sand;
But on the English coast, those most that usual are,
Wherewith the staules from thence do furnish us for far;
Amongst whose sundry sorts, since thus far I am in,
I Will of our Shellfish speak, with these of Scale and Fin:
The Sperme-increasing Crab, much Cooking that does ask,
The big-legg'd Lobster, fit for wanton Venus task,
Voluptuaries often take rather then for food,
And that the same effect which works in the blood
The rough long Oyster is, much like the Lobster limbed:
The Oyster hot as they, the Mussle often trimd
With Orient Pearl within, as thereby nature showed,
That she some secret good had on that Shell bestowed:
The Scallop cordial iudgd, the dainty Wilk and Limp,
The Periwincle, Prawne, the Cockle, and the Shrimpe,
For wanton women's tastes or for weak stomachs bought.
When Kestiven this while that certainly had thought,
Her tongue would never have stopped, quoth she, O how I hate, Kestiuens Oration.

Thus of her foggy Fennes, to hear rude Holland prate,
That with her Fish and Foul, here keeps such a coil,
As her unwholesome air, and more unwholesome foil,
For these of which she boasts, the more might suffered be;
When those her feathered flocks she sends not out to me,
Wherein clear Witham they, and many a little Brook,
(In which the Sun it self may well be proud to look)
Have made their Flesh more sweet by my refined food,
From that so ramish taste of her most fulsome mud,
When the toyld Cater home them to the Kitchen brings,
The Cook does cast them out, as most unsavory things.
Besides, what is she else, but a foul woosie Marsh,
And that she calls her grass, so blady is, and harsh,
As cuts the Cattels mouths, constrained thereon to feed,
So that my poorest trash, which mine call Rush and Reed,
For litter scarcely fit, that to the dung I throw,
Does like the Penny grass, or the pure Clouer show,
Compared with her best: and for her sundry Fish,
Of which she freely boasts, to furnish every Dish.
Did not full Neptunes fields so furnish her with store,
Those in the Ditches bred, within her muddy Moore,
Are of so earthy taste, as that the Ravenous Crow
Will rather starve, thereon her stomach then bestow.
From Stamford as along my tract towered Lincoln strains,
What Shire is there can show more valuable Veins
Of soil then is in me? or where can there be found,
So fair and fertile fields, or Sheep-walks nere so sound?
Where does the pleasant air resent a sweeter breath?
What Country can produce a delicater Heath,
Then that which her fair Name from * Ancaster does hold?
Ancaster Heath
Through all the neighboring Shires, whose praise shall still be told,
Which Flora in the Spring does with such wealth adorn,
That Beuer needs not much her company to scorn,
Though she a Vale lie low, and this a Heath sit hye,
Yet does she not alone, allure the wondering eye
With prospect from each part, but that her pleasant ground
Gives all that may content, the well-breathed Horse and Hound:
And from the Britans yet, to show what then I was,
One of the Roman Ways near through my midst did pass:
Besides to my much praise, there has been in my mould
Their painted Pauements found, and Arms of perfect gold.
They near the Saxons reign, that in this tract did dwell,
No Tract can (...) so brave Churches.
All other of this Isle, for that they would excel
For Churches every where, so rich and goodly reared
In every little Dorpe, that aftertimes have feared
T'attempt so mighty works; yet one above the rest,
In which it may be thought, they strove to do their best,
Of pleasant Grantham is, that Piramis so hye,
Reared (as it might be thought) to ouertop the sky,
The Traveler that strikes into a wondrous maze,
As on his Horse he fits, on that proud height to gaze.
When VVytham that this while a listening ear had laid,
To hearken (for her self) what Kestiuen had said,
Much pleased with this report, for that she was the earth
From whom she only had her sweet and seasoned birth,
From VVytham which that name derived from her Springs,
A Town so called.
Thus as she trips along, this dainty Riuelet sings.
Ye easy ambling streams, which way soe'r you run,
Or toward the pleasant rise, or toward the midday Sun:
By which (as some suppose by use that have them tried)
Your waters in their course are neatly purified.
Be what you are, or can, I not your Beauties fear,
When Neptune shall command the Naiades t'appeare.
In River what is found, in me that is not rare:
Yet for my wel-fed Pykes, I am without compare.
From Wytham mine own Town, first watered with my sourse,
As to the Eastern Sea, I hasten on my course.
Who sees so pleasant plains, or is of fairer seen,
Whose Swains in Shepherds gray, and Gyrles in Lincoln green? Lincoln
anciently dyed the best green of England.

Whilst some the rings of Bells, and some the Bag-pipes ply,
Dance many a merry Round, and many a Hydegy.
I envy, any Brook should in my pleasure share,
Yet for my dainty Pykes, I am without compare.
No Land-floods can me force to ouer-proud a height;
Nor am I in my Course, too crooked, or too straight:
My depths fall by descents, too long, nor yet too broad,
My Foards with Pebbles, clear as Orient Pearls, are strowd;
My gentle winding Banks, with sundry Flowers are dressed,
The higher rising Heaths, hold distance with my breast.
Thus to her proper Song, the Burden still she bare;
Yet for my dainty Pykes, I am without compare.
By this to Lincoln com'n, upon whose lofty Site,
Whilst wistly Wytham looks with wonderful delight,
Enamoured of the state, and beauty of the place,
That her of all the rest especially does grace,
Leaving her former Course, in which she first set forth,
Which seemed to have been directly to the North:
She runs her silver front into the muddy Fen,
Which lies into the East, in her deep journey, when
Clear Ban a pretty Brook, from Lyndsey coming down,
Delicious Wytham leads to holy Botulphs Town, Botulphs town contractedly
Boston.

Where proudly she puts in amongst the great resort,
That their appearance make in Neptunes watery Court.
Now Lyndsey all this while, that duly did attend,
Till both her Riuals thus had fully made an end
Of their so tedious talk, when lastly she replies; Lyndsies oration

Lo, bravely here she sits, that both your states defies.
Fair Lincoln is mine own, which lies upon my South,
As likewise to the North, great Humbers swelling mouth
Encircles me, twixt which in length I bravely lie:
O who can me the best, before them both deny?
Nor Britain in her Bounds, scarce such a Tract can show,
Whose shore like to the back of a well-bended Bow,
The Ocean bears out, and every where so thick,
The Villages and Dorps upon my Bosom stick,
That it is very hard for any to define,
Whether Vp-land most I be, (...) am Maratine.
What is there that complete can any Country make,
That in large measure I, (fair Linasey) not partake,
As healthy Heaths, and Woods fair Dales, and pleasant Hills,
All watered here and there, with pretty creeping Rills,
Fat Pasture, mellow Gleabe, and of that kind what can,
Give nourishment to beast, or benefit to man,
As Kestiuen does boast, her VVytham so have I,
My Ancum (only mine) whose fame as far does fly,
VVytham Eele, and Ancum Pyke, In all the world there is none syke.
For fat and dainty Eeles, as hers does for her Pyke,
Which makes the Proverb up; the world has not the like.
From Razin her clear Springs, where first she does ariue,
As in an even course, to Humber forth does drive,
Fair Barton she salutes, which from her Site out-braues
Rough Humber, when he strives to show his sternest waves.
Now for my Bounds to speak, few (...) (I think) there be,
The Bounds of Kestiven.
(And search through all this Isle) to parallel with me:
Great Humber holds me North, as I have said before)
From whom (even) all along, upon the Eastern shore,
The German Oceanlyes; and on my Southern side,
Clear Wytham in her course, me fairly does divide
From Holland; and from thence the Fosdyke is my bound,
Which our first Henry cut from Lincoln, where he found,
Commodities by Trent, from Humber to convey:
So Nature, the clear Trent does fortunatly lay,
To ward me on the West, though farther I extend,
And in my larger bounds do largely comprehend
Full Axholme, (which those near, the fertile do instile)
Which Idle, Don, and Trent, embracing make an Isle.
But wherefore of my Bounds, thus only do I boast,
When that which Holland seems to vaunt her on the most,
By me is ouermatcht; the Foul which she does breed:
She in her foggy Fennes, so moorishly does feed,
That Physic often forbids the Patient them for food,
But mine more ayrie are, and make fine spirits and blood:
For near this batning Isle, in me is to be seen,
More then on any earth, the Plouer gray, and green,
The Corne-land-louing Quayle, the daintiest of our bits,
The Rail, which seldom comes, but upon Rich men's spits:
The Puet, Godwit, Stint, the pallat that allure,
The Miser and do make a wastfull Epicure:
The Knot, that called was Canutus Bird of old,
Of that great King of Danes, his name that still does hold,
His apetite to please, that far and near was sought,
For him (as some have said) from Denmark hither brought
The Dotterell, which we think a very dainty dish,
Whose taking makes such sport, as man no more can wish;
For as you creep, or cowre, or lie, or stoop, or go,
So marking you (with care) the Apish Bird does do,
And acting every thing, does never mark the Net,
Till he be in the Snare, which men for him have set.
The big-boan'd Bustard then, whose body bears that size,
That he against the wind must run, e're he can rise:
The Shouler, which so shakes the air with saily wings,
That ever as he flies, you still would think he sings.
These Fowls, with other Soyles, although they frequent be,
Yet are they found most sweet and delicate in me.
Thus whilst she seems t'extoll in her peculiar praise,
The Muse which seemed too slack, in these too low-pitcht lays,
For nobler height prepares, her oblique course, and casts
A new Book to begin, an end of this she hasts.




The six and twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
Three Shires at once this Song assayes,
By various and unusual ways.
At Nottingham first coming in,
The Vale of Beuer does begin;
Toward Lester then her course she holds,
And sailing o'r the pleasant Oulds,
She fetches Soar down from her Springs,
By Charnwood, which to Trent she brings,
Then shows the Braueries of that Flood,
Makes Sherwood sing her Robin Hood;
Then rouzes up the aged Peake,
And of her Wonders makes her speak:
Thence Darwin down by Darby tends,
And at her fall, to Trent, it ends.
NOw scarcely on this Tract the Muse had entrance made,
Enclining to the South, but Beuers batning Slade
Receives her to Guest, whose coming had too long
Put off her rightful praise, when thus her self she sung.
Three Shires there are (quoth she) in me their parts that claim,
Large Lincoln, Rutland Rich, and th'Norths Eye Nottingham. The Vale of Beuer
bordreth upon 3. Shires.

But in the last of these since most of me does lie,
To that my most-lou'd Shire my self I must apply.
Not Eusham that proud Nymph, although she still pretend
Her self the first of Vales, and though abroad she send Not a more pleasant
Vale in all great Britain, then Beuer.

Her awful dread Command, that all should tribute pay
To her as our great Queen; nor White-horse, though her Clay
Of silver seem to be, new melted, nor the Vale
Of Alsbury, whose grass seems given out by tale,
For it so Silken is, nor any of our kind,
Or what, or where they be, or howsoere inclind,
Me Beuer shall out brave, that in my state do scorn,
By any of them all (once) to be ouerborne,
With theirs, do but compare the Country where I lie,
My Hill, and Oulds will say, they are the Islands eye.
Consider next my Site, and say it does excel;
Then come unto my Soil, and you shall see it swell,
With every Grass and Grain, that Britain forth can bring:
I challenge any Vale, to show me but that thing
I cannot show to her, (that truly is mine own)
Besides I dare thus boast, that I as far am known,
As any of them all, the South their names does sound,
The spacious North does me, that there is scarcely found
A roomth for any else, it is so filled with mine,
Which but a little wants of making me divine:
Nor barren am of Brooks, for that I still retain
Two neat and dainty Rills, the little Snyte, and Deane,
That from the lovely Oulds, their beauteous parent sprung
From the Lecestrian fields, come on with me along,
Till both within one Bank, they on my North are meint,
And where I end, they fall, at Newarck, into Trent.
Hence wandering as the Muse delightfully beholds
The beauty of the large, and goodly full-flockd Oulds,
She on the left hand (...) old Lecester, and flies,
Until the fertile earth glut her insatiate eyes,
From Rich to Richer still, that (...) her before,
Until she come to cease upon the head of Soar,
Where * Fosse, and Watling cut each other in their course
The 2. famous Ways of England. See to the 13. Song.
At * Sharnford, where at first her soft and gentle sourse,
To her but shallow Banks, begins to repair,
Of all this beauteous Isle, the delicatest air;
A little Village at the rising of Soar.
Whence softly sallying out, as loath the place to leave,
She Sense a pretty Rill does courteously receive:
For Swift, a little Brook, which certainly she thought
Down to the Banks of Trent, would safely her have brought,
Because their native Springs so nearly were allyde,
Her sister Soar forsook, and wholly her applide
To Auon, as with her continually to keep,
And wayt on her along to the Sabrinian deep.
Thus with her hand-mayd Sense, the Soar does easily slide
By Lecester, where yet her ruins show her pride,
Demolisht many years, that of the great foundation
Of her long buried walls, men hardly see the station;
Yet of some pieces found, so sure the Cyment locks
The stones, that they remain like perdurable rocks:
Where whilst the lovely Soar, with many a dear embrace,
Is solacing her self with this delightful place,
The Forest, which the name of that brave Town does bear, Lecester Forest.

With many a goodly wreath, crowns her disheueld hair,
And in her gallant Green, her lusty Livery shows
Her self to this fair Flood, which mildly as she flows,
Reciprocally likes her length and breadth to see,
As also how she keeps her fertile purlues free:
The Herds of Fallow Dear she on the Launds does feed,
As having in her self to furnish every need.
But now since gentle Soar, such leisure seems to take,
The Muse in her behalf this strong defense does make,
Against the neighbor floods, for that which tax her so,
And her a Channel call, because she is so slow.
The cause is that she lies upon so low a Flat,
Where nature most of all befriended her in that,
The longer to enjoy the good she does possess:
For had those (with such speed that forward seem to press)
So many dainty Meads, and Pastures theirs to be,
They then would wish themselves to be as slow as she,
Who well may be compared to some young tender Maid,
Entering some Princes Court, which is for pomp arayd,
Who led from room to room amazed is to see A Simily of Soar.

The furnitures and states, which all Imbroyderies be,
The rich and sumptuous Beds, with Tester-couering plumes,
And various as the Suits, so various the persumes,
Large Galleries, where piece with piece does seem to strive,
Of Pictures done to life, Landscape, and Perspectiue,
Thence goodly Gardens sees, where Antique Statues stand
In Stone and Copper, cut by many a skillful hand,
Where every thing to gaze, her more and more entices,
Thinking at once she sees a thousand Paradices,
Goes softly on, as though before she saw the last,
She longed again to see, what she had slightly past.
So the enticing Soil the Soar along does lead,
As wondering in her self, at many a spacious Mead;
When Charnwood from the rocks salutes her wished sight,
(Of many a Wood-god wooed) her darling and delight,
Whose beauty whilst that Soar is pawsing to behold
Clear Wreakin coming in, from Waltham on the Old,
Brings Eye, a pretty Brook, to bear her silver train,
Which on by Melton make, and tripping o'r the Plain,
Here finding her surpised with proud Mount-Sorrels sight,
By quickening of her Course, more easily does inuit
Her to the goodly Trent, where as she goes along
By Loughborough, she thus of that fair Forest sung.
O Charnwood, be thou called the choycest of thy kind,
The like in any place, what Flood has hapt to find?
No Tract in all this Isle, the proudest let her be,
Can show a Syluan Nymph, for beauty like to thee:
The Satyrs, and the Fawnes, by Dian set to keep,
Rough Hills, and Forest holts, were sadly seen to weep,
When thy high-palmed Hearts the sport of Bows and Hounds,
By gripple Borderers hands, were banished thy grounds.
The Driades that were wont about thy Lawnes to roue,
To trip from Wood to Wood, and scud from Grove to Grove,
On * Sharpley that were seen, and * Cadmans aged rocks,
Two mighty Rocks in the Forest.
Against the rising Sun, to brayd their silver locks;
And with the harmless Elues, on Heathy * Bardons height,
By Cynthia's colder beams to play them night by night,
A Hill in the Forest.
Exiled their sweet abode, to poor bare Commons fled,
They with the Oaks that lived, now with the Oaks are dead.
Who will describe to life, a Forest, let him take
Thy Surface to himself, nor shall he need to make
An other form at all, where often in thee is found
Fine sharp but easy Hills, which reverently are crowned
With aged Antique Rocks, to which the Goats and Sheep,
(To him that stands remoat) do softly seem to creep,
To gnaw the little shrubs, on their steep sides that grow;
Upon whose other part, on some descending Brow,
Huge stones are hanging out, as though they down would drop,
Where vnder-growing Oaks, on their old shoulders prop
The others hory heads, which still seem to decline,
And in a Dimble near, (even as a place divine,
For Contemplation fit) an Iuy-seeled Bower,
As Nature had therein ordayn'd some Syluan power;
As men may very often at great Assemblies see,
A Simily of Charnvvood Forest.
Where many of most choice, and wondered Beauties be:
For Stature one does seem the best away to bear;
Another for her Shape, to stand beyond compare;
Another for the fine composure of a face:
Another short of these, yet for a modest grace
Before them all preferred; amongst the rest yet one,
Adiudg'd by all to be, so perfect Paragon,
That all those parts in her together simply dwell,
For which the other do so severally excel.
My Charnwood like the last, has in her self alone,
What excellent can be in any Forest shown,
On whom when thus the Soar had these high praises spent,
She easily slid away into her Sovereign Trent,
Who having wandered long, at length began to leave
Her native Countries bounds, and kindly does receive
The lesser Tame, and Mess, the Mess a dainty Rill,
Near Charnwood rising first, where she begins to fill
Her Banks, which all her course on both sides do abound
With Heath and Finny olds, and often gleaby ground,
Till Croxals fertile earth does comfort her at last
When she is entering Trent; but I was like t'aue past
The other Sense, whose source does rise not far from hers,
By Ancor, that her self to famous Trent prefers,
The second of that name, allotted to this Shire, Two Rivers of one name in one
Shire.

A name but hardly found in any place but here;
Nor is to many known, this Country that frequent.
But Muse return at last, attend the princely Trent,
Who straining on in state, the Norths imperious Flood,
The third of England called, with many a dainty Wood,
Being crowned to Burton comes, to Needwood where she shows
Her self in all her pomp; and as from thence she flows,
She takes into her Train rich Dove, and Darwin clear,
Darwin, whose fount and fall are both in Darbysheere;
And of those thirty Floods, that wayt the Trent upon,
Does stand without compare, the very Paragon.
Thus wandering at her will, as uncontrolled she ranges,
Her often varying form, as variously and changes.
First Erwash, and then Line, sweet Sherwood sends her in;
Then looking wide, as one that newly waked had bin,
Saluted from the North, with Nottinghams proud height,
So strongly is surpised, and taken with the sight,
That she from running wild, but hardly can refrain,
To view in how great state, as she along does strain,
That brave exalted seat, beholds her in pride,
As how the large-spread Meads upon the other side,
All flourishing in Flowers, and rich embroyderies dressed,
In which she sees her self above her neighbors blessed.
As raped with the delights, that her this Prospect brings,
In her peculiar praise, lo thus the River sings.
What should I care at all, from what my name I take,
That Thirty does import, that thirty Rivers make; Whence Trent is supposed to
derive her name. See to the 12. Song.

My greatness what it is, or thirty Abbayes great,
That on my fruitful Banks, times formerly did seat:
Or thirty kinds of Fish, that in my Streams do live,
To me this name of Trent did from that number give.
What reack I: let great Thames, since by his fortune he
Is Sovereign of us all that here in Britain be;
From Isis, and Old Tame, his Pedigree derive:
And for the second place, proud Seuerne that does strive,
Fetch her descent from Wales, from that proud Mountain sprung,
Plinillimon, whose praise is frequent them among,
As of that princely Maid, whose name she boasts to bear,
Bright Sabrin, which she holds as her undoubted heir.
Let these imperious Floods draw down their long descent
From these so famous Stocks, and only say of Trent,
That Moorelands barren earth me first to light did bring,
Which though she be but brown, my clear complexiond Spring,
Gained with the Nymphs such grace, that when I first did rise,
The Naiades on my brim, danced wanton Hydagies,
And on her spacious breast, with Heaths that does abound)
Encircled my fair Fount with many a lusty round:
And of the British Floods, though but the third I be,
Yet Thames, and Seuerne both in this come short of me,
For that I am the Mere of England, that diuides
The North part from the South, on my so either sides,
That reckoning how these Tracts in compass be extent,
Men bound them on the North, or on the South of Trent;
Their Banks are barren Sands, if but compared with mine,
Through my perspicuous Breast, the pearly Pebbles shine:
I throw my Crystal Arms along the Flowery Valleys,
Which lying sleeke, and smooth, as any Garden-Allies,
Do give me leave to play, whilst they do Court my Stream,
And crown my winding banks with many an Anademe:
My Siluer-scaled Skuls about my Streams do sweep,
Now in the shallow foords, now in the falling Deep:
So that of every kind, the new-spawn'd numerous Fry
Seem in me as the Sands that on my Shore do lie.
The Barbell, then which Fish, a brauer does not swim,
Nor greater for the Ford within my spacious brimme,
Nor (newly taken) more the curious taste does please;
The Greling, whose great Spawne is big as any Pease;
The Perch with pricking Finnes, against the Pike prepared,
As Nature had there on bestowed this stronger guard,
His daintiness to keep, (each curious pallats proof)
From his vile ravenous foe: next him I name the Ruff,
His very near Ally, and both for scale and Fin,
In taste, and for his Bayte (indeed) his next of kin;
The pretty slender Dare, of many called the Dace,
Within my liquid glass, when Phoebus looks his face,
Often swiftly as he swimmes, his silver belly shows,
But with such nimble slight, that ere ye can disclose
His shape, out of your sight like lightning he is shot.
The Trout by Nature marked with many a Crimson spot,
As though she curious were in him above the rest,
And of fresh water Fish, did note him for the best;
The Roche, whose common kind to every Flood does fall;
The Chub, (whose neater name) which some a Cheuin call,
Food to the Tyrant Pyke, (most being in his power)
Who for their numerous store he most does them devour;
The lusty Salmon then, from Neptunes watery Realm,
When as his season serves, stemming my tydefull Stream,
Then being in his kind, in me his pleasure takes,
(For whom the Fisher then all other Game forsakes)
Which bending of himself to th'fashion of a Ring,
Above the forced Wears, himself does nimbly fling,
And often when the Net has dragd him safe to land,
Is seen by natural force to escape his murderers hand;
Whose grain does rise in flakes, with fatness interlarded,
Of many a liquorish lip, that highly is regarded.
And Humber, to whose waste I pay my watery store,
Me of her Sturgeons sends, that I thereby the more
Should have my beauties graced, with some thing from him sent:
Not Ancums siluered Eele exceeds that of Trent;
Though the sweet smelling Smelt be more in Thames then me,
The Lamprey, and his * Less, in Seuerne general be; The (...).

The Flounder smooth and flat, in other Rivers caught,
Perhaps in greater store, yet better are not thought:
The dainty Gudgcon, Loche, the Minnow, and the Bleake,
Since they but little are, I little need to speak
Of them, nor does it fit me much of those to reck,
Which every where are found in every little Beck;
Nor of the Crayfish here, which creepes amongst my stones,
From all the rest alone, whose shell is all his bones:
For Carpe, the Tench, and Breame, my other store among,
To Lakes and standing Pooles, that chiefly do belong,
Here scowring in my Foards, feed in my waters clear,
Are muddy Fish in Ponds to that which they are here.
From Nottingham, near which this River first begun,
This Song, she the mean while, by Newarke having run,
Receiving little Snyte, from Beuers batning grounds,
At Gaynsborough goes out, where the Lincolnian bounds.
Yet Sherwood all this while not satisfied to show
Her love to princely Trent, as downward she does flow,
Her Meden and her Man, she down from Mansfield sends
To Idle for her aid, by whom she recommends
Her love to that brave Queen of waters, her to meet,
When she toward Humber comes, do humbly kiss her feet,
And clip her till she grace great Humber with her fall.
When Sherwood somewhat back, the forward Muse does call;
For she was let to know, that Soar had in her Song
So chanted Charnwoods worth, the Rivers that along,
Amongst the neighboring Nymphs, there was no other Lays,
But those which seemed to sound of Charnwood, and her praise:
Which Sherwood took to heart, and very much disdained,
(As one that had both long, and worthily maintained
The title of the great'st, and brauest of her kind)
To fall so far below, one wretchedly confined
Within a furlongs space, to her large skirts compared:
Wherefore she as a Nymph that neither feared, nor cared
For ought to her might chance, by others love or hate,
With Resolution armed, against the power of Fate,
All selfe-praise set apart, determines to sing
That lusty Robin Hood, who long time like a King
Within her compass lived, and when he lift to range
For some rich Booty set, or else his air to change,
To Sherwood still retired, his only standing Court,
Whose praise the Forest thus does pleasantly report.
The merry pranks he played, would ask an age to tell,
And the adventures strange that Robin Hood befell,
Robin Hoods Story.
When Mansfield many a time for Robin has bin laid,
How he has cosned them, that him would have betrayed;
How often he has come to Nottingham disguisd,
And cunningly escapt, being set to be surprizd.
In this our spacious Isle, I think there is not one,
But he has heard some talk of him and little John;
And to the end of time, the Tales shall never be done,
Of Scarlock, George a Green, and Much the Millers son,
Of Tuck the merry Friar, which many a Sermon made,
In praise of Robin Hood, his Out-lawes, and their Trade.
An hundred valiant men had this brave Robin Hood,
Still ready at his call, that Bow-men were right good,
All clad in Lincoln Green, with Caps of Red and Blew,
His fellows winded Horn, not one of them but knew,
When setting to their lips their little Beugles shrill,
The warbling Eccho's wakt from every Dale and Hill:
Their Bauldricks set with Studs, athwart their shoulders cast,
To which under their arms, their Sheafes were buckled fast,
A short Sword at their Belt, a Buckler scarce a span,
Who struck below the knee, not counted then a man:
All made of Spanish Yew, their Bows were wondrous strong;
They not an Arrow drew, but was a cloth-yard long.
Of Archery they had the very perfect craft,
With Broad-arrow, or But, or Prick, or Rouing Shaft,
At Marks full forty score, they used to Prick, and Roue,
Yet higher then the breast, for Compass never strove;
Yet at the farthest mark a foot could hardly win:
At Long-buts, short, and Hoyles, each one could cleave the pin:
Their Arrows finely paired, for Timber, and for Feather,
With Birch and Brazill peec'd, to fly in any weather;
And shot they with the round, the square, or forked Pyle,
The loose gave such a twang, as might be heard a mile.
And of these Archers brave, there was not any one,
But he could kill a Dear his (...) speed upon,
Which they did boil and roast, in many a mighty wood,
Sharp hunger the fine sauce to their more kingly food.
Then taking them to rest, his merry men and he
Slept many a (...) night under the (...) tree.
From wealthy Abbots chests, and Churles abundant store,
What often times he took, he shared amongst the poor:
No lordly Bishop came in (...) (...) way,
To him before he went, but for his Pass must pay:
The Widow in distress he graciously relieved,
And remedied the wrongs of many a Virgin grieved:
He from the husbands bed no married woman wan,
But to his Mistress dear, his loved Marian
Was ever constant known, which wheresoere she came,
Was sovereign of the Woods, chief Lady of the Game:
Her Clothes tucked to the knee, and dainty braided hair,
With Bow and Quiver armed, she wandered here and there,
Amongst the Forests wild; Diana never knew
Such pleasures, nor such Hearts as Mariana slew.
Of merry Robin Hood, and of his merrier men,
The Song had (...) ceased, when as the Muse again
VVades * Erwash, (that at hand) on Sherwoods setting side, A Riueret parting
the two Shires.

The Nottinghamian Fields, and Derbian does divide,
And Northward from her Springs, haps Scardale forth to find,
Which like her Mistress Peake, is naturally enclind
To thrust forth ragged Cleeues, with which she scattered lies,
As busy Nature here could not her self suffice,
Of this oft-altring earth the sundry shapes to show,
That from my entrance here, does rough and rougher grow,
Which of a lowly Dale, although the name it bear,
You by the Rocks might think that it a Mountain were,
From which it takes the name of Scardale, which expressed,
Is the hard (...) of Rocks, of Chesterfield possessed,
By her which is instild; where Rother from her rist,
Ibber, and Crawley has, and Gunno, that assist
Her weaker wandering Stream toward Yorkshire as she wends,
So Scardale toward the same, that lovely (...) sends,
That helps the fertile Seat of Axholme to in-Isle:
But to th'vnwearied Muse the Peake appears the while,
A withered Beldam long, with bleared watrish eyes,
With many a bleake storm dimmed, which often to the Skies
She cast, and often toth' earth bowed down her aged head,
Her meager wrinkled face, being sullyed still with lead,
Which sitting in the works, and poring o'r the Mines,
Which she out of the Oar continually refines:
For she a Chimist was, and Natures secrets knew,
And from amongst the Lead, she (...) drew,
And Crystal there congealed, (by her enstyled Flowers)
And in all Medcins knew their most effectual powers.
The spirits that haunt the Mines, she could command and tame,
And bind them as she list in Saturns dreadful name:
She Mil-stones from the Quarrs, with sharpened picks could get,
And dainty Whetstones make, the dull-edgd tools to whet.
Wherefore the Peake as proud of her laborious toil,
As others of their Corn, or goodness of their Soil,
Thinking the time was long, till she her tale had told,
Her Wonders one by one, thus plainly does unfold.
My dreadful daughters borne, your mothers dear delight,
Great Natures chiefest work, wherein she showed her might;
The Peakes Wonders.
Ye dark and hollow Caves, the pourtratures of Hell,
Where Fogs, and misty Damps continually do dwell;
O ye my only loyes, my Darlings, in whose eyes,
Horror assumes her seat, from whose abiding flies
Thick Vapors, that like Rugs still hang the troubled air,
Ye of your mother Peake, the hope and only care:
O thou my first and best, of thy black Entrance named
The Diuels-Arse, in me, O be thou not ashamed,
The Diuels-arse in the (...)
Nor think thy self difgrac'd, or hurt thereby at all,
Since from thy horror first men used thee so to call:
For as amongst the Moors, the Iettiest black are deemed
The beautifulst of them; so are your kind esteemed,
The more ye gloomy are, more fearful and obscure,
(That hardly any eye your sternnesse may endure)
The more ye famous are, and what name men can hit,
That best may ye express, that best does ye befit:
For he that will attempt thy black and darksome jaws,
In midst of Summer meets with Winters stormy flawes,
Cold Dewes, that over head from thy foul roof distill,
And meets under foot, with a dead sullen Rill,
That Acheron it self, a man would think he were
Imediately to pass, and stayed for Charon there;
Thy Flore drad Cave, yet flat, though very rough it be,
With often winding turns: then come thou next to me,
My pretty daughter Poole, my second loved child,
(...) Hole.
Which by that noble name was happily enstild,
Of that more generous stock, long honored in this Shire,
Of which amongst the rest, one being out-lawed here,
For his strong refuge took this dark and uncouth place,
An heyre-loome ever since, to that succeeding race:
Whose entrance though deprest below a mountain steep,
Besides so very strait, that who will see it, must creep
Into the mouth thereof, yet being once got in,
A rude and ample Roof does instantly begin
To raise it selse aloft, and who (...) does intend
The length thereof to seo, still going must ascend
On mighty slippery stones, as by a winding stayre,
Which of a kind of base dark Alablaster are,
Of strange and sundry forms, both in the Roof and Floor,
As Nature showed in thee, what never was seen before.
For Elden thou my third, a Wonder I prefer Elden Hole.

Before the other two, which perpendicular
Diue'st down into the ground, as if an entrance were
Through earth to lead to hell, ye well might judge it here,
Whose depth is so immense, and wondrously profound,
As that long line which serves the deepest Sea to sound,
Her bottom never wrought, as though the vast descent,
Through this Terrestrial Globe directly poynting went
Our Antipods to see, and with her gloomy eyes,
To glote upon those Stars, to us that never rise;
That down into this hole if that a stone ye throw,
An acres length from thence, (some say that) ye may go,
And coming back thereto, with a still listening ear,
May hear a sound as though that stone then falling were.
Yet for her Caves, and Holes, Peake only not excells,
But that I can again produce those wondrous Wells
Of Buckston, as I have, that most delicious Fount,
Which men the second Bath of England do account,
Which in the primer reigns, when first this well began
To have her virtues known unto the blessed Saint Anne, Saint Anne of Buskston.

Was consecrated then, which the same temper has,
As that most dainty Spring, which at the famous Bath,
Is by the Cross enstild, whose fame I much prefer,
In that I do compare my daintiest Spring to her,
Nice sicknesses to cure, as also to prevent,
And supple their clear skins, which Ladies often frequent,
Most full, most fair, most sweet, and most delicious sourse.
To this a second Fount, that in her natural course, (...).

As mighty Neptune does, so does she ebb and flow,
If some Welsh Shires report, that they the like can show.
I answer those, that her shall so no wonder call,
So far from any Sea, not any of them all.
My Caves, and Fountains thus delivered you, for change.
A little Hill I have, a wonder yet more strange,
Which though it be of light, and almost dusty sand, Sandy Hill.

Vnaltred with the wind, yet firmly does it stand;
And running from the top, although it never cease,
Yet does the foot thereof, no whit at all increase.
Nor is it at the top, the lower, or the less,
As Nature had ordained, that so its own excess,
Should by some secret way within itself ascend,
To feed the falling back; with this (...) do not end
The wonders of the Peake, for nothing that I have,
But it a wonders name does very justly crave: (...)
A Forest (...) have I, (of which when any speak,
Of me they it enstile, The Forest, of the Peake)
The Peake Forest.
Whose Hills do serve for Brakes, the Rocks (...) shrubs and trees,
To which the Stag pursued, as to the (...) flees;
Like it in all this Isle, for sternnesse there is none,
Where Nature may be said to show you groves of stone,
As she in little there, had (...) compyld
The model of the vast Arabian stony Wyld.
Then as it is supposed, in England that there be
Seven wonders: to my self so have I here in me,
My seven before rehearc'd, allotted me by Fate,
Her greatness, as therein ordained to imitate.
No sooner had the Peake her seven proud wonders sung,
But Darwin from her (...), her mothers Hills among,
Through many a crooked way, opposd with envious Rocks,
Comes tripping down toward Trent; and sees the goodly Flocks
Fed by her mother Peake; and Herds, (for (...) and hair,
That hardly are put down by those of Lancashire,)
Which on her Mountaiues sides, and in her Bottoms graze,
On whose delightful Course, whilst Vnknidge stands to gaze,
And look on her his fill; does on his tiptoes get,
He Nowstoll plainly sees, which likewise from the Set,
Salutes her, and like friends, to Heauen-Hill far away,
Thus from their lofty tops, were plainly heard to say.
Fair Hill be not so proud of thy so pleasant Site,
Who for thou give the eye such wonderful delight,
From any Mountain near, that glorious name of Heaven,
Thy bravery to express, was to thy greatness given:
Nor cast thine eye so much on things that be above:
For saw thou as we do, our Darwin, thou would love
Her more then any thing, that so does thee allure;
When Darwin that by this her travel could endure,
Takes Now into her train, (from Nowstoll her great Sire,
Which shows to take her name) with many a winding Gyre.
Then wandering through the Wylds, at length the pretty Wye,
From her black mother Poole, her nimbler course does plye
Toward Darwin, and along from Bakewell with her brings
Lathkell a little Brook, and Headford, whose poor Springs,
But hardly them the name of Riuerets can afford;
When Burbrook with the strength, that Nature has her stored,
Although but very small, yet much does Darwin sted.
At Worksworth on her way, when from the Mines of Lead,
Brown Eclesborne comes in, then Amber from the East,
Of all the Darbian Nymphs of Darwin loved the best,
(A delicater Flood from fountain never flowed)
Then coming to the Town, on which she first bestowed
Her natural * British name, her Darby, so again, Darvvin, of the British
Doure Guin, which is White water. Darby from thence, as the place by the water.

Her, to that ancient Seat, does kindly intertaine,
Where Marten-Brooke, although an easy shallow Rill,
There offers all she has, her Mistress Banks to fill,
And all too little thinks that was on Darwin spent;
From hence as she departs, in travailing to Trent,
Back goes the active Muse, toward Lancashire amain,
Where matter rests enough her vigor to maintain,
And to the Northern Hills shall lead her on along,
Which now must wholly be the subject of my Song.




The seven and twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
The circuit of this Shire expressed,
(...), and Ribble then contest;
The Muse next to the Mosses flies,
And to fair Wyre her self applies,
The Fishy Lun then does she bring,
The praise of Lancashire to sing,
The Isle of Man maintains her plea,
Then falling Eastward from that Sea,
On rugged Furnesse, and his Fells,
Of which this Canto lastly tells.
SCarce could the laboring Muse salute this lively Shire,
But strait such shouts arose from every Moss and Mere,
And Rivers rushing down, with such unusual noise,
Upon their peably sholes, seemed to express their joys,
That Mersey (in her course which happily confines
Brave Chesshire from this Tract, two County Palatines)
As ravished with the news, along to Lerpoole ran,
That all the Shores which lie to the * Vergiuian, The Irish Sea.

Resounded with the shouts, so that from Creek to Creek,
So Iowd the Echoes cried, that they were heard to shreeke
To Fournesse ridged Front, whereas the rocky Pile
Of Foudra is at hand, to guard the out-layd Isle The circuit and true
demension of (...)

Of Walney, and those gross (...) foggy (...) awooke;
Thence flying to the East, with their reuerberance shook
The Clouds from Pendles head, (which as the people say,
Prognosticates to them a happy Halcyon day)
Rebounds on Blackstonedge, and there by falling fills
Fair Mersey, making in from the Derbeian Hills.
But whilst the active Muse thus nimbly goes about,
Of this large Tract to lay the true Demensions out,
The neat Lancastrain Nymphs, for beauty that excel,
That for the * Hornpipe round do bear away the bell;
The Lancashire Horne-pipe.
Some that about the Banks of Erwell make abode,
With some that have their seat by Ribbles silver road,
In great contention fell, (that mighty difference grew)
Which of those Floods deserved to have the sovereign due;
So that all future spleen, and quarrels to prevent,
That likely was to rise about their long descent,
Before the neighboring Nymphs, their right they mean to plead,
And first thus for her self the lovely Erwell said.
Ye Lasses, quoth this Flood, have long and blindly cr'd,
That Ribble before me, so falsely have preferred,
Ervvels oration
That am a Native borne, and my descent do bring,
From ancient Gentry here, when Ribble from her Spring,
An Alien known to be, and from the Mountains rude
Of Yorkshire getting strength, here boldly dares intrude
Upon my proper Earth, and through her mighty fall,
Is not ashamed her self of Lancashire to call:
Whereas of all the Nymphs that carefully attend
My Mistress Merseys State, there is none that does transcend
My greatness with her grace, which does me so prefer,
That all is due to me, which does belong to her.
For though from Blackstonedze the Taume come tripping down,
And from that long-ridg'd Rock, her fathers high renown,
Of Mersey thinks from me, the place alone to win,
With my attending Brooks, yet when I once come in,
I out of countenance quite do put the Nymph, for note,
As from my Fountain I toward mightier Mersey float,
First Roch a dainty Rill, from Roch-dale her dear Dame,
Who honored with the half of her stern mothers name,
Grows proud, yet glad her self into my Banks to get,
Which Spodden from her Spring, a pretty Riuelet,
As her attendant brings, when Irck adds to my store,
And Medlock to their much, by lending somewhat more,
At Manchester do meet, all kneeling to my State,
Where brave I show my self; then with a prouder gate,
Toward Mersey making on, great Chatmosse at my fall,
Lies full of Turfe, and Marle, her unctuous Mineral,
And Blocks as black as Pitch, (with boring-Augars found)
There at the general Flood supposed to be drowned.
Thus chief of Merseys train, away with her I run,
When in her prosperous course she watreth Warrington,
And her fair silver load in Lerpoole down does lay,
A Road none more renownd in the Vergiuian Sea.
Ye lusty Lasses then, in Lancashire that dwell,
For Beauty that are said to bear away the Bell,
Your Countries Horn-pipe, ye so minsingly that tread,
As ye the Eg-pye love, and Apple Cherry-red; He that wilfish for a Lancashire
man, at any time or tide, Must (...) his book with a good (...), or an Apple
with a red side.

In all your mirthfull Songs, and merry meetings tell,
That Erwell every way does Ribble far excel.
Her well-disposed speech had Erwell scarcely done,
But swift report there with imediatly does run
To the Virgiuian Shores, among the Mosses deep,
Where Alt a neighboring Nymph for very joy does weep,
That Symonds-wood, from whence the Flood assumes her Spring,
Excited with the same, was lowdly heard to ring;
And over all the Moors, with shrill re-ecchoing sounds,
The drooping Fogs to drive from those gross wat'y grounds,
Where those that toil for Turffe, with peating Spades doc find
Fish living in that earth (contrary to their kind) A wonder in Nature.

Which but that Pontus, and Heraclia likewise shows,
The like in their like earth, that with like moisture flows,
And that such Fish as these, had not been likewise found,
Within far firmer earth, the Paphlagonian ground,
A Wonder of this Isle, this well might have been thought
But Ribbell that this while for her advantage wrought,
Of what she had to say, does well her self advise,
And to brave Erwels speech, thus boldly she replies.
With that, whereby the most thou think me to disgrace,
That I an Alien am, (not rightly of this place)
My greatest glory is, and Lancashire therefore,
To Nature for my Birth, beholding is the more;
That Yorkshire, which all Shires for largeness does exceed,
A kingdom to be called, that well deserves (indeed)
And not a Fountain has, that from her womb does flow
Within her spacious self, but that she can bestow;
To Lancaster yet lends, me Ribbell, from her store,
Which adds to my renown, and makes her Bounty more.
From Penigents proud foot, as from my source I slide,
That Mountain my proud Sire, in height of all his pride,
Takes pleasure in my Course, as in his firstborn Flood:
And Ingleborow Hill of that Olympian Brood,
With Pendle, of the North the highest Hills that be,
Do wistly me behold, and are beheld of me,
These Mountains make me proud, to gaze on me that stand:
So Long-ridge, once ariu'd on the Lancastrian Land,
Salutes me, and with smiles, me to his soil inuites,
So have I many a Flood, that forward me excites,
As Hodder, that from home attends me from my Spring;
Then Caldor coming down, from Blackstonedze does bring
Me easily on my way, to Preston the greatst Town,
Where with my Banks are blessed; where at my going down,
Clear Darwen on along me to the Sea does drive,
And in my spacious fall no sooner I arrive,
But Sauock to the North, from Longridge making way,
To this my greatness adds, when in my ample Bay,
Swart Dulas coming in, from Wiggin with her ayds,
Short Taud, and Dartow small, two little Country Mayds,
(In those low watery lands, and Moory Mosses bred)
Do see me safely laid in mighty Neptunes bed;
And cutting in my course, even through the very heart
Of this renowned Shire, so equally it part,
As Nature should have said, Lo thus I meant to do;
This Flood diuides this Shire thus equally in two.
Ye Mayds, the Horne-pipe then, so minsingly that tread,
As ye the Egg-pye love, and Apple Cherry-red;
In all your mirthfull Songs, and merry meetings tell,
That Ribbell every way, your Erwell does excel.
Here ended she again, when Mertons Moss and Mere,
With Ribbels sole reply so much revived were,
That all the Shores resound the Rivers good success,
And wondrous joy there was all over * Andernesse,
A part of Lancashire so called
Which straight conuayd the news into the upper land,
Where Pendle, Penigent, and Ingleborow stand
Jngleborovv, Pendle, and Penigent, The highest Hills betwixt Barvvick and
Trent. See to the 28. Song.
Like Giants, and the rest do proudly ouerlooke;
Or Atlas-like as though they only undertook
To underprop high Heaven, or the wide Welkin dared,
Who in their Ribbles praise (be sure) no speeches spared;
That the loud sounds from them down to the Forests fell,
To Bowland brave in state, and Wyersdale, which as well,
As any Syluan Nymphs, their beauteous Scites may boast,
Whose Eccho's sent the same all round about the Coast,
That there was not a Nymph to Iollity inclind,
Or of the woody brood, or of the watery kind,
But at their fingers ends, they Ribbels Song could say,
And perfectly the Note upon the Bag-pipe play.
That Wyre, when once she knew how well these Floods had sped,
(When their reports abroad in every place was spread)
It vexed her very heart, their eminence to see,
Their equal (at the least) who thought her self to be,
Determins at the last to Neptunes Court to go,
Before his ample State, with humbleness to show
The wrongs she had sustained by her proud sisters spite,
And offering them no wrong, to do her greatness right;
Arising but a Rill at first from Wyersdales lap,
Yet still receiving strength from her full Mothers pap,
As down to Seaward she, her serious course does ply,
Takes Caldor coming in, to bear her company.
From Woolfcrags Cliffy foot, a Hill to her at hand,
By that fair Forest known, within her Verge to stand.
So Bowland from her breast sends Brock her to attend,
As she a Forest is, so likewise does she send
Her child, on Wyresdales Flood, the dainty VVyre to wayt,
With her assisting Rills, when VVyre is once repleat:
She in her crooked course to Seaward softly slides,
Where Pellins mighty Moss, and Mertons, on her sides
Their boggy breasts out lay, and Skipton down does crawle,
To entertain this VVyer, attained to her fall:
When whilst each wandering flood seemed settled to admire,
First Erwell, Ribbell then, and last of all this VVyre,
That mighty wagers would have willingly been laid,
(But that these matters were with much discretion staid)
Some broils about these Brooks had surely been begun.
When Coker a coy Nymph, that clearly seems to shun
All popular applause, who from her Crystal head,
In Wyresdale, near where Wyre is by her fountain fed,
That by their natural birth, they seem (in deed) to twin,
Yet for her sisters pride she cares not a pin,
Of none, and being helped, she likewise helps none,
But to the Irish Sea goes gently down alone
Of any vndisturbd, till coming to her Sound,
Endangered by the Sands, with many a lofty bound,
She leaps against the Tides, and cries to Crystal Lon,
The Flood that names the Town, from whence the Shire begun,
Her title first to take, and loudly tells the Flood,
That if a little while she thus but trifling stood,
These petty Brooks would be before her still preferred.
Which the long-wandring Lon, with good aduisement heard,
As she comes ambling on from Westmerland, where first
Arising from her head, amongst the Mountains nursed,
By many a pretty spring, that howerly getting strength,
Ariuing in her Course in Lancashire at length,
To Lonsdale shows her self, and lovingly does play
With her dear daughter Dale, which her frim Cheek does lay Lunesdale.

To her clear mothers Breast, as minsingly she traces,
And often embracing her, she often again embraces,
And on her Darling smiles, with every little gale.
When Lac the most loved child of this delicious Dale,
And Wemming on the way, present their eithers Spring.
Next them she Henbourne has, and Robourne, which do bring
Their bounties in one bank, their Mistress to prefer,
That she with greater state may come to Lancaster,
Of her which takes the name, which likewise to the Shire,
The Sovereign title lends, and eminency, where
To give to this her Town, what rightly does belong,
Of this most famous Shire, our Lun thus frames her Song.
First, that most precious thing, and pleasing most to man,
Who from him (made of earth) imediatly began,
Lancashire, Fair women.
His she self woman, which the goodliest of this Isle,
This country has brought forth, that much does grace my style;
Why should those Ancients else, which so much knowing were,
When they the Blazons gave to every several Shire,
Fair women as mine own, have titled due to me?
Besides in all this Isle, there no such Cattle be,
For largeness, Horn, and Hair, as these of Lancashire;
Lancashire Breed of cattle the best.
So that from every part of England far and near,
Men haunt her Marts for Store, as from her Race to breed.
And for the third, wherein she does all Shires exceed,
Be those great race of Hounds, the deepest mouthed of all
The other of this kind, which we our Hunters call,
Lancashire, Deep mouthd Hounds.
Which from their bellowing throats upon a sent so roar,
That you would surely think, that the firm earth they tore
With their wide yawning chaps, or rent the Clouds in sunder,
As though by their loud cry they meant to mock the thunder.
Besides, her Natives have been anciently esteemed,
For Bow-men near our best, and ever have been deemed
Lancashire Bowmen.
So loyal, that the Guard of our preceding Kings,
Of them did most consist; but yet among all these things,
Even almost ever since the English Crown was set
Upon the lawful head, of our Plantaginet,
In Honor, next the first, our Dukedom was allowed,
And always with the greatst, revenues was endowed:
And after when it hapt, France-conquering Edwards blood
Divided in it self, here for the Garland (...);
The right Lancastrian Line, it from Yorks Issue bare;
The Red-rose, our brave Badge, which in their Helmets ware,
The White and Red (...).
In many a bloody field, at many a doubtful fight,
Against the House of York, which bare for theirs the White.
And for my self there is not the Tiuy, nor the Wye,
See to the sixth Song.
Nor any of those Nymphs, that to the Southward lie,
For Salmon me excels; and for this name of Lun,
Llun, in the British, sulnesse.
That I am Christened by, the Britains it begun,
Which Fullness does import, of waters still increase:
To Neptune lowting low, when Crystal Lun does cease,
And Conder coming in, conducts her by the hand,
Till lastly she salute the point of * Sunderland,
A part of Lancashire iutting out into the Jrish Sea.
And leaves our dainty Lun to Amphitrites care.
So blyth and bonny now the Lads and Lasses are,
That ever as anon the Bag-pipe up does blow,
Cast in a gallant Round about the Harth they go,
And at each pause they kiss, was never seen such rule
In any place but here, at Boon-fire, or at Yeule;
And every village smokes at Wakes with lusty cheer,
Then Hey they cry for Lun, and Hey for Lancashire;
That one high Hill was heard to tell it to his brother,
That instantly again to tell it to some other:
From Hill again to Vale, from Vale to Hill it went,
The High-lands they again, it to the lower sent,
The mud-exhausted Meres, and Mosses deep among,
With the report thereof, each Road, and Harbor rung;
The Sea-Nymphs with their Song, so great a coil do keep,
They cease not to resound it over all the Deep,
And acted it each day before the Isle of Man,
Who like an Empress sits in the Virgiuian,
By her that has the Calse, long Walney, and the Pyle, The Calfe of Man, a
little Island.

As Hand-may ds to attend on her their Sovereign Isle,
To whom, so many though the Hebrides do show,
Acknowledge, that to her they due subjection owe:
With Corn and Cattle stored, and what for hers is good,
(That we, nor Ireland, need not scorn her neighborhood)
Her midst with Mountains set, of which, from * Sceafels height, A mountain
in the Isle of Man.

A clear and perfect eye, the weather being bright,
(Be Neptunes visage never so terrible and stern)
The Scotch, the Irish Shores, and the English may discern;
And what an Empire can, the same this Island brings
Her Pedigrecs to show, her right successiue Kings,
Her Chronicles and can as easily rehearce,
And with all foreign parts to have had free commerce;
Her Municipiall Laws, and Customs very old,
Belonging to her State, which strongly she does hold:
This Island, with the Song of Lun is taken so,
As she has special cause before all other, who
For her bituminous Turfe, squared from her Mossy ground,
And Trees far under earth, (by daily digging found,
As for the store of Oats, which her black Gleabe does bear,
In every one of these resembling Lancashire,
To her she will stoutly stick, as to her nearest kin,
And cries the day is ours, brave Lancashire does win.
But yet this Isle of Man more seems not to rejoice
For Lancashires good luck, nor with a louder voice
To sound it to the Shores; then Furnesse whose stern face,
With Mountains set like Warts, which Nature as a grace
Bestowed upon this Tract, whose Brows do look so stern,
That when the Nymphs of Sea did first her Front discern,
Amazedly they fled, to Amphitrite's Bower.
Her grim aspect to see, which seemed to them so sower,
As it malign'd the Rule which mighty Neptune bare,
Whose Fells to that grim god, most stern and dreadful are,
With Hills whose hanging brows, with Rocks about are bound,
Whose weighty feet stand fixed in that black beachy ground,
Whereas those scattered trees, which naturally partake,
The fatness of the soil (in many a slimy Lake,
Their roots so deeply sok'd) send from their stocky bough,
A soft and sappy Gum, from which those Tree-geese grow,
Called Barnactes by us, which like a Ielly first
Barnacles one of the (...) Wonders.
To the beholder seem, then by the fluxure nursed,
Still great and greater thrive, until you well may see
Them turned to perfect Fowls, when dropping from the tree
Into the Meery Pond, which under them does lie,
Wax ripe, and taking wing, away in flocks do fly,
Which well our Ancients did among our Wonders place:
Besides by her strong Site, she does receive this grace,
Before her neighboring Tracts, (which Fournesse well may vaunt)
That when the Saxons here their forces first did plant,
And from the Inner-land the ancient Britains drove,
To their distressed estate it no less succor gave,
Then the trans Seuern'd Hills, which their old stock yet stores,
Which now we call the Welsh, or the Cornubian Shores.
What Country lets ye see those soyles within her Seat,
But she in little has, what it can show in great?
As first without her self at Sea to make her strong,
(Yet how soe'r exposed, does still to her belong)
And fence her furthest point, from that rough Neptunes rage,
The Isle of Walney lies, whose longitude does swage
His (...) when his waves, on Furnesse seem to war,
Whose crooked back is armed with many a rugged * scarre
A scarre is a Rock.
Against his boystrous shocks, which this defensive Isle
Of Walney still assail, that she does scorn the while,
Which to assist her has the Pyle of Fouldra set,
And Fulney at her back, a pretty Insulet,
Which all their forces bend, their Furnesse safe to keep:
But to his inner earth, divert we from the deep,
Where those two mighty Meres, out-stretcht in length do wander,
The lesser Thurstan named, the famouser Wynander,
So bounded with her Rocks, as Nature would desery,
By her how those great Seas Mediserranean lie.
To Sea-ward then she has her sundry Sands again,
As that of Dudden first, then Leain, lastly Ken,
Of three bright Naiades named, as Dudden on the West,
That Cumberland cuts off from this Shire, does inuest
Those Sands with her proud Style, when Leuin from the Fells,
Besides her natural source, with the abundance swells,
Which those two mighty Meres, upon her either side
Contrribute by recourse, that out of very pride,
She leaves her ancient name, and Fosse her self does call,
Till coming to the Sands, even almost at her fall,
On them her ancient Style she liberally bestows.
Upon the East from these, clear Ken her beauty shows,
From Kendale coming in, which she does please to grace,
First with her famous Type, then lastly in her race,
Her name upon those Sands does liberally bequeath,
Whereas the Muse a while may sit her down to breath,
And after walk along toward Torkshire on her way,
On which she strongly hopes to get a noble day.




The eight and twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
Invention hence her Compass steeres,
Toward York the most renowned of Shires,
Makes the three Ridings in their Stories,
Each severally to show their glories.
Ouse for her most-lou'd Cities sake,
Does her Dukes Title undertake;
His Floods then Humber welcomes in,
And shows how first he did begin.
THe Muse from Blackstonedge, no whit dismayed at all,
With sight of the large Shire, on which she was to fall,
(Whose Forests, Hills, and Floods, then long for her ariue
From Lancashire, that looked her Beauties to contriue)
Does set her self to sing, of that above the rest
A Kingdom that does seem, a Province at the least,
To them that think themselves no simple Shires to be;
But that wherein the world her greatness most may see,
And that which does this Shire before the rest prefer,
Is of so many Floods, and great, that rise from her,
Except some silly few out of her Verge that flow,
So near to other Shires, that it is hard to know,
If that their Springs be hers, or others them divide,
And those are only found upon her Setting side.
Else be it noted well, remarkable to all, A great bravery of Yorkshire.

That those from her that flow, in her together fall.
Nor can small praise beseem so beaurious Brooks as these,
For from all other Nymphs these be the Nayades,
In Amphitrites Bower, that princely places hold,
To whom the Orkes of Sea dare not to be so bold,
As rudely once to touch, and wheresoere they come,
The Tritons with their Trumps proclaim them public room.
Now whiles the Muse prepares these Floods along to lead,
The wide VVest-riding first, desires that she may plead
The right that her belongs, which of the Muse she winnes,
When with the course of Don, thus she her Tract begins.
Thou first of all my Floods, whose Banks do bound my South,
The West Ridings oration.
And offrest up thy Stream to mighty Humbers mouth,
Of Ewe, and climing Elm, that crowned with many a spray,
Much Ewe and Elm upon the Bank of Don.
From thy clear Fountain first through many a Mead do play,
Till Rother, whence the name of Rotheram first begun,
At that her christened Town does loose her in my Don,
Which proud of her recourse, toward Doncaster does drive,
Her greatst and chiefest town, the name that does derive
From Don's near bordering Banks, when holding on her race,
She dancing in and out, indenteth (...)' Chase,
Whose bravery (...) adds, new honors to her Bank:
When Sherwood sends her in slow Iddie, that made rank
With her profuse excess, she largely it bestows
On Marshland, whose swollen womb with such abundance flows,
As that her batning breast, her Fatlings sooner feeds,
And with more lavish waste then often the Grasier needs:
Whose soil, as some report that be her Borderers note,
With th'water under earth undoubtedly does flote:
For when the waters rise, it risen does remain
High whilst the Floods are high, and when they fall again,
A strange opinion held by those of the neighboring Villages.
It falls: but at last, when as my linely Don,
Along by Marshlands side, her lusty course has run,
The little wandering Went, won by the loud report
Of the magnifique State, and height of Humbers Court,
Draws on to meet with Don, at her approach to Air:
Now speak I of a Flood, who thinks there is none should dare
(Once) to compare with her, supposd by her descent,
The darling daughter borne of lofty Penigent,
Who from her fathers foot, by Skipton down does scud,
And leading thence to Leeds, that delicatest Flood,
Takes Caldor coming in by Wakefield, by whose force,
As from a lusty Flood, much strengthened in her course;
But Caldor as she comes, and greater still does wax,
And traveling along by Heading Halifax,
Beheading, which we call Halifax Law.
Which Horton once was called, but of a Virgins hair,
(A Martyr that was made, for Chastity, that there
was by her Lover slain) being fastened to a tree:
The people that would needs it should a Relic be,
It Halifax since named, which in the Northern tongue,
Is Holy hair: but thence as Caldor comes along,
It chanced she in her Course on Kirkbey cast her eye,
Robin Hoods burying place.
Where merry Robbin Hood, that honest Thief does lie,
Beholding fitly too before how Wakefield stood,
She does not only think of lusty Robin Hood,
But of his merry man, the Pindar of the Town
Of Wakefield, George a Green, whose sames so far are blown,
For their so valiant fight, that every free man's Song,
Can tell you of the same, quoth she be talked on long,
For ye were merry Lads, and those were merry days;
When Air to Caldor calls, and bids her come her ways,
Who likewise to her help, brings Hebden, a small Rill:
Thus Air holds on her course toward Humber, till she fill
Her fall with all the wealth that Don can her afford.
Quoth the VVest-riding thus, with Rivers am I stored.
Next guide I on my VVharfe, the great'st in her degree,
And that I well may call the worthicst of the three,
Who her full fountain takes from my wast Western wild,
(Whence all but Mountaineers, by Nature are exild)
On Langstrethdale, and lights at th'entrance of her race,
When keeping on her course, along through Barden Chase,
She watreth Wharfdales breast, which proudly bears her name;
For by that time she is grown a flood of wondrous fame,
When VVashbrooke with her wealth her Mistress does supply;
Thus VVharfe in her brave course embracing VVetherby,
Small Cock, a sullen Brook comes to her succor then, See to the 22. Song.

Whose Banks received the blood of many thousand men,
On sad Palm Sunday slain, that Towton-Field we call,
Whose Channel quite was chok'd with those that there did fall,
That VVharfe discolored was with gore, that then was shed,
The bloodiest field betwixt the White Rose, and the Red,
Of welneere fifteen fought in England first and last:
But whilst the goodly (...) does thus toward Humber haste,
From Wharnside Hill not far, outflowes the nimble Nyde,
Through Nydersdale along, as neatly she does glide
Toward Knarsburg on her way, a pretty little Rill,
Called Kebeck, stowes her stream, her Mistress Banks to fill,
To intertaine the VVhafe where that brave * Forest stands, (...) Forest.

Entitled by the Town, who with vpreared hands
Makes signs to her of joy, and does with Garlands crown
The River passing by; but Wharfe that hastes down
To meet her Mistress Ouse, her speedy course does hie;
Dent, Rother, Riuell, Great, so on my Set have I,
Which from their fountains there all out of me do flow,
Yet from my bounty I on Lancashire bestow,
Because my rising soil does shute them to the West:
But for my Mountains I, will with the Isle contest,
All other of the North in largeness shall exceed,
That ages long before it finally decreed,
That Ingleborow Hill, Pendle, and Penigent,
Pendle Hill is near upon the verge of this Tract, but stands in. Lancashire.
Should named be the highest betwixt our Tweed and Trent.
My Hills, brave Whelpston then, thou Wharnside, and thou Came,
Since I West Riding still your only mother am;
All that Report can give, and justly is my due,
I as your natural Dam, share equally with you;
And let me see a Hill that to the North does stand,
The proudest of them all, that dare but lift a hand
O'r Penigent to peer; not Skiddo, that proud Mount,
Although of him so much, Rude Cumberland account,
Nor Cheuiot, of whose height Northumberland does boast
* Albania to survey; nor those from Coast to Coast
Scotland.
That welneere run in length, that rue of Mountains tall,
By th'name of the English Alps, that our most learned call;
As soon shall those, or these remove out of their place,
As by their lofty looks, my Penigent out face:
Ye thus behold my Hills: my Forests, Dales, and Chases
Upon my spacious breast note too how Nature places,
Far up into my West, first Langstrethdale does lie,
And on the Bank of Wharfe, my pleasant Bardon by,
With Wharfdale hard by her, as taking hand in hand:
Then lower toward the Sea brave Knarsborough does stand,
As higher to my North, my Niddersdale by Nyde,
And Bishopsdale above upon my Setting side,
Marshland, and Hatfield Chase, my Eastern part do bound,
And Barnsdale there does butt on Dons wel-watred ground:
And to my great disgrace, if any shall object
That I no wonder have that is worthy of respect
In all my spacious Tract, let them (so wise) survey
My Ribbles rising Banks, their worst, and let them say;
At Giggleswick where I a Fountain can you show,
That eight times in a day is said to ebb and flow,
Who sometime was a Nymph, and in the Mountains hye
The Metamorphosis of that Fountain. Nymphs of the Mountains.
Of Crauen, whose blew heads for Caps put on the Sky,
Amongst * the Oread's there, and Syluans made abode,
(It was ever humane foot upon those Hills had trod)
Of all the Mountain kind and since she was most fair,
It was a Satyrs chance to see her silver hair
Flow loosely at her back, as up a Cliffe she clame,
Her Beauties noting well, her Features, and her Frame,
And after her he goes; which when she did epsy,
Before him like the wind, the nimble Nymph does fly,
They hurry down the Rocks, o'r Hill and Dale they drive;
To take her he does strain, t'outstrip him she does strive,
Like one his kind that knew, and greatly feared his Rape,
The supposed Genius of the place.
And to the * Topic gods by praying to escape,
They turned her to a Spring, which as she then did pant,
When wearied with her course, her breath grew wondrous scant:
Even as the fearful Nymph, then thick and short did blow,
Now made by them a Spring, so does she ebb and flow.
And near the Stream of Nyde, another Spring have I,
As well as that, which may a wonders place supply,
Which of the form it bears, men Dropping well do call,
Because out of a Rock, it still in drops does fall,
Near to the foot whereof it makes a little Pon,
Which in as little space conuerteth Wood to Stone,
Cheuin, and Kilnsey Crags, were they not here in me,
In any other place, right well might Wonders be,
For their Gygantick height, that Mountains do transcend?
But such are frequent here, and thus she makes an end.
When Your thus having heard the Genius of this Tract, Your, the chiefest River
of Yorkshire, who alter her long course, by the confluence of other floods,
gets the name of Ouse.

Her well-deserued praise so happily to act,
This River in her self that was extremely loath,
The other to defer, since that she was to both
Indifferent, straightly wills West Riding there to cease;
And having made a sign to all the watery prease
For silence; which at once, when her command had won,
The proud North Riding thus for her great self begun.
My sovereign Flood, quoth she, in nature thou art bound The North-Ridings
Oration.

T'acknowledge me of three to be the worthiest ground:
For note of all those Floods, the wild West Riding sends,
There Is scarcely any one thy greatness that attends,
Till thou have passed York, and drawest near thy fall;
And when thou have no need of their supplies at all,
Then come they flattring in, and will thy followers be;
So as you oftentimes these wretched worldlings see,
That whilst a man is poor, although some hopes depend The Simily.

Upon his future age, yet there is not one will lend
A farthing to relieve his sad distressed state,
Not knowing what may yet befall him; but when Fate
Does pour upon his head his long expected good,
Then shall you see those Slaves, aloof before that stood,
And would have let him starve, like Spaniels to him crouch,
And with their glauering lips, his very feet to touch:
So do they by thee Your; whereas the Floods in me,
That spring and have their Course, (even) give thy life to thee:
For till that thou and Swale, into one Bank do take,
Meeting at Borough-Bridge, thy greatness there to make:
Till then the name of Ouse thou art not known to owe,
A term in former times the Ancients did bestow
On many a full-bankt Flood; but for my greater grace,
These Floods of which I speak, I now intend to trace
From their first springing Founts, beginning with the Your,
From Moruils mighty foot which rising, with the power
That Bant from Sea-mere brings, her somewhat more does fill,
Near Bishops-dale at hand, when Cover a clear Rill,
Next comes into Your, whereas that lusty Chase
For her loved Couers sake, does lovingly embrace
Your as she yields along, amongst the Parks and Groves,
In Middlehams amorous eye, as wandringly she roues,
At Rippon meets with Skell, which makes to her amain,
Whom when she has received into her Nymphish train,
(Near to that town so famed, for Colts there to be bought,
Rippon Fair.
For goodness far and near, by Horsemen that are sought)
Fore-right upon her way she with a merryer gale,
To Borough Bridge makes on, to meet her sister Swale,
(A wondrous holy Flood (which name she ever has)
The reason why Svvale is called Holy.
For when the Saxons first received the Christian Faith,
Paulinus of old York, the zealous Bishop then,
In Swales abundant stream Christened ten thousand men,
With women and their babes, a number more beside,
Upon one happy day, whereof she boasts with pride)
Which springs not far from whence Your has her silver head;
And in her winding Banks along my bosom led,
As she goes swooping by, to Swaledale whence she springs,
That lovely name she leaves, which forth a Forest brings,
The Valleys Style that bears, a brauer Syluan Maid,
Scarce any Shire can show; when to my Rivers aid,
Come Barney, Arske, and Marske, their sovereign Swale to guide,
From Applegarths wide waste, and from New Forest side.
Whose Fountains by the Fawnes, and Satyrs, many a year,
With youthful Greens were crowned, yet could not stay the there,
But they will serve the Swale, which in her wandering course,
A Nymph named Holgat has, and Risdale, all whose force,
Small though (God wot) it be, yet from their Southern shore,
With that salute the Swale, as others did before,
At Richmond and ariue, which much does grace the Flood,
Richmondshire within Yorkshire.
For that her Precinct long amongst the Shires has stood:
But Yorkshire wills the same her glory to resign.
When passing thence the Swale, this mineon Flood of mine
Next takes into her train, clear Wiske, a wanton Gyrle,
As though her watery path were pau'd with Orient Pearl,
So wondrous sweet she seems, in many a winding Gyre,
As though she Gambolds made, or as she did desire,
Her Labyrinth-like turns, and mad Meandred trace,
With marvel should amaze, and coming does embrace
* North-Alerton, by whom her honor is increast,
A County within Yorkshire.
Whose Liberties include a County at the least,
To grace the wandering Wiske, then well upon her way,
Which by her countenance thinks to carry all the sway;
When having her received, Swale bonny Codbeck brings,
And Willowbeck with her, two pretty Riuellings,
And Bedall bids along, then almost at the Ouze,
Who with these Rills enriched begins her self to rouse.
When that great Forrest-Nymph fair Gautresse on her way,
She sees to stand prepared, with Garlands fresh and gay
To deck up Ouze, before her self to York she show,
So out of my full womb the Fosse does likewise flow,
That meeting thee at York, under the Cities side,
Her glories with thy self does equally divide,
The East part watring still, as thou do wash the West,
By whose Embraces York abundantly is blessed.
So many Rivers I continually maintain,
As all those lesser Floods that into Darwin strain,
Their Fountains find in me, the Ryedale naming Rye,
Fosse, Rycall, Hodbeck, Dow, with Semen, and them by
Clear Costwy, which her self from Blackmore in does bring,
And playing as she slides through shady Pickering,
To Darwent homage does; and Darwent that diuides
The East Riding and me, upon her either sides,
Although that to us both, she most indifferent be,
And seems to affect her equally with me,
From my Division yet her Fountain does derive,
And from my Blackmore here her Course does first contriue.
Let my Demensions then be seriously pursude,
And let great Britain see in my brave Latitude,
How in the highest degree, by nature I am graced;
For toward the Crauen Hills, upon my West are placed
New-Forrest, Applegarth, and Swaledale, * Dryades all, Nymphs of the Woods.

And lower toward the Ouze, if with my Floods ye fall,
The goodly Gautresse keeps chief of my Syluan kind,
There stony Stanmore view, bleake with the Sleet and Wind,
Upon this Eastern side, so Ryedale dark and deep,
Amongst whose Groves of yore, some say that Elues did keep;
Then Pickering, whom the Fawnes beyond them all adore,
By whom not far away lies large-spred Blackimore,
The Cleeueland North from these, a State that does maintain,
Leaning her lusty side to the great Germane Maine,
Which if she were not here confined thus in me,
A Shire even of her self might well be said to be.
Nor less has Pickering Leigh, her liberty then this,
North-Alerton a Shire so likewise reckoned is;
And Richmond of the rest, the greatest in estate,
A County justly called, that them accommodate;
So I North Riding am, for spaciousness renowned,
Our mother Yorkshires eldst, who worthily is crowned
The Queen of all the Shires, on this side Trent, for we
The Ridings several parts of her vaste greatness be,
In us, so we again have several seats, whose bounds
Do measure from their sides so many miles of grounds,
That they are called Shires; like to some mighty King,
May Yorkshire be compared, (the like of any thing)
A Simily of Yorkshire.
Who has Kings that attend, and to his State retain,
And yet so great, that they have under them again
Great Princes, that to them be subject, so have we
Shires subject unto us, yet we her subjects be;
Although these be enough sufficiently to show,
That I the other two for bravery quite out-goe:
Yet look ye up along into my Setting side,
Where Teis first from my bounds, rich * Dunelme does divide,
The Bishopric of (...).
And you shall see those Rills, that with their watery prease,
Their most beloved Teis so plenteously increase,
The clear yet lesser Lune, the Bauder, and the Great,
All out of me do flow; then turn ye from the Set,
And look but toward the Rise, upon the German Maine,
Those Rarities, and see, that I in me contain;
My Scarborough, which looks as though in heaven it stood,
To those that lie below, from the Bay of Robin Hood,
A Catalogue of the wonders of the North Riding
Even to the fall of Teis; let me but see the man,
That in one Tract can show the wonders that I can,
Like Whitbies self I think, there is none can show but I,
O'r whose attractiue earth there may no wild geese fly,
But presently they fall from off their wings to ground:
If this no wonder be, where is there a wonder found,
And stones like Serpents there, yet may ye more behold,
That in their natural Gyres are up together rold.
The Rocks by (...) too, my glories forth to set,
Out of their cranied Cleeues, can give you perfect (...),
And upon Huntclipnab, you every where may find,
(As though nice Nature loved to vary in this kind)
Stones of a Spherick form of sundry (...) framed,
That well they Globes of stone, or bullets might be named
For any Ordnance fit: which broke with Hammers blows,
Do headless Snakes of stone, within their Rounds enclose.
Mark Gisboroughs gay Site, where Nature seems so nice,
As in the same she makes a second Paradise,
Whose Soil imbroydered is, with so rare sundry Flowers,
Her large Oaks so long green, as Summer there her Bowers,
Had set up all the year, her air for health refined,
Her earth with Allome veins most richly intermin'd.
In other places these might (...) be thought,
So common but in me, that I esteem as naught.
Then could I reckon up my Ricall, making on
By Rydale, toward her dear-lou'd Darwent, who is not gone
Far from her pearly Springs, but underground she goes;
As up toward Crauen Hills, I many have of those,
Amongst the cranied Cleeues, that through the (...) creep,
And dimbles hid from day, into the earth so deep,
That oftentimes their sight, the senses does appall,
Which for their horrid course, the people Helbecks call,
Which may for ought I see, be with my Wonders set,
And with much marvel seen: that I am not in debt
To none that neigboureth me; nor ought can they me lend.
When Darwent bad her stay, and there her speech to end,
For that East Riding called, her proper cause to plead:
For Darwent a true Nymph, a most impartial Maid,
And like to both allied, does will the last should have
That privilege, which time to both the former gave,
And wills the East Riding then, in her own cause to speak,
Who mildly thus begins; Although I be but weak, The East-Ridings (...).

To those two former parts, yet what I seem to want
In largeness, for that I am in my Compasle scant,
Yet for my Site I know, that I them both excel;
For mark me how I lie, ye a note me very well,
How in the East I reign, (of which my name I take)
And my broad side do bear up to the German Lake,
Which bravely I survey; then turn ye and behold
Upon my pleasant breast, that large and spacious Old
Of Torke that takes the name, that with delighted eyes, Yorks (...)

When he beholds the Sun out of the Seas to rise,
With pleasure feeds his Flocks, for which he scarce gives place
To Cotswold, and for what becomes a Pastoral grace,
Does go beyond him quite; then note upon my South,
How all along the Shore, to mighty Humbers mouth,
Rich Holdernesse I have, excelling for her grain,
By whose much plenty I, not only do maintain
My self in good estate, but Shires far off that lie,
Up Humber that to Hull, come every day to buy,
To me beholding are; besides, the neighboring Towns,
Upon the Verge whereof, to part her, and the Downs,
Hull down to Humber hasts, and takes into her Bank
Some less but lively Rills, with waters waxing rank,
She Beuerley salutes, whose beauties so delight
The fayre-enamoured Flood, as ravished with the sight,
That she could ever stay, that gorgeous Phane to view,
But that the Brooks, and Bournes, so hotly her pursue, The Church of (...).

To Kingston and convey, whom Hull does newly name,
Of Humber-bordring Hull, who has not heard the fame:
And for great Humbers self, I challenge him for mine:
For whereas (...) first, and Sheifleet do combine,
By meeting in their course, so courteously to twin,
Against whom on the other side, the goodly Trent comes in,
From that especial place, great Humber has his reign,
The marks how far he is called Number.
Beyond which he is mine own: so I my Course maintain,
From Kilnseys pyle-like point, along the Eastern shore,
And laugh at Neptunes rage, when lowdl'est he does rore,
Till Flamborough iutt forth into the German Sea.
The length of the East Riding upon the Sea.
And as the East Riding more yet ready was to say,
Ouse in her own behalf does interrupt her speech,
And of The Imperious land does liberty beseech,
Since she had passed (...), and in her wandering race,
By that fair Cities site, received had such grace,
She might for it declame, but more to honor York,
She who supposd the same to be her only work,
Still to renown those Dukes, who strongly did pretend
A title to the Crown, as those who did descend
From them that had the right, does this Oration make,
And to uphold their claim, thus to the Floods she spoke.
They very idly err, who think that blood then spilt,
Quzes Oration.
In that long-lasting war, proceeded from the guilt,
Of the proud Yorkist, (...); for let them understand,
That Richard Duke of York, whose brave and martial hand
The Title undertook, by tyranny and might,
Sought not t'attaine the Crown, but from succesfull right,
The title of the house of York to the Crown.
Which still vpheld his claim, by which his valiant son,
Great Edward Earl of March, the Garland after won:
For Richard Duke of York, at Wakefield Battle slain,
Who first that title broached, in the (...) Henry's reign,
From Edmond a fifth son of Edward did descend,
That justly he thereby no title could pretend,
Before them com'n from Gaunt, well known of all to be,
The fourth to Edward borne, and therefore a degree
Before him to the Crown; but that which did prefer
His title, was the match with Dame Anne Mortimer,
Of Roger Earl of March the daughter, that his claim,
From Clarence the third son of great King Edward came,
Which Anne derived alone, the right before all other,
Of the delapsed Crown, from Philip her fair mother,
Daughter and only heir of Clarence, and the Bride
To Edmond Earl of March; this Anne her daughter tide
In wedlock to the Earl of Cambridge, whence the right
Of Richard as I said, which fell at Wakefield fight,
Descended to his son, brave Edward after King,
( Henry the sixth deposed) thus did the Yorkists bring
Their title from a strain, before the line of Gaunt,
Whose issue they by Arms did worthily supplant.
By this the Ouze perceau'd great Humber to look grim;
(For evermore she has a special eye to him)
As though he much disdained each one should thus be heard,
And he their only King, until the last deferred,
At which he seemed to frown; wherefore the Ouze off breaks,
And to his confluent Floods, thus mighty Humber speaks.
Let Trent her tribute pay, which from their several founts,
For thirty Floods of name, to me her King that counts, The Oration of Humber.

Be much of me beloved, brave River; and from me,
Receive those glorious Rites that (...) can give to thee.
And thou Marsh-drowning Don, and all those that repair
With thee, that bringst to me thy easy (...) Air,
Embodying in one Bank: and Wharfe, which by thy fall
Do much augment my Ouze, let me embrace you all,
My brave West Riding Brooks, your King you need not (...),
Proud Nyades neither ye, North-Riders that are borne;
My yellow-sanded Your, and thou my sister Swale,
That dancing come to (...), through many a dainty Dale,
Do greatly me enrich, clear Darwent driving down
From Cleeueland; and thou Hull, that highly do renown
The East Riding by thy rise, do homage to your King,
And let the Sea Nymphs thus of (...) Humber sing;
That full an hundred Floods my (...) Court maintain,
Which either of themselves, or in their greaters train,
Their Tribute pay to me; and for my princely name,
From Humber King of (...), as anciently it came;
So still I stick to him: for from that Eastern King
Once in me drowned, as I my Pedigree do bring:
So his great name receives no prejudice thereby;
For as he was a King, so know ye all that I
Am King of all the Floods, that North of Trent do flow;
Then let the idle world no more such cost bestow,
Nor of the muddy Nyle, so great a Wonder make,
Though with her bellowing fall, she violently take
The neighboring people deaf; nor Ganges so much praise,
That where he narrowest is, eight miles in broadnesse lays
His bosom, nor so much hereafter shall be spoke
Of that (but lately found) Guyanian Orenoque,
Whose * Cateract a noise so horrible (...) keep, A fall of water

That it even Neptune frights; what Flood comes to the Deep,
Then Humber that is heard more horribly to rore? The roaring of the waters, at
the coming in of the Tide.

For when my * Higre comes, I make my either shore
Even tremble with the sound, that I afar do send.
No sooner of this speech had Humber made an end,
But the applauding. Floods sent forth so shrill a shout,
That they were easily heard all Holdernesse about,
Above the Beachy Brack, amongst the Marshes rude,
When the East Riding her Oration to conclude,
Goes on; My Sisters boast that they have little Shires
Their subjects, I can show the like of mine for theirs;
My Howdon has as large a Circuit, and as free,
A Liberty in the (...).
On Ouse, and Humbers banks, and as much graceth me,
My Latitude compared with those that me oppugn:
Not Richmond nor her like, that does to them belong,
Does grace them more then this does me, upon my coast,
And for their wondrous things, whereof so much they boast,
Upon my Eastern side, which iutts upon the Sea,
Amongst the white-scalp'd Cleeues, this wonder see they may,
The Mullet, and the Awke, (my Fowlers there do find)
Some wonders of the East. Riding.
Of all great Britain brood, Birds of the strangest kind,
That building in the Rocks, being taken with the hand,
And cast beyond the Cliffe, that poynteth to the land,
Fall instantly to ground, as though it were a stone,
But put out to the Sea, they instantly are gone,
And fly a league or two before they do return,
As only by that air, they on their wings were borne.
Then my Prophetic Spring at Veipsey, I may show,
That some years is dried up, some years again does flow;
But when it breaks out with an immoderate birth,
It tells the following year of a penurious dearth.
Here ended she her speech, the Ridings all made friends,
And from my tired hand, my labored Canto ends.




The nine and twentieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse the Bishopric assayes,
And to her fall sings down the Teis,
Then takes she to the dainty Were,
And with all braueries fitted her.
Tyne tells the Victories by us got,
In soughten Fields against the Scot.
Then through Northumberland she goes,
The Floods and Mountains dotb dispose;
And with their glories does proceed,
Not staying till she come to Tweed.
THe Muse this largest Shire of England having sung,
Yet seeing more then this did to her task belong,
Looks still into the North, the Bishopric and viewes, The Bishopric of
Durham.

Which with an eager eye, whilst wistly she pursues,
Teis as a bordering Flood, (who thought her self divine)
Confining in her Course that County Palatine,
And York the greatest Shire does instantly begin,
To rouse her self; quoth she, Does every Rillet win
Applause for their small worth's, and I that am a Queen,
With those poor Brooks compared, shall I alone be seen
Thus silently to pass, and not be heard to sing,
When as two Countries are contending for my Spring:
For Cumberland, to which the Cumri gave the name, (...) springs out of
Stanmore, which lies almost equally between Cumberland, and (...).

Accounts it to be hers, Northumberland the same,
Will needsly hers should be, for that my Spring does rise,
So equallytwixt both, that he were very wise,
Could tell which of these two, me for her own may claim.
But as in all these Tracts, there is scarce a Flood of fame,
But she some Valley has, which her brave name does bear:
My Teisdale, named of me, so likewise have I hear,
At my first setting forth, through which I nimbly slide;
Then Yorkshire which does lie upon my Setting side,
Me Lune and Bauder lends, as in the Song before
The Industrious Muse has showed; my * Dunelmenian shore,
The Bishopric of Durham.
Sends (...) to help my course, with some few other Becks,
Which (...) (as it should seem) so utterly neglects,
That they are namelesse yet; then do I bid adieu,
To (...) battelled Towers, and seriously pursue
My course to Neptunes Court, but as forthright I run,
The Skern, a dainty Nymph, saluting Darlington,
Comes in to give me aid, and being proud and rank,
She chanced to look aside, and spieth near her Bank,
Three black and horrid pits, which for their boiling heat,
(That from their loathsome brimms, do breath a sulpherous sweat)
Hell-kettles rightly called, that with the very sight,
This Water-Nymph, my Skern is put in such (...),
That with unusual speed, she on her Course does have,
And rashly runs her self into my widened waste.
In pomp I thus approach great Amphetrites state.
But whilst Teis undertook her Story to relate,
Were waxes almost wood, that she so long should stand
Upon those lofty terms, as though both sea and land
Were tide to hear her talk: quoth Were, what would thou say,
Vainglorious bragging Brook, had thou so clear a way
T'aduance thee as I have, had thou such means and might,
How would thou then exult? O then to what a height
Would thou put up thy price? had thou but such a Trine
Of Rillets as I have, which naturally combine,
Their Springs thee to beget, as these of mine do me,
In their consenting sounds, that do so well agree?
As Kellop coming in from Kellop-Law her Sire,
A Mountain much in fame, small Wellop does require,
With her to walk along, which Burdop with her brings.
Thus from the full conflux of these three several Springs
My greatness is begot, as Nature meant to show
My future strength and state; then forward do I flow
Through my delicious Dale, with every pleasure rife,
And Wyresdale still may stand, with Teisdale for her life:
Comparing of their Scites, then casting on my Course,
So satiate with the excess of my first natural source,
As petty Bournes and Becks, I scorn but once to call,
Wascrop a wearish Gyrle, of name the first of all,
That I vouchsafe for mine, until that I ariue
At Aukland, where with force me forward still to drive,
Clear Gauntlesse gives her self, when I begin to gad,
And whirling in and out, as I were waxed mad,
I change my posture often, to many a Snakie Gyre,
To my first fountain now, as seeming to retire:
Then suddenly again I turn my watery trayle,
Now I endent the earth, and then I it engrayle
With many a turn and trace, thus wandering up and down,
Brave Durham I behold, that stately seated Town,
That Dunholme hight of yore (even) from a Desert won,
Whose first foundation Zeal, and Piety begun,
By them who thither first Saint Cutberts body brought,
To save it from the Danes, by fire and sword that sought
Subversion of those things, that good and holy were,
With which beloved place, I seem so pleased here,
As that I clip it close, and sweetly hug it in
My clear and amorous arms, as jealous time should win
Me further off from it, as our divorce to be.
Hence like a lusty Flood most absolutely free,
None mixing then with me, as I do mix with none,
But scorning a Colleague, nor near me any one,
To Neptunes Court I come; for note along the Strond,
From Hartlepoole (even) to the point of Sunder land,
As far as * Wardenlaws can possibly survey; A Mountain on that part of the
Shire.

There Is not a Flood of note has entrance to the sea.
Here ended she her Speech, when as the goodly Tyne,
( Northumberland that parts from this Shire Palatine)
Which patiently had heard, look as before the Were
Had taken up the Teis, so Tyne now takes up her,
For her so tedious talk, Good Lord (quoth she) had I
No other thing wherein my labor to imply,
But to set out my self, how much (well) could I say,
In mine own proper praise, in this kind every way
As skillful as the best; I could if I did please,
Of my two Fountains tell, which of their sundry ways,
The South and North are named, entitled both of Tyne,
As how the prosperous Springs of these two Floods of mine
Are distant thirty miles, how that the South-Tyne named,
From Stanmore takes her Spring, for Mines of Brass that is famed,
How that named of the North, is out of Wheel-fell sprung,
Amongst these English Alps, which as they run along,
England, and Scotland here impartially divide.
How South-Tyne setting out from Cumberland is plide,
With Hartley which her hasts, and Tippall that does strive,
By her more sturdy Stream, the Tyne along to drive;
How the Allans, the East, and West, their bounties to her bring,
Two fair and full-brim'd Floods, how also from her Spring,
My other North-nam'd Tyne, through Tyndale makes in,
Which Shele her Hand-mayd has, and as she hasts to twin
With the other from the South, her sister, how clear Rhead,
With Perop comes prepared, and Cherlop, me to lead,
Through Ridsdale on my way, as far as Exham, then
Dowell me Homage does, with blood of Englishmen,
Whose Stream was deeply died in that most cruel war
Of Lancaster and York. Now having gone so far,
Their strengths me their dear Tyne, do wondrously enrich,
As how clear Darwent draws down to Newcastle, which
The honor has alone to entertain me (...),
As of those mighty ships, that in my mouth I bear,
Fraught with my country Coal, of this * Newcastle named,
Newcastle Coal.
For which both far and near, that place no less is famed,
Then India for her Mines; should I at large declare
My glories, in which Time commands me to be spare,
And I but slightly touch, which stood I to report,
As freely as I might, ye both would fall too short
Of me; but know that Tyne has greater things in hand:
For, to trick up our selves, whilst trifling thus we stand,
Bewitched with our own praise, at all we never note,
How the Albanian Floods now lately set afloat,
With the honor to them done, take heart, and lowdly cry
Defiance to us all, on this side Tweed that lie;
And hark the high-brow'd Hills alowd begin to (...),
With sound of things that Forth prepared is to sing:
When once the Muse ariues on the Albanian shore;
And therefore to make up our forces here before
The onset they begin, the Battles we have got,
Both on our earth and theirs, against the valiant Scot,
I undertake to tell; then Muses I entreat
Your aid, whilst I these Fights in order shall repeat.
When mighty Malcolme here had with a violent hand,
(As he had often before) destroyed Northumberland,
In Rufus troubled Reign, the warlike Mowbray then,
This Earldom that (...), with half the power of men,
For conquest which that King from Scotland hither drew,
At Anwick in the field their Armies overthrew;
Where Malcolme and his son, brave Edward both were found,
The (...) of Anvvicke.
Slain on that bloody field: So on the English ground,
When David King of Scots, and Henry his stern son,
Entitled by those times, the Earl of Huntingdon,
Had forradg'd all the North, beyond the River Teis,
In Stephens troubled reign, in as tumultuous days
As England ever knew, the Archbishop of York,
Stout Thurstan, and with him joined in that warlike work,
See to the 18. Song.
Ralfe, (both for wit and Arms) of Durham Bishop then
Renownd, that called were the valiant Clergy men,
With The Earl of Aubemarle, Especk, and Peuerell, Knights,
And of the Lacies two, often tried in bloody fights,
Twixt Aluerton and York, the doubtful battle got, The Battle of (...).

On David and his son, whilst of th'inuading Scot,
Ten thousand strewn the earth, and whilst they lay to bleed,
Ours followed them that fled, beyond our sister Tweed.
And when * Fitz-Empresse next in Normandy, and here, Henry the second.

And his rebellious sons in high combustions were,
William the Scottish King, taking advantage then, The second Battle at
Anvvicke.

And entering with an Host of eighty thousand men,
As far as Kendall came, where Captains then of ours,
Which aid in Yorkshire raisd, with the Northumbrian powers,
His forces overthrew, and him a prisoner led.
So Long shanks, Scolands scourge, him to that Country sped,
Provoked by the Scots, that England did invade,
And on the Borders here such spoil and hauock made,
That all the land lay waste betwixt the Tweed and me.
This most coragious King, from them his own to free,
Before proud Berwick set his puisant army down,
And took it by strong siege, since when that warlike town,
As Cautionary long the English after held.
But tell me all you Floods, when was there such a Field
By any Nation yet, as by the English won, The Battle at Halidon.

Upon the Scottish power, as that of Halidon,
Seven Earls, nine hundred Horse, and of Foot-souldiers more,
Near twenty thousand slain, so that the Scottish gore
Ran down the Hill in streams (even) in Albania's sight.
By our third Edwards prowess, that most renowned Knight,
As famous was that Fight of his against the Scot,
As that against the French, which he at Cressy got.
And when that conquering King did afterward advance
His Title, and had past his warlike powers to France,
And David King of Scots here entered to invade,
To which the King of France did that false Lord persuade,
Against his given Faith, from France to draw his Bands,
To keep his own at home, or to fill both his hands
With war in both the Realms: was ever such a loss,
To Scotland yet befell, as that at Neuills Cross, The Battle at Neuils
Cross.

Where fifteen thousand Scots their souls at once forsook,
Where stout John Copland then, King David prisoner took,
In The head of all his troops, that bravely there was seen.
When English Philip, that brave Amazonian Queen,
Encouraging her men, from troop to troop did ride,
And where our Clergy had their ancient Valourtride:
Thus often coming in, they have gone out too short.
And next to this the fight of Nesbit I report,
When Hebborn that stout Scot, and his had all their hire, The Battle of
(...).

Which in to our Marches came, and with inuasiue fire,
Our Villages laid waste, for which defeat of ours,
When doughty Douglasse came with the Albanian powers.
At Holmdon do but see, the blow our (...) gave
To that bold daring Scot, before him how he drove
His Army, and with shot of our brave English Bows,
Did wound them on the backs, whose breasts were hurt with blows,
Ten thousand put to sword, with many a Lord and Knight,
Some prisoners, wounded some, some others (...) outright,
And entering Scotl'and then, all (...) o'r-ran.
Or who a brauer field then The Earl of Surrey wan,
Where their King James the fourth himself so bravely bore,
The Battle of Flodden.
That since that age wherein he lived, nor those before,
Yet never such a King in such a Battle saw,
Amongst his fighting friends, where whilst he breath could draw,
He bravely fought on foot, where Flodden Hill was (...)
With bodies of his men, welneere to mammocks hewed,
That on the Mountains side, they covered near a mile,
Where those two valiant Earls of Lenox and Arguyle,
Were with their Sovereign slain, Abbots, and Bishops there,
Which had put Armor on, in hope away to bear
The Victory with them, before the English fell.
But now of other Fields, it (...) the Muse to tell,
As when the Noble Duke of Norfolk made a Road
A Road into Scotland by the Duke of Norfolk.
To Scotland, and therein his hostile (...) bestowed
On welneere thirty Towns, and staying there so long,
Till victual waxed weak, the Winter waxing strong,
Returning over Tweed, his Booties home to (...),
Which to the very heart did vex the Scottish King,
The fortune of the Duke extremely that did grutch,
Remaining there so long, and doing there so much,
Thinking to spoil and waste, in England as before,
The English men had done on the Albanian shore,
And gathering up his force, before the English fled
To Scotlands utmost bounds, thence into England sped,
When that brave Bastard son of (...), and his friend,
John Musgraue, which had charge the Marches to attend,
With Wharton, a proud Knight, with scarce four hundred Horse,
Encountering on the Plain with all the Scottish force,
Thence from the Field with them, so many prisoners brought,
Which in that furious fight were by the English caught,
That there was scarce a Page or Lackey but had store,
Earls, Barrons, Knights, Esquires, two hundred there and more,
Of ordinary men, seven hundred made to yield,
There scarcely has been heard, of such a foughten field,
That James the fifth to think, that but (...) very few,
His universal power so strangely should subdue,
So took the same to heart, that it abridg'd his life.
Such foyles by the English given, amongst the Scots were rife.
These on the English earth, the English men did gain;
But when their breach of faith did many times constrain
Our Nation to invade, and carry conquests in
To Scotland; then behold, what our success has bin,
Even in the latter end of our eight Henry's days,
Who Seymor sent by Land, and Dudley sent by Seas,
With his full forces then, O Forth, then did thou bear,
That Nany on thy Stream, whose Bulk was fraught with fear,
When Edenbrough and Leeth, into the air were blown The Siege of Leeth.

With Powders sulphurous smoke, and twenty towns were thrown
Upon the trampled earth, and into ashes trod;
As int' Albania when we made a second Road,
In our sixth Edwards days, when those two Martial men,
Which conquered there before, were thither sent again:
But for their high deserts, with greater Titles graced,
The first created Duke of Somerset, the last
The Earl of Warwick made, at Muscleborough Field,
Where many a doughty Scot that did disdain to yield,
Was on the earth laid dead, where as for five miles space
In length, and four in breadth, the English in the chase,
With carkeises of Scots, strewn all their natural ground,
The number of the slain were fourteen thousand found,
And fifteen hundred more ta'n Prisoners by our men.
So The Earl of Sussex next to Scotland sent again,
To punish them by war, which on the Borders here, The Road into Scotland by
the Earl of Sussex.

Not only robbed and spoiled, but that assistants were
To those two puisant Earls, Northumberland, who rose
With Westmerland his Peer, suggested by the foes
To great Eliza's reign, and peaceful government;
Wherefore that puisant Queen him to Albania sent,
Who fifty Rock-reard Pyles and Castles having cast
Far lower then their Scites, and with strong fires (...)
Three hundred towns, their wealth, with him worth carrying
To England over Tweed, when now the floods besought (brought
The Tyne to hold her tongue, when presently began
A rumor which each where through all the Country ran,
Of this proud Rivers speech, the Hills and Floods among,
And Lowes, a Forrest-Nymph, the same so lowdly sung,
That it through Tindale straight, and quite through (...) ran,
And sounded shriller there, then when it first began, A repetition of the Hills
parting Northumberland and Scotland, as they lie from South to North.

That those high Alpine Hills, as in a row they stand,
Received the sounds, which thus went on from hand to hand.
The high-rcar'd Red-Squire first, to Aumond Hill it told,
When Aumond great therewith, nor for his life could hold,
To Kembelspeth again, the business but relate,
To Black-Brea he again, a Mountain holding state
With any of them all, to Cocklaw he it gave;
And Cocklaw it again, to Cheuiot, who did rave
With the report thereof, he from his mighty stand,
Resounded it again through all Northumberland,
That White-Squire lastly caught, and it to Berwick sent,
That brave and warlike Town, from thence incontinent,
The sound from out the South, into Albania came,
And many a lusty Flood, did with her praise inflame,
Affrighting much the Forth, who from her trance awooke,
And to her native strength her presently betook,
Against the Muse should come to the Albanian Coast.
But Pictswall all this while, as though he had been lost,
Not mentioned by the Muse, began to fret and fume,
(...) wall.
That every petty Brook thus proudly should presume
To talk; and he whom first the Romans did invent,
And of their greatness yet, the longst-liu'd monument,
Should this be ouer-trod; wherefore his wrong to wreake,
In their proud presence thus, does aged Pictswall speak.
Me thinks that Offa's ditch in Cambria should not dare
To think himself my match, who with such cost and care
The Romans did erect, and for my safeguard set
Their Legions, from my spoil the proling Pict to let,
That often In roads made, our earth from them to win,
By Adrian beaten back, so he to keep them in,
To Sea from East to West, begun me first a wall
Of eighty miles in length, twixt Tyne and Edens fall:
Long making me they were, and long did me maintain.
Nor yet that Trench which tracts the Western Wiltshire Plain,
Of Woden, Wansdyke called, should parallel with me,
Comparing our descents, which shall appear to be
Mere vpstarts, basely borne; for when I was in hand,
The Saxon had not then set foot upon this land,
Till my declining age, and after many a year,
Of whose poor petty Kings, those the small labors were.
That on Newmarket-Heath, made up as though but now,
Who for the Devils work the vulgar dare auow,
See to the (...). Song.
Tradition telling none, who truly it began,
Where many a reverent Book can tell you of my Man,
And when I first decayed, Seuerus going on,
What Adrian built of turfe, he builded new of stone,
And after many a time, the Britans me repayr'd,
To keep me still in plight, nor cost they ever spared.
Towns stood upon my length, where Garrisons were laid,
Their limits to defend; and for my greater aid,
With turrets I was built-where Sentinels were placed,
To watch upon the Pict; so me my Makers graced,
With hollow Pipes of Brass, along me still that went,
By which they in one Fort still to another sent,
By speaking in the same, to tell them what to do,
And so from Sea to Sea could I be whispered through:
Upon my thickness, three marched easily breast to breast,
Twelve foot was I in height, such glory I possessed.
Old Pictswall with much pride thus finishing his plea,
Had in his utmost course attained the Eastern Sea,
Yet there was Hill nor Flood once heard to clap a hand;
For the Northumbrian Nymphs had come to understand,
That Tyne exulting late o'r Scotland in her Song,
(Which over all that Realm report had loudly rung)
The Calidonian * Forth so highly had displeased, The great River on which
Edenborough stands.

And many an other Flood, (which could not be appeased)
That they had vowed revenge, and Proclamation made,
That in a learned war the foe they would invade,
And like stout Floods stand free from this supputed shame,
Or conquered give themselves up to the English name:
Which these Northumbrian Nymphs, with doubt and terror struck,
Which knew they from the foe, for nothing were to look,
But what by skill they got, and with much care should keep,
And therefore they consult by meeting in the Deep,
To be delivered from the ancient enemies tage,
That they would all upon a solemn Pilgrimage
Unto the Holy-Isle, the virtue of which place,
They knew could very much avail them in this case:
For many a blessed Saint in former ages there,
Secluded from the world, to Abstinence and Prayer,
Had given up themselves, which in the German Maine,
And from the shore not far, did in it self contain The Holy Island

Sufficient things for food, which from those holy men,
That to devotion lived, and sanctimony then,
It Holy-Isle was called, for which they all prepare,
As I shall tell you how, and what their number are. A Catalogue of the Rivers
of Northumberla^d, as they run into the German sea, upon the East part of the
country betwixt the Falls of Tine and (...).

With those the farthest off, the first I will begin,
As Pont a pearlesse Brook, brings Blyth which puts in
With her, then Wansbeck next in wading to the Maine,
Near Morpet meets with Font, which follows in her train;
Next them the little Line alone does go along,
When Cocket comes down, and with her such a throng,
As that they seem to threat the Ocean; for with her
Comes Ridley, Ridland next, with Vsway, which prefer
Their Fountains to her Flood, who for her greater fame,
Has at her fall an Isle, called Cocket, of her name,
As that great Neptune should take notice of her state;
Then Alne by Anwicke comes, and with as proud a gate,
As Cocket came before, for whom at her fair fall,
(In bravery as to show, that she (...) past them all)
The famous Isle of Fern, and Staples aptly stand,
And at her coming forth, do kiss her Crystal hand.
Whilst these resolved upon their Pilgrimage, proceed,
Till for the love she bears to her dear Mistress Tweed,
Of Bramish leaves the name, by which she has her birth;
And though she keep her course upon the English earth,
Yet Bowbent, a bright Nymph, from Scotland coming in,
To go with her to Tweed, the wanton Flood does win.
Though at this headstrong Stream, proud Flodden from his height,
Does daily seem to fret, yet takes he much delight
Her loveliness to view, as on to Tweed she strains,
Where whilst this Mountain much for her sweet sake sustaines,
This Canto we conclude, and fresh about must cast,
Of all the English Tracts, to consummate the last.




The thirtieth Song.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of Westmerland the Muse now sings,
And fetching Eden from her Springs,
Sets her along, and Kendall then
Surueying, bears back again;
And climing Skidows lofty Hill,
By many a River, many a Rill,
To Cumberland, where in her way,
She Copland calls, and does display
Her Beauties, back to Eden goes,
Whose Floods, and Fall she aptly shows.
YEt cheerely on my Muse, no whit at all dismayed,
But look alost toward heaven, to him whose powerful aid;
Has led thee on thus long, and through so sundry soiles,
Steep Mountains, Forests rough, deep Rivers, that thy toils
Most sweet refreshings seem, and still thee comfort sent,
Against the Bestiall Rout, and Boorish rabblement
Of those rude vulgar sots, whose brains are only Slime,
Borne to the doting world, in this last iron Time,
So stony, and so dull, that Orpheus which (men say)
By the enticing Strains of his melodious Lay,
Drew Rocks and aged Trees, to whether he would please;
He might as well have moved the Universe as these;
But leave this Fry of Hell in their own filth defilde,
And seriously pursue the stern Westmerian Wild,
First ceazing in our Song, the South part of the Shire,
Where Westmerland to West, by wide Wynander Mere, See to the (...) end of the
27. Song.

The Eboracean fields her to the Rising bound,
Where Can first creeping forth, her feet has scarcely found,
But gives that Dale her name, where Kendale town does stand,
For making of our Cloth scarce matched in all the land.
Then keeping on her course, though having in her train,
But Sput, a little Brook, then VVinster does retain,
Toward the Vergiuian Sea, by her two mighty Falls,
(Which the brave Roman tongue, her Catadupae calls)
This eager River seems outragiously to rore,
And counterfetting Nyle, to deaf the neighboring shore,
To which she by the sound apparently does show,
The (...) foul or fair, as then the wind does blow:
For when they to the North, the noise do easliest hear,
They constantly affirm the weather will be clear;
And when they to the South, again they boldly say,
It will be clouds or rain the next approaching day.
To the Hibernick Gulf, when soon the River hasts,
And to those queachy Sands, from whence her self she casts,
She likewise leaves her name as every place where she,
In her clear course does come, by her should honored be.
But back into the North from hence our course does lie,
As from this fall of Can, still keeping in our eye,
The source of long lived Lun, I long-liu'd do her call;
For of the British Floods, scarce one amongst them all,
See to the 27. Song.
Such state as to her self, the Destinies assign,
By christning in her Course a County Palatine,
For Luncaster so named; the Fort upon the Lun,
And Lancashire the name from Lancaster begun:
Yet though she be a Flood, such glory that does gain,
In that the British Crown does to her state pertain,
Yet Westmerland alone, not only boasts her birth,
But for her greater good the kind Westmerian earth,
Clear Burbeck her bequeaths, and Barrow to attend
Her grace, till she her name to Lancaster do lend.
With all the speed we can, to Cumberland we hye,
(Still longing to salute the utmost Albany)
By Eden, issuing out of Husseat-Moruill Hill,
And pointing to the North, as then a little Rill,
There simply takes her leave of her sweet sister Swale,
Borne to the self same Sire, but with a stronger gale,
Toward Humber hyes her course, but Eden making on,
The first place of note which she runs through.
Through Malerstrang hard by, a Forest woe begone
In love with Edens eyes, of the clear Naiades kind,
Whom thus the Wood-Nymph greets: What passage shall thou find,
My most beloved Brook, in making to thy Bay,
That wandering art to wend through many a crooked way,
Far under hanging Hills, through many a cragged strait,
And few the watery kind, upon thee to await,
Opposed in thy course with many a rugged Cliffe,
Besides the Northern winds against thy stream so stiff,
As by maine strength they meant to stop thee in thy course,
And send thee easly back to Moruill to thy source.
O my bright lovely Brook, whose name does bear the sound
Of Gods first Garden-plot, th'imparadized ground,
Wherein he placed Man, from whence by sin he fell.
O little blessed Brook, how does my bosom swell,
With love I bear to thee, the day cannot suffice
For Malerstang to gaze upon thy beauteous eyes.
This said, the Forest rubd her rugged front the while,
Clear Eden looking back, regreets her with a smile,
And simply takes her leave, to get into the Maine;
When Below a bright Nymph, from Stanmore down does strain
To Eden, as along to Appleby she makes,
Which passing, to her train, next Troutbeck in she takes,
And Leuenant, then these, a somewhat lesser Rill,
When Glenkwin greets her well, and happily to fill,
Her more abundant Banks, from Vlls, a mighty Mere
On Cumberlands confines, comes Eymot neat and clear,
And Loder does allure, with whom she haps to meet,
Which at her coming in, does thus her Mistress greet.
Quoth she, thus for my self I say, that where I swell
Up from my Fountain first, there is a Tyding-well,
That daily ebbs and flows, (as Writers do report)
The old Euripus does, or in the self same sort,
The * Venedocian Fount, or the * Demetian Spring, Two fountains the one in the
South, the other in Northvvales. See to the 5. 10. and 27. Song.

Or that which the cold Peake does with her wonders bring,
Why should not Loder then, her Mistress Eden please,
With this, as other Floods delighted are with these.
When Eden, though she seemed to make unusual haste,
About clear Loders neck, yet lovingly does cast
Her often enfolding Arms, as Westmerland she leaves,
Where Cumberland again as kindly her receives.
Yet up her watery hands, to Winfield Forest holds
In her rough woody arms, which amorously infolds
Clear Eden coming by, with all her watery store,
In her dark shades, and seems her parting to deplore.
But Southward sallying hence, to those Sea-bordring sands,
Where Dudden driving down to the Lancastrian lands,
This Cumberland cuts out, and strongly does confine,
This meeting there with that, both merely Maratine,
Where many a dainty Rill out of her native Dale,
To the Virgiuian makes, with many a pleasant gale;
As Eske her farth'st, so first, a coybred Cumbrian Less,
Who comes to her Road, renowned Rauenglasse,
By Deuock driven along, (which from a large-brim'd Lake,
To hye her to the Sea, with greater haste does make)
Meets Nyte, a nimble Brook, their Rendeuous that keep
In Rauenglasse, when soon into the bluish Deep
Comes Irt, of all the rest, though small, the richest Girl,
Her costly bosom strewn with precious Orient Pearl,
Bred in her shining Shells, which to the deaw does yawne,
Which deaw they sucking in, conceive that lusty Spawne,
Of which when they grow great, and to their fullness swell,
They cast, which those at hand there gathering, dearly sell.
This clear pearle-paued (...), (...) to her harbor brings,
From Copland coming down, a Forest, Nymph, which sings
Her own praise, and those Floods, their Fountains that derive
From her, which to extol, the Forest thus does strive.
Ye Northern * Dryades all adorned with Mountains steep,
Upon whose hoary heads cold Winter long does keep,
Nymphs of the Forest.
Where often rising Hills, deep Dales and many make,
Where many a pleasant Spring, and many a large-spread Lake,
Their clear beginnings keep, and do their names bestow
Upon those humble Vales, through which they easily flow;
Whereas the Mountain Nymphs, and those that do frequent
The Fountains, Fields, and Groves, with wondrous meriment,
By Moone-shine many a night, do give each other chase,
At Hood-winke, Barley-breake, at Tick, or Prison-base,
With tricks, and antique toys, that one another mock,
That skip from Crag to Crag, and leap from Rock to Rock.
Then Copland, of this Tract a corner, I would know,
What place can there be found in Britan, that does show
A Surface more austere, more stern from every way,
That who does it behold, he cannot choose but say,
Th'aspect of these grim Hills, these dark and mistie Dales,
From clouds scarce ever cleared, with the strongst Northern gales,
Tell in their mighty Roots, some Mineral there does lie,
The Islands general want, whose plenty might supply:
Wherefore as some suppose of Copper Mines in me,
I Copper-land was called, but some will haue't to be
From the old Britans brought, for Cop they use to call
The tops of many Hills, which I am stored withal.
Then Eskdale mine Ally, and Niter dale so named,
Of Floods from you that flow, as Borowdale most famed,
With Wasdale walled in, with Hills on every side,
Hows'euer ye extend within your wastes so wide,
For th'surface of a soil, a Copland, Copland cry,
Till to your shouts the Hills with Echoes all reply.
Which Copland scarce had spoke, but quickly every hill,
Upon her Verge that stands, the neigbouring Valleys (...);
Heluillon from his height, it through the Mountains threw,
From whom as soon again, the sound Dunbalrase drew,
From whose stone-trophied head, it on to Wendresse went,
Which toward the Sea again, resounded it to Dent,
That Brodwater therewith within her Banks astound,
In sailing to the Sea, told it in Egremound,
Whose Buildings, walks, and streets, with Echoes loud and long,
Did mightily commend old Copland for her Song.
Whence soon the Muse proceeds, to find out fresher Springs,
Where Darwent her clear Fount from Borowdale that brings,
Does quickly cast her self into an ample Lake,
And with Thurls mighty Mere, between them two do make
An * Island, which the name from Darwent does (...); The Isle of Darvvent.

Within whose secret breast nice Nature does contriue,
That mighty Copper Mine, which not without its Veins,
Of Gold and Silver found, it happily obtaines
Of Royalty the name, the richest of them all
That Britan brings forth, which Royal she does call. The Mines Royal.

Of Borowdale her Dam, of her own named Isle,
As of her Royal Mines, this River proud the while,
Keeps on her Course to Sea, and in her way does win
Clear Coker her compeere, which at her coming in,
Gives Coker-mouth the name, by standing at her fall,
Into fair Darwents Banks, when Darwent there withal,
Runs on her (...) Race, and for her greater fame,
Of Neptune does obtain a Haven of her name,
When of the Cambrian Hills, proud Skiddo that does show
The highest, respecting whom, the other be but low,
Perceiving with the Floods, and Forests, how it fared,
And all their several tales substantially had heard,
And of the Mountain kind, as of all otherhe,
Most like Pernassus self that is supposed to be,
Having a double head, as has that sacred Mount,
Which those nine sacred Nymphs held in so hie account,
Bethinketh of himself what he might justly say,
When to them all he thus his beauties does display.
The rough Hibernian sea, I proudly ouerlooke,
Amongst the scattered Rocks, and there is not a nooke,
But from my glorious height into its depth I pry,
Great Hills far under me, but as my Pages lie;
And when my Helm of Clouds upon my head I take,
At very sight thereof, immediately I make
The Inhabitants about, tempestuous storms to fear,
And for fair weather look, when as my top is clear;
Great Fournesse mighty Fells, I on my South suruay:
So likewise on the North, Albania makes me way,
Her Countries to behold, when * Scurfell from the sky, A Hill in Scotland.

That Anadale does crown, with a most amorous eye,
Salutes me every day, or at my pride looks grim,
Often threatening me with Clouds, as I often threatening him:
So likewise to the East, that rue of Mountains tall,
Which we our English Alps may very aptly call,
That Scotland here with us, and England do divide,
As those, whence we them name upon the other side,
Do Italy, and France, these Mountains here of ours,
That look far off like clouds, shaped with embattelled towers,
Much envy my estate, and somewhat higher be,
By lifting up their heads, to state and gaze at me.
Clear Darwent (...) on, I look at from above,
As some enamoured Youth, being deeply struck in love,
His (...) does behold, and every beauty notes;
Who as she to her fall, through Fells and Valleys flotes,
Often lifts her limber self above her Banks to view,
How my brave by clift top, does still her Course pursue.
O all ye Topic Gods, that do inhabit here,
To whom the Romans did, those ancient (...) rear,
Often found upon those Hills, now sunk into the Soyles,
Which they for Trophies left of their victorious spoils,
Ye Genij of these Floods, these Mountains, and these Dales,
That with poor Shepherds Pipes, and harmless Heardsmans tales
Have often pleased been, still guard me day and night,
And hold me Skidow still, the place of your delight.
This Speech by Skidow spoke, the Muse makes forth again,
Toward where the in-borne Floods, clear Eden intertaine,
To Cumberland com'n in, from the Westmerian wastes,
Where as the readyest way to Carlill, as she casts,
She with two Wood-Nymphs meets, the first is great and wild,
And Westward Forest hight; the other but a child,
Compared with her Phere, and Inglewood is called,
Both in their pleasant Scites, most happily instald.
What Syluan is there seen, and be she nere so coy,
Whose pleasures to the full, these Nymphs do not enjoy,
And like Dianas self, so truly living chaste:
For seldom any Tract, does cross their waylesse waste,
With many a lusty leap, the shagged Satyrs show
Them pastime every day, both from the Meres below,
And Hills on every side, that neatly hemme them in;
The blushing morn to break, but hardly does begin,
But that the ramping Goats, swift Dear, and harmless Sheep,
Which there their owners know, but no man has to keep,
The Dales do ouer-spread, by them like Motley made;
But Westward of the two, by her more widened Slade,
Of more abundance boasts, as of those mighty Mines,
Which in her Verge she has: but that whereby she shines,
Is her two dainty Floods, which from two Hills do flow,
Which in her self she has, whose Banks do bound her so
Upon the North and South, as that she seems to be
Much pleased with their course, and takes delight to see
How Elne upon the South, in sallying to the Sea
Confines her: on the North how Wampull on her way,
Her purlews wondrous large, yet limitteth again,
Both falling from her earth into the Irish Maine.
No less is Westward proud of Waver, nor does win
Less praise by her clear Spring, which in her course does twin
With VViz, a neater Nymph scarce of the watery kind;
And though she be but small, so pleasing VVauers mind,
That they entirely mixed, the Irish Seas embrace,
But earnestly proceed in our intended Race.
At Eden now arrived, whom we have left too long,
Which being com'n at length, the Cumbrian hills among,
As she for Carlill coasts, the Floods from every where,
Prepare each in their course, to entertain her there,
From Skidow her tall Sire, first Cauda clearly brings
In Eden all her wealth; so Petterell from her Springs,
(Not far from Skidows foot, whence dainty Cauda creeps)
Along to overtake her Sovereign Eden sweeps,
To meet that great concourse, which seriously attend
That dainty Cumbrian Queen; when Gilsland down does send
Her Riuercts to receive Queen Eden in her course;
As Irthing coming in from her most plenteous source,
Through many a cruel Crag, though she be forced to crawle,
Yet working forth her way to grace her self with all,
First Pultrosse is her Page, then Gelt she gets her guide,
Which springs on her South, on her Septentrion side,
She crooked Cambeck calls, to wait on her along,
And Eden ouertakes amongst the watery throng.
To Carlill being come, clear Bruscath bears in,
To greet her with the rest, when Eden as to win
Her grace in Carlils sight, the Court of all her state,
And Cumberlands chief town, lo thus she does dilate.
What gives more delight, (brave City) to thy Seat,
Then my sweet lovely self? a River so complete,
With all that Nature can a dainty Flood endow,
That all the Northern Nymphs me worthily allow,
Of all their Nyades kind the nearest, and so far
Transcending, that often times they in their amorous war,
Have offered by my course, and Beauties to decide
The mastery, with her most vaunting in her pride, See to the 29. Song.

That mighty Roman Fort, which of the Picts we call,
But by them near those times was (...) Seuerus wall,
Of that great Emperor named, which first that work began,
Betwixt the Irish Sea, and German Ocean,
Does cut me in his course near Carlill, and does end The West end of the
(...) (...).

At Boulnesse, where my self I on the Ocean spend.
And for my Country here, (of which I am the chief
Of all her watery kind) know that she lent relief,
To those old (...) (...), when from the (...) they,
For succor hither (...), as (...) out of their way,
Amongst her mighty (...), and Mountains (...) from fear,
And from (...) (...), race residing long time here,
Which in their Genuine tongue, themselves did (...) name,
Why (...) so called.
Of (...), the name of Cumberland first came;
And in her praise be it spoke, this soil whose best is mine,
That Fountain brings forth, from which the Southern (...).
(So named for that of North, another has that style)
This to the Eastern Sea, that makes forth many a mile,
Her first beginning takes, and Vent, and Alne does lend,
To wait upon her (...); but further to transcend
To these great things of note, which many Countries call
Their wonders, there is not a Tract amongst them all,
Can show (...) like to mine, at the less Sakeld, near
To Edens Bank, the like is scarcely any where,
Stones seventy seven stand, in manner of a Ring,
Each full ten foot in height, but yet the strangest thing,
Their equal distance is, the circle that compose,
Within which other stones lie flat, which do enclose
The (...) of men long dead, (as there the people say;)
So near to Loders Spring, from thence not far away,
Be others nine foot high, a mile in length that (...),
The victories for which these Trophies were begun,
From dark oblivion thou, O Time should have protected;
For mighty were their minds, them thus that first erected:
And near to this again, there is a piece of ground,
A little rising Bank, which of the Table round,
Men in remembrance keep, and Arthurs Table name.
But whilst these more and more, with glory her inflame,
Supposing of her self in these her wonders great,
All her attending Floods, fair Eden do entreat,
To lead them down to Sea, when (...) comes along,
And by her double Spring, being mighty them among,
There ouertaketh Eske, from Scotland that does hye,
Fair (...) to behold, who meeting by and by,
Down from these Western Sands into the Sea do fall,
Where I this Canto end, as also therewithal
My England do conclude, for which I undertook,
This strange (...) toil, to this my thirtieth Book.
FINIS.

