THE LIFE O^ THE DVTCHE^ OF SVFFOLKE*

As it has been diverse and su^ times acted, with good applause.

Imprinted by A. M. for ^asper Emery; at Flowerdeluce in Paul's Churchyard.
1631.

The Actors names.
Duchess of Suffolk. Berty. Cranwell. Fox. Her Servants. Duke of
Northumberland. Earl of Erbaigh. Count Palatine. Earl of Arundel. L.
Hunsedon. L. Admiral. L. Clinton. L. Paget. Duke Brunswicke. Latimer, Cranmer,
and Ridley. Erasmus Roterodamus. Bonner and Gardner. Doctor Sands. M. Goseling
a Merchant. M. Perecell a VValoone. 2. Captains. Clunie a Parator. 2. Tilers.
Constable. Officers. A Nurse. A Post. Messengers. A Sexton. Burgomasters.
Keeper. Prisoners. Country People.
THE DVTCHE^ OF SVFFOLKE.
Actus Primus.
Enter FOX. Fox. KNights, Gentlemen, and Yeomen,
attend her Graces service; she will abroad.

Enter Cranwell vshering the Duchess of Suffolk, a ^^^^tlewoman bearing up her
train, Bertie, and ^^^^tlemen. (...) at the other door Begg^^^^ Cran. Be
vncoverd Gentelmen.

Fox. Rome there, back Beggars.

Dutch. Bertie, deal mine Alms.

Ber. Pray for the Duchess, friends.

Beg. Heavens preserve your Grace.

Exeunt Enter one with a Letter, delivers it k^eeling. Dut. What say thou?
from my King? I kiss his (...)
As humbly as my infant penitence,
When due correction threatened mine offense:
She (...) and (...) I may entreat the Palatine with grace,
All courtesy and favors, for my Sovereigns sake,
I will present him with smooth countenance,
But for the point here touching Marriage,
Beseech my Prince of pardon, since, as yet,
My Widows tears are scarce wipt from my cheek,
Touching the business, boute Sir Roger Willowbie,
My dear near kinseman, I Will not return
You empty handed back, but send
His highness Parram Lordship to dispose,
And thank his gracious providence for him.
Return my salutations on my knee,
And say my whole possessions are all his,
Berty reward his pains, On;
Enter Gardner to the Tower guarded. Stay, and know the reason of that guard,
How? give mine eyes the fullness of their wish,
Skreene not my Joys, I pray stand all aside,
My Gossip Gardner led unto the Tower,
It Is pity, nay man leave your courtesy,
My passion has no tears to answer you,
Truth now I hope has got a holliday,
Exit Gardner. The tyrant Wolf in hold, the Lambs may play,
Forward to Sussex house in Barnisby street:
More objects yet of comfort? what is he?

Enter Bonner guarded to prison. Fox. Bonner commanded to the Martial sie.

Dut. Fagots will then grow cheap, they say, my Lord,
That you have bought up all our firewood,
To send us in a shining flame to heaven,
But Bertie, see how lean has studdy made him,
And his care with sweating in repress of errors,
Enter Sands. An Ell will hardly girdle his lean wast.
Sands, I Will defer your welcome yet from Cambridge,
To show you here a president of zeal.

Bonn* Madam (...) scorns live not with charity,
My conscience is cont^nt to bear this cross.

Dutch. And mine as well content that thou should bear it,
think thou I will disburthen thy content,
Good man thou art deceived, my charity
Shuts up the doors against thy misery,
I tell thee, all my sorrows are dried up,
With this sweet breath of comfort, to see thee,
Infranchise truth by thy captivity.

Bonn. Time flaters you awhile, heaven has a power,
Can change the White to Sable in an hour,
My welthier thoughts, yet tell me I shall live,
these scorns to quittance, your free heart to grieve,
For time is rich in ransom, she may raise,
Exit wit^ gard^^* the scorned and captived Bonner, ware those days.

Dutch. If Englands sin deserves that curse again,
Doubtless my life the truth should still maintain.

Sand. The grace of heaven make strong that your resolue^

Dutch* Tut Sands, I am no novice to bear off
The gusty shocke of danger, here is proof,
Has bid the Cannon of rough threatening grief,
The deaths of one dear Husband, and two Sons,
(Regenerate in the fame of their deserts.)
Have made a violent shot against this breast,
But by the manly courage of that joy,
Is knit unto my spirits, to behold
The exild truth, now soiourning with time,
The rage of their repugnancie recoyles,
And I am Mistress of a Virgin heart.

Bert. With pardon gracious Madam,
Could Berties rude persuasion please your ears,
I wish it clothed with Hymen's royalties:
A husband, like an Ammell, would enrich
Your golden virtues.

Dutch. How Men can praise themselves.
Marriage is good, but where is the husband good?
A loving husband, Bertie, true in touch
May swear, so they will be, few prove such.

Bert. Durst my opinion venture, but to speak him,
I could commend that merit to your heart,
As I presume, your fancy would embrace.

Dutch. Void all the Chamber, Bertie, but your self,
The husband now, come man, fear not to speak,
Exeunt Servants. She sits. You have absolution, ere you do begin,
The husband can report his true deserts.

Bert. As much as observations greedy eye,
Could well retain, keeps warm upon my tongue,
Which to your noblest consideration was in honors womb,
And from her sucked his Nutriment of life,
His spirit like an ensign does display
The worthiness of his heroicke birth,
His more concealed virtues varnish that,
To make his Comet (merit,) wondered at,
Nature in moulding of his lyneaments,
Has shamed the cunning workmanship of Art,
That he is Madam, as your wish would make,
The richer in desert for your worthes sake.

Dutch. You have described the substance of a man,
Such as might ravish the most chastest thoughts,
Virginity could sin in wish of him,
For but on my deceas^d Brandons breath,
Did never wait such rich perfections,
In them I shall but re-espouse mine own,
Marry one Husband twice, embrace the dead,
Hug in mine arms a Suffolk buried*

Bert. If honorable Love live in a man,
It guides the vert^es of the Palatine.

Dutch. The Palatine? has he your wishes voice.

Bert. Could it assure him of your fancies choice.

Dutch. His stately honors are unmatched for mine.

Berty. His greatness reflects beams into your shine.

Dutch. That greatness claymes a duty from my heart.

Bert. No more then his love offers your desert.

Dutch. Your humble eyes see's merit, his will not,
Our weaker worthes in Marriage are forgot.

Bert. Nay rather Madam Wedlock does inroule,
The special essence of your rare deserts,
Remembering your perfections.

Dutch. I, they could live in your humility,
And my affections best afford them thee,
Whilst thy sweet tongue solicites for thy friend,
Into thy bosom all my thoughts I send.
(...) Cranwell what news.

Cran^^^^ Cran. The County Pallatine, now king of Poland.

Dutch. King of Poland?

Bert. Madam survey your thoughts,
Master your fears, and crown your happiness,

Dutch. King of Poland?

Bert. You Queen my hopes would see.

Dutch. Queen of my rich desires in marrying thee*
What of this king of Poland?

Cran. He stays your graces leisure,
Accompanied with the Earl of Arundell.

Enter the Palatine being King of Poland, and Arundell. Dutch. Entreat their
presence,
Welcome royal Prince,
My noble Lord.

Palate. Madam, my latest service comes to bring
An old affection from a new made king.

Dutch. My Pristine gratulations thus accept
The humble proffer of your sovereign heart*
But let me tell you, my thrice gracious Lord,
You deal not Kingly, by advantaged means
To set upon my infancy of Love,
To ambush lay it by intelligence:
You know my meaning, there is a privy thief
I know you set to pillage my affections,
He durst not else have broke my secrets up.
His travel has not loytered in your suit,
Nor will I be ungrateful to his pains.
Enter Fox. The Duke Northumberland, with the Earl of Erbaigh,
Desire to have access unto your grace.

Dutch. More suitors? well, they are all welcome; usher them in.

Enter Northumberland, and Erbaigh. North. Health and fair fortune
Wait on Suffolks Duchess.

Dutch. Your wishes return their virtues on your self.

North. The king salutes you in my vassal breath,
And bad me tell you, he received your gift
With thankful welcome, and bestowed the same*
(Peec'd out with honor, from his noble bounty)
Upon your cosen Sir Roger Willowby,
Creating him Lord Willowby of Parram,
To build remembrance of your gracious gift:
Further he prays you to entreat this Prince,
The Earl of Erbaigh with fair courtesy.

Erba. Madam, the love of your perfections*
Has called me hither, and of them I crave,
A welcome to my loyalty of heart.

Dutch. I wish sir, my perfections of that wealth
To rate so high a merit as yours is:
But Princes, leave this cheapning of my love,
It is a bad thing dear.
Shall I beseech of you my Lord of Poland, and the rest,
Princes or whosoever tenders me
The humble service of his noble heart
As to digest my choice with patience:
Amongst you I will choose, and at this time
And in his like interre my vviddowhood,
Amongst a throng of merits one but enters,
One wins the Goal still* though a thousand venters,
This man must but poss^sse me, let the voice
Of my affections, please all with her choice.

Arun. Pleased or displeased, you women choose you^ (...)
And reason you should have it, or als one
You Will take a fall to have it; fancies force
Makes honest plainness often speed the worse,
Choose Madam choose, and please thine own conten^^

Berty. The king of Poland Madam.

Dutch. How this fellow
Wakes my remembrance for the king of Poland,
As though my fancy hung upon his tongue,
I never shot a blunted arrow forth,
Nor shall my choice recoyle upon his worth,
Whom I Will call mine; come worst of fate,
Berty I choose thy self my marriage mate,
Upon this low foundation I erect
The Palace of mine honors, on this knee
I place the head of mine authority;
Let hand from hand exchange their offices,
What Is mine is thine, thine mine, sealed with this kiss.

Arun. How madcap Duchess; what and join lips
What ere we thought, I see it is a match.

Dutch. You see blind fancies folly in my choice,
His worth prevails, nor will I change my voice.

Berty. By the dear loyalty my thoughts do owe
To this vnmeasur'd grace you heap on me,
And by the virtue of a Christian faith,
The relish of this blessing is so strong,
That when I leave to love, I live too long.

Dutch. Princes, let your displeasure chide his meri^^
Which stole my love your honors would inherit.

Palate. My fury thus bursts forth, to wish increase
Of your spouse virtues in your lives sweet peace.

Erba. My hatred dies not so, but I would see
Your merits live in your posterity.

Dutch. Whereat frown you sir?

Fox. I hope it is no breach of duty, to conceal
Our close affections, they are priviledg'd,
And I will keep them so, you have my service;
If it may pleasure, so; if not, I care not:
I Will mourn mine own sins,
Take your Cloak and spare not.

Dutch. If you be tired with the wearing it,
Good speed you, I Will not break you back with care.

Fox. You have my heart, whilst I an honest ass,
(For so I count all men of patience,)
Have laden it with whole loades of businesses*
With iaunting on your errands, drudgt at home,
With so strong diligence, that sleep could scarce
Approach my eye^lids for a sennights space:
The honor of your Celler lives in me,
You scarce command a throat can gulpe a health,
You think I flatter, take good fellows words,
And him whose merit claymes pre-eminence,
By their opinion, deal your recompense.

Bert. If you mean me, I will not canvase
With you for the voice of quaint opinion;
You Will way down the scales,
Her honorable love, the gift of fate,
Not due of merit, does advance my state.

Fox. Why sir, might she not bestow her love on me?

Bert. She might.

Fox. She might, more fool she did not, but all is one
All friends now, heeres my hand, my spleenes down.

Bert, In this embrace I send a general love,
To all my fellow servitors:
I know some lowres upon my happiness,
How undeserved, let my offices
Of love to you, and duty to her grace,
In their impartial verdit render up.

Cran. O, take my answer as the general voice,
For from my mouth breathes their opinions:
She lessens not her honors in your choice,
But makes you Lord of her affections,
And them we serve not, but her royalties,
Which, as they are not lessened, why should we
Shrink from their service; whom her love does hon^^^
May challenge from us special reverence,
And so shall you, as homage for that love,
Whose soverainty commands our services.

North. Consent I see is liberal to this match,
And offers franckly my applauding heart,
Wishing of heaven to smile upon your loves,
That from them may grow up such gallant spirits
As may renown this land with honored merits.

(...) Enter Bonner, and Gardner. Bonn. Good morrow to my Lord of Winchester*
How do you like our air in the Marshalseas,
From that ith Tower? vvelcome toot my Lord.

Guard. Oh I thank your love,
But had we once our liberties,
We would set night upon these morning skies.

Bon. Oh that that hour were come, the king on^

Guard. What Is that my Lord of London?

Bon. I, pray man, pray, that heaven would take
Our good king Edward to yon happy land,
He Is sick, he is sick, heaven take the ^nfant child*
For this cracked world his virtues are too mild:
Is not this charitable, what say thou man?

Guard. But is the king sick?

Bon. And princes Mary well,
Oh how I long to hear his passing bell.
Soft who comes here.

Enter Clunie. Clu. Health to my honored Lords.

Guard. That were, thou meanest.

Clu. That are, I bring your Lordships from our an (...)

Bon. Queen? is Edward dead?

Clu. King Edward, of that name the sixth, is dead, and

Bon. Who, who I beseech thee, guides the state?

Clu. She that repeales you to your former seats,
Royal Queen Mary.

Guard. See.

Bon. Good hold my back, this sudden blast of comfort
Blows me up, where is my rival Ridley and the rest,
They now shall fire for this.

Clu. Sent down to Oxford.

Guard* Thence they shall not stir,
Till fire consume them, if I be Winchester.

Clu* By me her highness greetes you with that sea,
Adding unto it, high Chancellor of England.

Bon. An office good my Lord may coin revenge
With Justice stamp to pay our enemies.

Clu. My Lord of London, that's your title now,
Restored unto it with her graces favor.

Bon. And if affection ^enifie my duty*
Let me respectlesse die without her favor.

Exit Clunie. Enter Lord Paget. Paget. Where be the Lords of Winchester and
London?

Bon. The good Lord Paget, welcome, pray, what news si^?

Paget. Her highness gives us joint commission
By virtue of this Patent to peruse,
And cleanse the state of impious sectaries,
Wherewith it was infected in the days
Of her deceased brother Edwards reign,

Bon. Without affection of affinity.

Paget. Of any, not her sister is except.

Bon. Then let our Suffolkes Dowager expect
Answer for her scorned taunts, she threw on me of late
That hot spirit, fire and flax, Madam faggot stick,
If she recant not I will faggot her,
If all the wood in Middlesex can doo^,
Or Londons Bishopric have means to pay fort
I Will not niggard her bones and I do, arayne my charit^

Paget. I have already sent Process for her husban^
Forth by Cluine.

Enter Bertie and Clunie. Bon. My man, a trusty fellow
Worthy employment in the Lollards tower,
But here comes Bartie, welcome honest Clunie
It was well done, an honest knave, I Will gratify thy loue^
As I will quittance such malignant hates.

Ber. As whose, ant please your Lordship.

Bon. A vengeance flatter you,
Your courteous ear, wears daggers in your heart.

Ber. My ear, my Lord, is servant to my heart.

Bon. They serve ind^ed to guide the envious heart.

Guard. Sure I think Bertie be an honest man,
Religious was his education,
With our deceased Chancellor whom he served,
If since his Lady have not weaned him from it.

Ber. Your honor still shall find me the same man.

Bon. In substance, but how in Religion?

Ber. As then a member of the self same Church.

Bon. My good Lady your Wi^e sir, she is not so.

Ber. I do beseech your Lordships to suspend
And smother your opinions till a trial
Blow up the embers to an open flame,
Then censure as you find, and giue's your doom.

Guard. If we but find her answers half so calm.

Bon* Yes as thunder, she calm? as a baited Bear,
I will oppose my disputation,
Against a College of best discipline,
Rather then with her brains, she sticks her i^sts*
Like poisoned arrows, in our tender spleenes:
Thinking the sanctuary of her high birth*
To privilege her fond presumption,

Ber. My credit sir be pawnd.

Bon. Your credit^ tut tut, she hangs upon the mercy of the Queen,
But it will cast off her opinion.

Bert. Should she be cold, my Lords, or set a frown
Upon the alteration of her faith,
Your Lordships know the somes of money due,
From Charles the Emperor to her in the right,
Of her departed husband, Suffolkes Duke,
Which if your honorable license would
Assign me a free passage to those parts
To gather up your unexpected love,
Would heat her good opinion with the zeal.
Where now the strangenes makes her somewhat stagger.

Bon. Let him go my Lords, you shall go speed him hence
The way is broader unto our revenge,
Which I have sworn to take upon that Dame,
Whose scornful taunts did so deprave my fame.
What says my good Chancellor to this suit.

Guard. You have free passage Bertie, when you please.

Ber. To escape your envies, if we cross the seas.
Exit Ber.
Bon. Follow him Clunie and when thou think,
The solemn farewell of ^ivorced lips,
Has part this husband from his honored wife,
With some especial servants of the Queen
Enter the Duchess house in Barbican,
Take a true inventory of all her goods,
Discharge her household, save a man or two.
One Woman, and the Nurse that suckles her Child,
And say you have commandment from the Queen
To stay there till her highness further pleasure,
That she shall walk the hie-way to the Tower,
Be gone, perform thine Office carefully,
And I will pay thy pains as liberally.

Clu. I go my Lord, but do you hear the news?
How Docter Sands is escaped from the kings bench, and fled.

Guard. Send forth our warrants into every Coast.

Bon. Toward Kent* toward Kent, post Cluine, run villain
How starest thou? pack.
Live in my bosom if thou bring him back,
This Sands is Chaplain to yon scornful Duchess,
And he has tayne this lesson from her brains,
That house of sly devises, she is all wit,
Nor shall I sleep until I ruin it.

Exeunt om^^^ Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Bertie and Duchess. Bertie. Madam, my promise of your penitence,
Wayed with the puissance of your high birth,
Wherein you are alied unto the Queen,
Calmed the rough Menace of stout Gardner,
And set a reverence on stern Bonners tongue,
Humbly to wish your reformation.

Dutch. The Queen is near and dear unto my bl^^^
In the remembrance of our mothers loves,
Which charge greater sorrow at my heart,
Then the huge shocke of their malignant threats;
My ^oule has lodged the Truth, it shall not thence,
Whilst this weak flesh displayes her ayrie sense.

Ber. But Madam, let your wisdom shut her up,
Commit her not unto your state to guard,
But humble your hie spirit, sleike your speech,
That envy may not stumble at mistrust,
Or find a rub to start suspicion:
Wear a smoth brow in presence of your foes,
Be shaken with their threats, retreat your spirit,
Till they insult upon your patience:
The Conquest won in your submission,
They slake the eager pursu^e of revenge,
To give you time to purve^ for your escape;
You know my leave of passage ore the seas,
And with what cunning I have color'd it,
To free my conscience from the gaile of fear.

Dutch. But still leave mine upon the rock of care.

Ber. I go to seek releasement of that care,
Freely to spread the ensign of your Faith:
A simple, rusticke home of liberty,
Is worth your honors in captivity.

Dutch. It is, it is, and would befit our ^^ues,
To wear them out in contemplation:
There should we read^, upon the naked walls,
The first creation of our wretchedness;
There no intruding objects of gaie clothes,
Imbrodered hangings, or rich tapistrie,
Shall wound the service which we owe to heaven.
Oh M. Bertie, there my wish would be;
Change honored woe for poor felicity.

Ber. I Will lay a Bark at Leigh shall stay for you,
To be transported to me at Midelborow.

Dutch. But who conducts me to that Bark at Leigh?
Fear is a trusty guide, it is, it is,
She that knows no way, that way will not miss,
I prithee go, my Conscience to set free,
My tender feet shall learn to follow thee.

Ber. I go.

Dutch. Yet stay, nay go, alas which way?
And must we part?

Ber. We must,
My bodies hee^e, thou have my heart along with thee
Make much o'^t prithee, till we m^ete again,
M^ body and my soul you both retain.

Dutch. Slip not my duty, I beseech your love,
To her for whom my sorrows shed more tears*
Then is my wounded Conscience charged with fears.

B^r. Patience, good Madam.

Dutch. Passion Master Bertie,
M^ spl^^ne is wounded with compassionate pity,
I could drop out my Liver, ^ob my life
Of her dear essence, with immoderate sighs,
For that sweet Princes, wronged Eliz^beth*
Now in the gripe of their pernicious hate,
A guard of Angels ring her life about,
From the malicious practice of her foes;
Rebate their furies, cross their treacherous ways,
Let truth in her outliue these bloody days.

Ber. Amen, amen, what shall I deliver to her from (...)

Dutch. A comfortable salutation
To that heart sorrowing Lady which my prayer
From heaven has carried to her heart before.

Ber. Will you ought else?

Dutch. A kind embrace from you, exchange a tear, (...)
And so farewell.

(...) Ber. Oh this does clog me more, ways down my sp^^^
Should bear our fortunes to a soft repose,
Not daring here to peep out of ou^ thoughts,
Without the danger of the Vulters gripe,
Whose watching eyes of inquisition
Steals covertly upon our purposes,
And yet you lag me with your load of greefes.
I could toss woe for woe until to morrow,
But then weed wake the wolf with bleating sorrow.
With what unwillingness I part from you
Let that and these received.
(...) Adieu, adieu.

Exeunt severally Weep^^^ Enter Cranwell -- Cranwell meets h^^ Cran. Madam.

Dut. Now Cranwell, what would thou? thy M. go^

Cran. I am glad he stayed no^, to piece out our mon^^

Du* What heavy thought strains moisture from thy he^^^

Cran. (...) see your greatness struck with enuies da^^
Her highn^sse servants have attacht your goods,
Discharging all your household officers.

Du. What remedy? this was my expectation: I was a^^^
With complete resolution, to abide
The rigorous wrestle of this streame-borne tide.
Faintst thou at this? then thou would swoune to see
My honored state changed to ragg'd misery.

Cran. I will not line to see that.

Dutch. Then thy love is tried:
I thought it wou^d have lack^ed by my side.

Cran* How mean you Madam?
When it tires in service of your Grace,
May I never more have being on the earth,
Were you to pass the extremest of all woe,
Might I be worthy, I would share with you.

Dutch. Upon thy trust, then I repose my life,
Provide me against this even a Citizens Gown,
Ath meanest fashion, like my present fortunes:
This night I Will hazard to escape from hence,
Putting my fears into the hand of fate,
To trample on or readvance my state,
Will thou about it?

Cran. With a winged speed:
To cure your sorrows this manly heart shall bleed.
Exit Cran.
Enter Fox, and Clunie. Fox. Madam this world is changed.

Dutch: Change thou with it.

Fox. Change, and I did it were no heresy:
These humors graple with my honesty,
But they are frantic fits, I let them pass.

Dutch: Sir what are you?

C^u: My name is Clunie, and now your graces keeper.

Dutch* I hear you have discharged my household Servants.

Clu: It is her highness pleasure.

Dut: Or Bonners hate, but I accept it with a thankfulness.

Clu: All are not yet discharged, but your choice
May call two men, a woman, and a Nurse.

Dutch: Nay, Cranwell is all I will beseech of you.

Fox. Why Cranwell, more then Fox?

Dutch: Because more staid, with him,
Because of most continuance,
And longest vvearing in my services.

Fox: What mean you by this vvearing? I am sur^^
My wits are worn as thin as a Paper-leafe:
But it is the fairest end of Serving^men,
When we have spent the pleasure of our youth,
Ene sweat it out with painful industry,
To have such itching slaves to eat us out,
Do you so light respect me? I as light
Will make of you, and it come within my power*

Dutch: Farewell, pull down thy stubbornness of (...)
There brea^hes no servant of more honesty*
Wilt please your kindness, keeper, usher me,
To teach my steps to usher misery.

Exeunt Duchess and Cl^^ Fox: Now Thomas?
What will you do now, Thomas?
Your Mistres has discharged you, and your coat, Tho^^^
Which was as dear to you, as your skin, Thomas,
It is pulled over your ears, what remedy:
Has Fox nere a hole to hide's head in these extremities
Now I remember my Cozen Raynauld lives not far he^^
To him I Will make repair, and feed on country poultr^^
For a while, till I can cry Vindicta^on this Duchess.
Well what I Will do my thoughts not yet aprooue,
Fox will prove true to trust, not false to love,

(...) A cry within follow, fol^^^ Enter Hughe Tiler, and Ienkin going to work
with a tray of Tiles and a Ladder. Til. Ienkin where art thou, hark what a
kenell of (...)
Gives us our welcome into kent, set up, com^ and to th^^^^
Stamp the frost out of thy feet into the mortar for me,
I Will catch me a heat or I Will bear it out at'h stones.

Beats his fingers against his sides. Ien. A good fire would do better with
the fingers ends.

Tiler. But a pot of Ale and a tossed would do best of all
With a cold stomach, over go to the Cock
And see if he came a'th kind, if his ale will
Make a man crow, we will leave our implements here
They will not run away, and heeres no great crowd
Of People ith town, but if they be stolen, we may find 'em
Come Ienken, nimbly and stay by it.

Exeunt. Acry within follow, follow. Enter Sands, looking about. Sands. Whither
now will thou dispose thy self
From the enraged pursuit of this search
That with their fresh breathings have often tired thee,
After so many hazards, whence my care
Has sweat in water to redeem my fear,
Must I a^ last be forc'^ to yield and die
Finds the Tilers things. Oh grief, but who can slip his destenie
They come and I am tired,
Thank^s heaven I have found a means
I hope to shelter me in these extremes.

Goes up the Ladder and works. Enter Clunie, with many Officers. Clunie.
Follow, pursue with swiftness and he is ours,
Soft heeres a Tiler, we will enquire of him
Sands sings Which way he took, sir you Tiler ho
Durtdauber with a vengeance answer me,
^eaue singing of your neck verse, Rogue your best
Lest it prove so indeed, you will answerer'
Tiler hoe.

Shakes the Lad^ Sands. Say you sir, say you.

Clunie. Say you goodman rascal?
Saw you not a man pass this way
With a speedy course but now.

Sands. He crossed down that way.

Clunie. How the devil did we miss him?
Tired I hold my life, and tayne some barn,
Or privy shead; come lets back, search every nooke,
Ransacke the bushes, in each corner look.

Exeu^^ Sands. How strong my spirit is to call them back,
Armed with the steeled proof of inocence,
That can rebate the edge of tyrany,
Invulnerable innocence she would go,
But yet this flesh is frail and full of fears,
To keep the soul from yon Celestial spheres,
Thy will be done my maker, whose great hand
Has now my life from scortching malice fanned.

Ex* Ienk^^, Come away Hugh ti ti tiler,
Now we have lined our backs,
And warmd our bellies,
Lets do our days work in an hour
And drink our selves drunk all the day after.

Til. Whope, why the Cock ale has spurd thee alread^

Ien. Thou art a Coxcombe to say so, I will run up, and Come down my Ladder as
nimble as a Squerrill.


Tiler, For going up I know not, but thou't come dow^ With thy head forward.


Ien. Why then that is a trick more then ever thou sawe^ in thy life, oh in my
ale I can do any thing, tumble like a Eliphant.


Enter Clunie, and Officers. Clunie. Now where is this Tiler.

Ienkin. At hand quoth pickepurse,

Ha you any work for a tiler.
Clu. Not so much work sir as you have made for the searcher.
And which way crossed the man?

Ien. Should there not be two hundred of slates, say thou?

Clu. Answer me hobbihorse,
Which way crossed he you saw enough?

Ien. Who do you speak to sir,
We have forgot the hobbihorse.

Tiler. Yes truly sir,
Look well amongst your selves for him.

Clu. The man, the man sir Saunders, that you said you saw.

Ien. That I saw said you, all that I saw was a russet
Gentleman with a tosted Cullizance, and he went down
Gutter-lane I assure you.

Clu. That Is as true as Sands crossed this way, and we not see him.

Tiler. Did he cross this way and you not see him, the more blind buzzard you.


Clu. You told us sir enough, he went this way.


Ien. Who I, then I told you a lie, for I was then sipping my morning draught.


Clu Say fellows did not he direct us thither.

Ien. I, who I? Ienken the Tiler.

Watch. I you.

Ien. Bless my slating, is the devil amongst you, that you fall so fast a
lying, if I saw any of you before would every slate I have were in your
bellies, why do you not know Ienken the Tiler.


Tiler. Nor hugh the good Duchess of Suffolkes man.

Clu. The Duchess man, an Heretic.

Ien. Nay nay, that's most certain, what is an Erewig sir, a good fellow I hope.


Clu, You shall have that defind,
When you come before my Lord*

Tiler, Oh by no means,
He spits nothing but fire and fagot-sticks.

Ien. No matter, I have ale enough in my belly to
Quench vm.

Clu. So guard them safe, these villains have conveid
That traitor Sands their fellow, hence.

Ienk. Not I, I desire you, I renounce and confound you.

Clu. Dam up the brick bats mouth, convey them henc^
It Is they shall pay the price of Sands offense.

Exeunt ^mn^^ Enter Duchess like a Citizens Wife with Cranwell. Dutch. Cranwell.

Cranw. Madam.

Dutch. Speak softly, where is Nurse, speak softly pr^ thee Lord, why toyters
she, but call her not: soft, soft, w^^ creaking shoes have thou got Cranw. to
betray our feare^ put off them traitors.


Cranw. Madam.

Dutch. Thou speak too loud.

Cran. Neither my tongue, nor shoes, can reach an ear^

Dutch. Yes Cranwell but they do of jealous fear.
My life is on the hazard of this game
And I mistrust each step will cheat the same.

Cran. O that the poison of this fear were once remove

Dutch. We should not then halt here
The poison has the t^eason of my foes,
I wish but patience to abide their blows,
But who comes here, Nurse, with a candle light
It Is darkness woman must guide out our feere.

Enter Nurse with a Candle. Clunie abo^^ Clu. What light is that there ho?

Dutch. Nurse what have thou done?
Disperse away, to Lion key begone.

Clu. What ho, will none speak there, awake the gua^

Dut. What stay you for, for heavens sake will you go^
Good Cranwell, sweet Nurse, linger not my woe.

Cran. How will you find that way you yet nere w^^

Dutch. I Will 'trust in him that guides the Innocent,
Give me my Child, and Mantle, now heavens pleasure:
Exe. Cranwell and Nurse. Frewell, come life or death, I Will hug my treasure,
Nay chide not pretty babe, our enemies come
Thy crying will pronounce thy mothers dome.

Clunie within. Clu. She Is gone, sh^es gone.

Dutch. Not far, but be thou still
This gate may shade us from their envious will.
Exit.
Enter Clunie and Guard. Clu. Gone, gone, pursue her or we are undone.

Exeunt with Guard. Enter Duchess. Dutch Oh fear what art thou! lend me wings
to file,
Direct me in this plunge of misery,
Nature has taught the Child obedience,
Thou have bin humble to thy mothers wish,
Oh let me kiss these dutious lips of thine,
That would not kill thy mother with a cry,
Now forward whither heaven directs, for I
Can guide no better then thine infancy,
Here are two Pilgrims bound to Lyon-key,
And neither knows one footstep of the way,
Return you, then it is time to shift me hence.
Exit.
Enter Clunie with Guards. Clu. Search every corner, here, behind this gate
Her mantle, oh the luck, had we but staid
To search this nooke, when fury bore us hence
With violence to overtake her course,
We had prevented her intended escape
But what heaven would not, could not, it is decreed,
Her innocent life, should not by envy bleed:
But here we stint not, to pursue her flight,
I know twill boil up Bonners rancorous spite.

Exeunt. Enter Duchess. Dutch. Thus far, but Heaven knows where we ha^^ esca^^
The eager pursuit of our enemies,
Having for guidance my attentive fear,
Still I look back, still starte my tired feet,
Which never till now measured London street,
My honors scornd that custom, they would ride,
Now forced to walk, more weary pain to bide:
Thou shall not do so child, I Will carry thee
In sorrows arms to welcome misery,
Custom must steel thy youth with pinching want,
That thy great birth, in age may bear with scant,
Sleep peaceably sweet ducke, and make no noise
Me thinks each step is deaths aresting voice,
We shall meet Nurse anon, a dug will come
To please my quiet infant, when, Nurse, when?

Enter Nurse. Nurse. Who Is that calls Nurse?

Dutch. Aye me I am oreheard.

She hides herse^^^ Enter Cranwell. Nurse. Master Cranwell.

Cranw. Who goes there? Nurse?

Dutch. Cranwell.

Cranw. Madam.

Nurse: My sweet Lady.

Dutc. Whist honest Nurse? how strangely are we (...)

Cranw. It is the place where you appointed us.

Dutch. Then heaven is gracious to my ignorance,
For had this night worn on the pride of day,
By I it could not have found out the way.

Nurse. Are you not weary Madam?

Dut. Admit I be, let patience ease all, there is no (...)
Within cry. For Grauesend hoe.

Dutch. What Is that, he frighted me.

Cranw. They call for their passengers to Graues-end.

Dut. Pass we our fears with them, there stays at Lee
A Bark that will redeem our liberty,
If you dare venture, with my fortunes go,
A tide of Joy, may turn this stream of Woe.

Cranw. How you resolve of me, I know not, try,
And when I shrink, brand me with infamy.

Dut. In heavens name, on then, fellows all in sorrow,
When we stand need, we will mutual comfort borrow.

Exeunt. Enter B^nner, Gardner, Clunie, Ienkin and Tiler, guarded. Bon. My Lord
sit down, stand forth thou Ipocret.

Ien. I never drunk I pocrasse in my life sir,
It Was strong Ale that I am guilty of.

Bon. Clunie give evidence against this wretch,
Has set his hand to help a traitor hence.

Ien. Indeed my Lord I am no Traitor, I am a Tilor,
Clunie tells your Lordship a fable, we saw no such Man, not we.


Guard. No, will thou obstinately stand in it,
Did not thou lend him a disguise, employ him
Among other laborers about thy work,
And yet vvilt thou deny thou art no Traitor.

Bon. Slave, Villain, Dog,
Have we not here the honest testimony
Of mine own Parator, that saw him clothed
In thy apparel, and dare thou deny it,
Fagots, fagots, hence toth' stake with him.

Ien. Oh good my Lord, I shall never endure it,
I was wance but burnt ith hand, and I have bin
The worse fort ever since, do but here me,
Prove that I had any other apparel this seven years,
Then that you see upon my back, and burn me not,
But cut me into rashers, and broyle me for Carbonadoes.

Clu. My Lords as I am Clunie, and your Parator,
This counterfeit simplicitude was he,
That twixt the hours of 12. and 1. at Noone,
Convayed the impious Traitor from our fearch,
By shifting him into his homely rags.

Ien. Twixt 12. and 1. nere trust me, but at that (...) time I and my fellow
here, (can thou speak nothing^ thy self) were at dinner at mother
Puttocks, with a pi^^ of a Tripe and a blacke-Pudding, by the same token th^^
was a candles end in it as long as my thumb.


Bon. So, so, yar a cunning Knave, but sir, sir,
This cannot serve your turn, you rescued him,
And that by the law is held as Capital,
As if thy self were guilty of the crime.

Guard. His crime my Lord is it not manifest,
That he is a favourer of these Sismatikes,
And what is that but flat rebellion.

Bon. Go too, he must frye fort, he, shall I say the wo^
Bonner that ere long will purge this land with bonfiers,
We come not with the Olive branch of Peace,
But with the sword of Justice, these Hidraes-heads will (...)
Be flourishing, unless at once we giu't a fatal stroke,
Let them convert to ashes, let them burn,
So shall the State be quiet ^ how now, what news?
What have you caught the Duchess.

Enter Messenger. Mess. Most strangely sir, she did escape my hands,
Besides at Billinsgate have I kept narrow search,
Yet for my life could set no eye on her.

Bon. But we have all this while taine a vvrong cour^^^
Shall we imagine being hunted thus:
She would commit the sauegard of her life
To common passage, where she was assurd
There would be diligent weight laid for her:
No, she is more subtle, all the world, my Lord,
Shall not persuade, but she is in England still,
In Marget, Lee, or some such bordering town.

Messen. And in good time I met a man of hers,
One Fox, my Lord, a fellow, as it seems,
Disgraced by her, that told me we were wide
In that we went about.

Guard. Where met you him.

Messen. Coming from Algate.

Bonn. Would he not confess
Which way his Lady Mistrisse was escapt?

Mes. With much a do my Lords, with threars and promises,
At last he told me he would bring
Where we might trace her, and entrap her too.

Bon. Why brought you not that fellow to our presence?
He shall have dispensation how he will,
So he be trusty, and perform his word.

Messen. He promised faithfully to meet me here.

Bon. Well if he come, your ear.

They whisper. Enter Fox. Fox. Now Fox devise to qualify
Thy nature to thy name,
These be mere Caniballs
That take no pleasure but in sucking blood,
And though vnluckly it was thy chance,
To fall into their hands, yet be not thou
(How ever outward grievances may urge)
A traitor to thy Lady; smooth with these,
That under color to betray the Duchess,
She may have safer liberty to pass.

Messen. See my Lords, he is come.

Bon. Come hither sir, you did serve the Duchess,
And it is no doubt but you can give us notice
Which way she is fled, stand no upon nice terms
As fearing to incur some deadly sin,
But t^ll us plainly which way she is gone.

Fox. My Lords, I cannot readily discover
Which way she is gone, by reason I have bin
Long in disgrace, and quite dismissed the house,
But sure it is, she went disguised from hence,
And it is not possible but she must lurk,
Within some Haven town near to the coast.

Guard. What Town, as thou imaginest?

Fox. My Lords I think toward Dover,
Or the Downs of Kent.

Bon. Nay that's not likely, soft, some
A he^^^ News I hope.

Enter A Post. Post. Health to this honorable presence,
I come to certify your Lordships all,
That as we kept the Ports on Essex side,
It Was credibly reported, that the Duchess
With little or no train, is lodged in Lee,
And for she is disguised, and our Commission
Expired the date, we crave a fresh supply,
And some direction how to intercept her.

Bon. No better means then to renew our vvarrant,
And send this fellow with it that does know her,
Into what shape so ere she be transformed.
It shall be so, I thank thee Pursyvant
For thy good news, it glads me at the heart,
I shall at length be even with this proud Duchess,
At Lee in Essex, oh it is excellent:
But I will tell you how't shall be my Lord,
Fox shall not go alone, Clunie and I
Will bear him company, and vvithall, ha, ha,
I cannot choose but laugh to tell the rest,
As she is disguised to hide her from my flght,
So will I be, to take her, in her slight,
Is it not good, is it not rare my Lord,
Nay is it not the best that ere you heard,
When subtilty by fraud shall be debarred,
I vvarrant you she is ours Clunie, Fox come hither,
Provide you straight, Fox thou shall go with me,
Ha, vvilt thou not.

Fox. (A plague upon you,) I must answer, I.
How ere my heart abhor this treachery,
My Lord I will.

Bon. Why now thou please me,
And I will richly recompense thy pains,
But for we will not, our affairs at home,
In the mean time be slackt, or intermitted,
You my good Lords shall have a special care
About it straight, Fox, Clunie, follow me,
This is to Bonner chief felicity.

Exeunt all but Fox, and Ienken. Fox. Yes, I will follow,
Though not further ye,
I trust this is a means ordained of Heaven,
To bridle this bloodsuckers cruelty,
But how now, what art thou.

Ienken. Marry sir an honest man and a Tiler, that was sent for hither to be
examined about wan M. Sands, and it seems for Joy they have to kno where the
Duchess is, they have forgotten me, what were I best to do.


Fox. What else but get thee home unto thy house,
Away be packing, since they have forgot thee,
Do not thou tarty to reviue their memory.

Ien. Nay if I put them in mind on it, let me be chokt,
For want of drink, since Ale thou art so luckie,
I Will take the the other pot while it is nappy.
Exit Ienken,
Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus Tertius.
Enter Duchess, Cranwell, Nurse, the Child, Sands, Master Goseling a Merchant.
Goseli. Most honored Princes, think your self as sa^^
In my protection at this town of Lee,
As in the strongest hold you do possess.

Dut: Good M. Goseling now we fly to you
As to our harbor, in your hands it lies,
Either to comfort, or confound our lives?

Sands. We now are chaced by many savage men,
That with blood-thirstinesse pursue our deaths,
Being yet within the closure of their arms,
And desperate of all hope to you we fly.

Cranw. Cosen Goseling 'moungst a world of other men
The providence of heaven chose out you,
Either to be made famous for true faith,
Or by disloyal dea^ing infamous,
Presuming on your perfect honesty,
I brought my noble mistress, this grave Doctor,
This infant Lady, and present us all,
To your safe conduct: obetray our lives,
Bonner will give you gold, woe to that good
That bad men get, by selling guiltless blood,
If any such thought have possessed your heart,
Make Merchandise of mine, let these escape,
For these are precious in the eyes of heaven,
Let them depart, lead me to Bonner first,
Happy my blood, to quench his raging thirst.

Gosel. Cosen I wonder, what desert of mine
Has bred in you this bad opinion,
But I impute it rather to the zeal
You bear your Ladies safety, then the thought
Of any treason you discern in me,
Madam my life, yet out of dangers gripe,
I thrust into your peril, witness heaven,
I take upon me to conceal your flight,
And now I am as deep in Bonners hate
As near to danger, as the next to death,
Be confident in me, the zeal I bear,
To the sincere profession of the truth,
Is a sure guard for you to trust upon.

Dut. The poorest Princes, only rich in faith,
Will pay you a large bounty of her praier^,
Rememb^r then you call me Mistrisse White,
For by that name I past from Billings-gate,
Thence to Graues-end, and so from thence to Lee,
Where under your protection we remain.

Sands. In every place we here the Hue and Cry,
Pursue our fearful flight, in every town
We hear the voice of persecution.

Noise within. Craenw. And hark I here the officers within
If we be known, we are but dead.

Gosel. Tush Mistrisse White,
That name shall give free scope unto your flight.

Enter Constable, and Officers. Consta Good you, good even M. Gosseling,
Good you, good even.

Gosel. Welcome good M. Constable,
what is the news with you*

Consta* Marry we have a warrant here from the high Commission, to seek for
a Duchess, and certain other People, that are in her company, as Doctor Sands,
and one Master Cranwell, her Gentleman-usher, we are commanded to search your
house for such suspected Persons.


Gosel. See M. Constable, with me remains
No more then these, if Mistress White my daughter,
Come with her Child, and Nurse to visit me,
With this her husband, this her husbands father,
If you think her a Duchess, him a Doctor,
Then you may apprehend them at your pleasure,
If not, you had best to make a further search,
For I protest, no stranger more then these,
Harbors within my roof.

Con. I take your word sir, and yet I will not, I will sea
She a Duchess bless her good Woman,
Good Mistress White you are welcome to Lee, as I may say wit^
We have an honest neighbor of your Father,
Is this your Child, heaven bless the little mopps,
Alack, alack, it is as like the Grand-sire
As ever it may look, my pretty ducke.

Enter Fox. Fox. Where Is M. Constable, have you made search
In these suspicious houses.

Dut. Good heaven protect us, now we are betrayed,
This Villain will, I fear, discover us.

Fox. I know her, them, and all.

Dutch. Good M. Goseling stand to us now,
Or we are betrayed.

Gosel. Get you into my house.

Fox. Stand there attend there M. Constable,
My M. Doctor Bonner in disguise,
Stays at the gate, let me survey these parties.

Cranw. Thou know us Fox, we have bin fellow va^^
Confer the years past, with the present times,
And it will make thy flinty heart relent.

Fox. I know thee not.

Cranw. O Fox, she has bin the most honored Mistress
That ever servant served, stay me,
And whilst their bloody hands are busied,
With ceising me, let her, and these escape.

Fox. Peace fellow, now no fellows, thy Mistr. when (...)
In prosperity, turned me off, and therefore I will not (...)
Her in extremity.

Cranw. Will thou not know her in extremity,
Ungrateful villain.

Fox. No sir, I will not, I come to look a Duchess,
Woman be gone, I know thee not, thou a Doct, thou a dunce,
Get thee gone, Cranwell I knew, he was my fellow servant,
Thee I know not, thou art a paultrey fellow,
Away Goseling, take in your geese,
Ship them at your pleasure, when the coast is clear,
I my self will give you a watchword.

Sands. The fellow may mean well, let us withdraw.

Dut. I now perceive, I have done his faith much wrong,
His heart has no relation to his tongue.

Exeunt. Fox. Away, whers the Constable.
Heeres neither Cranwell, Sands, Duchess, nor Child,
Go call in my Lord Bonner.

Enter Bonner, and Clunie. Bonn. Fox.

Fox. My Lord.

Bon. What have thou found them Fox?

Fox. My Lord we had a wrong intelligence,
But thus you shall surprise them, pass they cannot
But by this way, now will we watch these passages,
For now the tide's at height, if they intend
To ship themselves, it must be presently,
Place your self here, directly by this well,
By you Clunie, here I mean to stand,
Guard that place well, by me this shall be mand.

Bon. Stand by me Clunie, Fox, i will pay thee well,
If by thy means we catch these miscreants,
Twill be thy making Fox, M. Cunstable where will you stand.

Fox. Let him keep that way, that bears to landward,
That way, I am sure they will not take,
Go make a strong watch there.

Con. I warrant you M. Fox, let us alone to guard that passage.

Clu. My Lord, you had best sit for your ease.

Exit (...) Bon. Oh I could watch hours, days, nights, months, yeer^^
So I might see their hearts weep bloody tears.

Fox. Look you stand sure Lord Bonner, for I hope,
Anon you^e need a bucket, and a rope.

Enter Goseling, Duchess, Sands, Cranwell, Nurse, and Child. Gose. Keep close
together, lest you loose your train,
My bark is ready to receive you straight,
That way you need must take, I Will not be seen,
Heaven be your guide, with me you have not bin.
Ex.
Dutch. Good sir farewell, my prayers on you attend,
I will report you for a Princes friend.

Fox. Stand, trust me and keep on,
What ere you see shrink not, away begone,
My Lord they come, they come, away, away.

Bon. Help, help, for heavens sake help.

Exeunt the^^ Clu. My Lord is in the well.

Fox. A rope for Bishop Bonner, Clunie run,
Call help, a rope, or we are all undone.

Clu. I Will to the watch for help.
Exit Cluni^
Bon. Help, help, good Fox.

Fox. Soft Bonner, not too fast
Here is no coming out till they be past,
My arms too short my Lord, a rope is coming.

Enter Clunie, Constable, Watch, with Ropes. Clu. Here in this well, ropes,
ropes my masters.

Fox. By this they are far enough,
Well done my Masters, lends your hands,
Draw Du^ out of the ditch.
Draw, pull, help all, so, so, well done.

They pull ^imou^ Bon. Oh Fox oh Clunie, oh my Masters all,
I am almost drowned, oh lead me to some fire.
Oh Fox, what meanest thou to rush with such rude force.

Fox. What would you have me do, I saw them coming,
And I had not the power to stay my self.

Enter Goseling. Bon. And are they past.

Gose. What stand you trifeling here, what seek you for?
If for the Duchess, if for Doctor Sands,
For Cranwell, and the rest, they in disguise,
Are got abord a Ship, and with full sails,
Fly from the Shore.

Bon. Thou telst me a sad tale,
Post Fox, run Clunie, hire a ^arke with speed,
Goseling we were suspicious of thy faith,
But by this message, thou have cleared thy self,
See Goseling, I am almost drowned.

Gos. I am sorry for your honor, that you escaped.

Bon. Tush we trifle time in their vain pursuit,
Thou shall have gold Fox; Clunie, thou reward,
Help me to fire good Goseling, Fox away,
We loose much expedition by thy stay.

Fox. I Will after them my Lord.

Bon. May all things prosper to thy hearts desire,
Come Goseling, prithee lead me to a fire.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Bartie, and Pericell a Walloune. Bertie. And as I told you
sir, with that excuse,
I grounded this my colorable passage,
And sent a ship, which stays for her at Lee,
Where by appointment she had promised meeting,
But She is so watched, so guarded, and so bard,
Of her true servants presence and access,
That I despair of her arrival here.

Pere. Good M. Bertie, cheer your drooping thoughts,
We are Walloones, but in subjection,
And strict obedience to the church of Rome,
Rewards and promises, are sent abroad,
To every foreign Prince, and Burgomaster,
To stay the Duchess, for the rumor runns,
She is escapt already from her house.

Enter Sands. Ber. It Is very certain M. Pericell,
Now shall we hear some news,
Here Is Doctor Sands.

Sands. News of the Duchess, that will please but ill,
I will forbear to speak of our escapes,
All which were winged, with fortune, and success,
And tell you of one hapless accident,
We all took Ship at Lee, but not together,
For I alone past in a Hollander,
No sooner did the wind blow from the shore,
But rose a tempest, which dispersed our ships,
And we might see the Bark wherein she went,
By violence of the waves forced back again,
Even to the havens mouth.

Ber. Even to deaths lean arms,
Thy tragic news, has slain me M. Sands,
We are as one, and what be^ide her person,
I feel in a true essence of her grief.

Pere. In these exreames, it is good to hope the best.

Ber. Oh M. Perecill, the worst of ills,
Falls on her head, and can I hope the best,
She Is like a Lamb, trapt with a heard of Wolves,
A harmless Dove amongst a thousand Hawks,
If she returned, what providence can save,
A body doomed already to the grave.

Enter Cranwell, Duchess Nurse, Child. Sands. See M. Bertie, lift up your sad
eyes.

Dutch. Bertie.

Bertie. Madam.

Kiss. Sands. Oh see the meeting of two faithful souls,
What a sweet union it does make of hearts,
When one another mutrall joy imparts.

Dutch. Defer the story, of our dangers past,
To acquaint us with some comfortable aid.

Bert. Oh pardon me one minute gentle Madam,
If I delay your fair request a little,
To take my fellow servants by the hand,
Good M. Cranwell, the firm loyalty,
You bear you Mistrisse, in her great extremes,
Shall be recorded in a book of Brass.

Cranw. Alas I have scanted of my duty much,
My liberal will's joined with unable power,
With my true service I do join my life,
And owe them both, unto your princely Wife.

Bert. You are a Mirror, Nurse, so art thou,
Thy noble carriage, thus I Kiss with joy,
Alas poor Lady, thou, ere thou can go,
Art forced to leave thy country, thy return,
Will make them smile, that now are forced to mourn,
Thy infancy in Pilgrimage is spent,
Yet thy abode hereafter shall be Kent,
And be an honored Countess of that name,
For so my true divining spirits do aim.

Dutch. What Gentleman is that.

Bert. It Is a Walloone Feris de Ryviers, alias Perecell.

Dutch. May we repose with him?

Bert. Madam you may not,
Neither in this place may I challenge you,
For I am noted, and your coming hither,
Both promised, and expected by great men,
Who to surprise you, have received reward,
All Ports are laid, all passages are stopped,
Search, and inquiry posts through every town.

Pere. Madam it is true, nor would I have you stay,
In Emden long, for you are laid for here.

Dutch. What shall we then do?

Sands. Madam, lets to Santon,
Let M. Berti^ stay with Perecell,
And meet us there hereafter.

Dutch. Content, let it be so,
Never two lovers, Married to more woe,
Here meet we, and here part we, oh short pleasure,
Which fortune serves us, in too small a measure.

Bert. My body is divided in the midst,
That way goes half my heart, and this way the other,
Necessity thy stern deeds I beshrow,
That thy rude hand, gives us the parting blow,
At Santon I will meet you Madam, here
I dare not know you, so adue my dear.

Exeunt Berty* Pererell Dutch. Berty farewell, to Santon bound we are,
With these companions, and our conduct care,
You people happy in a land of peace,
That joy your consciences, with the worlds increase,
Look with indifference into my sad life,
Here my poor husband, dares not know his wife,
And I a Princes, to avoid like danger,
Must use my own dear husband, as a stranger,
Toward Santon we, through deserts, any way,
Though all should leave me, I for grief must stay.

Cranw. Madam, you see what strictnes, we are forced to.
Lets wing our feet, till we can get to Santon,

Sands. Madam, let me admire your constancy,
For heaven has proved your patience every way,
Yet you are confident, and more your zeal to try,
Yo'r forced your loyal husband to deny,

Cran. Then what pale trembling cowards heart would faint,
To wade through danger with so pure a saint?

Enter 4. or 5. Theenes. 1. Thief. A booty, stend, dispoyle them, down with
them.

Dutch. We are beset with thieves.

Sands. Sands, thou must fly,
For weaponles, thou can no mastery try.
Exit Sands.
Nurse. Thieves, thieves.

Exit Nurse, and Child. 1. Thief. Pursue them not, lets ceise on them that
stay,

Fight, wound Cranwell. Cranw. Slaves, you have murderd me.

Thief. No matter, ceise on her, and rifle both,
Ha, by my faith a gallant lusty wench,
It Is the best booty, that we met this month.

Dut. Oh my true servants death, does grieve me more,
Then all the sorrows that I felt before.

They draw her aside to rifle her. Enter Bertie. Ber. I am jealous of the
safety of my wife,
And to escape the better through the woods,
I have clothed my self thus in an Out-lawes shape,
Oh, sight of ruth, my fellow Cranwell slain:
My wife graspt in the arms of ravishers,
Then heaven instruct me with some present means,
That I may find some aid to rescue them,
I have it, a booty, a booty, a brave booty:
But we want help, and aid to compass it,
Four wealthy Merchants, are come down this hill,
Some little aid, and we shall share them all.

2. Thief. Some of you look to see the Woman safe,
I Will help to take the booty.

3. Thief. And so will I.

1. Thief. One bird in the hand's worth two in the bush:
I Will take my present purchase.

2. Thief. We Will share a both sides, come conduct us to them.

Bert. I will, stir not from hence with her,
Till we return.

Exeunt. 1. Thief. My life for yours, come, will you uncase.

Dut. Do not disrobe me of my clothes, as you are a man.

1. Thief. Tut, stand not upon terms,
I love to see a Woman naked.

Dutch. Defend me heaven.

Enter. Bertie. Bert. So ho, ho, I have lost a Jewel,
And left it here behind, when I departed hence.

1. Thief. What value.

Bert. More precious then thy soul, and this it is,
Villain, think not to escape, your mates are far enough*

1. Thief. How goodman rascal.

They fight, the Thief (...)* Bert. Thus, Villain, for the world,
I would not stayne my hands with thy base blood:
But rascal, I will bind you to the peace,
Binds So now, let this ditch shelter you.

Dutch. My Berty? heaven be praised,
Though I am robbed of all the wealth I have,
I am rich enough, in my possessing thee,

Bert. Is M. Cranwell slain?

Cranw. But sorely hurt, and I am near to death.

Dutch. Bind up your wounds, with this white hank^ (...)

Bertie, I am so used to misery, (...)
That it seems nothing, where is the Nurse and Child?

Bert. Oh cross on cross, lets look about the wood^*

Dutch. My Susan lost, I will not stir one foot,
But to the Villains be a second prey,
Unless I find her.

Cranw. Lend me your hand dear sir, get I once up,
I Will spend the remnant of my blood that's left,
In search of my young Mistress.

Exeunt Om^^* Enter Nurse, and Child. Nurse. Oh whither shall I fly, to save
my life,
From the rude hands of these fell ravishers?
My hapless Lady, and her husband both,
By this, have felt the cruel stroke of death,
Or which is worse, are captive led away,
Noise (...) so ho, ho (...) And to the Vulters gripes become a prey,
Oh hark, I hear them coming, hence begone,
Hard is thy hap, that must be left alone,
Dear babe forgive me, I am forced for life,
Lean Child. To ease my carriage, leave thee to their strife.
Exit. Enter Berty, and Duchess looking. On forwards Madam, this way they are
gone,
Heaven be propitions, direct us in our search.

Dutch. Amen, amen.

Enter Cranwell staggering, and falls near the Bush where the Child is. Cranw.
Oh I am lost, sink body to the earth,
Ascend my soul, among Saints receive new birth.

Dutc. Help Bertie, help, it is Cranwell faints, oh help.

Bert. Speak to me man, look up, some wound belike
Is yet vnstopt, from whence proceeds this large effusion,
Its here, lend me some linen, so, so, he comes again,
And see heavens bounty, he at once has given,
Your Servant, and your Child: look Madam, see,
Thrown in a bush, and smiles, and laughes at ye.

Dutc. Having my Husband, Child, and this my servant,
I am the richest Princes on the earth,
But Berty, where is the Nurse, and Docter Sands.

Bert. Both fled, but wherefore Madam look you pale.

Dutch. Oh Berty, I do feel the time approach
Of my delivery, oh for help of Women.

Bert. What shall we do, I am beyond my self.

Dutch. Cranwell, what town is this that stands before.

Cran. Madam, they call it Wezill.

It snowes, and raines, thunders. Dutch. Go, begone,
Thy looks pleads for a cunning Surgeon,
We shall not need, thy help, thy wound is deep,
But stay you Bertie, you the Child must keep.

Cra. Madam, this storm, the cold, and my deep wounds,
May well excuse me, till my hurts are dressed.

Dutch: Be gone I say.

Bert. How fare you Madam.

Dutch. Sick I am, heaven knows,
Ready to die, with these my pinching throws,
It raines, and hailes, and snowes, and blows at once,
Where Berty, may we hide us from this storm.

Bert. Here in this Church Porch, Madam pray remon^^

Dutch. Help, and lead me thither, now lay the Ch^^ down Ber^
Go gather sticks, to help to make a fire,
More plagues my sins do merit year by year,
But these, good heavens, are more then I can bear.

Bert. Alas, alas, this is a homely place,
To bring a Princess of such state to bed,
A wide Church Porch, is made her bedchamber,
And the cold stones her couch, here are no curtains,
But the bleke Winds, could Clouds and storms of hay^^
And they begirt her round, heaven for thy mercy,
This poor distressed Princes shield and save,
Whose cold head lies upon some dead man's grave,
Here comes the Sexton, I will speak to him,
It may be, he may help us to releife.

Enter Sexton. Sex. Gods sacrament vat maukt ye dare.

Bert, Patience good sir.

Sex. Vat bedlers in den kerke, loopt hence strax.

Bert. Vncivell fellow, what thou speak, I know no*
But thy ill meaning by thy deeds, I guess:
Take that to teach thee more civillity.

Exit Cr^^ing help* Sex. Out skellum one hundred towsan devil.

Bert. Still fortune is against us, this base fellow
Will raise some tumult to betray our lives,
Yet yonder comes and man of gravity,
Enter Erasmu^^ and other* It may be he can speak the Latin tongue,
In that I Will let him understand my grief:
Optime and ornatissime vir, audi quaeso.

Eras. Quis es qui tot clamoribus, and tanta exclamatione,
Non modo Divinum Cenatorij locum irreverenter and
Orrose occupas, at vrbem tam claram civesque and Senatores,
Propter etates suas adoratissimas tam flactiose disturbas.

Dutch. Si cum front tam generosa cor tuum humanum consentire
Videtur, infortunij nostri miserere.

Era. Erasmus Roterodamus propter miserias vestras toto cord
Dolet, colo perfectiones and virtutes, quas intimo meo animo
Complectar, multi pendo.

Bert. Is this Erasmus borne in Roterdam,
He that so highly loved Sir Thomas More?

Erasm. Portate hanc ad domum Francisci de Ryvers alias Perecell
Sic domino dominaeque Erafmus Rotero damus omnibus
Officijs est observantissimus.

They bear her off in a Chair. Exeunt. Finis Actus Tertij.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Bertie. Bert. Within this town has Perecell a house,
There, by the credit of this learned man*
We have got harbor till the month expire,
In which her heavy burden may be eased,
Good heaven look down upon her misery,
Comfort her in her grief, strengthen her weakness,
Lay not our woes to wretched Bonners charge,
Free her sweet heaven, by thy Almighty hand,
That we may once revisite our own land.

Enter Cranwell. Cranw. Now cheer your self dear sir, here is a time,
To breath a space, this towne's a quiet port,
From the tempestuous gusts of Bonners hate.

Bart. Some refuge I confess, but the distressed Dutch*
In Childbed torment is a fresh alarm
Of new sprung care, I cannot be at quiet,
Until her safe delivery be past.

Cran. Doubt not of that, the powerful hand of hea^^^
In such extremities is ever strong.

Bert. Good heaven, when I recount the miseries
We have already past, me thinks the lottery
Of cruel Fortune, should be quite exhaust,
And yet when I record the name of Bonner,
With his desire to become great by blood,
The greater part of woe seems still behind.

Cran. Doubtless he is of a most pernicious spirit,
But he that has restrained his envious rage,
And hitherto repulst him, still will curb him.

Bert. I trust he will, Cranwell I prithee step,
And listen from the women what good news.

Enter Perecell, and Sands. Pere. Pray save that labor, we can bring the newe^

Bert. Welcome good Doctor Sands,
What; in good health?

Sands. Sir, thanks to heaven, who never leaves his o^^
Nor suffers them to perish in distress.

Bert. How fares the Duchess.
Gentle host resolve me.

Pere. Happy and well, cheer your declining thoug^^
Well that her perilous conflict has an end,
And happy that to comfort her withal,
There Is borne this day a young Lord Willobie.

Bert. A Boy.

Pere. A goodly Boy M. Bertie.
And one in whom already does appear,
These signs of Courage, to revenge your wrongs.

Ber. Good heaven I thank thee,
This your news dear friend,
Is as a summons after death to life, the preservation
Of his mother in travel, was wondrous strange,
The place where he is borne is strange,
The loving hands, that did first entertayne
His presence to this pilgrimage of life,
Are likewise strange, then as his birth has bin,
So shall his name, we will call him Peregrine.

Sands. A stranger to his Country by that name,
But by his deeds hereafter time may prove,
None more adventured for his Countries love.

A Drum beats a soft March. Ber. As it please his stars, but soft,
What Drum is this, some galle I fear,
To intermix our sweet,
Some sorrow to confound this sudden jioy.

Pere. Your servant Fox did vow to bring you word,
If any hurt were secretly pretended.

Ber. Is Fox arived, upon what cause,
Is Fox arived, upon what cause
Is he past over, do you know gentle sir.

Enter Fox. Pere. Himself make answer for himself.

Fox. Sir, be not you dismayed, in breife these drums,
And those that after these sad Music dance,
Are none that wish you, nor the Duchess good,
A Captain sent from England, and the bloodhound Clunie,
With them the Duke of Brunswicke, clad in arms,
And at the least, ten Ensigns after him,
These how ere they vizard their intents,
With other color, as to vex the Emperor,
Yet their whole purpose, is to look for you,
The gates, and walls, are every way beset,
And through the Town, a privy search begun,
And but you presently devise some means,
To escape from hence, they will take you in your lodging.

Bertie. Escape, there is now no time to talk of escape,
No, no, the secret providence of heaven,
Has so ordained, we should be Bonners thrall,
And welcome wished death, the end of all.

Sands. My mind presageth of a better speed.
What M. Bertie why not now escape,
As well as heretofore.

Bertie. How can that be,
The painful Duchess, lying now in Childbed.

Sands. Is there no art, no means to blind their eyes.

Fox. You are so many of you, it is impossible,
Besides the Duchess, she cannot remove.

Bert. Oh, were she safe, I cared not for my life.

Sands. Nor I for mine.

Fox. Nor I, had I ten thousand lives,

Pere. Cease you your passions, my brain has tuto^^ (...)
And in a cunning plot shall set you free.

Ber. Do that, and Bertie is for ever thine.

Fox. Fox, and his sword, for that will be thy slave.

Cranw. Thy friendship will I bear unto my grave.

San. What thou attempt'st,
My prayers shall help to second.

Pere. I neither do expect thanks, nor reward,
But what I do is of mere charity,
Then list unto me, there is a friend of mine,
A Country Gentleman, not far from hence,
Whose brother late returned from the wars,
And falling sick, within the City here,
Dyed some few days since, now this Gentleman,
Because his brother shall be buried,
Amongst his Ancestors, decrees this night,
To have his body in a Wagon brought,
Home to the Parish Church, where he remains,
And for that purpose has his servants sent,
To see it safe conveyed: A wagon like to theirs,
Covered with black, shall be provided straight,
Into the which, by help of Women's hands,
The Duchess, and her Infant shall be lifted,
You, and the rest disguised in mourning weeds,
Shall follow after as the guard,
And in the dead Man's name without suspect,
Pass by the Soldiers, who if they chance,
To question who you are,
The Burgers being by, and made acquainted,
With such a herce, that is to pass that way,
Will quickly answer them, without more search,
How like you this.

Bert. It will I hope prove current.

Sands. The pretext is fit, and for the Duchess ease:

Fox. Fox has no more sense then a batle-doore,
If in his judgment, we already be not
Delivered from the mischief of their hands.

Pere. Come I Will provide you all things necessary.
And after pray for your success therein.

Fox. I Will back to them, and help you what I can.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Brunswick, L. Paget, Portgraue, Clunie, and Soldiers.
Paget. Great Duke of Brunswick, this your flexible,
And courteous disposition of your troops,
To be for Englands service, shall receive
The due belongs to so great a merit.

Bruns. Noble Captain, I were much to be condemned,
If I neglect my duty to the Church,
But are you sure, these fugetiues are here?

Page Clunie, thou touldst me, that thou saw a man
Of theirs, since we befet the town wast true?

Clu. Yes noble Captain, Cranwell the Duchess usher,
And there is no question, but the rest are here,

Bru. Well then Captain, the other Ports being gard^^
Here with this company we will keep our station,
Where is the Portgraue? have you sent abroad,
Sufficient search amongst the private houses?

Port. We have my Lord.

Bruns. They cannot be in Weasell,
But either coming forth, or lurking here,
They must in all sorts be discovered by us.

Cap. Oh they are politic, and passing subtle,
And if or art, or policy, can help them,
There Is in their company, an Instrument.
Can plot a hundred wales for their escape.

Brun. Let them express their cunning, if they can,
And escape our hands, now we have sented them.

Enter (...) Fox. How now my Lord, oh I am out of breath,
In coming to you, yet I hope my have,
Is little for your purpose, they are coming,
Stand on your guard, for this way they must pass,
There Is Bertie, Cranwell, Sands, with them the Duchess,

Cap. It Was well done Fox, there is thy reward, stand clo^^
Or, now, or never, let us show our care, stand, who g^^ther

Enter four, bearing a Hearce, Bertie, Sands, Cranwell, Mourners. Bruns. Some
funeral it seems.

Cap. It may be some device procured by them,
So to escape the danger of our watch, stand.

Port. I can assure your Lordship, it is not so,
This is the body of young Vandermast,
Whose brother dwelling some four leagues from hence,
Although he died here, yet will have him buried,
Whereas his Ancestors are all entombed,
And for that cause, has sent his servants for him.

Bruns. Is it no otherwise.

Berty. No mighty Prince,
And would to heaven it had not bin so now:

Cap. Pass then, pass, it is not you we look for.

Exeunt they. Bruns. What was this Vandermast, a Citizen?

Port. No my good Lord, he was a Soldier,
A proper Gentleman, and one had served
The Emperor, and others in their wars,
Yet was ordained, to end his days at home.

Enter second Funeral. Bruns A thing no more then usual, but how now,
What Is here, an other funeral? nay then
It is a hazard, we are all deluded.

Cap. My thoughts began to prophecy as much,
Speak, are not you the parties that even now
Came this way, with a mourning funeral.

1. Mour. Not we my Lord, this is the first appearance,
We made this evening.

Bruns. What have you there concealed.

1. Mour. Nothing my Lord, but a dead body Coffined,
The brother of our M. late deceast.

Port. I, this is Vandermast, the other past,
Upon my life, was Barty, and the Duchess.

Cap. They were unwilling to look up me thought.

Bruns: And he that spoke, spoke with a fained voice.

Fox. It Was they, it was they, oh, I could tear my hair,
To think we were so grossly overseene.

Cap: I said as much, come let us follow them,
Send horsemen out, to every quarter straight,
My Lord of Brunswick.

Bruns: You need not bid me ride,
This oversight, has clapped wings to my thoughts.

Exeunt all but Fox. Fox. Now for some pretty policy again,
To lead them forth the way, until the Duchess,
May reach Polonia, and deserve the prize,
Fox play thy part, some stratagem devise.

Exit (...) Enter Bonner, and Gardner. Bonn. Where sits the wind, no news from
German
If those malicious fugitives be tayne,
Our officers I fear, neglect their charge,
Our Captain deals but coldly with the States.

Guard. I dreamt my Lord, that Bertie and the Duchess*
Were both advanced upon a regal throne,
And had their temples wreathed with glittering gold.

Bon. That throne do I interpret, is the stage
Of horrid death, these wreathes of Gold, bright flames,
That shall not only circle in their brows,
But wind about their bodies, till they waste,
And be converted to a heap of ashes,
Me thinks this work of ours goes slowly forward,
The air of England freezeth for defect
Of burning Meteors, to keep it warm.

Guard. See yet my Lord, there has of late bin sacrific^^
In sundry places, many persons, of several qualities,
Whose names were tedious to relate.

Bon. Tut this is nothing, every town should blaze,
And every street, in every town look red,
With glowing sinders of the Miscreants:
Till like to Cockle, they were quite extinct,
And nothing seen to flourish but pure Corn:
The morning spends apace, where are these knaves,
Appointed to bring Fagots for the fire,
Wherein bold Latimer, and Ridley must expire.

Enter two with Fagots. Guard. They come my Lord.

Bonner. Fie on you loytering knaves,
Why make you not more have, be gone, I say,
And see the stake, and every thing be ready,
See how I am still procrastinated,
The Mayor of Oxford, means to dyne I think,
Before he bring the Prisoners to the stake,
How now? where are they?

Enter Sheriff. Sheriff. Hard at hand my Lord,
But the weak age of Latimer is such,
They cannot come so fast, as else they would,
Besides some disputations as they pass,
Had with the Scholars, has detayn'd their speed.

Bon. He have no disputations, bring them on.

Enter Latimer, and Ridley, with Halberds. Ridley. Come brother Latimer, lend
me your arm,
The weak, the weak, but not the blind, the blind,
This day in Oxford, shall be seen to guide.

Lati. My heart is iocund, brother Ridley, still,
And in my Spirit, I fly unto yon place,
But these weak withered sap^i^ are too blame,
These legs of mine, that having now at least,
Full four score and eight winters done me service,
Should now deceive me trust me, but my soul is
Linct in charity, with all the world,
I could be well content, to chide with them.

Bon. These are those self justifying Publicans,
Away with them, conduct them to the fire.

Guard. Come, come, spend no time in talk,
Will you convert, be sorry for your crime,
And you shall yet find favor with the Queen.

Bon. Fie, fie, spit at them, offer them no mercy.

Ridley. Proceed in scorn, so was our Master used,
The servants are (...) better then their Lord,

Bonn. Drag them away there, hence away I say.

Cranm. Stay, stay.

Cranmer with Bon. Which voice is that.

Guard. Some one that's prisoner in Bocardo here,

Enter Cranmer. Cranm. Oh stay my Lords, whom lead you there (...)
The reverent fathers, Ridley, and Latimer?

Bon. I Cranmer, but more favor rests for thee,
Because thou art converted from thine errors.

Cranm. Did you not tell me, they were likewise change*
And have you falsely circumvented me?
Oh heaven, forgive my ^rayterous revolte,
And you the chosen vessels of his love,
Dear Latimer, sweet Ridley pardon me,
To make am^nds, I Will come and dye with you.

Lati. As your revolt, grave Cranmer, was our grief,
So to hear these repentant graceful words,
Infuse our hearts with joy, beyond compare.

Bon. Will Cranmer then turn, and return again.

Cranm. To turn to virtue never comes to late.

Bon. Thy recantation underneath thy hand,
Is published, and will thou now contradict it.

Cranm. Bonner, to cut off needless circumstance,
Let this declare my resolution,
This hand that writ that faithless recantation,
Since I am bard from dying with my friends,
Mark how I punish in this lingering flame,
It shall burn off, as an assured sign,
Hereafter of my constant Martyrdom,
No scandal shall be left by my default,
Open you heavens, and entertain my willing sacrifice,
Yet this is but an earnest of that love,
Hereafter shall in greater measure shine.

Bon. Iay lor pull down that scismatick,
Lodge him within the dungeon, load his joints
With Iron fetters, let him fast from meat,
And have no comfort, but continual checks, dispatch, I say.

Cranm. Farewell religious mates,
What earth does separate, I hope ere long,
Shall meet in heaven, spite of proud Bonners tongue.

Rid. Farewell kind brother, nere decline no more,
But follow us, as we have gone before.

Laty. What stay we for, my quiet thoughts desire,
To cloth this flesh, in purple robes of fire.

Bon. You shall not need to urge our expedition,
Lead them away, their Tragedy once ended,
We will prepare attentive ears to hear,
News of the Duchess landing prisoner.

Exeunt. Enter Duchess, and Bertie, with their Children. Duchess. Yet we have
escaped the danger of our foes,
And I that whilom was exceeding weak,
Through my hard travel in this infants birth,
Am now grown strong upon necessity,
How forwards are we toward Windam Castle.

Bert. Just half our way, but we have lost our friends,
Through the hot pursut^ of our enemies.

Dutch. We are not utterly devoyd of friends,
Behold the young Lord Willowhy smiles on us,
And it is great help, to have a Lord our Friend.

Bert. Good heaven I pray once sort to happy end,
This dangerous Pilgrimage, here undertook,
Sit on this bank a while, and rest our limbs,
Wearied with travail, as our minds with care.

Sits down. Enter Fox, Clunie, Captain, and Soldiers. Clu. You are a Captain
of the Palsegraues band,
These are the other recreants, ceaze them both,
The hundred Crowns proposed, are surely yours,
I know him valiant, and therefore I will clyme
Up in this tree, to see, and not be seen,
Pray lends a hand, whilst you surprise them,
I will laughing stand.

Climbs up the trese. Fox, If I fit you not, ere you come down,
Say Fox is a Goose.

2. Cap. Sir I attach you as an enemy
Unto the Palsegraue, in whose land you are,
You and you ^^ull, obey it ye were best,
Or in resistance hazard both your lives.

Ber. Attach me sir, I know no reason why,
Nor to my knowledge am an enemy,
Unto the Palsgraue, or the meanest man
Within his confines, were are Travelers,
And will immediately forsake the land.

2. Cap. You are a Lance knight, this your Concubine.
And these your Bastards, that by rapine live,
And thus disguised you come to undermine,
Our Countries government, then yield your selves.

Dutch. Though misery has stamped upon out brow
The mark of poverty, yet gentle stranger,
Do not so far forget all manliness,
To be a slanderer of the Innocent.

2. Cap. Term me a slanderer.

Bert. And a Villain too, if thou maintain these defamations
Term me a Thief, my wife a Concubine,
My Children base borne; by a soldiers faith,
Were thou the greatest spirit the Palesgraue has,
I cannot brook this slavish insolence,
That I am angry, witness this reply,
I will defend mine honor though I dye.

Strikes him* 2. Cap. Villains I charge you all inviron him,

They fight. Dutch. So many to one silly passenger,
Then farewell woman weakness, welcome sword,
For once I Will play the man, to save my Lord.

She fights, beats them off. Clu. Why this is excellent, now I hope to live
To see them apprehended or else slain.

Fox. These hopes I Will cross, by cutting down the branch
Whereon he builds this weak foundation.

cuts the branch Clu. Oh I shall fall, help me good M. Fox.

Fox. I, wherefore Clunie, to betray my Lady?
So hateful Bonner, dived into the well,
So fall this damned Parator to hell,
And now I Will help my Mistress to my power,
Fox, come out a your hole, and take your Cozens part
Or I Will pull you out by the ears.
cry within. Help, help, our Captains ^^^^hered, raise the town.

Fox. The Captain slain then Fox it is best to fly,
And lest some sad mischance should second them,
I will convey these Children to the Woods,
That borders near at hand, oh heaven I pray,
Exit with children. Make this disasterous time a happy day.
Cry within. Help, help, our Captains slain.

Clu. I must down, bless my neck and care not.
Cry within. Follow, follow, follow.

Clu. Oh, my guts, a vengeance on this Fox.
Cry within. This way, this way follow.

Exit creeping. Enter Berty, and Duchess. Dut. What cries are these, oh have
thou slain the Cap.

Bert. If he be slain, require not heaven his blood,
Of miserable Berty.
Within. Help, help, help.

Dut. A second volley of heart wounding words,
Oh fly my love, fly, fly, and save thy life,
Before the town be raised, shift for your self,
If you be taken, there is no way but death.
Within. Here, here, this way.

Dut. Why stir you not, our foes are hard at hand.

Bert. I am so amazed I know not where to go,
I Will take this way.

Dut. Rather dear Love take this.

Bert. That way they come.

Dutch. What shall we do,
Behold a Ladder raised against this house,
In happy time, mount up and save your life,
I will defend the bottom with my sword,
And though heaven knows I am orelaid with woe,
I Will rather dye then see your overthrow.

Bert. But I shall leave thee to thine enemies.

Dutch. Shift for your own life, take, no care for mine*
For heavens sake quickly, you delay the time.

Bert. Fear lend me wings, but oh my griefs so great,
It ways me down, and I must needs retreat.
Cry within. Come away, come away, ho! come away.

Dutch, They are at hand, oh good my love mount up.

Getts up the Ladde^^* Enter Burgomaster, with Soldiers. Soul. See where they
are that made the fray.

Burg. You fellow, that run up the Ladder,
Down, down, or I Will pull you down in a ropes name.

Dut. He is my husband, and a Gentleman,
And I Will defend him from your tyranie.

Burg. A Woman fight.

Dut. Such are my fortunes now,
Therefore keep off, who ventures on this way,
Treads a path that leads to his death.

Bert. My friends what seek you, wherefore com^^amm'd

Bur. You have slain a Captain of the Palsgraues ^an^^
Wounded his soldiers, and besides we hear,
You are a Lanceknight, this your Concubine,
And come disguised to undermine the State,
In whose defense these men have armed themselves.

Bert. You seem a Burgomaster, by your habit,
And they that mis-inform'd you were too blame,
Know gentle sir, I am an Englishman,
And on some special business bound this way,
Toward Windam-Castle, till we were disturbed,
By the oppression of the man that is slain.

Burg. I wreake not friend of what estate you are,
Nor to what end you travail through these parts,
You have slain a map, and you must answer it,
According to the law of Nations.

Soul. Down with him, he shall answer it with death.

Burg. Peace there, I charge you, in the Princes name.

Bert. It seems these men are thirsty for my blood,
And without law are set to take my life,
Then it were madness for a man to yield,
To abide a trial, and the judgment past:
Since I must dye, I Will choose the death my self,
And that's to stand on a defensive guard,
Except you swear as you are a Christian,
A Magistrate, and one that will do right,
That I shall have due process of the Law
And be defended from the multitude.

Dutch. Do not, I pray, endanger so your life,
But trust unto the shelter you have got.

Burg. A sorry fortress to defend his life.

Bert. But will you take that oath.

Burg. By heaven I do, and I will see it kept inviolate.

Bert. Then work the worst of fate, if right bear sway,
He cannot speed amiss that does no wrong,
Oh, innocence is bold, free, liberal,
Fearelesse of any danger, that may fall,
I (...) me sir, a Prisoner to the law,
Justice is blind gaze not upon our persons,
Although our birth be near so mean or base,
But fix the eye of judgment on our case.

Bur. So, bind their hands, and lead them to the statehouse
They shall have justice done immediately,

Dutch. Oh stay a while, I have lost my little babes,
What savadge hand has taken my children hence,
Whilst we were busied in this lucklesse brawle.

Bert. My Children borne away! oh then I fear,
It is some treason to abridge our lives,
And that the Captain, that did wrong us thus,
Did it to that intent.

Dutch. It Is so, till now we nere were truly miserable,
Our other miseries were sunneshine days,
Compared unto the greatness of this storm,
Oh suffer me good sir, to seek them out,
For without them, I am but half my self.

Burg. A strict enquiry shall be made forthwith,
In every place that borders here abouts,
Grieve not too much, though such are poor men's treasure
What needy thief to steal them would take pleasure.

Exeunt Omnes* Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Burgomaster, Bertie, Duchess, followed by Soldiers: other side,
Palsegraue, Erbaigh, and Lords attendants. Pals* Right welcome's Erbaigh, to
the Poland king,
Nich'as Van houe, our worthy Burgomaster,
What means this concourse of so many men,
And what are they that you lead bound with you.

Burg. Strangers, an please your excellence my Lord,
That have committed murder in your realm,
Slain Wisendrop a Captain of your band,
For which offense, our purpose is to lead them,
unto the State-house to receive their judgment.

Erba. If I mistake not, I should know that face,
Oh it is the virtuous Lady Katherine,
This M. Berty, her espoused husband,
And has your good stars in your Pilgrimage,
Brought you amongst you Friends?

Pals. The Lady Katherine, what the Suffolks Duchess,
My quondam Love, haild through the streets with cords,
And for the murder of a man that lives,
Oh it is uncivil usage, my good Lady,
Yar villains all unto our Soveraigntie,
How dare you thus abuse her royal birth.

Burg. Pardon my Lord, we did not know her state.

Pals. Her heavenly face, then which there is none more fair,
In England, or the World,
Might without other witness of her state,
Suffice to tell you, she was nobly borne,
This is that Duchess, mirror of this age,
She whom the lordly Bishops of the Realm,
Bonner, and Gardner, persecute so much,
Pardon me Madam, that I have so long,
Suffered your excellence to stay in bonds.

Dutc. This your acknowledgment, most mighty king,
Amazeth me, considering my distress,
For it is a common custom in the world,
To take no notice of the miserable.

Pals. I stand amazed at this strange accident,
The circumstance whereof we will hear elsewhere,
Mean time thrice welcome to the Polands king,
And much it greeues me that so great a Princes,
Should be so basely handled in my land.

Enter Sands, and Cranwell. Sand. Oh help dear Lord, and shield us from our
for*
We are pursued by Brunswicke, and his Captains,
Who seek our lives, we fly to your protection.

Pals. Whence are you friends.

Dutch. The truest friends we have*
Of England mighty Prince, I know them both,
The first is Doctor Sands, a worthy man,
The other Cranwell, and my Secretary.

Enter Brunswicke, English Captains, and Soldiers. Bruns. My Lord of Erbaigh,
and the king of Poland,
Shield not those traitors, both to heaven and men,
From the due punishment of their offense,
Behold an Englishman, and a Commander of a good esteem*
Has his commission signed to apprehend,
This Sands, and Cranwell, fled to you for help,
Then as you tender the privilege of Princes,
Ore their subjects*
Suffer this writ to have his current here,
As I have done through all my territories.

Bert. It ill beseemes the noble duke of Brunswicke,
To be a persecutor of good men.

Dutch Or you good Captain, agent in this cause.

1. Cap. That's recreant Berty, and the Suffolks Duchess*
They likewise are included in this scroule.

Bruns. My Lord of Poland, we demand them all,
Then yield them royal sir, unto ou^ hands.

Pals. First will I sacrifice ten thousand lives,
Ere suffer these religious souls to dye,
My Lord of Brunswicke, you are over bold,
To make so rash an entrance in my land,
Without our special license granted first.

Bruns. The league betwixt us warrants my approach.

Pals. The League, for this time, is your priveledge,
But as you dread the Palsgra^es puisance
And fear to violate our wrighten love,
Immediately vntred your forward steps,
Forsake the soil where you have set your foot,
Or look to be withstood with fire and sword,
These Lambs are fled into our foulds for aid,
And we will defend them, say what may be said.

Bruns. This disobedience draws upon your land,
Deserved malediction from the Church.

Pals. That we will dispense withal, and to let you know,
How we do slight those stinglesse menaces,
Here I create this noble Gentleman,
Earl of Crozam, an Earldom under us,
Religious Docter Sands, our Chapleine,
And M. Cranwell our chief Secretary,
So tell Lord Bonner, Gardner, and the rest.

Enter Atkinson. Atkin. Health and long life unto the King of Poland,
Captain, from Englands queen, I thus salute you,
Here is a countermand for your Commission,
By which you are enjoined to stay the search,
After the Suffolk Duchess, and her friends.

1 Cap. To stay the search? is our dread Sovereign,
Altered in her Religion, or is she dead:

Atkin. She Is dead good sir, Queen Mary is deceas't,
And the most virtuous Lady Elizabeth,
Invested in the regal dignity,
My Sovereign hearing* that the Lady Katherine,
The Suffolk Duchess, her allie in blood,
Did live obscurely in these Provinces,
In want, in misery, and great distress,
Sends to repeal both her, and all her friends,
If such a Lady harbor in your land,
I do entreat her highness Proclamation,
May have his current course through every town.

Pals. In you dear sir the Proclamation ends,
Here is the Duchess, here are all her friends.

Dutch. I kindly thank you, for your worthy pains*
Has the director of all humane lives,
Preserved my Sovereign, that heroicke Maid,
From the intangling snares of blood and death,
And changed her prison, to a royal Throne?
Here on this ground, where first I heard the news,
I render thanks unto the gracious heavens,
Thou that send'st Balm of comfort to the wounded,
Joy to the bruised heart, oppressed for truth,
Lengthen her days as long as heaven has stars,
Or this fair frame foundation for a world,
Or if it be thy gracious providence,
For to remove her to a happier place,
Let in her stead arise, and from her ashes come,
A Phoenix may enlighten Christendom,
Oh, had I now my Children lately lost,
I should surviue as I had near bin crossed.

Enter Fox, and Children. Fox. That comfort Madam on my bended knee,
Your servant Fox humbly presents your grace.

Dutch. My Per^grine, my Susan, then for care
To make a mixture with this too much Joy,
Or I shall surfeit with the raretie.

Enter Clunie. Clu. Justice my Lord, Justice, Fox has broke my ne^ke

Pals. How comes it Fox, that he exclaimes on thee?

Fox. Marry andt please your Majesty, it was thus,
This villainous rascal, followed to surprise my Lady,
And being afraid to venture himself, set on one of (...)
Palsegra^es Captains to do it, whilst he climbed
Up into a tree and stood laughing, now sir, I cut the bow,
And he fell down, and if you have not broake your neck,
I would you had.

Pals. If this be true, he has bought his pleasure dear,
Sir begone, this justice I allow,
For his derision t^en, deride him now.

Clu. All things goes backward for our good,
Madam farewell, your punishment is past,
Now set your mind to punish us at last.

Dutch. Revenge shall be a stranger in my heart,
The tortures I Will inflict upon my foes,
Is kindness, for unkindness, grace for death,
For what is prosperity but a puff of breath,
My Lord of Brunswick, pray let us be friends.

Bru. Withal my heart, since every heart befriends you.

Pals. It joys me that your sorrows here take end,
Wilt please you Madam, here to stay with us
Or go for England, if you so resolve,
I Will see you furnished with a noble fleet.

Dutch. To England with full sails, blow gentle wind,
I long to see my Sovereign noble maid,
Princes I humbly thank you for these honors,
Done to your handmaide, far unworthy them,
But time shall testify my thankfulness,
Be smooth rough sea, that I may pass a maine,
To do my duty to my Sovereign.

Exeunt. Enter Bonner, with officers after him, two Men, and a Woman* 1. Down
with him, give us leave to be revenged on him.

2. For all the tyrany that he has used

Bon. What have I done, you should revile me thus?

3. What have thou done to deserve our hate?

Bon. Defend me Officers, shall I without Law,
Be trod to death by the rude Multitude.

1 Offic. Keep off my Masters,
It Is her highness pleasure,
He shall not be convicted but by Law.

3. And whether goes he.

1. Offi. To the Marshalsea.

All. We will not leave him, till we see him in.

Enter Keeper, Grindall, Cox, and Scory. Offi. This is the Prison, here the
Keeper comes,
And with him Master Grindall, Scory, Cox,
Such reverent men as, Bonner, by your means,
These many years have suffered much distress*

Keep. But now they are delivered, and their place,
Bonner, you must an other while supply,
So says the strict Commission I have here.

Grind. Trust me, I glory not to see his fall.

Story. Believe me* nor do I.

Cox. Though we know, had not our Keeper bin more kind to v^
Then you were M. Bonner, we might here,
Have starv^d for want of meat, but heaven forgive you,
We do with all our hearts.

Scory. And we will labor too, so much as in us lies,
Unto the Council, you may be favorably
Dealt withal, so fare you well.

Exeun^ Bon. Farewell, this course inconstant fortune keeps,
While wan one laughes, an other always weeps.

Exeun^ Enter Lord Hunsdon, Admiral, and Clinton. 1. Such measure as to others
he has met,
The same let him receive, good M. Keeper.

2. Remember Lollards-tower.

3. Let his best diet be but from the basket,
Nay, bread and water, is too good for him,
His fat Shroue-tuesday sides may well endure,
A hungry Lent or two, and never hurt him*

Offic. Here I deliver up my charge.

Keep. And I receive him,
Come M. Bonner, you must go with me

Bon. Stay I have bethought me, I Will recant.

Keep. It cannot serve your turn.

3. Recant, he has already twice or thrice done so.

2. Tut, he can turn with every weathercock,
Away with him.

Keep. Come sir, will you go.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Lord Hunsedon, Admiral and Clinton, with staves,
Gentlemen atendants. Admi. Who wast that said the Duchess came through
Southwark.

Huns. It Was the Lord Clinton.

Clin. I left her Grace now at S. Georges Church,
Accompanied with M. Richard Berty,
With Doctor Sands, Cranwell, and trusty Fox,
And diverse other Gentlemen attendants.

Admi. Here at the Martialsea we will stay her coming,
And hark, her trumpets sounds her near approach,
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, I pray you all
By that dear love you owe her majesty,
To be officious in the entertayne,
Of this renowned Lady Katherine.
Enter in state, the Duchess, Berty, Sands, Cranwell, and Fox. Cry with in.
Heavens preserve your grace,
Your relief to poor Prisoners.

Dutch. What Prison call you this?

Cran. The king's bench Madam, where all these prisoners,
Are detayn'd for debt.

Dutch. If they be able to make satisfaction, and will not,
They are worthy to lie there,
But if by cruelty of Creditors,
It Is Christian charity to succor such.

Sands. I have heard that some lie there in policy,
And have ingrost into their greedy hands,
The goods of diverse thrifty minded men,
And though well able, yet they will not pay.

Dutch. Great pity that such men escape unpunished,
But are they in the number that do beg.

Sands. No Madan, they are laid on beds of Down,
Fare daintely, and never taste of want,
Except it be the want of Liberty,
And that is no want, because they have large walks,
As yards, and gardens, and fair bouling-allies,
With company at will to spend the time.

Dutch. To them we wish a better Conscence,
But to the poor, and such as want indeed,
One of you give amongst them 40. Angels,
My troubles make me sensible of theirs:
Distress is sharply set, and bites too sore,
To be endured by such as are true poor,
So forwards Gentlemen.

Fox. Room for the Lords.

Admi. Thrice welcome is the noble Suffolks Duchess*
To us, and to her royal majesty,
In whose high favor, you are highly plac'^*

Clin. In sign whereof her princely Majesty,
Restores you to your ancient Siegnories,
Intitles you, as due to you by title,
Barronesse of Willowby* and Earsbie,
Duchess Dowager of Suffolk,
Her highness nearest and most dearest subject.

Hunsd. Your goods, and lands extracted violently,
Her Majesty restores to you again,
Here Is the true inventory of them all,
As they were ceis'd into the Bishops hands.

Admi. And that you may build on her Princely love,
It is her pleasure, M. Richard Berty,
The husband of your troubles and your cares,
Should be chief Secretary to the State,
Till higher titles do advance his worth.

Bert. An honor my good Lord Admiral,
That I esteem, and yet desire it not,
O be it not offensive to her Grace,
That I have leave to lead a private life,
After my painful travel in strange Lands.

Adm. Enjoy your minds contentment with your mind.

Hun. You, Doctor Sands, her highness, and the Clergy,
Do consecrate Archbishop of York.

Sands. An honor far exceeding my desert.

Clint. Master Cranwell Gentleman usher to her grace,
Her highness will retain in self same place,
To attend her Majesty.

Cranw. Withal my heart, I humbly tender a true subjects
Yet might it please her royal Majesty,
Since I have served my Lady in distress,
Endured so many troubles for her sake
That I may live, and dye in serving her.

Clint. A virtuous inclination, hold it still,
It will renown thee more then to be great.

Dutch. My Lord of Hunsdon, Clinton, Effingam,
I humbly thank her Majesty, and you,
Oh may I live to express a loving heart,
By some good action pleasing to you all.

Enter Prisoner with a Box. Pri. Madam be good unto a company of poor
Prisoners.

Dutch. What other Prison Cranwell call you this.

Cranw. This is the Prison of the Marshalsea,
Chiefly pretended for her Highness household,
But there are diverse other prisoners.

Enter Goseling. Dutch. It Is charity to help distressed men,
Of what estate so ere, cause they be men,
I leave their faults respect unto the Law,
Give them as much as the'ther Prisones,
But what is he that with a downecast look,
Gives signs of coffeehouse.

Gos. Madam I am a Prisoner here,
But joy to see your Grace at liberty.

Dutch. That face and voice, I often have seen and heard,
Did not you sometime make abode in Lee.

Gos. Madam I did, and those that knew me called me Goseling.

Dutch. Then I am sure, you knew one Mistress White,
This is the man that helped me to escape,
When we were near beset with Bonners traynes.

Cranw. It is my kinseman Madam, now I know him,
What cause has brought thee to this hard distress.

Gos The cause even now aleaged.

Dutch. Has Bonner bin so cruel to my friend,
Before mine eyelids wear the seal of sleep,
If heaven be pleased I will release thee Goseling.
And pay thy charges to the utmost farthing,
Oh my dear friend, it never shall be said
I was ungrateful, where I was befriended,
And now his troubles make me call to mind,
The faithful dealing of my servant Fox,
See Lords, a man whom I dismissed my service,
More through self-will, then any just offense,
Yet has he quitted that disgrace so well,
That I admire the strangeness of his art,
For Bonner used him as a special means,
To seek my life, which oftentimes he saved,
Paying my great unkindness, with kind love,
Many such servants may this land afford,
That use their wits to such good purposes,
Here as a part of thy deserved reward,
I freely give thee a hundred pounds a year,
And when I dye my land shall make it good.

Fox. And when Fox fails you, let him dye in a ditch.

Dutch. Gramercies gentle servant, now my Lords,
Lets bend our pace toward famous London Bridge,
How pleasing is the prospect of the City,
Now I have bin five years a stranger here,
Through the same to White Hall to her grace,
That I may see my loving Sovereigns face.

FINIS.

