A Heavenly Harmony of Spiritual Songs, and holy Himnes, of godly Men,
Patriarchs, and Prophets.

Imprinted at London. 1610.

To the courteous Reader.
GEntle Reader, my meaning is not with the variety of verse to feed any vain
humor, neither to trouble thee with devises of mine own invention, as carieng
an ouerweening of mine own wit: but here I present thee with these Psalms or
Songs of praise, so exactly translated as the prose would permit, or sense
would any way suffer me: which (if thou shall be the same in heart thou art in
name, I mean a Christian) I doubt not, but thou will take as great delight in
these, as in any Poetical fiction. I speak not of Mars, the god of Wars, nor of
Venus, the goddess of love, but of the Lord of Hosts, that made heaven and
earth: Not of Toys in Mount Ida, but of triumphs in Mount Sion: Not of
Uanitie, but of Ueritie: not of Tales, but of Truethes.

Thus submitting my self unto thy clemency, and my labors unto thy
indifferency, I wish thee as my self.

Thine, as his own. M. D.

The Spiritual Songs and holy Hymns, contained in this Book.
1 THe most notable Song of Moses, which he made a little before his death. 2
The Song of the Israelites, for their deliverance out of Egypt. 3 The most
excellent Song of Solomon. Containing eight Chapters. 4 The Song of Annah, 5
The Prayer of Jeremiah. 6 The Song of Deborah and Barach. 7 A Song of the
Faithful, for the mercies of God. 8 Another Song of the Faithful. 9 A Song of
thanks to God. 10. An other Song of the Faithful.
Other Songs and Prayers out of the books of Apocripha.
11 The Prayer of Judith. 12 The Song of Judith. 13 A Prayer in Ecclesiasticus
of the Author. 14 The Prayer of Solomon. 15 A Song of Ihesus the son of
Sirach. 16 The Prayer of Hester. 17 The Prayer of Mardocheus. 18 A Prayer in
the person of the Faithful. 19 A Prayer of Tobias.
FINIS.
The most notable Song of Moses, containing Gods benefits to his people, which
he taught the Children of Israel, a little before his death: and commanded them
to learn it, and teach it unto their children, as a witness between God and
them. Deutronom. Chap. xxxii.
Ye Heavens above, unto my speech attend,
And Earth below, give ear unto my will:
My doctrine shall like pleasant drops descend,
My words like heavenly dew shall down distill,
like as sweet showers refresh the herbs again
Or as the grass is nourished by the rain,
I will describe Iehouahs name aright,
And to that God give everlasting praise:
Perfect is he, a God of woondrous might,
With judgment he directs all his ways.
He only true, and without sin to trust,
Righteous is he, and he is only just.
With loathsome sin now are you all defilde,
Not of his seed, but Bastards, basely borne:
And from his mercy therefore quite exilde,
Mischievous men, through folly all forlorn.
Is it not he which has you dearly bought:
Proportioned you, and made you just of naught?
Consider well the times and ages past.
Ask thy forefathers, and they shall thee tell,
That when Jehovah did divide at last,
The Inheritance that to the Nations fell:
And seperating Adams heirs, he gave
the portion, his Israel should have.
His people be the portion of the Lord,
Jacob the lot of his inheritance:
In wilderness he has thee not abhorred,
But in wild Deserts did thee still advance.
He taught thee still and had a care of thee,
And kept thee as the apple of his eye.
Like as the Eagle tricketh up her neast,
Therein to lay her little birds full soft,
And on her back does suffer them to rest,
And with her wings does carry them aloft.
Even so the Lord with care has nourisht thee,
And thou have had no other God but he.
And great Jehovah gives unto thee,
The fertilst soil the earth did ever yield:
That thou all pleasure might behold and see,
And taste the fruit of the most pleasant field:
Honey for thee out of the flint he brought,
And oil out of the craggie rock he wrought.
With finest butter still he has thee fed,
With milk of Sheep he has thee cherished:
With fat of Lambs, and Rams in Bazan bred,
With flesh of Goats he has thee nourished.
With finest wheat he has refresht thee still,
And gave thee wine, thereof to drink thy fill.
But he that should be thankful then for this,
Once waring fat, began to spurn and kick:
Thou art so crancke, and such thy grosenesse is,
That now to lust thy prouender does prick,
That he that made thee, thou remembrest not,
And he that saved thee thou have clean forgot.
With Idols they offend his gracious eyes,
And by their sin provoke him unto ire:
To devils they do offer sacrifice,
Forsake their God, and other gods desire.
Gods whose beginnings were but strange and new,
Whom yet their fathers never feared nor knew.
He which begat thee is clean out of mind,
The God which formed thee thou do not regard:
The Lord to anger was therewith inclinde,
His sons and daughters should him so reward.
And there he vowed his cheerful face to hide,
To see their end, and what would them betide.
For faithless they and froward are become,
And with no God move me to jealousy:
To anger they provoke me all and some,
And still offend me with their vanity:
And with no people I will move them then,
And anger them with vain and foolish men.
For why? my wrath is kindled like the fire,
And shall descend to the infernal lake:
The earth shall be consumed in mine ire,
My flames shall make the mighty mountains quake
With many plagues I will them still annoy,
And with mine arrows I will them destroy.
With hunger, heat and with destruction,
I will them burn, consume and overthrow:
They shall be meat for beasts to feed upon,
The ground envenomed whereupon they go.
In field, in chamber still my sword shall slay
Man, maid and child, with him whose head is gray.
And I will scatter them both far and near,
And hence forth make their memory to cease,
Save that the furious enemy I fear,
And that his pride should thereby more increase.
And they should say, and forth this rumor ring,
that they and not the Lord have done this thing.
They are a nation void of counsel quite,
To understand, there does not one intend:
But were they wise, in it they woule delight,
And would consider of their latter end.
Can one or two put thousands to the flight,
Except the Lord do help them with his might?
For with our God their Gods may not compare,
Our foes themselves will still the same confess:
Their Uines of Sodom and Gomorra are,
Their grapes of gaul, clusters of bittenesse.
Their wine is like to Dragons poison sure,
or gaul of Aspes, that no man may endure.
And have not I laid up in store this thing,
Amongst my treasures do I not it hide?
The recompense with vengeance will I bring,
And all in time their foot away shall slide.
For their destruction (lo) is now at hand,
And mischief here even at their heels does stand.
For why? the Lord does judge the earth alone,
And to his servants show himself most kind:
When he shall see their power is past and gone,
And none kept up in hold nor left behind.
when men shall say, let us your gods behold,
Where be they now, whom ye so much extold?
Which often did eat the fatted sacrifice,
And drank the wine of the drink offering:
Unto your help now let us see them rise:
Lo, I am God, and there is no such thing:
I kill, give life, I wound, make whole again,
Out of my hands no man can ought retain.
I lift my hands on high to heaven above,
Immortal I, and only live for ever:
My glittering sword I sharp for my behooue,
In righteous judgment still I do persevere.
I will send vengeance on mine enemies,
And many plagues on them which me despise.
Mine arrows then of blood shall have their fill,
My sword shall eat the very flesh of men:
For such my Saints as they do slay and kill,
And for the Captives they imprison then.
And when I once begin revenge to take,
From plague and vengeance then I will not slake.
Ye nations all, honor his people then,
He will revenge his servants guiltless blood,
And surely plague the vile and wicked men,
Which stoutly have against him ever stood.
He will show mercy still unto his land,
And on his people, brought forth by his hand.
A Song of Moses and the Israelites, for their deliverance out of Egypt. The
xv. Chap. of Exodus.
I Will sing praise unto the Lord for aie,
Who has triumphed gloriously alone,
The horse and rider he has overthrown,
And swallowed up even in the raging sea.
He is my strength, he is my song of praise,
He is the God of my salvation.
A Temple will I build to him alone,
I will exalt my fathers God always.
The Lord Jehovah is a man of war,
Pharao, his chariots, and his mighty host
Were by his hand in the wild waters lost,
His Captains drowned in red Sea so far,
Into the bottom there they sanke like stones,
The mighty depthes our enemies devour,
Thy own right hand is gloorious in thy power,
Thy own right hand has bruised al their bones.
And in thy glory thou subverted have
The rebels rising to resist thy power,
Thou sentst thy wrath which shall them all devour,
Even as the fire does the stubble wast.
And with a blast out of thy nostrilles
The flowing flood stood still as any stone,
The waters were congealed all in one,
And firm and sure as any rocks or hills.
The furious foe so vainly v^^^teth still,
And voweth to pursue with endless toil,
And not return til he have got the spoil,
With fire and sword they will destroy and kill.
Thou sentst the wind which ouerwhelm'd them all,
The surging seas came sousing in again,
As in the water, so with might and maine,
Like lead, unto the bottom down they fall.
Oh mighty Lord, who may with thee compare?
Amongst the Gods I find none like to thee:
whose glorie's in holiness, whose fears in praises be
whose chief delights in working woonders are.
Thou stretchest out thy right and holy arm,
And presently the earth did them devour:
And thou will bring us by thy mighty power,
As thou have promised without further harm.
And for thy people (Lord) thou shall provide,
A place and seat of quietness and rest:
The nations all with fear shall be oppressed,
And Palestina quake for all her pride.
The Dukes of Edom shall hang down the head,
The Moabites shall tremble then for fear,
The Cananites in presence shall appear,
Like unto men whose fainting hearts were dead,
And fear and dread shall fall on them alas,
Because thou helpest with thy mighty hand:
So still as stoues amazed they shall stand,
Oh mighty Lord, while thine elect do pass.
And thou shall bring thy chosen and elect,
Unto the mount of thine inheritance:
A place prepared thy people to advance,
A Sanctuary there thou shall erect,
Which thou (oh Lord) established have therefore,
And there thy name shall reign for evermore.
The most excellent Song which was Salomons, wherein is declared the true and
unfeigned love between Christ and his Church, containing, viii. Chapters.
Chap. 1.
LEt him embrace his Dear, with many a friendly kiss,
For why? thy love than any wine to me more pleasant is:
In smell thou art most like, sweet odors unto me,
thy name like precious ointme^t is, so sweet as sweet may be
Therefore the Uirgins al, of thee enamored are,
Entice me on to follow thee, lo, we our selves prepare:
The King has brought me in, to chamber richly dight,
He is my joy, his love is sweet, the good in him delight.
Ye daughters of Jerusalem, although that brown I be,
Than Arras rich or Cedars fruits, I seemlier am to see,
Disdain me not although I be not passing fair,
For why? the glowing sunny rays discolloured have my laire:
My mothers darlings dear, with envy swelling so,
Have me co^strain'd to keep their Uine, thus I mine own forgo.
Tell me my sweet and dear, where thou thy slocke do feed,
Or where thy little Lamblings rest, about midday indeed?
Else shall I walk about, all wandering like a stray,
And seek thee after other flocks, through many an unknown way:
If that my paths (oh Paragon) be so unknown to thee,
Go feed thy flock amongst the tents, where none but shepherds be,
My true and loyal Love, I may thee well compare
To famous Pharaos horses great, which in his chariots are,
Thy cheeks bedded with precious stone, most lovely to behold,
About thy neck likewise do hang great massy chains of gold.
Fine costly borders for my Love, of gold we will prepare,
With silver studs accordingly of work surpassing rare.
Whiles he at table sat, perfumes then did I make
Of Spicknard sweet and delicate, al for my true Loves sake:
My love more sweet than Myrrh, between my breasts does ly,
Or Camphere, that does spring and grow in vine of Engady.
How fair art thou my Love, my Dove, my Darling dear,
Thine eyes most like unto the Doves, in sight to me appear.
Oh how exceeding fair, and seemly to be seen,
The bed where we together lie, is hung with pleasant green:
The beams our house uphold, they all of Cedar be,
The reaching Rafters of the same, of Fyrre, that stately tree.
The second Chapter.
I Am the fragrant Flower, of brave vermilion hue,
And Lilie in the valey low, ysprong up fresh and new:
As Lilly flower excels the thorn, or little chyer of grass,
So far my Love the Uirgins all in beauty does surpass.
Or as the barren crooked stock unto the straightest tree,
No more the sons unto my Love may ought compared be:
To rest by his sweet side, to me a heavenly bliss,
The fruit that springs from my Love, exceeding pleasant is.
To Celler he me brings, of wine abundant store,
His love displaied over me, how can I wish for more?
Fill forth your Flagons then, whereof the fume may fly,
Bring forth your cates to comfort me, ah me, for love I die.
His left hand clipping close, about my neck does hold,
His right does sweetly me embrace, and eke my corpse enfold.
I charge you by the Roes and Hinds, ye Jewish daughters all,
Not once to stir nor wake my Love, until she please to call.
But stay, me thinks this is, mine own Loves voice I hear,
Lo, how he skips from hill to hill, lo, you he does appear.
My Love is like a Roe, that frisketh in the wood,
Or like the strong and stately Heart, in prime and lusty blood.
He closely shroudes himself behind our wall I see,
And through the gate he does disclose and show himself to me.
And calling then, he says, come to thine own my Dear,
For lo, the clouds are past and gone, the skies are crystal clear:
The flowers in the field, so fair and freshly spring,
The birds do chant with merry glee, the Turtle now does sing:
The fig trees bear such store, that boughs with weight are bent,
The Uines with blossoms do abound, which yield a sweet acce^t.
Come to thine own my dear, my Darling and my Dove,
Leave thou the place of thine abode, come to thine own true love
Let me behold thy face, most pleasant to the sight,
And hear my best beloueds voice, that most does me delight.
Destroy the subtle Fox, that does the grapes devour,
For lo, behold, the time is come, the vines do bud and flower.
My Love to me is true, and I likewise his own,
Which in the Lilles takes repast, himself even all alone:
Until the day does spring, or shadows fade away,
Be as a Roe or like the Hearts, which on the mountains play.
The third Chapter.
BY night within my bed, I romed here and there,
But al in vain, I could not find my Love and friendly Fere.
Then straight ways up I rose, and searching every street
throughout the city far and near, but him I could not meet.
The watchmen found me tho, to whom I then can say,
Have ye not seen mine own true Love, of late come this a way:
Then passing them, I found my Love I long had sought,
And to my mothers chamber then, my darling have I brought.
I charge you by the Roes and Hinds, this vow to me you make,
Ye Jewish daughters, not to call my Love till she do wake.
Who Is that which does from wilderness, in mighty smoke appear,
Like the perfumes of odors sweet, which Mercha^ts hold so dear.
About the bed of Solomon, behold, there is a band
Of threescore valiant Israelites, which al in armor stand,
All expert men of war, with sword still ready pressed,
Least foes in night time should approach, when men suspect them least:
King Solomon has made of Liban tree so sure,
A Palace brave, whose pillars strong are al of silver pure:
The pauement beaten gold, the hangings purple grain,
The daughters of Jerusalem with joy to entertain.
Ye Sion daughters, see, where Solomon is set
In Royal throan, and on his head, the princely Coronet,
Wherewith his mother first, adorned him (as they say)
When he in marriage linked was, even on his wedding day.
The fourth Chapter.
BEhold, thou art al fair my Love, my hearts delight,
Thine eyes so lovely like the Doves, appear to me in sight,
Thy hair surpassing fair and seemly to the eye,
Like to a goodly heard of Goats, on Gilead mountain hie.
Thy teeth like new washed sheep, returning from the flood,
Whereas not one is barren found, but bears twins so good.
Thy lips like scarlet thread, thy talk does breed delight,
Thy temples like pomgranet fair does show to me in sight.
Thy neck like David's Tower, which for defense does stand,
Wherein the shieldes and targets be, if men of mighty hand.
Thy breasts like twinned Roes, in prime and youthful age,
Which feed among the Lillies sweet, their hunger to assuage.
Until the day do spring, and night be banished hence:
I will ascend into the mount of Myrrh and Frankensence.
Thou art all fair my Love, most seemly (...) to see,
From head to foot, from top to toe, there is no shot in thee.
Come down from Libanon, from Libanon above,
And from Amanahs mountain hie, come to thine own true love.
From Sheuers stately top, from Hermon hill so hie,
From Lions dens and from the cliffes, where lurking Leopards lie.
My Spouse and sister dear, thy love has wounded me,
Thy lovely eye and seemly neck, has made me yield to thee.
Thy love far better is, than any wine to me,
Thy odors sweet does far surpass, the smell where spices be.
Thy lips like honey comb, under thy tongue does lie
The honey sweet: thy garments smell, like Libanon on hie.
My Spouse a garden is, fast under lock and kay,
Or like a Fountain closed (...), where sealed is the way.
Like to a pleasant plot I (...) thee well compare,
Where Ca^phere, Spicknard, dainty fruits, with sweet Pomgranets are.
Even Spicknard, Saffron, Calamus, and Synamon^ do grow,
With Incense, Myrrh and Alloes, with many spices more.
Oh Fountain passing pure, oh Well of life most dear.
Oh Spring of lofty Libanon, of water crystal clear.
Ye North and Southern winds upon my garden blow,
That the sweet spice that is therein, on every side may flow.
Unto his garden place, my Love for his repast
Shall walk, and of the fruits therein, shall take a pleasant taste.
The fifth Chapter.
WIthin my garden plot, lo, I am present now,
I gathered have the Myrrh and spice,
that in abundance grow:
With honey, milk and wine, I have refresht me here.
Eat, drink my friends, be merry there, with hearty frie^dly cheer.
Although in slumbering sleep, it seems to you I lay,
Yet hear I my beloved knock, me thinks I hear him say,
Open to me the gate my Love, my hearts delight,
For lot, my locks are all bedewed with drizling drops of night.
My garments are put off, then may I not do so,
Shall I defile my feet I washed, so white as any snow.
Then fast even by the door to me he showed his hand,
My heart was then enamoured, when as I saw him stand.
Then straight ways up I rose, to open the door with speed,
My hands and fingers dropped Myrrh, upon the bar indeed.
Then opened I the door, unto my Love at last,
But all in vain, for why? before, my Love was gone and past.
There sought I for my love, then could I cry and call,
But him I could not find, nor he, nould answer me at at all.
The watchmen found me then, as thus I walked astray,
They wounded me, and from my head, my veil they took away
Ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye my Love do see,
Tell him that I am sick for love, yea, tell him this from me.
Thou peerless Gem of price, I pray thee to us tell,
What is thy Love, what may he be, that does so far excel?
In my beloueds face, the Rose and Lilly strive,
Among ten thousand men not one, is found so fair alive.
His head like finest gold, with secret sweet perfume,
His curled locks hang all as black, as any Ravens plinne.
His eyes be like to Doves, on Rivers banks below,
Ywasht with milk, whose colors are, most gallant to the show.
His cheeks like to a plot, where spice and flowers grow,
his lips like to the Lilly white, from whence pure Myrrh does flow,
His hands like rings of gold, with costly Chrisalet,
His belly like the Yuory white, with seemly Saphyrs set.
His legs like Pillars strong, of Marble set in gold,
His countenance like Libanon, or Cedars to behold.
His mouth it is as sweet, yea, sweet as sweet may be,
This is my Love, ye Uirgins lo, even such a one is he*
Thou fairest of us al, whether is thy Lover gone,
Tell us, and we will go with thee, thou shall not go alone*
The sixth Chapter.
Down to his garden place, mine own true Love is gone,
Among the Spice and Lillies sweet,
to walk himself alone.
True am I to my Love, and he my loving make,
Which in the Lillies makes abode, and does his pleasure take,
With Tirzah or Jerusalem, thy beauty may be waide,
In show like to an Army great, whose Ensigns are displaid.
Oh turn away thine eyes, for they have wounded me,
Thy hairs are like a heard of Goats, on Gilead mount that be
Thy teeth like new washed sheep, returning from the flood,
Whereas not one is barren found, but bears twins a good,
The temples of thy head, within thy locks to show,
Are like to the Pomgranet fruit, that in the Orchards grow.
Of Concubines four score there are, of Queens twice treble ten
Of Uirgins for the multitude, not to be numbered then.
But yet my Dove alone, and undefiled Fere,
Her mothers only daughter is, to her exceeding dear.
The Uirgins saw my Love, and they have liked her well,
The Queens and eke the Concubines, they say she does excel.
Who Is she I do behold, so like the morning clear,
Or like the Moon, when toward the full, in pride she does appear
Bright as the radiant rays, that from the Sun descend,
Or like an Army terrible, when Ensigns they extend.
Unto the nuts down will I go, and fruitful valeyes low,
To see if that the Uine do bud, and the Pomgranets grow.
My self I know not I, ne nothing knew I then,
Let me be like a chariot, even of thy noble men.
Return again, oh make return, thou Shulamite so dear,
Let us enjoy thy company, I pray thee soiorne here.
What see you in the Shulamite, in her what may you see,
But like a troop of warlike men that in the armies be.
The seventh Chapter.
HOw stately are thy steps with brave and lofty pace,
Thou dainty princess, darling dear,
with comely gallant grace.
the ioines of thy fair thighs, the which so straight do stand
Are like to curious jewels wrought, by cunning workma^s hand
Thy navel like a goblet is, which still with wine does flow,
Thy belly like an heap of wheat, about which, Lillies grow.
Thy breasts I may compare like to two little Roes,
which follow on their mothers steps, when forth to feed she goes.
Thy neck like to a Tower, of costly Iuory framed,
thine eyes like Heshbo^ waters clear, by that Bathrabbin named
Thy nose like Libanon Tower, most seemly to the eye,
Which toward Damascus city fair, that stately town does ly.
Thy head like Scarlet red, thy hair of purple hue^,
The King in thee does take delight, as in his Lady true.
How fair art thou my Love, and seemly to the sight,
The pleasures that abound in thee, they are my chief delight:
Thy stature like the Palm, the tall and straightest tree,
Thy breasts, the which do thee adorn, most like to clusters be.
Upon the pleasant palm, I said I will take hold,
And rest upon her pleasant boughs, I said I will be bold.
Thy breasts are like a bunch of grapes, on the most fruitful vine,
Thy nose in smell like to the fruit, of al most pure and fine,
The roof of thy sweet mouth, like purest wine does taste,
Which makes the very aged lagh, forgetting sorrows past.
I am unto my Love, a faithful friendly Fere,
And he is likewise unto me, most tender and most dear.
Go we into the field, to sport us in the plain,
And in the pleasant villages (my Love) let us remain.
Then early will we rise and see, if that the vine do flourish,
And if the earth accordingly do the Pomgranets nourish.
I feel the Mandrakes smell, within our gates that be:
The sweetest things both new and old (my Love) I kept for thee.
The eight Chapter.
OH that thou weart my brother borne,
that sucked my mothers breast:
Then sweetly would I kiss thy lips,
and by thee take my rest.
Unto my mothers closet sure, mine own Love will I bring,
And be obedient unto him in every kind of thing.
There will I give to thee (my Love) the dainty spiced wine,
And pleasant liquor that distills from the Pomgranet fine.
With his left hand he shall support, and eke my head vpreare,
And with the right most lovingly he shall embrace his dear.
Ye daughters of Jerusalem, do not my Love disease,
But suffer her to take her rest, so long as she shall please.
Who Is that which from the wilderness, you comes from above,
And in this sort familiarly does lean upon her Love:
Under a pleasant aple tree, from whence like fruit does spring,
Thy mother first conceived thee, even forth which did thee bring
Let it be like a privy seal, within thy secret heart,
Or like a Signet on thy hand, thy secrets to impart:
For jealousy is like the grave, and love more strong than death
From whose hot brands there does proceed a flaming fiery breath
The floods cannot alay his heat, nor water quench his flame,
Neither the greatest treasure, can counteruaile the same.
Our little sister has no breasts, what shall we do or say,
when we shall give her to her Spouse, upon her wedding day?
If that she be a wall, on that foundation sure,
A princely palace will we build, of silver passing pure.
And if she be a door, she shall enclosed be
With brave and goodly squared boords, of the fine Cedar tree.
I am a mighty wall, my breasts like Towers hie,
Then am I passing beautiful in my beloueds eye.
King Solomon a vinyard had, in fair Baalhamon field,
Each one in silver yearly does, a thousand pieces yield,
But yet my vineyard (Solomon) thy vine does far excel,
For fruit and goodness of the same, thou know it very well.
A thousand silver pieces are, even yearly due to me,
Two twousand likewise unto them, the which her keepers be.
Oh thou that in the garden dwell'st, learn me thy voice to know
That I may listen to the same, as thy companions do.
Fly my beloved hence away, and be thou like the Roe,
Or as the Heart on mountain tops, whereon sweet spices grow.
The Song of Annah, for the bringing forth of Samuel her son. The second
Chap. of the first book of Samuel,
MY heart does in the Lord rejoice, that living Lord of might,
which does his servants horn exalt, in all his peoples sight.
I will rejoice in their despite,
which erst have me abhord,
Because that my salvation depends on the Lord.
None is so holy as the Lord, besides thee none there are:
With our God there is no God, that may himself compare.
See that no more presumptuously, ye neither boast nor vaunt,
Nor yet unseemly speak such things, so proud and arrogant.
For why? the counsel of the Lord, in depth cannot be sought
Our enterprises and our acts, by him to pass are brought.
The bow is broke, the mighty ones subverted are at length,
And they which weak and feeble were, increased are in strength
They that were full and had great store, with labor buy their bread
And they which hungry were and poor, with plenty now are fed.
So that the womb which barren was, has many children born,
And she which store of children had, is left now all forlorn.
The Lord does kill and make alive, his judgments all are just,
He throws down into the grave, and raises from the dust.
The Lord does make both rich and poor, he al our thoughts does try.
He brings low and eke again, exalts up on hie.
He raises up the simple soul, whom men pusude with hate,
To sit amongst the mighty ones, in chair of princely state,
For why? the pillars of the earth, he placed with his hand,
whose mighty strength does still support, the weight of all the land.
He will preserve his Saints likewise, the wicked men at length
He will confound: let no man seem, to glory in his strength.
The enemies of God the Lord, shall be destroyed all,
From heaven he shall thunder send, that on their heads shall fall.
The mighty Lord shall judge the world, and give his power alone
Unto the King, and shall exalt his own anointed one.
The Song of Jonah in the Whales belly. In the second Chap. of Jonah.
IN grief and anguish of my heart, my voice I did extend,
Unto the Lord, and he thereto, a willing ear did lend:
Even from the deep and darkest pit, and the infernal lake,
To me he has bowed down his ear, for his great mercies sake.
For thou into the midst, of surging seas so deep
Have cast me forth: whose bottom is, so low and woondrous steep.
Whose mighty wallowing waves, which from the floods do flow
have with their power up swallowed me, and ouerwhelm'd me tho.
Then said I, lo, I am exilde, from presence of thy face,
Yet will I once again behold, thy house and dwelling place.
The waters have encompast me, the floods inclosde me round,
The weeds have sore enco^bred me, which in the seas abound.
Unto the valeyes down I went, beneath the hills which stand.
The earth has there enuiron'd me, with force of all the land.
Yet have thou still preserved me, from al these dangers here,
And brought my life out of the pit, oh Lord my God so dear.
My soul consuming thus with care, I prayed unto the Lord,
And he from out his holy place, heard me with one accord,
Who to vain lieng vanities does wholly him betake,
Does err also, Gods mercy he, does utterly forsake.
But I will offer unto him the sacrifice of praise,
And pay my vows, ascribing thanks unto the Lord always.
The Prayer of Jeremiah, bewasling the captivity of the people. In the fifth
Chap. of his Lamentations.
Call unto mind oh mighty Lord, the wrongs we daily take
Consider and he hold the same, for thy great mercies sake.
Our lands and our inheritance, mere strangers do possess,
The alients in our houses dwell, and we without redress.
We now (alas) are fatherless, and still pursude with hate,
Our mourning mothers now remain in woeful widows state.
We buy the water which we drink, such is our grievous want,
Likewise the wood even for our use, that we our selves did plant.
Our necks are subject to the yoke, of persecutions thrall,
We wearied out with cruel toil, and find no rest at all:
Before time we in Egypt land, and in Assyria served,
For food our hunger to sustain, least that we should have sterued
Our fathers which are dead and gone, have sinned wondrous sore,
And we now scourged for their offense, ah, woe are we therefore.
Those servile slaves which bondmen be, of them in fear we stand
Yet no man does deliver us, from cruel Cauiues hand.
Our livings we are forced to get, in perils of our lives,
The dry and barren wilderness thereto by danger drives.
Our skins be scortcht as though they had, bin in an oven dride,
With famine, and the penury, which here we do abide.
Our wives and maids defloured are, by violence and force,
On Sion, and in Judah land, sans pity or remorce.
Our kings by cruel enemies, with cords are hanged up,
Our grauest, sage and ancient men, have tasted of that cup.
Our young men they have put to sword, not one at al they spare,
Our little boys upon the tree, sans pity hanged are.
Our elders sitting in the gates, can now no more be found,
Our youth leave off to take delight, in musicks sacred sound.
The joy and comfort of our heart, away is fled and gone,
Our solace is with sorrow mixed, our mirth is turned to move.
Our glory now is laid full low, and buried in the ground,
Our sins full sore do burden us, whose greatness does abound.
Oh holy blessed Sion hill, my heart is woe for thee,
Mine eyes pour forth a flood of tears, this dismal day to see.
Which art destroyed and now lies wast, from sacred use and trade.
Thy holy place is now a den, of filthy Foxes made.
But thou the everliving Lord, which do remain for aye,
Whose seat above the firmament, full sure and still does stay.
Wherefore do thou forsake thine own? shall we forgotten be?
Turn us good Lord, and so we shall be turned unto thee.
Lord call us home from our erile, to place of our abode,
Thou long enough have punished us, oh Lord, now spare thy rod.
The Song of Deborah and Baracke. The fifth Chap. of Judges.
PRaise ye the Lord, the which revenge
on Isreal's wrongs does take:
Likewise for those which offered up
themselves for Isreal's sake.
Hear this, ye kings, ye princes al, give ear with one accord,
I will give thanks, yea sing the praise, of Isreal's living Lord.
When thou departedst (Lord) from Seir, and out of Edom field,
The earth began quake, the heavens rain, the clouds their water yield
the mou^tains hie before the Lord, have melted every del,
As Synay did in presence of, the Lord of Israel.
In time of Sangar, Anaths son, and in old Iaels days,
the paths were al unoccupied, men sought forth unknown ways,
The towns and cities there lay wast, and to decay they fell,
Til Deborah, a matrone grave, became in Israel.
They chose the^ gods, then garboils did, within their gates abcu^d
A spear or shield in Israel, there was not to be found.
In those which govern Israel, my heart does take delight,
And in the valiant people there, oh, praise the Lord of might.
Speak ye that on white Asses ride, and that by Midden dwell.
And ye that daily trade the ways, see forth your minds you tell.
The clattering noise of archers shot, when as the arrows flew,
Appeased was amongst the sort, which water daily drew.
The righteousness of God the Lord, shall be declared there,
And likewise Isreal's righteousness, which worship him in fear.
The people with reioicing hearts, then all with one consent:
I mean the Lords inheritance, unto the gates they went:
Deborah up, arise and sing, a sweet and worthy song,
Baracke, lead them as Captives forth, which unto thee belong.
For they which at this day remain, do rule like Lords alone,
The Lord over the mighty ones, gives me dominion.
The roots of Ephraim arose, against Amalecke to fight.
And so likewise did Benjamin, with all their power and might.
From Macher came a company, which chiefest sway did bear,
From Zebulon, which cunning clarks, and famous writers were,
The kings which came of Isacher were with Deborah tho,
Yea Isacher and Barack both attend on her also.
He was dismounted in the vale, for the deuisions sake,
Of Ruben the people there, great lamentation make.
Gilead by Jorden made abode, and Dan on ship board lay,
And Asher in the Desert he, upon the shore does stay.
They of Zebulon and Nepthaly, like worthy valiant wightes,
Before their foes even in the field, advanced themselves in fight.
The kings themselves in person fought: the kings of Canaan,
In Tanach plain, whereas the stream, of swift Megido ran.
No pay, no hyer, ne coin at all, not one did seem to take,
They served not for greedy gain, nor filthy lucre sake.
The heavens hy and heavenly powers, these things to pass have brought
The stars against proud Sifera, even in their course have fought
The stream of kishons ancient brook, has ouerwhelm'd the^ there
My soul, since thou have done thy part, be now of hearty cheer.
The hardened hooues of barbed horse, were al in pieces broke,
By force of mighty men which met, with many a sturdy stroke.
The Angel has pronounced a curse, which shall on Meroz fall,
And those that do inhabit there, a curse light on them all.
Because they put not forth their hands to help the living Lord,
Against the proud and mighty ones, which have his truth abhord
Iaell the Renit Hebers wife, most happy shall be blessed,
Above al other women there, which in the tents do rest.
He asked water for to drink, she gave sweet milk to him,
Yea butter in a lordly dish, which was full trick and trim.
her left hand to the nail she put, her right the hammer wrought.
Wherewith presumptuous Sisera unto his death she brought,
And from his corpse his head she cut, with mortal deadly wound,
When through the temples of his head, she naild him to the ground.
He bowed then unto the earth, and at her feet can fall,
And where he fell there still he lay, bereaved of senses all.
The mother then of Sisera, in window where she lay,
Does marueil much that this her son does make so long a stay.
Her Ladies then, they hearing that, make answer by and by,
Yea, to her speeches past before, her self does this reply:
Has he not gotten mighty spoils, and now division makes,
Each one a Damsel has or twain, which he as captive takes.
Sisera of costly colored robes, full rich, with needle wrought,
Has got a pray, which unto him, as chiefest spoils are brought.
So let thine enemies (O Lord) sustain and suffer blame,
And let thy chosen blessed ones, that love and fear thy name,
Be like the Son, when in the morn, his glory does increase:
Or like the land, which many a year, has bin in rest and peace.
An other Song of the faithful, for the mercies of God. In the xii. Chap. of
the prophecy of Isaiah.
OH living Lord, I still will laud thy name,
for though thou were offended once with me:
Thy heavy wrath is turned from me again,
and graciously thou now do comfort me.
Behold, the Lord is my salvation,
I trust in him, and fear not any power:
He is my song, the strength I leave upon,
the Lord God is my loving Savior.
Therefore with joy out of the well of life,
draw forth sweet water, which it does afford:
And in the day of trouble and of strife,
call on the name of God the living Lord.
Extol his works and woonders to the sun,
unto al people let his praise be shown:
Record in song the meruails he has done,
and let his glory through the world be blown.
Cry out aloud and shout on Sion hill,
I give thee charge that this proclaimed be:
The great and mighty king of Israel,
now only dwells in the midst of thee.
A Song of the faithful. In the third Chap. of the prophecy of Habacucke.
LOrd, at thy voice, my heart for fear has trembled,
Unto the world (Lord) let thy works be showen:
In these our days now let thy power be known,
And yet in wrath let mercy be remembered.
From Teman lo, our God you may behold,
The holy one from Paran mount so hie:
His glory has clean covered the Sky,
And in the earth his praises be inrolde.
His shining was more clearer than the light,
And from his hands a fullness did proceed,
Which did contain his wrath and power indeed,
Consuming plagues and fire were in his sight.
He stood aloft and compassed the land,
And of the Nations does defusion make
The mountains rent, the hills for fear did quake,
His unknown paths no man may understand.
The Morians tents even for their wickedness,
I might behold the land of Midian:
Amazed and trembling like unto a man,
Forsaken quite, and left in great distress:
What, did the rivers move the Lord to ire?
Or did the floods his Majesty displease:
Or was the Lord offended with the seas,
That thou came forth in chariot hot as fire.
Thy force and power thou freely did relate,
Unto the tribes thy oath does surely stand,
And by thy strength thou did divide the land,
And from the earth the rivers separate.
The mountains saw, and trembled for fear,
The sturdy stream, with speed forth passed by,
The mighty depthes shout out a hideous cry,
And then aloft their waves they did vpreare.
The Sun and Moon amid their course stood still,
Thy spears and arrows forth with shining went,
Thou spoilest the land, being to anger bent,
And in displeasure thou did slay and kill.
Thou wentest forth for thine own chosens sake,
For the sauegard of thine anointed one:
The house of wicked men is overthrown,
And their foundations now go all to wrack.
Their towns thou strikest by thy mighty power,
With their own weapons, made for their defense:
Who like a whyrl-wind came with the pretense,
The poor and simple man quite to devour.
Thou made thy horse on seas to gallop fast.
Upon the waves thou ridest here and there:
My intrals trembled then for very fear,
And at thy voice, my lips shook at the last.
Grief pierced my bones, and fear did me annoy,
In time of trouble, where I might find rest:
For to revenge, when once the Lord is pressed,
With plagues he will the people quite destroy.
The fig tree now no more shall sprout nor flourish,
The pleasant vine no more with grapes abound:
No pleasure in the city shall be found:
The field no more her fruit shall feed nor nourish.
The sheep shall now be taken from the fold,
In stall of Bullocks there shall be no choice.
Yet in the Lord my Savior I rejoice,
My hope in God yet will I surely hold.
God is my strength, the Lord my only stay,
My feet for swiftness, it is he will make
Like to the Hinds, who none in course can take:
Upon high places he will make me way.
A Song of thanks to God, in that he shows himself Judge of the world, in
punishing the wicked, and maintaining the godly. In the xv. Chap. of the
prophecy of Isaiah.
OH Lord my God, with praise I will persevere
Thy blessed name in song I will record:
for the great wonders thou have done O lord,
Thy truth and counsels have been certain ever.
A mighty city thou make ruinat.
The strongest towns thou bring to decay:
A place where strangers usually do stay,
And shall not be reduced to former state.
The proudest people therefore stoop to thee,
The strongest cities have thee still in fear:
Thou strengthnest the poor man in despair:
And helpest the needy in necessity.
Thou art a sure refuge against a shower,
A shadow which does from the heat defend:
The raging blasts the mighty forth does send,
Is like a storm which shakes the stateliest tower.
Thou shall abate the foreign strangers pride,
Like as the heat does dry the moistest place,
The glory of the proud thou shall deface.
Like as the clouds the sunny beams do hide.
The Lord of hosts shall in this mount provide,
And to his people here shall make a feast,
Of fatted things and dainties of the best,
Of Marrow and wines finely purified.
And in this Mountain by his mighty hand,
That same dark cloud the Lord will clean destroy,
Even with the veil which does his folk annoy,
And death no more before his face shall stand.
The Lord will wipe out of his chosens eyes,
The tears which do their faces so distaine:
And their rebuke shall now no more remain,
Thus says the Lord, these be his promises.
And men shall say (then) lo, this same is he,
This is our God, on whom we did attend,
This is the Lord that will us still defend,
We will be glad and joyful (Lord) in thee.
Thy hand (oh Lord) here in this mount shall rest,
And cursed Moab shall by thee be beaten,
As in thy judgment thou of long do threaten.
As in Mamena straw of men is thresht.
And over them the Lord his hand shall hold.
As he that swimmeth, stretches him at length,
And by his power and by his mighty strength,
The proud and stout by him shall be controlde.
Thy highest walls and towers of all thy trust,
He shall bring down and lay them all full low,
Unto the ground his hand shall make them bow,
And lay thy pride and glory in the dust.
An other Song of the faithful, wherein is declared in what consists the
salvation of the Church. In the xvi. Chap. of the prophecy of Isaiah.
ANd in that day, this same shall be our song,
In Judah land this shall be sung and said,
We have a city which is woondrous strong,
And for the walls, the Lord himself our aid.
Open the gates, yea set them open wide,
And let the godly and the righteous pass:
Yea let them enter, and therein abide,
Which keep his laws, and do his truth embrace:
And in thy judgment thou will sure preserve,
In perfect peace those which do trust in thee:
Trust in the Lord, which does all trust deserve,
He is thy strength, and none but only he.
He will bring down the proud that look so hie,
The stateliest buildings he will soon abase:
And make them even with the ground to lie,
And unto dust he will their pride deface.
It shall be trodden to the very ground,
The poor and needy down the same shall tread:
The just man's way in righteousness is found,
Into a path most plain thou will him lead.
But we have waited long for thee, oh Lord
And in thy way of judgment we do rest:
Our souls does joy thy name still to record,
And thy remembrance does content us best.
My soul has longed for thee (oh Lord) by night,
And in the morn my spirit for thee has sought:
Thy judgments to the earth give such a light,
As all the world by them thy truth is taught.
But show thy mercy to the wicked man,
He will not learn thy righteousness, to know,
His chief delight is still to curse and ban,
And unto thee, himself he will not bow.
They do not once at all regard thy power,
Thy peoples zeal shall let them see their shame,
But with a fire thou shall thy foes devour,
And clean consume them with a burning flame.
With peace thou will preserve us (Lord) alone,
For thou have wrought great woonders for our sake
And other Gods beside thee have we none:
Only in thee we all our comfort take.
The dead and such as sleep within the grave,
Shall give no glory, nor yield praise to thee:
Which here on earth no place nor being have,
And thou have rooted out of memory.
Oh Lord thou do this nation multiply,
Thou Lord have blessed this nation with increase:
Thou art most glorious in thy majesty,
Thou have enlarged the earth with perfect peace.
We cride to thee, and often our hands did wring,
When we have seen thee bent to punishment.
Like to a woman in childbyrth traueiling,
Even so in pain we mourn and do lament.
We have conceived and labored with pain,
But only wind at last we forth have brought:
Upon the earth no hope there does remain,
The wicked world likewise auailes us naught.
The dead shall live, and such as sleep in grave
With their own bodies once shall rise again:
Sing ye, that in the dust your dwelling have,
The earth no more her bodies shall retain.
Come, come my people to my chamber here,
And shut the doors up surely after thee:
Hide thou thy self, and do not once appear,
Nor let thine eyes mine indignation see.
For from above the Lord is now disposed
To scourge the sins that in the world remain:
His servants blood in earth shall be disclosde,
And she shall now yield up her people slain.
Finis.
Hereafter follow certain other Songs and Prayers of godly men and women, out
of the Books of Apocripha.
The Prayer of Judith, for the deliverance of the people. In the ix. Chap. of
the book of Judith.
OH Lord, the God of Simeon,
my sovereign Father dear:
To whom thou gave strength and might,
the sword in hand to bear.
To take revenge on those which first, the maidens womb did came,
And spoiled her virginity, with great reproach and shame.
For which offense, thou gave up, their princes to be slain.
so that their wounds with gory blood, their heds did all distain.
Their servants with their lords each one, have felt thy wrath alike
who sitting in their roial seat, thou sparest not to strike.
Their wives, their daughters, and their goods, thou gave for thy behoue
As prais, as captives, and as spoils, to those who^ thou did love.
who modu'd with zeal, could not abide, their blood defiled to see,
Then hear me Lord, a widow poor, which here do call to thee.
things past, and things not yet discerned, thy providence has wrought,
Things present and the things to come, by thee to pass are brought.
Each thing is present at thy call, thy wisdom does devise,
Thy secret judgments long before, thy knowledge does comprise.
Th'Assirians now in multitude, a mighty number are,
Whose horsemen on their barbed horse, themselves to war prepare.
Their hope in footmen does consist, in sling, in spear and shield,
They know not thee to be the Lord, whose force does win the field.
Let all their force, their strength and power, be by thy might abated,
Who vow thy Temple to defile, which thou have consecrated.
Yea, to pollute thy Tabernacle, thy house and holy place,
And with their instruments of war, thine Altars to deface.
Behold their pride, and pour on them, thy wrath and heavy ire,
And strength my hand to execute, the thing I now desire.
Smite thou the servant and the Lord, as they together stand,
Abate their glory and their pride, even by a woman's hand.
For in the greatest multitude, thou take not delight,
Nor in the strong and valiant men consists not thy might.
But to the humble, lowly, meek, the succourlesse and poor,
Thou art a help, defense, refuge, and loving savior,
My father in thy name did trust, O Isreal's Lord most dear,
Of heaven, of earth, of sea and land, do thou my prayer hear.
Grant thou me wit, slight, power, strength, to wou^d the^ which advance
Themselves over thy Sion hill, and thine inheritance.
Declare to nations far and near, and let them know full well,
Thou art the Lord, wohse power and strength, defends Israel.
The Song of Judith, having slain Holophernes. In the xvi. Chap. of the book
of Judith.
TUne up the Timbrels then with laud unto the Lord,
Sound forth his praise on Simbals loud, with songs of one accord,
Declare and show his praise, also his name rehearse,
In song of thanks exactly pend, of sweet and noble verse.
The Lord he cease wars, even he the very same,
It Is he that does appease all strife, Jehovah is his name.
The which has pitched his tent, our surest strength and aid,
Amongst us here, least that our foes, should make us once dismayed
From northren mountain tops, proud Assure came a down,
With warlike men a multitude, of famous high renown.
Whose footmen stopped the streams, where rivers wont to flow,
And horsemen covered all the vales, that lay the hills below.
His purpose was for to destroy my land, with sword and fire,
To put my yongmen to the sword, did thirst with hot desire.
My children to captivity, he would have borne away,
My virgins so by rape and force, as spoils and chiefest pray,
But yet the high and mighty Lord, his people does defend,
And by a silly woman's hand, has brought him to his end.
For why? their mighty men, with Arms were not subdude,
Nor with their blood our young men's hands, were not at al imbrude.
No, none of Titans line, this proud Assirian slew,
Nor any Giants aid we craved, this soldier to subdue.
But Judith she alone, Meraris daughter dear,
Whose heavenly hue has bred his baine, and brought him to his beer.
She left her mourning weed, and decked her self with gold,
In royal robes of seemly show, all Israel to behold.
With odors she perfumed her self, after the queintest guise,
Her hair with fillet finely bound, as Art could well devise.
Her slippers neat and trim, his eyes and fancy fed,
Her beauty has bewitched his mind, her sword cut off his head.
The Perseans were amazed, her modesty was such,
The Medes at her bold enterprise, they marueiled as much.
Amongst th'Assyrians then, great clamors can arise,
When as the fact so lately done, apear'd before their eyes.
the sons which erst my daughters have, even on their bodies born
Have slain them as they fled in chase, as men so quite forlorn.
Even at the presence of the Lord, the stoutest turned his back,
His power did so astonish them, that al things went to wrack,
A song now let us sing, of thanks unto the Lord,
Yea, in a song of pleasant tune, let us his praise record.
Oh God, thou mighty Lord, who is there like to thee,
In strength and power, to thee oh Lord, none may compared be.
Thy creatures all obey, and serve thee in their trade,
For thou no sooner spakst the word, but every thing was made.
Thou sentest forth the spirit, which did thy work fulfill,
And nothing can withstand thy voice, but listen to thy will.
The mountains shall remove, where their foundation lay,
Likewise the floods, the craggy rocks, like wax shall melt away.
But they that fear the Lord, and in him put their trust,
Those will he love and still impute, amongst the good and just:
But woe be those that seek, his chosen flocks decay,
The Lord God will revenge their wrongs, at the last judgment day
For he such quenchlesse fire, and gnawing worms shall send,
Into their flesh, as shall consume, them world without an end.
A Prayer of the Author. In the xxiii. Chap. of Ecclesiasticus.
LOrd of my life, my guide and governor,
Father, of thee this one thing I require,
Thou will not leave me to the wicked power,
Which seek my fall, and still my death desire.
Oh, who is he that shall instruct my thought,
And so with wisdom shall inspire my heart:
In ignorance that nothing may be wrought
By me with them whose sin shall not depart.
Least that mine errors grow and multiply,
And to destruction through my sins I fall:
My foes rejoice at my adversity,
Who in thy mercy have no hope at all.
My Lord and God, from whom my life I took,
Unto the wicked leave me not a pray:
A haughty mind, a proud disdainful look,
From me thy Servant take thou clean away.
Uaine hope likewise, with vile concupiscence,
Lord of thy mercy take thou clean from me:
Retain thou him in true obedience,
Who with desire daily serves thee.
Let not desire to please the greedy mawe,
Or appetite of any fleshly lust:
Thy servant from his loving Lord withdraw,
But give thou me a mind both good and just.
The Prayer of Solomon. In the ix. Chap. of the book of Wisdom.
OH God of our forefathers all, of mercy thou the Lord:
Which heaven and earth, and al things else, createdst with thy word.
And by thy wisdom made man, like to thy self alone,
And gave him over thy works, the chief dominion.
That he shoud rule upon the earth, with equity and right,
And that his judgments should be pure, and upright in thy sight.
Give me that wisdom, which about, thy sacred throne does stay,
And from amongst thine own elect (Lord) put me not away.
For I thy servant am, and of thy handmaid borne,
A silly soul, whose life alas, is short and all forlorn.
And do not understand at all, what ought to be my guide,
I mean thy statutes and thy laws, least that I slip aside.
For though a man in worldly things, for wisdom be esteemed,
Yet if thy wisdom want in him, his, is but folly deemed.
Thou chosest me to be a King, to sit on royal throne,
To judge the folk which thou of right, do challenge for thy own.
Thou have commanded me to build, a Temple on thy hill,
And Altar in the self same place, where thou thy self do dwell.
Even like unto thy Tabernacle, in each kind of respect,
A thing most holy, which at first, thy self thou did erect.
Thy wisdom being still with thee, which understands thy trade,
When as thou framedst first the world, and her foundation laid.
Which knew the thing that most of all, was pleasant in thy sight
Thy will and thy commandments, wherein thou takst delight.
Send her down from that heavenly seat, whereas she does abide,
That she may show to me thy will, and be my only guide.
For she does know and understand, yea, al things does foresee.
And by her works and mighty power, I shall preserved be.
Then shall my works accepted be, and liked in thy sight,
When I upon my fathers throne, shall judge thy folk aright.
Who knows the counsel of the Lord, his deep and secret skill.
Or who may search into his works, or know his holy will?
For why? the thoughts of mortal men, are nothing else but care,
Their forecasts and devises all, things most uncertain are.
The body is unto the soul, a weight and burden great,
The earthly house depresseth down, the mind with cares repleat
The things which here on earth remain, we hardly can discern,
To find their secret use and trade, with labor great we learn.
For who does search or seek to know, with traueill and with care,
The secrets of the mighty Lord, which hie in heaven are.
Who can thy counsels understand, except thou do impart
Thy wisdom, and thy holy spirit do send into his heart?
For so the ways of mortal men, reformed are and taught,
The things that most delights thee, which wisdom forth have brought.
A Song of Ihesus the son of Sirach. In the last Chap. of Ecclesiasticus.
I Will confess thy name O Lord,
And give thee praise with one accord:
My God, my King, and Savior,
Unto thy name be thanks and power.
I have been succored by thee,
And thou have still preserved me:
And from destruction kept me long,
And from report of slanderous tongue.
From lips still exrcisde with lies,
And from my cruel enemies,
Thou me in mercy do deliver,
Thy blessed name be praisde for ever.
From monsters, that would me devour,
From cruel tyrants, and their power:
In all affliction pain and grief,
Thou succourest me with some relief.
From the cruel burning flame.
Poor I inclosde within the same:
From the deep infernal pit,
From venomed tongues that poison spit.
From speeches that of malice spring,
From accusation to the king,
From all reproach and infamy,
From slander, and like villainy.
My soul, to death praise thou the Lord,
And laud his name with one accord:
For death was ready thee to take,
And thou near the infernal lake.
They compassed me round about,
But there was none to help me out:
I looked when succor would appear,
But there was none that would come near.
Upon thy mercies then I thought,
And on the wonders thou have wrought:
How from destruction thou do save,
Such as in thee affiance have.
In prayer then I did persevere,
That thou from death would me deliver:
Unto the Lord I cry and call,
That he would rid me out of thrall:
Therefore I still will praise thy name,
And ever thank thee for the same:
My prayers shall of thee be heard,
And never from thy cares debard.
Thou sau'st me from destruction,
And other mischiefs more than one:
Therefore will I praise thee O Lord,
And in my songs thy name record.
The Prayer of Hester, for the deliverance of her and her people. In the xiiii.
Chap. of Hester.
O Mighty Lord, thou art our God, to thee for aid I cry,
To help a woman desolate, since danger now is nie:
Even from my youth I often have hard my predecessors tell,
That from amongst the nations all thou chosest Israel.
And chosest those our fathers were, from theirs that went before
To be thine own and have performed, thy promise evermore.
Now Lord we have committed sin, most grievous in thine eyes,
Wherefore thou have delivered us, unto our enemies.
Because that to their heathen gods, with worship we have gone,
Knowing that thou art God the Lord, the righteous Lord alone.
Yet not content, nor satisfied, with these our captives bands.
But with their Idols they themselves, have ioin'd and shaken hands
Quite to abolish and subvert, what thou appointed have,
And this thine own inheritance even utterly to waste.
To shut and stop the mouths of those, that yield thee thanks and praise,
Thy glorious temples to defile, thine Altars up to raise:
And to induce the heathen folk, to laud their Idols might,
To magnify a fleshly King, a man, a mortal wight.
Then let not such the Scepter sway, whose glory is of naught,
Least they deride us when that we, to misery are brought.
And those devises they have wrought, t'intangle us withal,
May turn unto their own decay, and on their heads may fall.
Remember Lord, and show thy self, to us in time of need,
And strengthen me thou King of kings, and Lord of power indeed,
Instruct my tongue with eloquence, my speeches to impart.
Before the Lions face, and by, thy wisdom turn his heart.
To hate our deadly enemy, so wholly bent to ill,
Destroy him, and al such as do consent unto his will.
But let thy hand deliver us, and help and succor me,
Since I am now left comfortless, and have no help but thee.
Thou know right well all things O Lord, and this thou know then
I hate the glory and the pomp, of wicked sinful men,
And utterly detest the bed, of any heathen wight,
Uncircumcised, most vnpure, and odious in thy sight:
Thou know my necessity, and that with hate I bear
This token of pre-eminence, which on my head I wear.
And as a filthy menstruous cloth, I take thereof such shame,
As being by my self alone, I never wear the same.
And that at Hamans table yet, thy handmaid has not fed,
Nor took delight in princes feast, nor drank wine offered,
And never ioi'd in any thing, since first I hither came,
Until this day but in the Lord thou God of Abraham.
Oh thou the high and mighty God, hear thou the voice and cry
Of them, whose hope, whose trust and stay, only on thee does lie.
And now in need deliver us, out of their cruel hand,
And from the dread and fear O Lord, wherein we daily stand.
The Prayer of Mardocheus. In the xiii. Chap. of Hester.
OH Lord, my Lord, that art the King of might,
Within whose power all things their being have:
Who may withstand that lives in thy sight,
If thou thy chosen Israel wilt save.
For thou have made the earth and heaven above,
And al things else that in the same do move.
Thou made all things, and they are all thine own,
And there is none that may resist thy will:
Thou know all things, and this of thee is known,
I did not erst for malice nor for ill,
Presumption nor vain glory else at all,
Come nor bow down unto proud Hamans call.
I could have bin content for Isreal's sake,
To kiss the soles even of his very feet:
But that I would not man's vain honor take,
Before Gods glory, being so unmeet.
And would not worship none (O Lord) but thee:
And not of pride, as thou thy self do see.
Therefore (oh Lord) my God, and heavenly king
Have mercy on the people thou have bought:
For they imagine and devise the thing,
How to destroy and bring us unto naught.
Thine heritance, which thou so long have fed,
And out so far from Egypt land have led.
Oh hear my prayer, and mercy do extend,
Upon thy portion of inheritance,
For sorrow now some joy and solace send,
That we may live thy glory to advance.
And suffer not their mouths shut up oh Lord,
Which still thy name with praises do record.
A Prayer in the person of the Faithful. The xxxvi. Chap. of Ecclesiasticus.
Have mercy on us blessed Lord,
Which made all things with thy word:
Behold us Savior from above,
Illuminate us with thy love.
And let the wicked dread thy name,
Which never sought unto the same:
And know that thou art God alone,
And like (in woonders) to be none.
Oh Lord lift up thy mighty hand,
The world thy power shall understand:
As by us thou art sanctified,
By them so be thou magnified.
That they may learn thy power to know,
As we that be thy servants do,
Thou art the living Lord alone,
And other Gods besides thee none.
Renew the signs (Lord) thou have shown,
And let thy woonderous woorks be known:
Declare the strength of thy right hand,
Let them thy power understand.
Arise to judgment in thine ire,
Pour out thy wrath as hot as fire:
Destroy the cruel adversary,
To spoil our foes (Lord) do not tarry.
Shorten thou these wicked days,
Think on thine oath at all assaies:
Let thy woonders (Lord) appear.
And be thou praised far and near.
In burning fire (Lord) let them die,
Which do escape, and seek to fly:
And let them perish with annoy,
Which seek thy people to destroy.
Cleave thou the heads of mighty kings,
Our enemies in godly things:
And let the world behold and see,
That we are chosen unto thee.
Lord, gather Jacob unto thee,
That they thy might and power may see:
that they thy wondrous works may show
And to be thine themselves may know.
Unto thy folk impute no blame,
Which ever called upon thy name:
To Israel Lord be thou mild,
Thy only heir thy first borne child.
Unto Jerusalem show pity,
Thy sanctuary and thy city:
Bless Sion where thy prophets live,
Thy glory to thy people give.
And be thou witness unto those,
Which have been thine still to dispose:
And raise them up oh Lord, on hie,
Which in thy name do prophecy.
Reward them (Lord) that wait for thee,
That they thy Prophets truth may see:
Hear thou thy servants prayer oh Lord,
As thou to Aaron gave thy word.
Guide us in way of righteousness,
The earth thy glory shall express:
And to the world it shall be known:
Thou art eternal and alone.
A Prayer of Tobias, exhorting all men to praise the Lord. Tobias. Chap. xiii.
Blessed be that king which evermore shall reign.
So ever may his kingdom blessed be:
Which punishes and pittieth again,
Which sends to hell, and likewise sets free.
Before whose presence may no creature stand,
Nor any thing avoid his heavy hand.
Ye children of his chosen Israel,
Before the Gentles still confess his name:
With whom he has appointed you to dwell,
Even there (I say) extol and laud his fame:
He is a Lord and God most gracious,
And still has been a father unto us.
He will scourge us for our iniquity,
Yet mercy will he take on us again,
And from those nations gathered shall we be,
With whom as strangers now we do remain.
If in your hearts he shall repentance find,
And turn to him with zeal and willing mind.
When as your dealings shall be found upright,
Then will he turn his face from you no more:
Nor thenceforth hide his presence from your sight,
But lend his mercy, then laid up in store,
Therefore confess his name, and praises sing,
To that most great and highest heavenly King.
I will confess him in captivity,
And to a wicked people show his might,
Oh turn to him, vile sinners that you be,
And do the thing is upright in his sight.
Who Is there can tell if he will mercy show,
Or take compassion on you, yea or not?
I will extol and laud thy name always,
My soul, the praise of heavens King express:
All tongues on earth shall spread abroad his praise,
All nations show forth his righteousness.
Jerusalem thou shall be scourged then,
But he will spare the sons of righteous men.
Fail not to give the Lord his praises due,
And still extol that everlasting King:
And help to build his Tabernacle new,
In which his Saints shall ever sit and sing.
In which the captives shall have end of grief,
In which the poor shall ever find relief.
Many shall come from countries far and near,
And shall great gifts unto his presence bring,
Many before his presence shall appear,
And shall rejoice in this great heavenly King,
Cursed be those which hate thy blessed name,
But blessed be those which love and like the same.
Triumph with joy, ye that be good and just,
Though scattered now, yet shall you gathered be:
Then in the Lord fix all your hope and trust,
And rest in peace till you these blessings see.
blessed be those which have bin touched with grief
when they have seen thee scourged, and want relief.
Those only shall rejoice with thee again,
And those shall be partakers of thy glory:
And shall in bliss for ay with thee remain,
Now passed once these troubles transitory.
Then (oh my soul) see thou rejoice and sing,
And laud the great and highest heavenly King
And he will build Jerusalem full fair,
With Emeralds and Saphyrs of great price,
With precious stones he will her walls repair,
Her towers of gold with work of rare device.
And all her streets with Berall will he paue.
With Carbunckles and Ophirs passing brave.
And all her people there, shall sit and say,
Praised be God with Aleluiah.
FINIS.

