THE SCHOOL of PATIENCE.

Written in Latin By H. DREXELIUS And Faithfully translated into English by R.
S. Gent.

London. By Thomas Harper 1640.

Viro sorti Prove: (...) 25.V.32

Melior est Patiens PATIENTIA JOB

FORTITUDO SAMSON

W. Marshall sculpit


THE SCHOOL OF PATIENCE.

Written in Latin by H. DREXELIUS.

And faithfully translated into English, by R. S. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, M. DC. XL.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Lady, G. O. C. K.
MADAM,
I Never had the happiness personally to see, or present my service to your
Honor, yet so much have I heard of your virtue, specially this of Patience,
that I presume, amongst all the Ladies of this Kingdom to choose you sole
Patroness of this School of Patience; of which book the famous Drexelius may
well challenge himself Author, I naught else but the errors. In this Scool,
Madam, all we mortals, from the highest to the lowest, must of necessity be
Scholars; not to suffer, were not to live. Then, as the kid in the fable
breaking from the altar, when its fellows were sacrificed, and falling
afterward amongst a heard of wolves cried out; why not rather to the Gods? So
we Christians, since suffer needs we must, why not rather for God, for him who
suffered first for us, then for him who goes about like a roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour? If patiently and willingly we suffer, the labor's
less, the reward greater; if unpatiently and unwillingly, the labor more, the
reward none at all, but contrariwise eternal punishment. All the art then and
mastery is, not to be too dissolute in prosperity, nor diffident, or impatient
in adversity; this skill is learnd by Patience, the precepts and rules whereof
this book declares; which would not presume to show it self in public,
without the honor of your Ladyships protection; To whom I likewise recommend
the most dutiful respects of

Your Honors most humble servant R. S.

THE AUTHORS EPISTLE TO THE well-wishing Reader.
MY desire (gentle Reader) is, to teach thee Patience, but compendiously. I
must confess I was unwilling to undertake this Subject, which perhaps may
seem strange, and move thee to ask this question: Is it not copious enough?
Yes indeed is it; and this very reason had almost persuaded me not to meddle
with it. It is too copious, too abundant, insomuch that I knew not what first,
what last to treat of: and, believe me, there is no Subject, whereupon I could
more enlarge my self. I have had long since a world of matter for it, so that
I could with as much facility, almost, have written great volumes, as small and
lesser books. But I more regard the benefit and utility of my Reader, then the
bulk and ostentation of the work. Should thou read much and consider
little, forget the beginning before thou come to the end, what would all
this avail thee? In very truth, a copious and fl^unting discourse, will help
but little to the commendation of Patience. For this respect I have contained
my book within this compass and strict limits, written but little, but
methodically and succinctly, the better to help my Readers memory, illustrate
his understanding, and incite his will. I may well say I have rather selected,
then collected the contents of this book. And perhaps, if God spare me life
and health, I may publish more hereafter: mean while accept these for a taste.
Farewell my good Reader, and compose thy self to Patience, a thing of all
others the most necessary.

IN some few Copies this fault has escaped, viz. Saint Thomas More, for Sir
Thomas More, page 520. lin. 24. Other escapes are not many; all which
(courteous Reader) you may please to pardon and correct.

A small Table upon the School of Patience.
The first part.
What kinds of punishments, or what crosses are to be suffered in the School
of Patience. Chap. 1. Why scholars in the school of Christ are so hardly and
sharply handled. Chap. 2. Why some scholars are so sharply and hardly
entreated in this school. Chap. 3. Five kinds of punishments and afflictions
are severally expressed. Chap. 4. Other five kinds of afflictions are
particularly explicated. Chap. 5. What faults are chiefly to be avoided in the
School of Patience. Chap. 6.


The second part.
Affliction teaches men to be courageous and faithful. Chap. 1. Affliction
teaches commiseration and abstinence. Chap. 2. Affliction teaches prayer and
mortification. Chap. 3. Affliction teaches prudence and modesty. Chap. 4.
Affliction for diverse respects is very profitable, and for the most part that
which harmeth, warns. Chap. 5 All afflictions are from God whosoever he be
that imposes them. Chap. 6.


The third part.
That afflictions are to be endured patiently. Chap. 1. That afflictions are to
be undergone cheerfully. Chap. 2. That afflictions are to be borne constantly.
Chap. 3. That afflictions are to be endured with thanks giving. Chap. 4. That
afflictions are to be entered into with premeditation. Chap. 5. That afflictions
are to be suffered with conformity of man's will to Gods. Chap. 6.


The School of PATIENCE.
The First Part.
CHAPTER I. What punishment, or what crosses are to be endured, in the School
of patience.
Upon a time, the oak (being shattered and weather-beaten) began in a familiar
manner to discourse with the reed. The subject of his speech was his own
calamity: for the malignity of fortune together with his disasters had made him
cloquent. Look on me neighbor (said the oak) and thou shall behold the mirror
of misfortune. I hardly retain the moiety of my self, I am so shaken and
miserably torn in pieces: thus have the boistrous winds handled me. But what (I
pray thee) shall I more admire? thy safety, or mine own ruin? there is no
comparison between thy strength and mine. The eye of any man may witness, that
I am a thousand times stronger then a hundred, yea then a thousand reeds;
notwithstanding being assaulted by violent and stormy winds, I seem to have no
strength at all; but am shaken, torn, broken, and pulled up by the roots. In the
mean time thou find occasions to delude these impetuous winds, fightst with
a hollow and empty trunck, ever victorious, still triumphant; whilst we (vast
giants) are soon vanquished. How comes this to pass? The reed that had learned
to be silent and reserved, forbearing a long while to interrupt the oak, at
last replied in this manner: There is no reason (good neighbor said she) why
you should wonder at this: your strength is the sole cause of your destruction;
if that were less, you (safe and sound) would flourish. You are (by your
favor) too confident in your forces: you contest and strive with the winds,
and thereby are utterly ruinated; you have a potent enemy that will give way to
none, such an one as is animated with his adversaries forces, and becomes more
powerful when he encounters with the strongest: the greater difficulty he
finds in the assault, the more certain he is of victory. Hence comes it to
pass that the highest and thickest oaks are soonest overthrown by the winds,
that deride and laugh at the folly of weak resistance. I, not being ignorant of
my own frailty, an hundred times a day humbly adore and bow down even to the
earth. Nay I stick not, that I may preserve my life, to worship so powerful an
enemy a thousand times together: for in such a case, not power, but prudent
subtil^y prevails.

It Is even so with man; strength is not secure, where counsel and dexterity are
wanting. The wind of adversity spares no man, assault^ all, good and bad, none
are exempted from disasters: there is only this difference, that many by
affl^ction are instructed, and advanced to heaven, others dejected and cast
headlong to hell: wherefore not how much we suffer, but in what manner we bear
it, is to be considered.

In one School, sometimes two hundred scholars are through up together, but,
all prove not masters: many wear, bares, but few become Apollo's. Some leave
the School to be soldiers, others inkeepers, or merchants. From the study of
literature, some go to be Clerks, Sextons, yea and Carriers; others to be
maltsters, surveiors of land, or husbandmen: it matters not what thou learnest,
but what benefit thou make by learning: as the condition of scholars is
different, so is their profit; some want wit, others money, some industry: and
so neither they, nor these, nor the other attain to learning.

The like happens in the School of Patience, or School of Christ, where the
profit that students reap, is correspondent to their ardent desire, or neglect
of learning: but above all, it is most remarkable and proper to this School,
that all in it (except those that will not) may be proficients: nor wit, nor
money shall be wanting, so they bring a prompt and ready will to embrace
learning: here industry alone can accomplish all; here the sole and worst of
all mischiefs is, to have no will to learn.

But what book need we in this School, what volumes must we revolve? It was a
laudable custom in ancient times to present a schedule to their guests, or
send it home to their houses, where all the dishes to be served in at the feast
were specified. By this means every man was advertised before hand, so many
courses you shall have, these and these dishes, so many in number, and in such
and such order. Wherefore if none of the first course be pleasing to your
palate, forbear, and keep your stomach for the second, or the third. So fitting
was it thought that the guests should know before hand what the house keeper
intended to set before them.

It will be no less expedient in the Schol of Patience, to know with what
calamities Almighty God is wont to visit and afflict mortals. The first duty of
a Scholar, is, to inform himself of the books wherein he must study. Job
solicitous in this point, said; Let himself who judges, write a book, that I
may bear it on my shoulders. Whereby (you see) he desired all whatsoever he was
to suffer, might be reduced to one volume, which he was ready and willing to
undergo, and bear as a burden on his back.

Let us therefore (before we proceed) do the l^ke, and divide afflictions
(commonly called crosses) into several heads.

Sect. I.
What pains soever are in this world, all afflictions, exercises and trials,
whatsoever they be, are comprehended in this decad of several chastisements.
For God has in his School of Patience,

1. Rods. 2. Arrows. 3. Torches. 4. A garland of straw. 5. Wands. 6. Cords and
chains. 7. Knotty clubs. 8. A Cloak. 9. Scourges. 10. A Sack.
Let us briefly explane these punishments, and hereafter in their due places
particularize them more at large.

Rods, signify dolours and diseases, which are almost innumerable, and every
one more or less, participates of the bitterness of death. These rods are
preparatives, to dispose us for death: the high way to death, is by diseases. A
disease often times has prolonged life, and the readiest way to recover men,
was to believe they could not live. Virtue finds a place even in the bed of the
sick man.

Arrows, symbolize griefs, solicitudes, cares, discontents, sadness, fears.
suspicions, and anguishes, anxious scruples, allurements, and vehement
temptations, secret remorse of conscience, terrors, violent motions and
perturbations of mind. The arrows of our Lord are sharp, and all his bows bent.

Torches, are types of poverry: we see div^rs familiar ways of scorching men
in jest: poverty has as many to burn them in earnest. Sometimes a man
sleeping, has in sport, a paper smeared with ^allow, put upon his shoe, and
set on fire. Sometimes the end of a sm^ll wax candle is stuck burning on his
finger: sometimes they heat a stove so that he seems smoking in a hot bath; and
now and then that which is most dear unto us, is snatched up and cast into the
fire: he is burnt enough who beholds in the flames what he best loves. After
this manner men are commonly exercised by poverty.

A garland of straw, is the symbol of derision, contempt, and contumely;
scarcely shall you see the scholars of this school so sensible of any disgrace,
as of this garland, which notwithstanding amongst them is ordinary. Almost
every where the simplicity of the just man is scorned. He that walks the
right way, and fears God, is despised of him that goes an infamous way.

Under these sour kinds of punishment is contained for the most part,
whatsoever we suffer. For it is either the body, or mind, or the endowments of
both, that are subject to calamity. Therefore we assign Rods, Arrows, Tapers,
and Garlands of straw. But of these miseries we will speak more at large
heeraf^er.

By Little Wands, are deciphered daily miseries, hunger, thirst, cold,
in^ommodious habitation, uneasy apparel, journeis spent in vain, hope
frustrated, and the like. For as the schoolmaster seldom lays by the wand
without striking, sometimes one scholar, sometimes another; one while their
hand, another while their head; So man seldom is at truce with these daily
miseries, never wants what he would most willingly avoid.

Chains and cords, are peculiar miseries, and proper to each man's estate, every
man is obliged, some more, some less, according to his condition of life.
Wedlock is a strong tie indeed, a chain of iron, or rather of adamant, which
none but death can break. Often times married couples find neither hunger, nor
thirst, nor want of health, but only want of peace and unity: the one objecting
to the other; I can neither live with thee, ner without thee. For he was tied
who said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.

Knotty Clubs, or Scorpions are cal^mities common to many, as plagues, heresy,
tyrany, war, fire, famine, inundations, and oppression of the poor.
Ecclesiastes complained; I turned my self (said he) to other things, and I saw
the oppressions that are done under the sun, and the tears of the innocents,
and no comforter: and that they cannot resist their violence, being destitute
of all humane help. And I praised rather the dead then the living, and happier
then both have I judged him that is not yet born, nor has seen the evils that
are done under the sun.

A Cloak, I call those miseries which we bring upon our selves, crucifying as
it were, and miserably wounding our own minds, with our own conceits and
suspicions. It is ordinary for a man to betray his own cause, and to load
himself with true or feined afflictions. Job complains of himself; I am
(says he) become burdensome to my self. Every one is as miserable as he makes
himself.

Scourges, are the afflictions which are laid upon us by others, especially
those that proceed from the tongue; as calumnies, disgraces, detractions,
slanders, and all other injurious words. To these I ad denials of things most
earnestly sought, or compalsions to that which men most carefully would avoid.
These are the stripes which leave a mark behind them, and fetch blood at every
blow. But S. Gregory comforts us: We are now (says he) G^eg. part. 3. past.
admon. 13.
outwardly scourged, that we may here after inwardly without stroke of
discipline be sitted to the temple of God.

Finally, a Sack, is a heap of many mischiefs packed up together. If you ask a
sick man in what part of his body he feels most pain, he will answer you, all
over, in all parts alike. So often times afflictions oppress a man by heaps,
the devil insulteth, men oppose against him, God withdraws his comfort, sickness
and poverty torment him, all is out of frame, both in body and mind, and
whatsoever presents it self unto him, seems fearful and terrible. Of such a
man we may well say, he is in a sack up to the chin, and wants only death to tie
the knot over his head, and hurry him to his grave. Of each of these
afflictions we will speak hereafter more at large.

Now if almighty God should give a man his choice; saying, choose what
afflict^on thou think most wholesome for thy self: to be lasht with tongues,
burnt with poverty, scourged with sickness, transfixed with griefs, or crowned
with a contemptible garland of straw: Who is it that would not answer with
David and Susanna: I am p^rplexed on every side; I am very much straightned. It
would be a thing never resolved upon. This only I imagine he would answer: O
Lord, if thou will vouchsafe me a royal gift indeed, set me free from all
miseries and troubles whatsoever.

Ah! what a gross^ error is this, we would, if we mi^ht, have the whole world
put out of fr^me for our sake, we have en^red into the world under these
conditions, to suffer all things patiently that may happen We are unequal in
our birth, but not in our death. All the middle space between the cradle and
the grave, must of necessity be filled with many griefs and afflictions. Thou
must grieve, hunger and thirst, thou must wax old, and if the days of thy life
be prolonged amongst men, fall sick, lose some thing most dear to thee and die.
This is the condition of this mortal life.

Sect. II.
SOme men secretly, but fondly persuade themselves, that this life may be
pass^d smoot^ly without troubles or oppositions. You are deceived, o you
morta's, you are deceived exceedingly: for through many tribulations we must
enter into the kingdom of God. And, Ought not Christ to have suffered, and so
to enter into his gl^ry? And shall we, vile members, under so glorious a head,
promise our selves any better ^ondition? We must ^est assured o^ this, that the
way to heaven is no soft delicious way, bordered with roses, or beset with
sycomores; but rough, craggy and in accessible to those that would pass
thither through pleasure and delicacies. God is not wont to cocker his servants
or treat them like wantons. But S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo, the very flower
of Bishops, gives us some comfort heerin. God, says he, scourges us Aug. com
8. in ps. 13 5. circa med mihi, page 654.
with these labors to instruct us; know ye, my brethren, that all humane
misery, under the burden whereof the world groaneth, is not a penal sentence,
but a medicinal affliction. See how we are beset on every side with grief,
with fear, with labor and necessity. The testimony of Ecclesiastes may be
sufficient heerin. All his days, says he, are full of sorrows and miseries. A
wise disciple of S. Augustine Th Kemp. l. 3 c. 12. legete^um caput.
said; Howsoever I shall dispose my self to peace, this life is not to be
passed over without warfare and grief? And what closet, I pray you, is so
secret, into which calamity enters not? What quiet repose of life so raised or
strongly fortified, that is not shaken with sorrows and cares? Whersoever thou
shall hide thy self, says Seneca, humane miseries with troublesome Sen. ^^ 82.
initio and consol ad Polyb. c. 33. and consol. ad Marc. ^. 12.
noise will compass thee about; many things outwardly environ either to
deceive or vex us, and many things we carry in our selves, which even in the
deepest solitude toss and turmoil us. There is not, nor ever has been in the
world any house without complaints more or less, and yet you can name none so
miserable, that may not take comfort in seeing some more miserable then
themselves. This life is diversely afflicted with misfortunes, and we are so far
from having peace in it, that we can hardly make a truce. It is not so delicate
a thing to live as we imagine: we have undertaken ^ long journey, wherein we
must of necessity often slip, be tired and fall; through these stumbling blocks
we are to make this our rugged journey, we never rest in safety, every where we
meet with troubles and disquiet: whatsoever we do, which way soever we turn our
selves, we have no means to lead our lives otherwise.

Behold, I beseech you, the course of all things throughout the whole world:
there is nothing therein so excellent, but has its adversary close annexed
unto it. What gain is there more fruitful, or honest, then tillage and
husbandry? yet one furious storm oftentimes destroys the whole crop. It is
most truly said: He that observes the wind shall never sow, and he that
considers the clouds, shall never mow. What have we more fair then the Sun ^
yet is he not without his blemishes, he is covered with clouds, daily buried
under the earth, and sometimes eclypsed. What is more necessary then the air,
which is in a manner our food? yet in one year, yea in one month, it is a
thousand and a thousand times changed; sometimes moist, at other times dry;
sometimes clear, sometimes cloudy and turbulent; one while wholesome, another
while noisome; now subtle and piercing, soon after as gross and foggy as in
Boeotia. There is no liquor more esteemed then wine, yet none has more dregs
in the bottom: Who would drink it, if he did but consider how loathsome it ^s
in the Press, or hurtful in the daily abuse? Ale or Beer, which many men
extol as they were Nectar, are brewed for the most part, with foul and
unsavory water. The Shambles expose flesh to be sold, but not without bones.
Fair trees many times, bear small, sour, worm-eaten, hard, and soon rotten
Apples. The stateliest C^ties are not without some poor and homely cottages:
The beautifullest houses must have their vaules, sinkes, and sewers for their
filth and excrements; and let build^^g be never so curious and artific^all,
they are not exemp^ed from all discommodities. Look up to the sky, and you
shall fearcely s^e it one whole day without a cloud; the clearer the sky, the
sooner for the most part, come the cruell^st tempests: the winds are never
constant; the mild Western gales oftentimes give place to the dull South, or
stormy North. Oil is not without a foamy mother, nor Wheat without darnell.
How much filth li^s hid in the fairest and comeliest men and women? and how
many changes are they subject to in one day? Man, doubtless, never continues
stable in one state: and what wonder? fith God found wickedness even in his
Angels. In all places we find adversaries, every where enemies; there is no
absolute happiness to be looked for. Would we have the Sun shine upon us every
day? all things pass with a gentle current at our beck and command? this we
may madly dream of, but never waking enjoy: all the works of nature contradict
it, and point us out an enemy in every corner. The same likewise may be
observed in moral things.

Sect. III.
THere is scarce any book free from errors and faults, escaped either by the
Author or Printer: Where shall you find honor without burden? or if no
burden, no true honor. Where can you show me a company of men exempted from
all misfortunes? or any man so upright and holy, that has not in him some
thing to be reprehended? Who is he that dines or sups without some vinegar? Let
me eat a full meal, and satiate my self, straight after my stomach upbraids
me, and makes me wish I had eaten less Let me check my appetite and forbear,
then hunger affl^cts me. Thus Ash Wednesday succeds shrovetide, and feasting
fasting. Next to the Temple of Honor is that of Labor; the way lies from the
one to the other: honey is mixed with gall, and every commodity with
discommodity.

I have heard that Pleasure and Pain once fell at ods, and chose Jupiter for
their Judge, the one would not yield in any respect to the other; but Jupiter,
declaring his sentence, so composed the matter between them, that from
thenceforth they should never be at difference, but live together linked with
indissoluble bands, and what marvel?

Semper odoriferis proxima spina rosis, The sharpest thorn grows next the
sweetest rose.

Which way soever thou turnest thy eyes, thou shall see honey mixed with g^ll:
there is nothing in this world pure and sincere without dregs: this is incident
to all earthly creatures, by a certain natural propension, to wear away and
consume. The Iron has an inbred cankering and rust; wood, rottenness and
little gnawing worms. Thus all creatures, towns and kingdoms have within them
their causes of destruction. Look upon all things high and low, great and
small, made by the hand, or invented by the wit of man, in all ages past or to
come, they fall to ruin and decay. And as rivers run headlong and with an
uncessant course into the sea: so man and all things created for man, pass by
this channel, as it were, of death and slaughter, to their d^terminate end,
which is death; for which, pestilence, war, and slaugh^er, serve as instruments
Lips l. 1. de constable. c. 15.
and means. Why then are we so impatient? would we trumph before the victory?
be choic^ly ^ed at our masters (...) before we h^v^ labou^ed for (...)? were
not the ^nsolencie of that servant intoll^rable, who at his return from labor
should find fault that the table were not yet covered, no^ the meat served up?
Why, lay the cloth, my friend, and bring up meat, such is thy masters
pleasure: prepare thy self first to serve him, after this, thou may both
eat and drink. There is a time to sow, there will also come a time to reap;
the one must necessa^ily precede the other. They that sow in tears shall reap
in joy. Going they went and wept, casting their seeds; b^t coming they shall
come with exultation, carrying their sheaves. Saint Chrysostom speaks to the
purpose: As all manner of grain, says he, stands in need of showers to make it
grow; so we of tears: And as it is requisite that the earth should be ploughed
and cut; so the faithful so^l, lest it bring forth Chrysostom. tom. 1 in Ps.
125. mihi. page 981.
ill ^oin, had need, in stead of the plow to have temptations and afflictions,
to mollify her hardn^sse, and bring under her pride We ought first to labor,
and then se^k quietness and repos^ of mi^d. Do thou aspire to heaven, and
yet entertain thy body with quiet and ease? G^ve ear to the same Saint
Chrysostom, who not without good cause reprehendeth our s^^th in this manner:
What do thou, O man? what say^st thou? think thou to scale the skies, and
attain unto the kingdom of heaven, and yet ask (without blushing or hiding
thy self for very shame even in the bowel^ of the earth) whether any
difficulty will occur in the way, or any tough or disastron^ accident befall
thee?

Do what thou will, thou shall never come to heaven before thou art soundly
hewed and polished. Very truly said that most religions man: The kingdom of
heaven is the kingdom of those that are tempted, afflicted, contemned, and by
sundry means polished and hewed. How dare thou (poor cowardly wretch) appear
amongst so many stout and renowned Commanders? God would have thee know how
precious the good is we seek after, Vita Alvaressi, cap. 40. S. 1.
for attaining whereof we undergo so many labors and pains.

The Hebrews being to pass into the land of promise, presented Sehon King of
H^shbon with these requests; That they might pass through his country, along
the beaten high way, neither declining to the right nor left hand: That he
should sell them meat for money, that they might eat: That he should give them
water for money, that so they might drink. The King condescended not: so that
they were to open a way by force. We desire likewise to go to heaven without
trouble or warfare; many men's resolution is, not to hurt any one, so they may
not be wronged themselves; but all in vain: heaven admits no such effeminate
cowards, who endeavor nothing more then To suffer nothing.

Therefore let us imitate that laudable saying of the Ancients, Nul^a dies sine
linea, No day without a line, and say: Nulla dies sine nubecula, No day without
some cloudy accident. Let no day pass over our heads, without doing or
suffering somewhat stoutly and courageously for Christ's sake: for through many
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Through many, yea
through very many; there is no object in the world more remarkable, or worthier
of admiration, then a man courageous in misery, and firmly resolved to sustain
all adversity. And behold, this is an acceptable time, behold now is the day of
salvation. The first lesson in the School of Patience is to know, that without
much suffering no man profits.

CHAP. II. The reason why the Scholars in this School are so sharply and
roughly entreated.
MANY things are preserved by motion, which otherwise would perish. Corn
corrupts unless it be stirred, and often turned: Many times by lying still, it
sprowts, or becomes musty. A garment lying long, as a close prisoner, in a
chest, becomes a banquet for mo^thes. Ir^n if it be never used, is eaten and
consumed with rust. Vines without p^u^ing and cu^^i^g, degenerate and grow
wild. Grapes are soon rotten, unless they be pressed. A hundred such things
may be observed; and that which daily experiments confirm, cannot be denied.
Nevertheless, we r^p^ne and wonder why God should exercise men with so many
several calamities: we have showed in the precedent Chapter, that it is
fitting and necessary this should be so. Now we will make it apparent, that
nothing can be more for the behoof and benefit of man.

Sect. I.
A Thousand reasons may be alleged, why God does not vouchsafe to give his
servants a Paradise on earth; but rather sends them thither from the cross.
Here I appeal to the ordinary custom of men: If a man conceives no hatred
against a lewd house for being beaten there, or tumbled down a pair of stairs,
much less will he detest that house, if he be kindly entertained: So if we
should be well entreated in this world, scarcely any would seek after the joys
of heaven. Not one man amongst a thousand, but would say, I am well contented
with those which I already have, why should I seek after uncertainties? Many
men besotted with their pleasures and riches, would neglect heaven, and, like
brutish Oxen, lie down in the pasture they go in. Therefore it was requisite,
that all things here should be mingled with gall, lest the honey of this world
should be preferred before the sweetness of heaven. Why, I pray you, was
Egypt so cruel and malicious toward the Hebrews? for their governors (as we
read) were most tyrannical, their taskes doubled, their scourges and
afflictions insufferable; and besides, all their male children were threatened
to be killed: what was Gods design herein? Nothing else but to beget in his
people an extreme hatred and loathing of Egypt; and consequently, of Idolatry
in general. To this end were the exhortations of Moses moving them to desire
the land of Promise. To this end was Pharaoh suffered to tyrannize, that the
Hebrews conceiving hatred against so cruel a Lord, might seek another more
peaceable country.

Excellently well says Saint Gregory, By Gods merciful will it comes Greg l.
23. c. 13. post. med.
to pass, that his elect lead a troublesome life in this their pilgrimage.
This life is the way by which we travel toward our country; and therefore by
his secret judgment we are often afflicted here, lest we should fall in love
with the way in stead of the country. A traveller (especially such an one as
is easily disposed to loyter) is soon persuaded to stay and solace himself
under shady trees, and in pleasant medows; seeks new and new delays, one while
sitting down in this place, and another while in that, till he has trifled,
and idly spent the whole day. Therefore Saint Gregory says, that our Lord
makes in this world the way which leads to heaven rough and sharp to his
elect, lest any of them, entertained with ease and delights of this life, as
with a pleasant way, should rather desire to hold on still his journey, then
speedily to finish it: and lest, too much delighted with the way, he should
forget what is to be desired in his country.

And as it does much inkindle the love of God to have but once tasted how sweet
our Lord is: even so, to have somewhat felt the bitterness of transitory
things, does not a little thrust us forward to the hatred of them. Behold the
power of adversity and affliction, it presents us the wormwood of this world to
taste, it strewes the earth with thorns, to force our feet to mend their pace.
Elegantly says Saint Augustine: O the infelicity of humane creatures! the
world Aug. to. 10. Sermon 3 de Temp. circa med.
is bitter, and yet beloved: think what it would be if it were sweet and
savoury: it is turbulent, and yet most earnestly desired; what would it be if
it were calm and quiet? How eagerly would thou pluck the flowers, since thou
can not hold thy hands from the thorns? Saint Chrysostom was of the same
mind: If we environed on all sides with so many miseries, desire to prolong
this present life, what would we do without them? when would we desire or seek
after future felicity? We are so madly blinded with self-love, that in stead
of health, we dote on Physic; in stead of the journies end, fall in love with
the journey; and the cratures in stead of the Creator. Hence comes it, that God
is in a manner forced to give us bitter potions, lest we rather covet to drink
vinegar and wormwood, then celestial nectar, and prefer earth before heaven.

Sect. II.
That golden Orator Saint Chrysostom, of whom I spoke, proves excellently
well, that it is a thing very profitable to be afflicted. Touching which point,
this is seriously to be considered, that humane understanding conceives not so
much as the least shadow of divine Majesty: our imagination, when we think of
God, reaches no further then to Kings and Emperors. Alas! how base, how
childish, are even our sublimest cogitations? Hence it proceeds, that we f^ll
into so many errors. It is the saying of the wise man, God has tried them,
and has found them worthy of himself, So immense is the Majesty of God, that
no man may be esteemed worthy thereof, before he be thoroughly exercised with
sundry calamities, like a stout and courageous Champion, who cannot challenge
the prize before he has sought the combat. To good purpose was that which
Nicetas Choniates said; He is only miserable, who in affliction is too much
contristated; and thereby renders himself unworthy of God.

Isaac being now almost blind with age, sought by touching to find out his
son: Come hither (said he) my son, that I may feel thee, and may prove whether
thou be my son Esau or no. In like manner God deals with us: I must touch
thee, my child, (says he) my hands are hot indeed, they burn, but if thou be
my child, thou will suffer me to touch thee: he that refuses to be touched by
me, is none of mine, and is unworthy of me. I suffered my only Son to be
crucified, and I found him worthy of me: Even in the same sort I dealt with his
Virgin Mother, transfixed her heart with a sword of grief, which for many
years together I pulled not out, and found her worthy of me: nor have I
otherwise treated my dearest friends, and I found them worthy of me. And
would thou be singular, and exempted from the number of the afflicted? If
thou escape without chastisement, thou art likely to have no share amongst my
children. After this manner do I exercise and try my children, and by
chastising honor them. More enriched and honored was Joseph in exile, then in
his fathers house. Ezechiel amongst captives was comforted with heavenly
miracles. The three Hebrew children were never more refreshed then in the
burning furnace: nothing could have h^ppened to them more honorable, then to
enjoy in the midst of the flames, the amiable society of an Angel. Whosoever
therefore desires to be numbered amongst the children of God, let him declare
himself so, and with a generous spirit and undaunted courage, say: I am
affl^cted, but endure it patiently: I am tortured and tormented for Christ's
sake, but bear it willingly: I am overwhelmed with calumnies and false
accusations, but bear them for the love of God cheerfully, God be praised: I
am bound and burned, but for the hope of heavenly joys endure it courageously:
It is that I desire, I would rather have fire burn, then overcome me: I had
rather my God should call me in this world to wage war, then to live in
delights. I know well, the Ox designed to the slaughter, is left at his own
liberty in the pleasant pastures, while another pressed with the heavy yoke,
is suffered to live. Chastising, my Lord will punish me, and not deliver me to
death. Thus it becomes a Christian Champion to think and speak.

Sect. III.
ANd that we may the better apprehend what has been said, let us discourse in
this manner: The supreme element of fire is so noble and strong by nature, that
whatsoever viler substance it lays hold of, be it cloth, lether, wood, yea
even flints themselves, it burns and consumes them into ashes, as if it should
say: Such is my innate generosity, that I will not admit into my bosom these
base materials, that are not worthy of me; but give me the noblest metals, Gold
or Silver, and I hurt them not, they are welcome to my bosom, them I purify
and refine: for they are worthy of me. And has the fire such a preeminence
amongst other things created, that it imbraceth nothing but that which is most
worthy of it? what shall we then think of God? Malachias struck with
admiration, says: Who shall be able to think of the day of his advent? and who
shall stand to se^ him? For he is, as it were, a purging fire, and as the herb
of Fullers, and he shall sit purifying. Neither will he refine gold and silver,
and bring it to the former luster, slightly and superfi^ially, but accurately:
for he will try them till he find them worthy of himself.

God proceeds after this manner for three ends: for whom he affl^cteth, he
either chastises and punishes, corrects and amendeth, or finally rewards
and crowns. First, what marvel is it, if God daily punish and correct us? we
daily offend him: for the just man falls seven times a day, God deals herein,
as does a careful and industrious man; who, that he may not come in debt,
pays all with ready money: so God mercifully expiateth daily our offenses with
daily miseries. And this is a great favor: for whilst we are judged, we are
corrected by our Lord, that we may not be condemned with this world. King David
said well: Before I was humbled, I sinned. Sin and punishment are never f^r
asunder.

The other end for which God afflicts us, is to teach and correct us. It ^s a
great happiness for a man to know himself and his own imperfections. We
commodiously attain to this knowledge by adversity; which S. Gregory manifestly
declares: By being (says he) outwardly stricken, we are inwardly, by sorrow
and affliction, put in mind of our sins; and by th^s which outwardly we
suffer, we become inwardly more penitent for that we have committed. A little
stone flew Golias, a vast Giant, in a single combat, because he thought
himself invincible. Peter very stout and resolute in promises, said, he was
ready to go to prison, and to death it self for his Lord. Come on then Peter,
and watch but for one short hour and a half. Ah! what a watchman? his Captain
had no sooner turned his back, but the Soldier fell asleep: a vigilant chief
Sentinel. In stead of watching, he falls a sleep; then forsakes his standing
and flies, hurls away his weapons and denies his Captain at the voice of a
silly maid. But by this means S. Peter learned to know himself. Saint
Augustine affirms, that Aug. in psa. 60.
all our profit grows from temptation, without which no man truly knows
himself. Who would ever have thought that fire had been in the flint, had it
not been discovered by the dash of the steel. God even by afflicting, crowns
at last. Saint Gregory Greg p^^sat. in Job. c. 5. med. and l. 20. moral. c. 20.
post. med.
observing this, says: When the innocent person is securged, his patience
mereaseth his merit. The soul of the elect now seems to wither, that
hereafter it may grow green, and flourish with everlasting joy. Now is the day
of their affliction, because hereafter the days of their rejoicing shall
follow. This also does God pronounce by the mouth of S. James. Blessed is that
man who suffers temptation, because after he is tried, he shall receive the
crown of life. Neither is our affliction a preparative only for future
rewards, but even the affliction it self is sometimes a reward.

Justus Lipsius, the luster of this our age, and (as it was said of Pliny) the
matchless Prince of learning, though he were most addicted to the Muses, yet
he far preferred piety before them: many years together he weekly made his
confession. He had a very neat Library, furnished with choice books for all
whatsoever that served for rare and polite literature, which he could procure
for love or money, out of all parts of the world, he had stored up there. In a
word, it was a treasure beyond all Maggazines of gold, gathered together in one
house. There was nothing upon earth that Lipsius loved more ardently then this
learned delight: a man would have said his heart had been wholly enshrined in
this Library. But (O my God) O most disasterous mischance! that which with so
great care and diligence he had gathered together in so many years, all that
with a sudden fire, was in one moment burned to ashes. Out alas! I verily think
Lipsius had rather have lost himself, then this which came so near him. But
this is Gods usual custom, these are the rewards wherewith he recompenceth
virtue in this world, and should be taken for great favors. Thus God deals
with his best friends, either depriving them of that which they most dearly
affect, or not granting what they most earnestly request. Sometimes you shall
have a man, who as if he would persuade God, not to take away his delights,
will petition him in this manner: O my Lord, afflict me at thy pleasure, so
thou grant me this, or take not away that which I so infinitely love. God hears
not these prayers; he takes away that which is most dear, and gives not that
which is most desired, and so even transfixeth the heart of man: yet this is a
favor, and one of Gods rewards. After this sort did the Angel comfort Tobias,
saying: Because thou were acceptable to God, it was needful that temptation
should prove thee. As if he had said, Wheresoever yertue is, there must be
affliction (the reward of virtue.) Every one that is most dear to God is
chastised.

Sect. IV.
But now and then God chastises where he neither intends to correct sin,
reform errors, nor exercise virtue, but only to manifest his power, which our
Savior plainly declared in that blind man in the Gospel: This man (says he)
has not sinned, nor his parents, but only that the works of God may be
manifested in him. Some will say, with what equity can this be done? may I
lawfully strip another to cloth my self? I answer, that there are two kinds
of law or justice; the one strict, severe, and extreme, and as Divines call it,
Condignum: the other mitigated or qualified, as when any thing is decreed with
lenity and mercy. Wherefore admit all men were innocent Hieremies, Daniels,
Baptists, yet might God, out of the rigor of his justice, punish them, in
regard of the innate original sin, which (being the ^rime source of all
misery) had formerly defiled them. By one man sin entered this world, and by sin
death: and not that alone, but accompanied with many calamities. Wherefore
presupposing original sin, God may justly, and yet punctually observing the
Law, punish (de condigno) even the most innocent, with what afflictions soever,
so they be not eternal. Hence it is, that many infants are punished by death
and diseases. How much more justly may we then be punished, who to original
add many actual sins? Moreover, if any one complain, that God takes from him
that which ordinarily he uses to bestow on others, as food, health, riches,
and the like, God may justly answer, I ow thee nothing, what I have hitherto
given, take, as from the hand of my free bounty and goodness, all my gifts are
gratis. Now I withdraw them, that thou may know they came from me, and that
freely without any obligation of my part. Hitherto I have dealt liberally with
thee, if it be my pleasure not to continue it, what law have thou against me?
may not I do what pleases me? Friend, I do thee no injury: take that which is
thine, and get thee gone. Saint Augustine expressing this equity of God, says:
He afflicts us sometimes, and Aug. to. 8. in Psa. 62. mihi page 260.
withdrawes from us that which is necessary, that we may know our Father is a
Lord that can as well correct us as cherish us. Who is he therefore that can
think he has the least wrong offered him? It is the Princes pleasure to give
this man a horse, to that a chain of gold, to one a Captains place, to another
nothing. But suppose (notwithstanding all this) that things necessary to
sustain life be due unto us, were it an injury for God, by virtue only of
supreme honor and title of majesty, to abridge us of them? what cause have we
to complain? we are subjects, and consequently bound to observance. These only
you may call free and exempt, who are not in the labors of men, nor with men
shall be scourged.

We well know that life is dearer then either health, riches or honor: All
which a man has he will give for his life. Yet did the Martyrs in testifying
their love to Christ, cheerfully yield up their lives: and shall we for no
less cause refuse to undergo things of less difficulty? Moreover, what wrong
were it to any, to have his old and threadbare cloak taken away, and a newer
and better bestowed upon him? none at all. Who, unless he were mad, would
withstand it? No less foolish would he be reputed, who should so highly esteem
his old ha^, worth about three-half-pence, as to refuse fifty crowns for it.
God takes from us health, riches, honor, to bestow upon us so much the more
grace and glory: what injury call you this? For this cause S. James exhorts us:
Esteem it (my brethren) all the joy) that may be, to fall into sundry
temptations. To change transitory things for eternal, is not th^s the best
mart that may be? Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, was so ardently in love with
suffering, that he couragio^sly said: Let there come upon me fire, hanging,
quartering, beasts, breaking my bones, and whatsoever else may be inflicted
upon my body, yea the very torments of hell, only that I may enjoy Christ. No
greater gain can there be, then to lose after this manner.

Sect. V.
St. John Climacus relates a strange Climacus grad. 4. ante med. mihi page 57.
thing, which with his own eyes and ears he had observed in his Monastery,
where the Steward was of a very modest and mild disposition. This man, the
superior of the Monastery, after some invective speeches (as if he had been
unworthy to consort with the rest) commanded to be expelled the Church: but
Climacus finding some means of private speech with the Abbot, greatly commended
his innocence who had been so much reprehended; to whom the Abbot wisely
replied: I know it very well, Father, that our Steward is an upright and
religious man, and that he has hitherto committed no fault which ought so
sharply to be reproved; but as you know it were a cruel and barbarous part, to
snatch bread out of the hand or mouth of an infant: so you may think a
governor of a religious house does not well discharge his duty to himself or
others, if he seek no^ carefully to advance those under his charge to as high a
reward in heaven as is possible; whether it be by reproves or contumelies, by
scoffs, affronts, accusations, or any other means whatsoever. Virtue by
adversity increases, by being wounded flourishes, by injuries is erected, by
suffering refined, and without an adversary fades and withers away. The
superior therefore in religion that neglects to exercise his subjects in
this sort, depriveth some of the reward of suffering, others of the example of
patience; and, to conclude, puts the innocent in danger of pride, by not
exercising their patience and modesty: for the fertilest grounds breed weeds
and darnell, if they be not cultivated and moistened with seasonable dewes of
rain. If then the governor of a Monastery does well and orderly in exercising
even his innocent subjects with contumelies, what wrong does God, the governor
of the worlds most ample monastery, bounded, as it were, with the walls of the
heavens, and vast Ocean? what wrong, I say, does this omnipotent Father in
exercising his children with hunger, diseases, poverty, and other injuries? An
excellent discourse. And surely virtue without an adversary withers away.
Even the grave and wise opinion of Quintus Metellus delivered in the Senate,
shows this. Metellus, after the taking of Carthage, said in open Senate, that
he knew not whether the victory had brought more good or evil to the people of
Rome: for as it had profited by restoring peace, so it would be no small
prejudice by removing Hanniball. For by his passage into Italy, the virtue
Valor. li. 1. c. 2. post initium.
and valor of the people of Rome was awakened; and being freed of so sharp an
adversary, it was to be feared they would fall asleep again: he thought it
therefore as great a mischief to have the edge of their ancient valor rebated,
as if their houses were burnt, their fields wasted, and treasure exhausted.

This then may be the Oracle of Oracles; That Virtue without an adversary
decays and pines away: without a cross Patience falls asleep. All hail
therefore thou most precious cross, that rub'st off the rust of vices, that
set before us the mirror wherein we may learn to know our selves, that
bring us upon the stage to act the part of patience; thou that crownest us,
not with navall, obsidionall, civicke, murall or castrensall, but with heavenly
crowns, thou that do furnish us with all manner of virtue, and never leavest
us till thou bring us unto God. Transfix me therefore (O my dear Lord) burn
me, cut me, pull me in pieces in this world, so thou spare me for all eternity.
And when hereafter we shall be presented with this bitter cup, and asked,
whether we be able to drink it, grant we may courageously answer, we can,
through thy divine help and assistance, not our own: for the servant is not
greater then his Lord and Master. While Joab, that warlike Captain, takes up
his lodging under a tent covered with skins, Urias is ashamed to lie at his own
house in a bed of Down. It would be a thing infinitely odious to see delicate
members decked with roses and bracelets, perfumed with civet and balsamum,
under a head imbrewed with blood, and pierced with thorns.

We ought therefore to be most assured, that Almighty God for a thousand
reasons, may exercise, and even hardly handle his scholars in this school,
with all manner of cares, griefs and afflictions. These are like the strokes
which instruct, fashion, sh^pe and square us for immortal beatitude. This is
our way to life everlasting. Wherefore (as says S. Augustine) Aug. to. 10. de
verb. Dom. Ser. 23. c. 3.
let not stripes dismay us, that the joy of resurrection may comfort us.

CHAP. III. Why some Scholars are more afflicted in this School then others.
IT is an old complaint of Scholars in Schools, and of inhabitants in Cities*
that some are ch^stised and prese^^ more then others; some favorably, others,
rough^y used: the Crows pardoned, and Doves punished. This seems not to go
well, since Citizens should live indifferently after one sort; yet for the most
part, the contumacious, disobedient, and rebellious, are more friendly
entreated, and bounteously rewarded, then good and virtuous persons. Many, and
those very holy men, have complained heerof. Why (says Jeremy the Prophet)
does the way of the impious prosper? Why is it well with all that transgress
and do wickedly? Job making the like complaint, says: Why then do the impious
live? Why are they advanced and strengthened with riches? And the Prophet
Habacuc much after the same manner. Why (says he) look not thou upon them
that do unjust things, and hold thy peace when the impious devoureth him
that is more just then himself? Into the same complaints likewise fell the
most holy King David, saying: My feet were almost moved, my steps almost
slipped; because I have had zeal upon the wicked, seeing the peace of sinners.
And I said, Then have I justified my heart without cause. In vain do we esteem
of virtue, if wickedness be more powerful, and vice honored with ampler
rewards then virtue.

Whosoever thou art, look round about the world, and thou shall see them dye
here and there, upon whose life and health the safety of very many depended;
and those suffered to live and prosper, for whom it had been better they had
never been born: thou shall see strong and healthful men ^ob and spoil; and
harmless creatures miserably afflicted with diseases: Many wicked men advanced
to prime dignities, and the honester sort grievously oppressed with poverty;
who can ever sufficiently wonder at this? Nay, who is there that would not be
moved with with indignation, to see vice flourish every where, and virtue
commended, but not advanced? Even Saint Augustine Aug. lib. 10. de Civ. cap. 2.
himself says: We know not by what judgment of God this good man is poor,
or that evil man rich.

Sect. I.
IT seems very difficult for humane reason to apprehend, why wicked men
prosper so much in their way: and why, on the other side, innocent Abel is
slain before others in the family of Adam: obedient Joseph in the house of
Jacob, thrown into a pit, sold to strangers, and cast in prison: Zealous Elias
oppressed with hunger, and driven into banishment: devout Daniel condemned to
the Lions: patient Job scourged by the Devil: righteous S. John Baptist at
Herod's command dragged to prison: S. Peter, so servent in the love of his
master, hurried to execution, and crucified under Nero. Peruse holy Scriptures
from the first of Genesis to the last of the Apocalypse, and thou shall
scarcely find any thing more frequent then the calamities of just men. Look
back (O you mortals!) upon all precedent ages, read sacred and profane
histories, and you shall find all filled with good men's tears. At Athens,
Socrates the wise, Phocion the good, Aristides the just, Mithridrates the
victorious, suffer undeservedly; Aristides banishment, the other death. At Rome
Marcus Cato, that exemplary wise man, that lively mirror of virtue, is pulled,
haled, thrust, spit upon, turned out of his Pretorship, carried to prison, and
there, like Socrates put to death. Rutilius and Camillus are compelled to live
in banishment; Pompey and Cicero put to death by their own servants. The ends
of good Se^ l. de tranquil. c. ^5. p^st. ^nit.
men are oftentimes very miserable. Will any man then be virtuous, since virtue
is so ill rewarded? Saint John Baptist groans in chains, whilst Herod
licentiously revells and dances. Poor Lazarus dies for hunger, whilst his
executioner the rich glutton, clothed in purple for many days together
sumptuously feasteth. Many are the troubles of just men. What does God all this
while? Is he, or does he seem to be asleep? He that numbreth all the hairs of
our head, takes account even of the Sparrows, and least birds of the air,
keeps a reckoning of every lease upon the trees, without whose consent not so
much as one of them falls to the ground: can he, I say, behold so many
injuries, and toler^te them with patience? How does God know, and if there be
knowledge in the h^ghest? This is that infamous rock whereat so many have
suffered shipwreck by despair.

O you mortals! God is neither ignorant nor unjust. Most wisely and most justly
are these revolutions in the world, the first be made the last, and the last
first, the innocent punished, and the guilty pardoned. We live here as if we
kept perpetually the Saturnalia; the wicked dominier and flourish, good men are
made subject, groan and lament; masters serve, and servants play the m^sters.
But how little a while will this continue? F^r otherwise will it be in the
eternal world. This is but a prelud^um to that better life; let us not wonder
to see all things turned upside down in this game, virtue oppressed with
continual labors, and vice enjoying all ease and delicacies. There is nothing
upon earth done without cause. Some I will here set down.

Sect. II.
THe first reason is, that we may be conformable with Christ. For whom he has
foreknowne and predestined to be made conformable to the image of his Son.
God has sent his Son unto us: but what image, I pray you, has he given us of
himself? No other then that which represented him a man contemptible,
miserable, and nailed to the Cross. Behold, (O man!) what image thou must
imitate, to whom thou must conform thy self. The whole life of Christ was
nothing but a mere cross: and would thou frame a quiet life to thy self,
flowing with delights, and replenished with pleasures? Christ before he was
born had a stable pointed out for his nativity: scarcely was he born, but his
death was sought after; being born, he was laid, not in a cradle of Ivory or
Silver, but upon straw in a homely manger. His infancy and youth he passed in
labor and want, witness himself; I am poor (says he) and brought up in
labors from my youth. When he began to preach, he had many contumclies,
affronts and injuries offered him; some took up stones to throw at him, others
led him to the top of a hill to cast him down headlong. Finally, to conclude
and crown, as it were, all his injuries, at last he died on a Cross, and was
buried in another man's tomb. And as Christ began to suffer before he was born,
so ceased he not to suffer when he was dead: for after his death and burial,
he was called, Seductor ille, that seducer. Very truly said Christ of himself:
Against me all thy wrath has passed, and over me thou have brought all thy
waves. This is the Image of his Son, which God proposes to be imitated. This
is the court-colour, and to be diversely afflicted, is to wear our Princes
livery. It is a most true saying, That all the life of Christ Tho. de Kempis,
l. 2. c. 12. n 7.
was a continual crucifying and martyrdom, and look thou for joy and
tranquillity? It is the custom of some Academies, to cloth those that live
and study together, in garments all alike so is it the pleasure of God, that
all his scholars in the school of Patience, be clad in the same color, all
suitable to his Son, with contempt, ir^isions, calumnies, calamities and
aff^onts: he has predestined them to be conformable to the Image of his Son.

The second cause is, calamity and affliction awake men out of sloth. We are
most of us unwilling to take pains, and very prone to sloth and idleness.
Hence comes it, that unless we be rowsed, we wax sluggish and sl^epy, not
without danger of our salvation. Garments lying still unworn, are eaten with
moaths; a field for want of tilling, is overgrown with thorns; a standing water
is filled with Toads and Frogs: and a man never exercised with calamities,
becomes effemina^e by pleasure, and corrupted with vice. For whilst men sleep,
the enemy comes and sowes darnell. Wh^lst S^^son s^^pt in the bosom of D^^ila,
he l^st both his hair and strength: the Philistines waked him indeed, but to
his cost, being deprived of his hair and strength to defend him. Scipio
Nas^^a, (that soul of valor and wisdom) would have Carthage spared for no
other reason, then to keep the Romans awake. God himself placed in the midst
of Israel, the Hetheans, Gergezeans, Amorrheans, Ch^naneans, P^erezeans,
Heveans, J^^^zeans, most pot^st enem^es, lest Israel should sleep in vice and
iniqu^ty, and to m^^ster them occasion of perpetual war an^ victory.

David, before he was proclaimed King, shrouded himself in the dens of wild
beasts, hardly secured from the secret practices of his enemies, he made a
scruple even to touch Saul his mortal enemy: but when he had purchased his
peace, and flowed in pleasures and idleness, he feared not, by letters, to
pro^ure the death of his most faithful servant Urias.

The Church of God never more flourished, then when she was most afflicted,
amidst swords and crosses, she beheld the combats and victories of her Martyrs.
After the same manner goes it with every particular man; no sooner is he at
truce with adversity, but he becomes sluggish and vicious: assuredly, unless
we be often stirred up, and visited, and even galled with adversi^y, we
languish and lose our selves with idleness. We are perpetually inebriated and
sluggish, unless something happen to put us in mind of humane misery. But
observe here what the master does sometimes in the School: He sees two of his
scholars sleeping in their several places, and forthwith calls alowd to one of
their fellows, saying, Pinch that Boy, and awake him; mean while lets the other
sleep, as if he saw him not. And why commands he not both to be wakened? The
reason is, because the one is docible and capable of learning, and shortly
after shall be commanded to repeat his lesson, being of a sharp wit, and ready
tongue, and therefore well beloved of his master. The other Endymion, is the
dunce and drone of the school, never better, or more at quiet then when he
sleeps. Such an one as this the master passes over with neglect, and had
rather have him sleep, then pr^^e and disturb the rest. So Almighty God
provokes, incites, and exercises his most forward and aptest scholars,
scourges every child whom he receives into his favor.

Sect. III.
THE third reason is to increase their faith. He that learns, ought to believe.
We believe there is a heaven prepared for the blessed, and a hell for the
damned; but, I beseech you, what lively faith or assurance have we of either?
No eye could ever penetrate to hell, nor do any return from heaven to declare
how matters go there. This cogitation afflicts many: for some thinking not
rightly with themselves, have said: There was never any known to return from
hell. Nevertheless, we must believe that there are both these places, except
we conclude that God is unjust: for if he who has covenanted to punish the
wicked, and reward the good, pays neither in this world, certainly in the
world to come he will not fail, both to punish the one, and liberally to reward
the other. But most evident it is, that many here want the reward of their
virtue, and in stead thereof are oppressed with penury, afflicted with
diseases, and environed with whole troops of miseries. Neither have the wicked
their payment in this life; for they sail with a prosperous and favorable
gale of wind: whereas they deserve to be tossed with the most tempestuous waves
that may be. Well then, may the hope of the virtuous daily increase, and the
bad have most just cause to fear, that he whom they so much hate, shall be
their judge at last. Certainly there are none, how good or bad soever, but
shall have their hire. Seeing therefore none are so wicked, but that sometimes
(even forgetting their wickedness) they do or say well: for which, how little
soever it be, they shall receive a temporal reward; notwithstanding they shall
have their eternal punishment at length, though deferred for a time. The
highest is a patient debtor. Wherefore by this means our faith may be
strengthened, and by these temporal punishments and rewards, gather an assured
belief of eternal.

The third reason is to illuminate the understanding. The master in the School
ought principally to labor, that children by little and little may learn to
grow wise, cast off their childishness, and come to know their own ignorance.
This is that which God himself endeavors in the School of Patience: That
vexation may give understanding.

In very deed we never sufficiently apprehend how miserable and fr^il we are,
till our own miseries teach us. Moreover, we are too much besotted with
self-love, and easily thereby persuaded, that we are unable to endure many
things: And yet the testimony of experience it self sets before our eyes,
and teaches us, whether we will or no, how much we can (if our will be not
wanting) endure for Christ's sake. Many sick persons suffer that, which when
they were well, they thought they could never have endured: yea, and by
suffering this, learn how poor and slender our patience is in time of health.
It is an easy matter to be patient when we have nothing to trouble us. King
David blaming himself, said: In my prosperity I said, I will not be moved for
ever. Thou have turned away thy face from me, and I was troubled. Peter (if he
had not fallen so miserably) would never have believed himself to be so weak
and pufillanimous. In the place of the last Supper he boasting said: Although I
were to dye with thee, yet would I not deny thee, though all should be
scandalized, yet would not I. But shortly after he saw his own weakness. For
this cause the wise man advises: My son, in thy life time try thy soul, and
if it be wicked, give it no power. What knowledge has he of himself, that is
not tempted? To know himself, he must try himself. No man knows what thou
art able to do, no not thy self, unless some difficulty give thee oceasion
thereof. How far the alarm will awake a man's courage, is then known, when the
alarm is given. The sent of pepper is not smelt till it be pounded. It is
never known how well the Lute or Harp are tuned, till they be touched. How
patient the blessed mother of our Lord was, appeared in the stable at
Bethlehem, by her fligh^ into Egypt, and under the cross at Jerusalem. These
most holy anchorites Stephen and Benjamin, showed their patience by suffering
most grievous diseases: Stephen by stretching forth his putrified limbs to the
Chyrurgian to be cut off, while he, the patient, not to lose time, wove palm
branches with his hands; and with so undaunted a courage and countenance,
suffered himself to be cut, as if it had not been his arm, but another body.
And when others, even with looking on, were sensible of his pain, he said unto
them: O my children! what soever God does, is to a good end: Let us combat, let
us suffer, whilst we are as Champions within the lists. It is better to suffer
a short pain, then to be involved in everlasting torments. Benjamin, who
Pallad. cap. 30 de Steph.
for the space of fourscore years, lived a most perfect life, and was reported
to heal diseases, was, notwithstanding, himself miserably afflicted with the
dropsy. Of this man Dioscorus the Bishop spoke, when visiting him, with
Evagrius and Palladius in his Idem Pallad. c 18. and Heraclid. in s^o paradiso,
c 2. in fin^.
company, he said: Come, I beseech you, let us behold another Job, who not
only conceals his pains and griefs with patience; but also rendereth thanks
for that he is visited with sickness. To whom Benjamin himself replied: Pray,
O my brethren! that my inward man may not be sick of a dropsy. My body
benefited me little when it was in health, nor hurts me now it is sick.

Sect. IV.
THe fifth cause is, for that affliction is the greatest sign of profit, and a
special incitement thereunto. Schoolmasters require most pains and industry at
their hands who are most hopeful. The wise Roman excellently discoursed Sen de
Provid c. 4.
of this. Those therefore (says he) whom God likes and loves, he animate^h,
corrects, exercises; but those whom he seems to cherish and spare, he
reserveth untou^hed for future miseries. You are deceived if you think any m^n
exempted: there are none so happy but shall have their share in afflictions,
whosoever he be that seems dismissed, is but deferred. Why does God afflict the
best men with corporal infirmities, and other adversities? Why are the
hardiest men in the camp put upon the greatest danger? The Captain sends his
most selected men to lie by night in ambush for the enemy, to discover the
passage, or make way through the watch. Not one of them sent forth, says, the
Captain has dealt ill with me, but rather he has disposed well: The same let
every one say, who is commanded to suffer that which abject spirits would faint
and shrink at. It has pleased God to do us this favor to manifest what man is
able to suffer. God therefore takes the same course with good men, which
masters do with scholars: they expect that those who are most hopeful should
labor most. Did the Lacedaemonians, think you, hate their children, whose
abilities they made by stripes a public trial of? their parents themselves
animated them to endure the blows courageously; and even when they were
mangled and half dead, multiplied wounds upon wounds. What wonder is it that
God handles generous spir^ts so roughly? Virtue is never taught by soft and
gentle means. Are we scourged and tormented by calamities? we must not think it
cruelty, but a combat, which the oftener we undergo, the sooner we shall become
valiant. Whom our Lord loves, he chastises. To this purpose Saint Augustine
says excellently well: Good Aug. in Psa. 93.
men live in labor and travel, because they are scourged as children: Evil
men rejoice and exult, because they are condemned as strangers. Fear not
therefore to be scourged, but rather fear to be disinherited.

Pharaoh King of Egypt, made a very unjust law against the infants of the
Hebrews, commanding all their male children to be slain. Origin explaineth this
Manlian law in this manner: If, says he, you chance to see one man amongst a
thousand converted to our Lord, and seeking after eternity, hating unlawful
pleasures, and loving continency, etc. this man Pharao (the Prince of
darkness) seeks to kill, and with a thousand engines and stratagems fights
against him. Let it not therefore seem strange to any, that Crows are
pardoned, and Doves grievously punished, that the wicked are happy, and the
lovers of virtue miserable. It was anciently the saying of Demetrius, No man
seems to me more Senec l. de Provid. c. 3.
unhappy, then he that has never been unhappy. In like sense Bias called him
unhappy who could bear no unhappiness. These speeches of wise men Seneca
confirming with his most illustrious testimony, says: I will give thee Son.
Epist. 124. and he omnium Epist ^larum clausu^a est.
a brief rule or scantling, whereby thou shall measure thy self, and know
whether thou be perfect or no: Thou shall then be good thy self, when thou
once understandest those to be happy who are most unhappy. What Christian then
is there that will not think himself miserable, even for this cause alone,
for that he seldom it miserable? A thousand reasons may be produced to this
purpose.

Sect. V.
BUt suppose we could find no reason why we should be justly miserable; yet
we must not so utter the least word against our masters command. Know we not
how Scholars are treated? If the master out of his chair pronounce this
sentence: be gone sir and prepare for a whipping, I will come instantly: the
scholar notwithstanding presumes to mutter, saying, why fir? why master? what
have I done? the master presently replies, what varlet? stand'st thou asking
why thou art to be whipped? get thee gone quickly, thou shall have twice as much
for that fault which thou have doubled by asking me why? Very well says
Salvianus, as it were in the person of a Salv. l. 3. de Prove.
Schoolmasters. Why ask thou me, why one is greater, another less, one
miserable, another fortunate? I know De quo part. 2. cap. 6.
not what reason God h^th for it, it is a sufficient reason that I show it is
God that does it. Let this reason suffice that God is the author of all
punishments and calamities. Such is the pleasure of that most provident
governou^ of this school, why do we (miserable worms) mutter against it.

King David curiously searching into this point, was of opinion he could find
out the reason of this so hidden a secret: I thought said he, that I might know
this, but it was labor unto me. Therefore get thee gone curious cogitation: If
I said I will expound after this manner, behold I have reprobated the nation of
thy ch^ldren, to wit, Abel, Noah, Abraham. Isaacke, and the dearest friends of
God, whom I should grievously accuse, should I avouch they were forsaken of
God, or that they had in vain lived virtuously, because (as is most apparent)
they chastised. It is a labor to me until I enter into the Sanctuary of God,
and understand in the last of them: We shall never sufficiently penetrate into
the reasons why God spares this man or afflicts that, till we may in a
better world, behold the book of Gods accomptes. Whosoever therefore
considers these unequal punishments of mortal men, let him pronounce that
saying of the Kingly Prophet. Thou art just, O Lord! and thy judgment right. I
am severly punished, but conf^sse I have a thousands times deserved it. It is
not f^r me to take account of God why others are punish^d. Thus much only I
know that the judgments of God are an infini^e abyss. The eye of God always
waketh, and only connives at the sins of men, when you think it sleeps.

Saint Augustine inciting us to attention that we may the better understand
this secret, says; see my brethren, and advisedly observe: God is grievously
displeased with him whom he suffers to sin and scourges not. For whom he
truly and mercifully loves, he does not only forgive him his sins that they
may not hurt him in the world to come, but likewise chastizeth Aug. in Psalm.
98. post med. mihi page 453
him, least he should always take delight in sin, wherein God is like an
expert Physician who knows exactly what is most proper for every patient. Tell
me why a Physician ministers more Wormwood or Ellebot to one patient then
another? Because his disease or complexion requires it. Think the same of God,
who by the month of Saint Augustine speaks in this sort to the sick person:
I Aug. ib. page 454.
know whom I cure, let not the sick man advise me. What I apply eats in like
a corrasive, but withal heales thee. The Chyrurgian, though thou intreat'st
him, takes not off his plaster till thy sore be cured; virtue is perfected in
infirmity, and therefore it is a Lip. l. 2. de Constable. c. 8.
most true saying. The only and surest trial and refining of virtue, is
affliction.

CHAP. IV. Five kinds of punishments and afflictions are particularly
explained.
A Great Prince commanded his device to be expres'd in this manner. A gourd
floating on the top of the water, and as if it understood it is own state and
condition, speaking these words: ^^ctor non mergor, I am tossed, but sink not:
for gourds swim aloft by reason of their light and spungy substance. Not much
unlike this was that device which Claudius Paradinus speaks of, borne by
Admirallus Chabotius, a man of great renown, to wit, a windball or ba^oone,
with this Motto, Concussus, sur^o: Stricken, I bound aloft, for these balls by
blows are forced to mount and fly upward. Many men never carne to be wise
till they be beaten with their own rod; they aspire not to heaven, but when
they begin to loath the earth; they elevate their minds to eternal, when
they have ill success in frail and transitory things. Concussisurgunt, being
stricken, they rise and bound upward, like bladders blown with wind; the
h^rder they are stricken, the higher they mount. This we have sufficiently
showed in the three former Chapters. Now we proceed to the ten several
kinds of afflictions and calamities which we intimated before.

Sect. I. Rods.
THe first instrument wherewith scholars in the school of Patience are
corrected, ^s Rods; diseases and infirmities are afflictions known to all
men. Is there any so healthful that he feels not now and then the smart of
these Rods? There is scarcely any that is not hereby put in mind that he is
mortal being subject, as he is, to so many diseases. The strongest complexion
in the world is not exempt, but feels sometimes gnawing, aching, or griping
pains. Either their head, eyes, teeth, arms, legs, or stomach aches. And
what wonder? We are even a seminary of diseases, and do we think it strange to
be sick? Diseases creep into every age and state of life. We are no sooner
borne but we begin to be sick: and therefore may believe Saint Augustine,
for who is there, Aug. in Psa. 102. ante med mihi page 473.
says he, that is not sick in this life? who is there that lingreth not in
one languour or other? our birth in this mortal body is no other then a
preludium or entrance to infirmities. Why then are we afraid at the approach
of diseases?

This life is a perpetual disease. But Idem Sermon. 74.
yet believe me, there is a place for virtue in sickness: which by the saying
Senec. Epist. 76.
of Saint Ambrose is verified: the infirmity of the body is the sobriety of the
mind. Infirmity is the forge of virtue; and, as Hierom says, it is better to
have the stomach sick then the mind. There have been some, but very few, who
have lived to fourscore years of age in perfect health: yet this old house
began to decay, and at last was dissolved, and utterly ruinated.

Thus much let us be assured of, that for the most part, none behave themselves
better in sickness, then they who in time of health have often learned the Art
of suffering amongst sick persons. Here let every man question himself in this
sort: If thou were in this state, how would thou demean thy self? how mildly
and pleasingly would thou speak? how patiently would thou suffer thy pains?

To seek for health from witches, or sorcerers, is the property of a man
desperate, and wretchedly in love with his life. Is there not a God in Israel,
that you go to seek counsel of Beelzebub the God of Accaron? Let our sickness
draw us to God, not to the Devil the enemy of God.

The Hebrews when they were freed from diseases and slaughters, forgot their
God: but no sooner were their infirmities multiplied, but they made haste to
return unto him. Sometimes the neck, foot, or arm is cauterized to cure the
head: So God burns and cauterizes the body with diseases, to heal the soul. A
painful disease makes a sober soul, says the wise man. And to say truth, it
is better to be scorched with a burning fever, then with the flames of sin.

Many then detest at last, and loath their unlawful pleasure when they are
visited with sickness. Rightly said S. Greg. hom. 1^. in Evang. propius finem.
Gregory, By the divine goodness it comes to pass, that an inveterate habit
of vice is purged with a long ma^ady. Our evil customs which have continued
long without any amendment, deserve oftentimes a long punishment; and if God
chastise so severely when he pardons, how sharply will he strike when he is
incensed? How rigorously will he punish the reprobate, seeing he bears so
heavy a hand over his beloved children?

There was a certain religious man, (as testifies Ruffinus Aquileiensis) who
earnestly requested an holy Anchoret named John, to cure him of a tertian. No,
said he, for hereby you seek to be deprived of a good thing, and for you most
necessary: For as clothes are washed with soap, so is the soul purified by
sickness. The disease of the body is the health of the soul. Virtue in
infirmity is perfected.

This (on a time) moved a certain religious old man (as I find written by
many) to say to his sick Scholar ^ Courage (my child) let not this disease of
thy body trouble thee. If tho^ be iron, this fire will burn off thy rust,
if gold, it will refine thee: be not the fore discontented: if it be Gods will
to afflict thee with sickness, who art thou that dare resist or repine
against his blesled will? bear it then courageously, and beseech God to
conform thy will to his in all things.

Sure if we would consider of this matter as we ought, should find sickness
to be so great a benefit, sent from God, that a hundred years service were too
little to deserve it. In sickness we are invited to make our peace with God,
whom perhaps before we opposed and grievously exasperated. Blessed Saint
Gregory says that sick persons are to be admonished to consider how much good
they may reap by corporal afflictions, which both expiate the sins formerly
committed, and restrain them from committing the like afterward. Most wisely
said Solomon. The blewnesse of the wound will wipe all evil, for according to
the interpretation of S. Gregory, and smart of Gods chastisements, purges all
sins either of thought or deed.

Wherefore sick persons are to be advertised, that in this respect they Greg.
part. 3. pastor admo. 3 med.
may think themselves the children of God, for that they are chastized with the
scourge of his discipline, for were it not that he intended to bestow on them
an inheritance after their, correction, he would never so carefully, and to
their trouble, instruct them. Wherefore he that is afflicted with bodily
sickness may comfort himself and say, let my body perish, which of necessity
must perish, so my soul be saved. Can any man be grieved to see his old rotten
cottage pulled down, and in stead thereof a fair new fabric erected? Let
not then the sick man (though he have one foot in the grave) be discomforted:
we know if our earthly house be dissolved, we have another provided by God, not
a perishing manufacture, but an eternal house in heaven.

But you will say it is an easy matter for him that is sound and in good
health to comfort the sick, we would perhaps change our note, were our health
exchanged for their sickness. What sick man will ever be persuaded that
corporal infirmities are to be preferred before entire health? By your good
leave (sir) you express your self herein to be too much a man, and altogether
ignorant of Christian discipline. Know you not that of Saint Paul? When I am
infirm then I am strong. In this sense Saint Gregory said: while rough
adversity weakneth Oreg. l. 29. Moral. c. 15. propius finem.
holy men, it makes them stronger. The flesh pampereth and cherishes it self
with delicious viands; but the spirit is supported by sharp and rough
entreaties: the one is fed with delights, the other nourished with bitterness;
and so the flesh for a time, lives sweetly, that the spirit may dye eternally.

But give me leave, I pray you, to answer here your objections.

Pain, say you, is hard and unsufferable. To which I may reply; But you are a
weakling and effeminate.

There have been but very f^w that could endure pains and dolours.

Answ. Let us be of those few.

But we are weak and frail by nature.

Answ. Cast no imputation on Nature, she has brought us forth strong and
vigorous.

Is there any man that seeks not to avoid pain?

Answ. It pursues them that fly from it: if the dolor or grief be small, let
us bear it; a little patience will suffice: if the pain be great, let us endure
it, the glory will be the greater.

But a man in perfect health might spend his time more vertucusly.

Answ. Nay, far less. Think that saying of Saint Augustine verified in Aug.
Tract. 7. ^n Joan.
thee. How many are there wicked in health, who sick would be innocent? Sin is
pruned and cut off by sickness.

But O how rich is he that has his health!

Answ. No, in sickness thou beginnest to be acceptable to God. Reckon this
amongst other benefits of thy disease: we never set a right value on health
till it be taken from us.

O how weak and how feeble am I now!

Here let Saint Bernard answer thee: Better it is to be broken with labors and
dolours, and be saved, then to remain Bern de inter d^mo^. 46.
in health and be damned.

O what a slave am I to pains and grief!

Answ. Reflect thine eye from thy self upon Christ crucified: there view a man
of dolours indeed, and knowing infirmities: for he truly bare our languors, and
sustained our dolours. Ah! when will this obstinate and cruel disease have an
end?

Answ. It is a sign of cold love to desire presently an end of suffering for
Christ, before we have well begun.

But if I were now in health, I would go to Church and purify my soul with
heavenly Sacraments.

Ans. Believe me, the least degree of patience in sickness is the best means
to expiate thy sins.

Therefore as blessed Saint Gregory advises, we must say to the sick, that if
they believe they have any right to their country in heaven, they must of
necessity suffer labor and pain here, as in a foreign land: Let him that is
sick commend himself to the divine goodness, and say: Even thy rod and thy
staff have comforted me. Here let me be pricked, here tormented, here burned,
so I burn not everlastingly.

Think not much, I beseech thee, gentle Reader, to peruse what the harbinger of
eternity brings, to compose and rectify the thoughts of sick persons. Here we
surcease, to avoid prolixity.

Sect. II. ARROWS.
PAins and griefs are arrows piercing deeper then any two-edged sword. King
David being very sensible of these arrows, says: Thy arrows are sharp;
cares, irksomeness, grief, fear, sickness, wound the soul like arrows. It
is in a manner the greatest grief of all to have a wounded mind. For as
mental delights far exceed all corporal; so the grief and anguish of the
mind far surpasses all other dolours.

Christ the Redeemer of the world, on mount Olivet and mount Calvary,
complained not of stripes and scourges, nor of the sharp pricking thorns and
nails, but upon the cross cried out of his grieved mind, that he was forsaken
of his father.

The sorrow and heaviness of Christ was inexplicable, which caused those
lamentable voices: My soul is heavy even to death. And, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? The wounds of the mind exced all penal acerbities: And
therefore the wise man said, Grief of heart is an universal wound.

Sometimes Almighty God brings his servants into such straits, that all things
seem to oppose them; and, which is the greatest misery, they think that God
himself is highly offended with them. Nevertheless, they are not destitute of
hope, but again and again cry, O my Lord God! in the day I have cried, and in
the night before thee: because my soul is filled with evil things, and my life
has drawn near to hell. I am poor, and in labors from my youth: Or
(according to others) I am afflicted, and like to one giving up the ghost: from
my youth I have born thy terrors, and have trembled.

The Scripture tells us, that the Hebrews passing out of Egypt, came into
Mara, and could not drink the waters of Mara, because they were bitter, etc.
There he gave them precepts and judgments, and there he tried them. Here one
will say, I beseech thee, Lord, was there not a more commodious place for the
enacting of thy Laws? Did the worst seem unto thee the fittest? here the very
water it self increased their thirst.

But (Reason) what meanest thou here to expostulate? There God established
Laws and Precepts, and there he tempted and tried them. For this affair the
most incommodious place was most fitting for them. In the richest and most
fertile countries, amidst delicacies, the Law of God, for the most part, is
contemned. Felicity is but stepmother to all virtues. They who are oppressed
with adversities, and fearful of losing their estates, learn sooner to fear
God, then they who by felicity are invited to lasciviousness. For the most
part God is nearest unto us in adversity. Therefore Nahum the Prophet said: Our
Lord was in the tempest, in the whirlwind of his way. God comes to us in the
midst of lightning and thunder, and then commonly he is nearest when the
tempest of affl^ction is greatest. Witness Saint Gregory: The evils which
here oppress us, compel us to have recourse unto God.

Jonathan and David (that noble pair of friends) thus agreed between
themselves. I (said Jonathan) will shoot three arrows, and will shoot as it
were practicing at a mark. I will likewise send a boy saying unto him, go
bring me my arrows, if I say to the boy look, the arrows are on this side
thee, take them up, come to me, for then all is in peace, and nothing amiss.
God every day and moment shootes and sends forth his arrows out of his bow,
and powers forth on men all kinds of maladies. Whosoever is stricken with one
of these arrows, let him not be appal'd or dismayed at the wound, behold the
arrows of God have transfixed thee; peace i^ with thee, and there is no hurt
done. These wounds are signs of health. But these shaftes (thou say)
miserably torment thy mind, and often times affl^ct thee with extreme
anguishes. To be vexed in mind, to repent, to be contristated, to grieve and
fear, are horrible torment^ to the m^nde. Admit all this, yet if thou
patiently receive all these arrows shot against thee, fear not, peace is with
thee, and there is no harm done, thy God lives.

Behold King David who perceiving himself more then once wounded, says; thine
arrows are fixed in me, and thou have confirmed thy hand upon me. He did not
only lament and groan at the arrows shot against him, but also at those that
were fixed and sticking in him. There were many things that grieved and
troubled this good king. Be^sabe was no sooner delivered of a son but it
^yed. His son Ammon committed incest wi^h his daughter Thamar then ready for
marriage. Ammon himself being dru^ke at a feast, is slain by his brother
Absolon. From this degenerating son Absalon, that good father deposed from
his royal throne, and deprived of his crown, is forced to fly as from the
face of an enemy. Behold what deep wounds these arrows made in King David I
not one or two, but very many they were that showred down one his head.

And how sharp and penetrating was Nathans speech pronouncing in public, Tu
es ille-vir, Thou art that very man; why have thou contemned the word of thy
Lord (say^h God) that thou might do evil in my sight? wherefore the sword
shall not depart from thy house for ever, because thou have despised me.
Behold, I will raise up mischief upon thee from thine own house, for thou
have done thine actions in secret: but I will perform that word in the sight
of all Israel, and in the sight of the Sun. Behold almost as many arrows as
words. O what deep wounds made these penetrating Darts in the kings heart?
arrows (and those innumerable) they were wherewith he was transfixt on all
sides, yet comfort was not wanting: King David lost no courage, for though the
shafts of God pierce, stick fast, torment and rend; yet soon after they f^ll
away. Death like a Chyrurgion pulls them out. For thine arrows pass quickly
away, and the voice of thy Thunder in a wheel.

How many soever the arrows be which God shoots against us, they are soon
drawn out by his all curing hand. The moment seems somewhat long wherein we
are afflicted But that indeed is a voice of Thunder; depart, be gone, you
accursed, go into everlasting fire; away, get you gone, weep for ever, burn
for ever. O dreadful! this voice shall be for ever circumvolved on the wheel
of eternity. This Thunder shall be perpetually in the ears of the damned, and
shall never cease to transfix as it were with wounding Darts, those guilty
souls. But now the arrows of our Lord are transitory, and therefore may well
be called silver and golden shaftes, for that they come from the hand of God,
pass away speedily, and give for a little patience an immortal reward.

Dictamnum is an Herb well known to Hearts, and Goats, which having tasted,
the arrows fall from their wounded sides, as Virgil sings,

Virg. l 12 Aen^id.
Non illa feris inc^gnita capris Gramina,
Cum tergo volucre^ hasere sagit^ae.
An herb which savage Goats know where by kind,
(While shafts are in their bodies fixed) to find.
If wild beasts wounded with arrows have natural remedies so near at hand,
shall our sore want a salve? Even this thought alone (that the shaftes of our
Lord will soon pass away) if it be seriously waigh'd and applied, is an
excellent receipt; for what does sooner mitigate sorrow, then to consider with
confidence that God will end the grief, and bring consolation, and with it
eternity which shall never have end.

Dabit D^us his quoque finem. Annaeus the Philosopher comparing Mecaenas while
he lay in his downebed, to a miserable man hanging upon a cross, says
Mecaenas endeavors to procure sleep by soft musical st^a^nes gently
res^u^ding a far off, but though he make himself drowsy with wine, and
seek to q^iet his perplexed thoughts with a thousand delights yet shall he lie
as broad awake upon his downy bed as the other on the cross But its a comfort
to the one that he suffers for a good cause (and as we may say for Christ)
considering with patience for what he suffers. The other consumed with
pleasure, and intoxicated with too much felicity, is more tormented with the
guilt of his crimes for which he suffers, then with the suff^ring it self.

A sick and discontented mind shall never be perfectly cured with delights.
The greatest comfort of a troubled mind is to suffer adversity for Christ's
sake; and after the speedy end of his misery, expect eternal solace.

Let us therefore endure and persevere; blessed eternity is near at hand, all
adversity and trouble whatsoever a man suffers in this life, all cross^s, be
they never so grievous and horrible, are (as Saint Augustine says) in
comparison of eternal fire, not only light Aug. ^o 10. Sermon 19^. de tempore
ante med. mihi. page 298.
and trivial, but even none at all. The end of all these is already in sight:
Eternity shall never have end.

Sect. III. Tapers.
BUrning Tapers are the emblemes of poverty. Poverty (if it lights upon a man
that knows how to make good use of it) is a most efficacious means to attain
to virtue. God in the School of Patience, diverse ways makes use of this
instrument. There are some brought to such extreme poverty, that they have not
so much as bread to satisfy their hunger, nor are they able with their
hand-labour to get their livings: these are worthy of compassion. Of such may
be understood that saying of Diogenes: Poverty is no ordinary sickness. There
are others who suffer in private a world of misery (shame-fac'd beggars I mean)
who rather choose to starve then beg: certainly these deserve no less
commiseration then the former. There are others poor and needy, but withal
idle and lazy, such as might easily free themselves from poverty, if they
would first shake off sloth: they will take no pains, and so fall into the
snare of beggary. They had rather starve then not be idle. There are others
very laborious, but crossed by domestical casualties, are notwithstanding
subject to poverty. Some there are who seem to be very rich, and yet so far in
debt, that they have almost p^wn'd their so^ls. To these we may well say He is
rich that is not in debt. And finally, some there are who seem poor only to
themselves whereas indeed their disease proceeds not so much from poverty as
covetousness: they want not victuals, but they desire to have them in a more
pompous and magnificent manner. They are not content to be clothed and fed, but
they will have dainty and costly viands: these kind of people you shall hear
often complaining, how many things do I stand in need of? And surely these
ungrateful wretches, who are not content with their estates, are not only
very poor, but even in some sort most miserable. Next to these are they of
whom Saint Chrysostom speaks: Even Kings themselves have Chrysostom. Hom* 12. in
Ep. ad Tim.
not been exempted from poverty. In a word, Poverty by what means soever it
happens (if we know how to make right use of it) will be a powerful motive to
embrace virtue.

Poverty, said Seneca, is no evil but Sen. ep. 123. fin^.
to him that repugnes it. Saint Chrysostom calls it the mother of health.
Saint Augustine, the mistress of all Aug. in Psa. 76.
Wisdom and true Philosophy. It is most certain, for howsoever the enemies of
poverty oppose it, she, the inventer Basil in Hexam.
of Arts, derogates from no man, unless he disparage himself; as excellently
Saint Basil said: To be called a poor man is no disgrace

God burns us with these tapers, and the fire of poverty, either to waken us
when we sleep, or to chastise us when we sin; or finally, to reward us for our
constancy. Wherefore he long since forewarning us, says; And I will turn my
hand, I will refine and purify thee from thy dross, and take from thee all
thy T^n.

Absolon having once or twice Tent his servants to invite Joab, that warlike
Captain, to come unto him, when he saw he came not, what, think you, did this
royal young man? The books of Kings record? And when he had sent the second
time, and he would not come unto him, he said to his servants: Know ye Joabs
field that lies near to mine, containing his barley harvest? go therefore and
burn it with fire. After this manner God humbles many men, and with flames of
poverty even forces them to better courses. Whom he knows to be proud, or
else foreseeth (except he prevent them) they will become contumacious and
insolent.

Let this therefore be the Lesson which we ought to learn in the School of
Patience, lest poverty (a thing in it self not evil) by the abuse become an
evil unsupportable. The wise man to make us cautious herein, says: Through
poverty many have offended and gone astray: for some to have wherewith to fill
their bellies, cheat and steal: others prostitute themselves, and set their
souls to sale. These make ill use of poverty, a thing very good of it self.

The Scholars in the School of Patience must otherwise behave themselves when
they are burned with the fire of poverty. Each of them may say, thou have
examined me with fire, and there is no iniquity found in me. All extremities
are rather to be endured, Chrysostom Hom. 71. in Mat.
then to offend God. Better it is to beg then steal.

Saint Bernard through ardent affection Ber. Ser. 16. in Psa. Qui habitat. ante
finem mihi. page 559.
to poverty, said, It is better for me, my Lord, to be in tribulation, so thou
be with me, then to reign, feast, or glory without thee: It is much better to
embrace thee in tribulation, to have thee with me in the furnace of poverty,
then to be even in heaven without thee. What are we afraid of? Why delay we?
Why seek we to avoid this furnace of poverty? The fire is terrible, but our
Lord is with us in tribulation: If God be with us, who can stand against us?
Let us therefore, that we may take no harm by poverty, seriously revolve this
in our mind, that all poverty, whatsoever it be, is laid upon us by God for
our greater good, that we may be thoroughly refined from our dross.

Even as a tender and loving mother when she beholds her child playing abroad
in the yard, fiercely assaulted by Turkey-cockes and hens (because he is in a
red coat) with wings raised, train displayed, and bristling crestes;
presently steps to him and takes him from those furious fowls, and (though the
child cry and mourn to see himself disrobed) she pulls off his scarlet
wherewith Turkies naturally become so fierce, and all this she does for the
good of her little one, not moved at all with his fond and childish tears: let
him weep and spare not, so he may escape this imminent danger. So God
oftentimes uncloathes us, takes away our goods, oppresses us with poverty,
but all for our good, for by this means we are delivered from many dangers,
from the assaults of the Devil, and snares of manifold sins: but we like
children cry and lament, wrangle and complain that we are deprived of
necessaries, and brought to utter beggary. Oh you foolish babes! why weep you,
why complain you? all this is done for your good. God would not have bereaved
you of temporal substance, but that he foresaw they would become very
prejudicial to you; he would not have reduced you to this poor estate, but
that he perceived from all eternity you should not otherwise attain to the
kingdom of heaven.

Wherefore, commit these anxious cares to this most loving father, who
infinitely exceeds in providence and compassion, the most tender mother. But
thou art poor, yea, poor against thy will; give me leave then once more I
pray thee, to answer thy objections.

Poverty, thou say to me seems intolerable. Answ. Certainly thou art more
to it, then it to thee.

I am forsaken and contemned of all. Answ. Save only God; his eyes look upon
thee poor man.

O! how happy are the rich and wealthy? Answ. Oh miserable happiness! for the
hoording up of riches is full of labor; the possession full of fear; and the
loss with grief, the love Bern de convers. ad Clericos c. 13. and de 5.
negotiat. mihi. page 1748.
of riches corrupts, the use is burdensome, and their decrease full of
vexation and trouble.

What is more miserable then beggary? Answ. Perhaps thou art ignorant of that
which all men know. Lazarus the needy beggar was after his death placed in
Abraham's bosom, and the rich glutton in the midest of hell: the one by Angels
was in the place of rest; the other by devils buried in hell.

He that has money, has all at his command.

Answ. Nay rather he has nothing if he be destitute of virtue: thou have all
things with thee that may make thee good. When the rich man shall sleep, he
shall take nothing with him, he shall open his eyes and find nothing.

We may be poor though we abound in riches.

Answ Certainly great is that man who is poor in the midst of riches, but
far more secure is he that wants them.

Alas how void and empty are my coffers?

What matter is it how empty thy chest be? look to thy conscience: he is rich
enough who has a quiet conscience.

But I want necessaries. Answ. Perhaps thou rather want industry to provide
necessaries. It is not much that nature requires, but the mind and the eyes
are insatiable: desire is never satisfied. Nature contents her self with
little.

The poor man lies every where dejected.

Answ. Cheerful poverty is most honorable: whosoever agrees well with
poverty, is rich; he is not poor that has little, but he that covets much.

Poverty is extremely prejudicial both to me and others.

Ans. It would damnifie neither you nor others, but that your poverty proceeds
more from vitiousnes then want.

Poverty is an obstacle to me in all things.

Answ. Rather say; it furthers you, if thou will be at rest and find repose of
mind, either thou must be poor, or seem so without care of frugality, thy
endeavors can never avail thee: for frugality is voluntary poverty.

Say what you will, poverty is an insufferable misery.

Answ. Give me leave I pray to tell you, Seneca convinces you of untruth, who
directly says that there is no evil in poverty, so a man keep himself Sen.
consol. ad Hell c. 9. post medium.
free from the frenzy of avarice, which subverteth all.

Oh you that are poor! whosoever you be, what think you of such a father who
sees his little son with bread in his hand, and a mastiffe lying in wait,
and ready to bit him by the fingers? were it not a point of wisdom in him, and
a wary foresight of future mischief, rather then a depriving the child of
victuals, to snateh the bread out of his hand? So God sometimes deprives us of
food and temporal felicities, not to impoverish or famish, but to reclaim us
from sin. Is not virtue for the most part banished, and all kind of vices
embraced in their kingdom, where men fare daintily, sleep largely, and spend
the day idly.

Happy therefore are the poor, who willingly embracing poverty, entertain it
as a special friend to virtue. To this end was that generous speech of Saint
Paul uttered: The things which were to me a gain, the same I deemed for Christ
a detriment.

No man is worthy of God, but he that knows how to contemn riches, and he is
truly rich who agrees well with poverty. To this purpose Diogenes said:
Poverty is a virtue which is learned of it self. The matter is plain: should
not riches be taken from us we should be undone and destroyed by them. And who
is he that can so warily touch these thorns, and not wound his own
conscience? poverty alone is not wounded by this thorny brake. He abhorres not
poverty who aspires to blessed immortality. For as truly says Saint Gregory:
Whosoever he be that fixes his desire upon eternity, can neither be deterred
with poverty, nor shaken with adversity.

Sect. IV. A Garland of Straw.
THE Garland of Straw signifies all kinds of scoffs, derisions and contempts.
This is a terrible and grievous punishment to scholars at school, how light
soever it seems to others. Some time it happens in schools that the master
commands a boy to stand in a place by himself with rods in his hand. This is
a more grievous punishment to that boy, then to be ten times beaten with
rods. In Spain they put in mockery a paper hat upon those whom they lead to
execution. After this manner Andronicus an Emperor Vid considerationes
g^ernita^is consid. 5. 53.
of the East was crowned with a wreath of Garlic, set upon the back of a
scabbed Camel, and led through the city in a miserable triumph.

To be contemned, derided and scoffed at, a proud man deemeth one of the
greatest punishments that may be inflicted.

This crown of Straw seems to some all lead, beset with pricks like a
bristled Hedge-hogge. For we abhor nothing more then to be disgraced, branded
with ignominy, or forced to the blush in presence of others. This often times
seems more grievous then death it self. Hence it is that many guilty persons
kill themselves in prison rather then they will be made an object of scorn and
contempt to the world.

At the latter day when every one shall return from death to life, that terrible
arraignement in the sight and presence of all mankind, that calling to account
and pointing out by the voice and finger of the judge, that stern eye fixed on
the whole world shall more torment the damned then the very flames of hell. For
this cause shall men say in most desperate manner to the sleepy rocks and
mountains, fall you upon us, and to the hills cover us. Then shall it seem to
them a gentler punishment to be buried al^ve under the heavy weight of these
mountains, then to be arraigned at the tribunal seat of Christ, to receive
that heavy sentence, and be proclaimed by the elect, the utter enemies of God

Saul King of the Hebrews, a notorious example of a man infinitely wicked,
when he heard Samuel foretell the dissolution and final catastrophe of his
kingdom and fortunes, the deprivation of Gods grace, his own reprobation, and
utter ruin of all; desired only to preserve his honor: But now honor me,
said he, before the elders of my people, and before Israel. So much he feared
this loss (when all things else were in a desperate case) that his people
should cease to honor him.

Behold how Saul was able like the Ostrich to digest the greatest calamities,
as hard iron, and yet is dejected with a thing which might seem to be of least
account: to wear this wreath of straw he esteems more grievous then death it
self. What was the cause? He was proud. There is nothing in the School of
Patience more fit to suppress pride, then this Garland of Straw. This is the
most efficacious means to pull down arrogance; he that is crowned with this
Garland is forced (though much against his will) to qualify his lofty spirit.

But above all things this is most to be admired: we desire to be reputed
submissive and humble, and yet hate nothing more then humility and contempt of
our selves: free us from ignominy. and in a manner, all things else seem
tolerable: with this, men are wont to be most dejected, they especially that
are proud and not fully subjected. We vainly persuade and flatter our selves
that all things (besides this garland of straw) are tolerable. A very fond
persuasion: which Cassianus refu^eth thus: We would, says he, have chastity
Cass. collat 4. c. 1^. (...).
of body, without chastizing our flesh: acquire purity of heart, without labor
and watching: enjoy carnal case and quietness, and yet abound in spiritual
virtues: possess the gift of patience, yet never would beprovoked by scorns
and reproaches; practice the humility of Christ without the loss of worldly
honor, and serve him with humane praise and estimation. In a word, we desire
to keep our head from the straw garland, and to be humble without humility.

In this case we must not flatter our pride; this garland of straw is fittest
for that head which most abhorres it, to that alone this diadem is most
suitable. Elegantly and learnedly says Seneca: Sen. do Provid. c. 4. post
initium.
How can I be assured of thy constancy against ignominy, infamy, and popular
hatred, if I see thee all thy life soothed and applauded, and followed with
acertain inexpugnable and headlong troop of flatterers.

This one word Repete, rehearse the same again, vexes more the Reader, then
any other correction how rigorous soever.

But this is an apparent sign of secret pride, which likes nothing worse then
to be blamed or shamed by blushing: whereupon some men, singular as well for
learning as contempt of themselves, (when their ruin was to read at dinner or
supper) purposely pronounced some words amiss, that they might be forced to
blush at their own dissembled ignorance.

When Martin Delrio (a man of an ancient house; and, by the many notable books
he wrote famous for his learning) had diverse years professed divinity at Liege,
he was by command sent to Tornay, where according to the rules of his Order, he
might retire himself from public reading and noise of the world, and quietly
spend some time in holy meditations. Here he laying aside both Philosophy and
Divinity, underwent, yea even ambitiously sought after all the most abject
offices amongst religious novices. Sometimes with a poor thread bare cloak he
attended the Cater to the market, and carried to the College the provision he
bought, through the streets in view of all the people, taking upon him the
office of a poor Porter. This man neither feared, nor refused the garland of
straw; nay he thought himself honored by wearing it. This above all the rest
much astonished the religious of his order, to see a man so grave and learned,
after he had spent so many years in the socity of Jesus, been reader a long
time in Philosophy and Divinity, and a preacher highly esteemed; after all
this, I say, his sight failing him, and almost blind with age, so diligently
and willingly (whilst others sat at table) to stand or incommodiously sit at
the usual deske, reading, according to the custom, some pious book, and
pronouncing the tones and accents according to the direction of others. Behold
how Delrio with a prompt and ready will embraced a garland of straw. Nothing
seemed to him so ignominious and shameful in his latter years, as the fear
of shame and ignominy.

The like did Lanfranke, a man singularly endued with all manner of literature:
He on a time was appointed reader, and being by his unlearned Superior
commanded to repeat what he had read, and to pronounce it contrary to the rules
of Grammar, readily obeyed. Questionless he reputed this straw garland a
special ornament: This good man was not ashamed, for Christ's sake, to be put
to shame. Aloysius Gonzaga did the like, as is recounted in his life.

When the mind is once thoroughly steeled with virtue, it becomes impassible,
no derisions nor contempts can ever wound it. Can a man, think you, truly
resigned to the will of God, be at any time moved with ignominy, who has once
fully rejected the opinion of the world, and placed all his honor in Christ his
Savior? An ignominious death is beyond all ignominy: yet this so many thousand
holy Martyrs have embraced with as cheerful a countenance as other when they
are adorned with purple and diadems. Christ himself, King of Martyrs, to this
end, suffered a most ignominious death, to teach his servants to suffer, and
not to put affronts and disgraces upon others. No man is more pleased with
contempt, then he who has first learned to contemn himself.

A true despiser of himself is as content with contumelies, as if they were
miters, and then most of all rejoices and applauds his happiness, when he is
most derided. For true glory indeed is to suffer with indifferency for Christ's
sake, as well the greatest as the least reproach and contumely. The true
disciples of Christ are crowned first with thorns, and afterward with gold
and precious gems.

King David pursuing the Amalekites, found in the field an Egyptian even sick
to death, and strictly examined him about his country, house and kindred; who
returned this answer: I am an Egyptian young man, servant to one that is an
Amalekite, and my master has left me behind, because I fell sick three days
since. David commanded this man to accompany him after he had sworn him. S.
Gregory having considered these passages, Greg. in Evang.
said, God chooses those whom the world despises; because for the most, part,
by being despised, a man comes to know himself. The garland of straw is an
ignominy prejudicial to none but such as are impatient.

Let us go therefore (as Saint Paul encourages us) let us go out of the Camp
to meet Christ Jesus, carrying upon us his disgrace. Saint Paul is our leader
to that bloody pavilion of Christ crucified; he exhorts us to follow him
through glory and disgrace, through infamy and good fame, as seducers, yet
speakers of the truth. We have innumerable valiant Champions to accompany us in
this way, who have been well acquainted with crosses, d^sgraces and whips, yea
with prisous, chains and fetters. To gain a crown of gold, they have patiently
worn a wreath of straw. He is not yet arrived to happiness, who knows not how
to endure contempts and disgraces.

Sect. V. Wands.
THe miseries of man which daily molest him, are represented by Wands.
Occasions of suffering are never wanting; let us stand or sit, walk or eat,
drink or sleep, the troubles and grievances are innumerable which intrude upon
us; we are daily contesting and wrangling with our own inconveniences. It may
well be said, that the master in this School never lays afide his wands. You
shall scarcely see a man that has not daily some mischance or other happening
unto him: But most of those whereat we repine, are more offensive then
prejudicial.

The words of that most religious Thomas a Kempis, concern all men: Thou art
wretched wheresoever thou Imi^. Christ. l 1. cap. 22. initio, and l. 2. c. 12
n. 3. 4.
art, and whithersoever thou turnest thy self, except thou turn to God.
Dispose and order all things according to thy own will and liking; yet shall
thou never want something to suffer, either willingly or unwillingly. Turn to
all above thee, below thee, within or without thee, and in all these thou shall
find a cross: every where thou must of necessity suffer with patience, if
thou will enjoy inward peace, and deserve an everlasting crown.

These miseries of ours, though they may be endured and overcome with facility,
yet considering they occur daily, our merit thereby is wonderfully increased,
if we suffer them for Gods sake, as Ludovicus Blosius teaches Blos. insiit.
spirit c. 2. propius finem
very well, that it is a matter of no small moment to suffer even the least
trouble for the love of God.

All that can be said of these kinds of miseries and molestations, is, that
they are burdensome, but wholesome, if they be willingly embraced. For as Saint
Augustine says, God regards Aug in Psa. 61. prope finem.
what a man is willing, rather then what he is able to do.

Abigail the wisest amongst the women of her time, besides the present of all
kinds of viands, to appease King David's wrath, made likewise her addiesse by a
notable oration, saying, The soul of my Lord shall be kept as safe as if it
were in the posie of the living, with thy Lord God: but the soul of thy
enemies shall be wheeled about, as it were in the force and circle of a sling.
Here this wise Lady, by an excellent comparison, showed the difference between
the lives of the wicked and just, especially in suffering adversities. Good and
virtuous men are like fresh flowers, which the Gardener having newly gathered,
lest they should be scattered and wither, ties them together in a nosegay, with
so strait and hard a bond, that (if it were possible) they would cry out and
complain of the injury. But flowers thus compacted and set in water, live long
and flourish.

By this posie I understand daily miseries which teach us, at least, to live
with more purity, though perchance with less content. As for example: I am
very hungry; to relieve my hunger I insinuate with the Cook: I am thirsty, but
love not to draw mine own drink, and therefore make use of the Butler: I want
apparel, but know not how to make it, and therefore I employ the Tailor. To
want these things is indeed a misery, but hereby I become more courceous, and
am obliged to love and respect others. If there were some that wanted no man's
help, they would afford none so much as a good word. After this manner the
souls of good men are preserved as it were in the bundle of the living.

It is far otherwise with the impious, they indeed daily suffer miseries, but
may be well likened to the stones which the sting circles and wheels about to
throw them further off. The wicked will live in the compass of no laws, they
seek as much liberty as they can, they greedily hunt after their own
pleasures, and will not be debarred their delights: they lie therefore loose in
the sting, tossed to and fro, and fly about to all manner of impieties, till
at length after so many wanton friskes and gambols, they are cast out. They are
thrown out from the hand of God.

And therefore, as an old expositer Glossa ordi^^^ia.
says, a posie is bound that it may be preserved, a stone is put into the
sling that it may be cast away. Let men consider with themselves, how they
brook daily miseries, whether they be bound together like flowers, or whirld
about like stones.

Christ our crucified King, inviting us to carry our cross, offered it not for
a year, month or week, but a daily cross: and, as Saint Luke testifies,
said to all: If any man will come after me* let him deny himself, and take up
his cross daily, and follow me.

I am of Saint Chrysostoms mind, that our life much resembles a ship of
burden, which is haled against the stream. Consider the daily troubles,
tumults and miseries in such a ship, wherein thou art enforced day and night to
hear perpetual clamours: there thy sleep is short and unquiet, there thou
art forced to accept Mariners fare, ill dressed and sodden in the ship: there the
vessel is sometimes becalmed, and creeps forward like a Snayle: their
perpetual turmoiles rise one after another. Now the cable is broken; by and by
the ship str^kes against a Rock: one while the Mariner a far off discovers
dangers, sometimes the ship lights upon a shallow, grates on the ground, and
there lies gravelled. And for that in Merchants ships for the most part much
wine is transported, the Cooper is still knocking and deafening thy ears with
hooping his barrells least they should leake, burst in sunder with the new
Wine; when the ship is at some little rest, then storms arise in the air;
dark night approaches, and a violent wind forces you to stay: one while
tempestuous showers, after that, violent storms either hinder, or force you to
sail with less speed, here is alwa^es something to molest and trouble you.
Such for all the world is our life, full of daily miseries, and always brings
with it something for ^s to suffer. Our navigation toward heaven says Saint
Chrysostom, is against the stream, and do thou think to s^^le without any
difficulty? Wherefore continual patience is requisite to overcome perpetual
troubles and molestations. Let every man take up his cross daily.

Here we may merit much as well by the assid^ity, as by the difficulty in
suffering. In a true and pious sense M^^hois the Abbot was wont to say: I had
rather be doing some small work, Pelag. l. 7. n. 11.
so it be continual, then one great work: quickly ended. He is not to be
thought less patient, who daily exercises his patience as it were at the
stake, then another that bears great burdens, but seldom; yea, sometimes it
hapens that we overcome great difficulties, and yield in small ones: we put up
with patience a great injury, and yet impatiently quarrel with a Gnat or a
Fly. O p^ssi graviora! O you who ^^st Vir l. 1. Ae^.
have suffered more!

Dionysius the Carthusian writes that a certain novice of his order, who at
first going on cheerfully, and ready to do any thing, began by little and
little to saint, and deem that burdensome, which in the beginning seemed very
easy: but that which vexed most this religious man was, his black hood, which
bring a novice he was bound to wear. He much repined at this, and thought it a
heavy cross, though others found therein no difficulty. It happened on a time
as he fell asleep about noone, he dreamt that Christ with a very great cross
pa^^ed through the Clo^ster of the monastery, and endeavored to ascend up the
stairs, but could not, by reason of the heavy weight of his cross: the novice
therefore in his dream resolved with himself to go and help him to bear
his burden. But Christ looking on him with a stern countenance, said, what
do thou (most impatient creature) help me to carry my cross? thou that art
not able to bear thine own, come thou to help others? At these words the
novice awaked, and made a firm purpose to become exemplar and constant in
bearing all things patiently.

The same often happens to us: we undergo things that are indeed difficult,
and yet are overcome in sl^ght and trivial matters; we would be ready to say
to this novice, why does this kind of habit so much molest thee? the hood,
which thou so much abhorrest, is black indeed, but it is but light, and such
as the rules of thy order accustomably appoint all novices to wear. Let us, I
beseech you, speak in this manner to our selves; what is hunger, thirst, cold,
heat, unseasonable weather, incommodious habitation, unpleasant walk^s, tedious
and irksome importunities of friends, disturbance of children, sloathfulnesse
of servants, a shrewd wife? are they miseries? it is true, and in color sad and
nothing delightful, yet without difficulty to be supported, if we would not
undergo them with repugnance and impatience. Our habit acquired in bearing
them, would molifie and in fine overcome them; they are but little wands, and
no huge beams, and the oftener they strike us, the less they hurt us.
Tertullian wisely admonishing us Tertul. l. de Pa^i^n. c 8.
in this case, says, let not the servants of Christ admit such an aspersion,
after he has with patience encountered with great temptations, to yield in
those that are slight and frivolous.

God out of his mercy toward David says, I will be his father, and if he do
any thing amiss, I will rebuke him with the rod of men, and with the stripes
of the sons of men; that is, I will strike as a father or master does with a
rod or ferula the hand of his Scholar, where the blow is not great, and it
smarts but for a little while.

Behold how God with the rod and scourge of men (that is with miseries well
known to men) corrects us, lest he withdrawing his fatherly chastizement, we
should run headlong into all manner of vice. Therefore King David said, thy
rod and thy staff, they both together, have comforted me. whereby confessing
himself a disobedient child, he acknowledged God to be a mild and not a
rigorous father.

It was learnedly spoken by Seneca, Sen. de con. ad Po^^b. c. 36.
to have no feeling of misery, is not the part of a man: and to be impatient in
adversity is not the property of a generous spirit. To endure hunger, cold,
thirst, and other discommodities of this life, is indeed a heavy burden, but
withal healthful. Let us persever in suffering, since a short encounter here,
expects an immortal reward.

CHAP. V. The other five kinds of punishment are likewise severally declared.
SUIDAS tells us a pleasant fable. Upon a time, says he, the Fir Tree, and
Bramble were at variance; the one greatly reproached the other, in so much that
they came to sharp and bitter speeches. In fine said the Fir Tree, what need
many words? thy greatest preferment is no higher then to the Oven, or Furnace,
thou art good for nothing but for fuel, this is thy fatal end to which thou
were ordained: here must thou be lodged where thou shall be devoured by fire:
As for me (though I cannot deny but I am somewhat hardly dealt withal) seeing
I am first cut down, and after carried to the saw pit, there sawed in pieces,
then delivered up into the hands of Cirpenters and Joyners, to be plained and
polished; yea, and stripped out of my skin: yet all this redoundes to my
honor, because of me they make Benches, Houses, Ships, and Churches. In a
word, I am useful for all things, and in all places.

The Moral of this Fable, I may truly say, presents us that which passes in
the world. The difference between a good and bad man is, that the one like the
Bramble shall burn in fire, and the other like the Fir Tree, grow upright to
be transplanted into heaven. It Is true, the servant of God is many times wounded
by the sword of affliction, he is cut and cast down, hewed and stripped of his
fortunes. But all this does him no harm; thus is he squared and made fit for
the heavenly building, whilst the Bramble is designed for the fire: the
Fir Tree as we said before, by the axe is cut and squared: so is man by these
five instruments, Rods, Arrows, Tapers, a Garland of Straw, and Wands, as you
have heard. We will add now five more, to wit: Fetters, or Chains, Knotty
Clubs, a Cloak, Scourges, a Sack: Ordinary and usual furniture for the
School of Patience, the several particulars we will briefly set down.

Sect. I. Cords and Chains.
BY these are deciphered afflictions coincident to each man's condition and
course of life; for every estate and degree has its fetters and chains, such
you shall find every where, but with this difference, that some are chaind and
laden with strait and heavy gyves: others with slack and gentle bands: some
with chains of gold, others of adamant. The single state of life wants not its
crosses, but wedlock has many more.

Here by the way I must needs encounter a gross error, whereby men are
miserably deluded. As no man wants his cross, so every one will have his to be
the greatest, and most unsupportable. He that has sore eyes, thinks none has
the like pain: he that has the stone, says, no man living is more tormented
then himself. Another troubled with the toothach, deems no pain so great as
that he suffers. They that are troubled with gnawing of the stomach, with
ulcers, or the cholick, imagine other men's torments but flea-bitings to theirs.
In like manner, he that is afflicted in mind, had rather suffer any torment
whatsoever, so his thoughts might find repose. A man wounded with horror and
remorse of conscience, seems to be already plunged in hell: he that
unfortunately has married a cursed shrew, is of opinion that his affliction and
misery is the greatest in the world, and that they in Bride-well, or the house
of Correction are not so unhappy: the soldier diseased and oppressed with
want, condemns his condition as the most disastrous: the trades man that is
sorc'd to stay at home and labor all day, sitting on a bench like a waterman
at his oar, groans under that burden as the greatest and heaviest in the
world: servants and slaves complain and think none so unhappy as themselves,
Magistrates, Governo^^s; and such as sit and guide the stern of the Common
wealth, think no labor can be compared with thei^s: the Merchant tired out
with sea voyages, commends the Citizens easy life, and condemns trading in
merchandise for the most troublesome.

Saint Chrysostom in the public exercise of his eloquence, expressed the
like complaints: Whosoever has a sore eye, quoth he, thinks no infirmity
comparable to his. They that are troubled with a pain in their stomachs, say,
this is the sharpest of all other. In like manner, the grief and affliction
which every man feels, seems to him the most difficult, speaking according to
his own experience. He that has no children, thinks nothing more grievous
then to want issue: He that has many, and is poor withal, complains of
nothing more then of the charge of many children. The private man persuades
himself that his course of life is most abject and unprofitable. The Soldiers
tell us, there is nothing more laborious and dangerous then warfare; and that
it were better to live with bread and water, then undertake such troubles, etc.
How many admire old age? how many on the other side, will have youth too happy?
what a comely thing were it, say we, to be old? but when our head grows gray,
we change our note, and say; Youth, where art thou? Thus have we many causes of
grief: one only way there is, by following virtue, to rest free from this
inequality. Seeing then we feel our own miseries more then other men's, we
believe ours to be more heavy and insupportable then theirs. Here I may ask
with Horace:

Qui fit, Mecanas, ut nemo quam s^bi Hor. l. 1. Sa^. 1. initio.
s^r^em
Seu ratio dederit, seu sors objecerit illa. Contentus vivat?
Tell me, Mecaenas, why none lives content
With that which reason or his lot has sent?
Every man thinks his own fortune miserable: his own cross is always
heaviest: wherefore this absurd, though usual error in the School of Patience,
is to be corrected. And let every man be assured, that all kinds of life have
their difficulties, all estates their peculiar crosses. Have thou chosen a
course of life? Doubt not, the chains and cords thereof will follow thee: he
that receives rents, must look to be charged with expenses: he that enters
upon his inheritance, undertakes likewise the payment of debts. Have thou
retired thy self to a holy life? Think of nothing else but crosses that will
be perpetual: Whosoever lives in this state of life, must be crucified. Art
thou a Soldier? Be sure thou shall find extreme poverty, wounds and death.
Art thou a Merchant? Look before hand, not only to be weather-beaten, and tossed
with tempests, but also for ship wrackes and loss of goods. Art thou a
Scholar? Prepare thy self to undergo all labour^ and difficulties that may
occur, or else forsake the Muses. Have submitted thy self to the service of
a master? Resolve thy self that servants must sustain the worst that may be.
Has Fortune, or Nature made thee a Master? Provide before hand, for thou must
endure a world of cares and solicitudes. Have thou married a wife? Make full
account, as if thou had them already, that many miseries are kept in store
for thee; no man purchases this estate at lower rates. Thou have voluntarily
put on such gyves and fetters, as death only must shake off. Imagine thou have
undertaken a chargeable warfare, the storms of a family, a daily punishment,
and all the afflictions this world may afford. For these kind of people shall
have the tribulation of the flesh. And why strive we in vain? Every course of
life, all states are full of bitterness, every where some thing occurres that
is sharp and irksome.

By the law of God it was decreed: let every oblation which is offered to our
Lord, be done without leaven; not any leaven or honey shall be ^ff^red in the
sacrifice of our Lord; whatsoever sacrifice thou shall offer, thou shall season
with salt. Honey and leaven are utterly excluded from divine Sacrifices. For we
must not only abstain from sin, but likewise from those pleasures which
lead thereunto. Both are rejected, as well the hory of pleasure, as the leaven
of impiety: whatsoever we consecrate to God must be seasoned with salt. Nothing
is acceptable to him, as says Saint Hierome, if it have not in it some
bitterness: God himself for the most part seasons all things with much salt,
and steepes all in bitterness.

King David perceiving this, said, Thou have laid tribulation upon my back,
who is there that feels not this sharpness? And added further, thou have
brought us into the snare. It is God that binds and t^es us to a certain
course of life; some with fetters, others with bracelets: this man with
collars, that with chains; some with cords, and others with iron; some with
thonges of leather, and others with gold; but no less is he bound with gold,
then others with iron: we are bound and fettered in what course of life soever
we live. He of all others in the School of Patience is deemed the skilfullest,
who can with most facility carry his fetters, and with Christian patience ease
himself, and lighten his burden. These are gyves which we must bear as we
may, since we can not break them. It is a benefit to many to be bound thus,
otherwise having their hands and heels at liberty, they would become
exorbitant and dissolute.

Let us therefore utterly condemn that error whereby every one is persuaded
his cross is heaviest. Rather let him certainly persuade himself, that he
never has nor shall suffer so much, but there may be found others who have
suffered much more.

But out of that former error often springs another; For we do not only
think our afflictions the greatest, but lik^wise seck (though all in vain) to
abandon them. From hence it comes, that the Husbandman hates the plough and
spade, the Mason his trowell, the Smith his file, the Scrivene^ his pen, the
Schoolar his book: the husband brooks not his wife, the servant his master,
nor the scholar his tutor; every one scorns his own occupation, and falls out
with the course of life he should live by. The slothful man for fear of cold
will not hold the plough.

Here Saint Paul cries alowd to all men: Let every man remain in that vocation
to which he is called How I pray you? By laboring and suffering courageously.
For which cause also S. Paul earnestly entreating, said; I therefore bound in
our Lord beseech you, to walk worthy the calling to which you are called with
all humility and mildness, with patience. Miserable wretches! why strive we,
why attempt we in vain to break these fetters? all we can do, will but make
them faster.

Let our feet therefore wear these fetters, till our heads be crowned; perhaps
that day is now near at hand, in which we shall sing to our deliverer. Thou
have broken in pieces my bonds, to thee will I sacrifice the sacrifice of
praise.

Sect. II. Knotty Clubs.
BY Knotty Clubs are expres'd such calamities as are common to many; to wit,
Tyranny, Heresy, War, Pestilence, Barrenness, Famine, Oppressions,
Slaughters, Inundations, Diseases, shipwrackes, Ruins, loss by Fire,
Earthquakes, Gapings of the Earth, and other public calamities. Those
ordinary disasters which we suffer are very profitable. They all come from the
hand of God, the author of all good things, the head and fountain, who
ministers these as bitter potions; bitter indeed to the taste but wholesome in
operation.

Three principal reasons may be given, why these calamities are sent unto us;
for either God exercises the good; chastises sinners, or punishes the
wicked, and all this for our good. We see daily good men have their several
afflictions, or else are involved in the same together with wicked men. This we
often see and admire, because we fully comprehend not the cause thereof, nor
observe the end. The cause and motive is the love of God toward us: the end
not prejudicial but beneficial unto us, for this exercise is many ways
profitable. If thou desire to become a skillfull Mariner, thou must be taught
by tempests: if an expert soldier, by dangers, if a stout man indeed,
afflictions must harden thee: For the learning and experience of a man is known
by patience. And to this end are men exercised. Another end there is in these
calamities and afflictions, which are sent us either to chastize us after we
have sinned, or to curb and withhold us from sinning. This hand is like that
of a merciful father, which often scourges those that offend; but the hand of
a rigorous executioner punishes slowly and but once; Gods punishments
specially belong to those that are evil, but they are not evil, as they curb
and restrain us from wickedness. Thus all punishment is good in respect of
justice, and impunity evil, which causes the impious to persever in their
wickedness.

Moreover public slaughters and ruins by wars, famine, plague, and other
calamities are justly sent by Almighty God; nor have we any cause to think
them new or strange, or more grievous then in former ages. In times past there
have been as great, yea, and more deplorable Even in this of ours, since the
year of our Lord, 1618. for these twelve last past, war has like a
depopulating fire, cruelly wasted all Europe, without doubt some hundred
thousands have perished in this time, by plague, famine, and slaughter. Yet
this is not so much to be admired; in the only City of Jerusalem in times past,
the number of those which dyed, or were slain, during the siege, were ten
hundred thousand, and ninety seven thousand taken. And in all that time
throughout the several places of Judea, there were of Jews slain twelve
hundred and forty thousand; besides many that perished by famine, banishment
and other miseries. B^hold the catastrophe of one only nation! yet what a small
portion of the world, and handful of men was that compared with all Europe?

What shall we say now of other places? That second Punicke war alone
consumed in less then seventeene years, in Italy, Spain, and Sicily, fifteen
hundred thousand men. The civil wars of Caesar and Pompey devoured about
three hundred thousand. That of Brutus, Cassi^s, Sextus Pompe^us caused a
greater effusion of Roman blood. One only man C. Caesar (the very pest and
plague of humane kind) confesses and boasts that he had slain eleven
hundred and ninety two thousand men in battle. Pompey the great testified by an
inscription in the Temple of Minerva, that he had discomfited, put to flight,
slain and taken by surrender, one and twenty hundred and eighty three thousand
men. To these we may add Q. Fabius, who slew an hundred and ten thousand
French. C. Martius 200000. Cimbrians. And in this latter age, Aetius, who in
the memorable Catalonian battle, slew an hundred sixty two thousand men. With
these I join M^^hridates, who with one letter mandatory, slew eighty thousand
Roman Citizens, dispersed in Asia about their several affairs.

And not men only, but towns and cities also were destroyed by war. Cato the
Censor vaunteth, that he had taken more towns in Spain, then he had lived
days there. The number (if we credit Plutarch) was four hundred. And
Sempronius G^^cchus in the same country, as Polybius writes, razed and
demolished three hundred.

What shall I say now of several plagues and diseases? In Judea, one plague
under King David, in less then one day, swallowed up seventie thousand men.
Under the Emperors Galbus and Volusianus, a plague, rising from Aethiopia,
past through all the Roman provinces, and for fifteen years together,
incredibly wasted them, and sent innumerable more to those that were gone
before them. Scarocly was there ever any plague greater, farther dispersed, or
of longer continuance. But that was more notorious which raged at Bizantium,
and Procopius l. 22 de bello Persico Agathas l. 5. h^st.
the places near adjoining, in the time of Justinianus the Emperor; the
violence was so great, that every day there were five thousand, and sometimes
ten thousand burials. The plague that was in Afric is no less to be admired,
which beginning after the destruction of Carthage, consumed in Numidia alone,
eight hundred thousand persons, in the Seacoasts of Africa two hundred
thousand, and in Utica thirty thousand Soldiers. In Greece under the
government of Michael Duca, the plague was so outrageous, that the Sub a^num
Christianum. 1359.
quick were not able to bury the dead. Finally, in the time of Petrarch there
reigned so great a plague in Italy, that of every thousand there scarce
remained ten men alive.

Now concerning Famine, neither we, nor any in this age of ours, behold any
thing comparable to that of former times. Under Honorius the Emperor, there
was so great a dear ^^ at Rome of all manner of corn, that one man lay in wait
for another life, and this voice was openly heard in the public Theater: Set
a price upon man's flesh. Again, under Justinian the Emperor, there was so
great a famine throughout all Italy, wasted at that time by the Goths, that
only in Picenum there died fifty thousand men by famine; and every where not
only the flesh of men, but even their excrements were eaten for want of other
food.

In the time of Habides King of Spain, the drouth was so extreme, that for the
space of six and twenty years, all fountains and rivers, save only Iberius
and Boetis, were dried up, and the ground in sundry places had such wide gaping
rists, that many for want of sustenance seeking to fly to other places, could
find no passage; so that Spain, especially in the mid-land country, being
despoiled of grass, herbs and trees (excepting only some few preserved on the
banks of the river Boetis) bereft of men and beasts, lay miserably w^ste and
desolate. The kinsfolk both of Kings and Noblemen, forsook their ancient
seats, and seeing their household provision begin to fail them, and not likely
to last many days, the unablest of them, with all convenient speed, be took
them to the neighbor provinces and places on the sea coast. In fine, after six
and twenty years, came most tempestuous winds, that rent up all the trees by
the roots, and withal great showers of rain, whereby the country was
refreshed, and many of the inhabitants, though mingled with other nations,
returned to their ancient habitations, and restored the name and nation of the
Spaniard, which was almost abolished. All this is set down in the Chronicles of
Joan Mar^^na, l. 1 Re^um H^s^an. c. 13. fins.
Spain, and therefore I forbear to write more of these things so well known.

To what end should I now rehearse the examples of ancient tributes and Ager
art^^^. qui (...) sole^ and ser^. Pasc^^s qu^. pascendo pe^^^^ ap^^a.
exactions? Most of all those provinc^s which were under the Roman Empire, p^id
he fifth part of all their fruits of their pasture ground, and the tenth of
arable. Antony and Caesar spared not to exact for one year, the tributes that
were due for nine or ten.

After the death of Julius Caesar, when they took up Arms to recover their
liberty, every Citizen was constrained to pay the five and twentieth part of
all his goods. And more then this, all that were of the Order of the Senators,
for every tile of their house Three asses are 2 d..
were commanded to pay six asses. An infinite tribute, which to us may seem
incredible. Octavius Caesar, exacted of every free man the eighth part of his
goods. If I s^y nothing here of the extortions of the Triumviti, and other
tyrants.

But far above all these exactions and rapines, were those of the Roman
Colonies, whose taxes imposed upon their subjects, were beyond all imagination
insusterable. Every where you might have seen the Roman Legions, and whole
Cohorts led to their fields and towns: and the miserable inhabitants in a
moment dispoiled of all their goods and fortunes, without any f^ult of theirs:
their riches and well grown fields were their greatest offense. It is a
miserable thing for men to be robbed of their money, and lose also their lands
and houses. All this, I say, is grievous; but most of all, to be wholly
expelled their country. Behold many thousands scattered abroad and dispersed,
children from their parents, masters from their servants, husband from their
wives, into several countries; some into Afric, others into Scythia or
Britanny, as it happened One Caesar Octavianus, even in Italy it self, placed
eight and twenty Colonies: and in the Provinces as many as pleased him.
Doubtless this was an inundation of all calamities together.

What should I now say of delages, Tranquil. d^ Caesar. Tacitus in Annall. Alil.
earth quakes, fires, and other ruins, which have often devoured whole Cities
at a time. At Fidenis, when Tiberius was Emperor, above twenty thousand men
perished by the fall of the Amphitheater.

In all age, there have and will be calamities through the whole world. It
should rather be admired to see any one exempted from this general affliction,
without bearing a part of the burden which all others sustain. Solon brought to
the top of a high tower in Athens, a dear friend of his grievously lamenting
for some disaster, where showing him all the houses under him in that great
City, he spoke in Lipsius l. ^. Constable. c. 20. etc.
this manner: Do but consider how great mourning and lamentation there is, has
been, and hereafter will be in th^se houses, and thereby comfort your self,
and lay aside all frivolous complaints. The same must we do, and present these
infinite miseries to the eyes of all those who bewail our age, as the most
deplorable. Be of good comfort; that which we repute a loss, is a
preservation. With these mild affl^ctions our good God purges, as it were,
and expiates our offenses. After we have past through fire and water, he will
bring us to a place of rest and happiness: you are sure of the one, and may
expect another.

Sect. III. A Cloak.
I Call that affliction a cloak which is shaped by (...) himself, or else
(coming from some other cause) is augmented by his own vain perswafions.
Certainly every thing appears according to the shape and form which a man
gives it. It is incredible how powerful the imagination or conceit is in this
kind: sometimes through conceit we fall sick; yea, are killed outright. Now
and then it happens that two men are laden even with the very same cross; yet
the one, having a more generous spirit, thinks his as light as a feather: the
other surcharged with abject and melancholy thoughts, calls his a cross of
lead. Here the same thing by several conceits is diversified.

Oftentimes the heaviness and weight of the cross corresponds to the opinion
of him that carries it: our evils increase or decrease according to our
several humors. It is burden enough for a man, to persuade himself he bears
a burden. The imagination swaies as much in diseases, as in other evils which
we suffer. There are some that liken the imagination to rain, whereby
thousands of little Frogs are produced; others comp^re it to thunder, which
makes Ewes cast their Lambs, and honey become sower.

The imagination is like to multiplying glasses, which make a company of twenty
soldiers, seem a little army. There is nothing in the world so great but may
seem less if the pregnant imagination be qualified. Fearful cogitations,
suspicions, envies, and a thousand such conceits which miserably perplex our
minds, are nothing else but fond toys produced by our imagination. It is like
a dream of one half awake, which presents sometimes a thousand ridiculous
fantasies, and at other times as many hidious Bug-beares and Hobgoblins. It is
a common saying that imagination makes the case. The like may I say:
Imagination either makes or aggravates a cross. Even as he that passes over a
narrow bridge, or climbs up to a high place, begins not to fall till he
imagines he is falling: so certainly he often becomes miserable indeed, who
imagines himself to be miserable.

Look what shape we give, or what cloak we cast over things; the same they
appear, which J. Climacus confirms by this ensuing story: Upon a time says
he, as we were sitting at table in our College, the Superior rounded me in the
ear, saying, Father, will you have me show you a man very old, and yet most
prudent and religious? I answered, there was nothing I more desired to see, and
therefore earnestly besought him to do me that favor; whereupon the Superior
called unto him from the next table a Priest of fourscore years of age, who
had care of the Wardrobe, and spent eight and forty years in the College,
commended by all for his virtue. This old man came readily, and stood expecting
at the table (for dinner was but newly begun) what his Superior would be
pleased to command him. But he making as if he had not seen him, neither
willed this old man to depart, nor appointed him what he should do, but did
purposely prolong dinner more then ordinary. This most patie^t old man stood
without his dinner there almost 2 hours, not moving a foot. All which,
Climacus admired with silence, but was ashamed so much as once to cast an eye
upon that venerable g^^y head. After this manner stood this old man (a
spectacle worthy of heaven) till dinner was ended. And when all arose from
table, he was commanded to depart, Exp^cta^^ exp^ctavi Domi^num and intendio
mihi, Psa. 30. 1.
and recite the beginning of the three and thirtieth Psalm. Climacus
astonished at this spectacle, and moved with a religious curiosity, calling
aside this old man who had stood there so long. Father, said he, what I beseech
you, did you think when you stood at the table so long a time without your
dinner? the old man mildely replied, I imagined this to be rather the command
of God then of man; wherefore Climac grad. 4. p. 7 ab v^i^^^ quarti grad.
persuading my self that I stood not at the table, but before God; I presented
my prayers to him, and by this means admitted not so much as the least evil
conceit against my Superior.

Behold an excellent point of art to be practiced in the School of Patience.
Certainly every thing appears unto us according to the figure or cloak we
cast upon it, such I mean as we frame in our imagination. If we invest it with
a black mourning robe, the aspects thereof will be doleful unto us: If it be
glos'd over with a light and pleasant color, it will encourage us to embrace
it with an undaunted resolution.

But sometimes let him, who would not grieve too much, behold the thing it
self naked and undisguis'd, and that which before threatened death and horror,
will now invite him to laughter: the like happens to us which to little
children, for if they see one disguised, though they know him very well, and
daily use to play with him, yet they are affrighted at the sight. We must not
only take from men, but even from things themselves their disguise, and show
them truly as they are. Look, I beseech you, somewhat more narrowly into the
matter, what it is for a man to be sick, or poor, when it is not through his
own fault: what to have lost the favor of men. Consider advisedly what it is
to have injuries offered unjustly: think what it is for a virtuous man to be
contemned and vilified, and you will say, that all these are but terrible
vizards only to affright babes.

Most men figure sickness in their imagination, as the greatest evil, and
poverty as the extremest dishonor in this life; and conceive injuries,
contempt, disgraces, loss of favor, vexation of envious persons, so grievous,
that by all means possible they are to be avoided. Thus of Ants, we make huge
Elephants; of Dogs, Tigers and Panthers; of Hares, formidable troops and
squadrons of hideous monsters. By this means we dye an hundred deaths before we
are so much as in danger of sickness. And we imagine our selves poorer then
Irus or Codrus, before poverty has set so much as one foot within our doors.
By this means we often cry out, we have lost the field, and that all things
are in desperate case, before we confront the enemy; we have no sooner tasted a
little wormwood wine, but we fear we shall be overwhelmed and drowned with
wormwood: we scarcely tread on a thorn, and yet dream of wounds and massacres.
Thus we belie our miseries, by making them far greater then they are; and
consequently, through apprehension, make our selves more miserable. Who can
reckon up the follies and fopperies of this mortal life? The things that
terrify us are more in number then those that hurt us: and many times we are
not so sick as conceit has made us. Some things vex us more then they should,
some before they should, and some Livius l 27. Fama bellum conficit, and pa^va
momenta in sp^^^ mecu^ ve impellunt a^^mos.
when it is contrary to all reason they should molest us: for either we augment
our grief by feigning it to be more then it is, or else seem crushed before it
fall upon us. We are for the most part, full of suspicions, and Fame (that is
wont to end the war) deludes us. Thus we give way to opinion, and never
suppress that which terrifies, nor reject it; but we tremble and turn our
backs like those that are put to flight by a little dust raised by a flock of
sheep, or a fabulous rumor dispersed without any certain author. I know not
how it comes to pass, but we are most terrified with vain fears, Truth has
its certain limits; but that which is divulged without any ground, is subject
to mere conjectures and surmises of a timorous mind. Let us therefore look
diligently into the matter.

How many things unexpected have come to pass, and many things never fallen out
which we look'^ for? Say what thou fear should happen, will it avail thee
to grieve before it come? There will be time enough to do it when it is
present: mean time hope for better, and be not solicitous about that which
comes to morrow; for the next day will bring care enough of it self. Every day
comes furnished with its own mischief. That which we fear, perhaps will
happen, perhaps not; in the mean season, while it is absent, let us lay aside
vain fears.

Sometimes before any signs appear that presage evil, the mind shapes to it
self vain shadows, or wrests some word of a doubtful signification to a
worse sense, or imagines some man more offended then he is, not considering
how angry he is, but how far a man may be transported with passion. By this
means we fear things doubtful as if they were certain, and endeavor not to
moderate our fears which soon give way to scruples. Examine therefore as well
thy hope, as thy fear, and trouble thy self no more then thou must needs.

Most excellently says Epictetus: Men Epictet. Enchir. cap. 10.
are not troubled with real matters, but with the imagination they have of
them. For example: Death is not evil in it self, otherwise it would likewise
have seemed so to Socrates: but it is the apprehension we have of death which
makes it evil. Wherefore, when we are disturbed or distracted, let us not
blame others but our selves, to wit, ou^ own imaginary opinions.

This by Seneca is expressly confirmed. Sen. consol. ad Marciam, cap. 19.
It is therefore opinion, says he, that torments us, and every evil has the
rate we value it at; we have the remedy in our own hands. And consequently
crosses in the School of Patience, are either precious, or of no esteem,
heavy or light according to the price which the Scholars set upon them, or the
weight they afford them. Every man is as miserable as he thinks himself to be.

Sect. IV. Scourges.
WIth good reason are those afflictions thought greatest which proceed from the
tongue, as chiding, railine, detraction, contumelies, calumnies, unjust
reproaches, false accusations, and whatsoever comes from an evil man's tongue,
the source and sink of all mischiefs. To these may be added the denial of
reasonable suits, the requesting of those that are harsh and unreasonable, and
the commanding of things difficult and hardly feasible. All these afflictions
are represented unto us by scourges. These are grievous stripes indeed, and
inflict most cruel wounds, they cut even the very bones, especially when a man
is whipped by those from whom he least expected such entreaties.

The King of Jerusalem long ago^ complaining, said; if mine enemy ha^ reviled
me, I would surely have bornt it, and if he that hated me, had spoken great
things against me, I would perhaps have hidden my self from him: but thou a
man of the same profession, my guide and my familiar, who together with me
tookest sweet repasts, do thou also new turn thy heel upon me? Or as Caesar
said to Brutus; and thou also my son? when he was stabbed in the Senate house.
But let us here infuse some comfort like Balsamum into the wound.

First, it is most certain that all men are subject to this evil, how wary or
holy soever they be, they must suffer and have their part in being lash't with
men's tongues. The scourge of the tongue, says the wise man, communicating to
all. The Prophet Jeremy, a man sanctified before his birth, complains
notwithstanding, and says, Woe be to me, my mother, why have thou brought me
forth, a man exposed to discord through the whole world? all men were apt to
pick quarrels with him, and lay imprecations and curses upon him.

Jobs suffering had not seemed so great, while he was only tormented by Satan,
had not his own wife and kindred likewise cruelly scourged him. As spices
pounded disperse their sweet odours: so does virtue oppressed and persecuted
far extend her renown. Yea there are some living creatures which, while they
are beaten, breathe forth a most pleasing sent: Such for all the world was Job,
the more stripes he received, the sweeter was the odor of patience which
breathed from him. Blessed is the man whom God corrects: refuse not therefore
the chastisement of God.

Another comfort is: The protect^on of God, through which though we be still
sensible of these stripes, yet we receive no damage thereby. Thou shall be
hidden from the scourge of the tongue (says Job) and thou shall not fear the
calamity when it comes. The name agrees well with the thing it self: for the
scourge of the tongue does not only smart, but likewise leaves a mark behind
it, that is, a foul blot that stains their fame and reputation. Moreover as
stripes for the most part are laid on the back, so detractions wound most
behind our backs. But whosoever then art that suffer'st this, take courage,
thou shall be hidden from this scourge: God himself will defend the, so that
no lies nor calumnies shall hurt the, or if they do, it shall be recompensed
with greater good.

A third comfort is: that by these stripes our sins are expiated, if they
bear these scourges with patience and modesty. In times past the young men of
Rome in their games of Lupercalia ^anne about with goat skins on their backs,
and leather thonges in their hands scourging whenever they mean: the women of
their own accord were wont to meet them and offer the palms of their hands
to be stricken, supposing thereby they should Alex: ab Alex: l. 4. ^^ier:
g^^^al. ^^tio.
have facility in child birth. This the Romans used to do in the month of
February: But we are daily afflicted, sometimes one, sometimes another, yea
even the most innocent and just are not exempted. In this case it behooves us
to endure all with patience, since sometimes we cannot withstand them, though we
would. But these scourges, taken patiently, dispose us to a happy death.

It is a matter of great consequence, when a man knows he has been ill spoken
of, to bear it with equanimity. And therefore Saint Bernard, who was most
ready to endure like scourges, said: Bern: in epist.
In my judgment there is no fitter medicine for the wounds of my soul then
reproaches and contumelies. There is no reason then why I should be displeased
thereat, who am a wretched man worthy of all despite and reproach. Senc de
b^a^. vite. cap. 55.
What Seneca said to the Romans let every man say to his detractours: Rage and
^oare as much as you will, exercise your mischievous tongues by calumniating
good men: you shall sooner break your teeth, then bite them.

The fourth comfort is: that the detractions and calumnies of wicked persons,
nothing hinder the examination of any man's cause at the tribunal of God, but
rather further it. That was a worthy speech of St. Hierome: Amongst Christians
(says he) that man is miserable who effereth injury, not he who suffers it.
As Christ our Savior declares: Blessed are you when men speak evil of you,
and persecute you, and speak all the worst they can against you, belying you
for my sake; rejoice and exult, for your reward is very great in heaven.

Saint Peter following this word of our Lord: If you be reproched says he, for
the name of Christ, you shall be blessed. This is that whereby you are made
like to Christ, and become Angels. That wise woman of Thecua, indevouring to
extol and magnify with the greatest praise the King of Hebrews, said: My Lord
the King is like the Angel of God, neither benediction nor malediction can
move him.

Saint Gregory does very well instruct and arm every one against these
tongue-scourges. When we are praised (says he) or dispraised, we should
always have recourse to our own conscience, and if we find not therein the
good that is spoken of us, with great sorrow and solicitude let us procure to
have it: on the other side if we find not therein the evil which men object,
we ought very much to rejoice. For what is it for men to commend us, if our
own conscience accuse us? or how little should our grief be, though all men
accuse us, while our own conscience tells us we are innocent?

But some will say, it grieves me more then may be imagined, to be so rashly
slandered and belied unjustly. Let it grieve thee a Gods name, But what then?
to grieve for Christ and the kingdom of Heaven should be a Christians chiefest
comfort. Art thou greeved to hear these things spoken of thee? let it rather
trouble thee if they be true, if thy own conscience accuse thee; for then thy
conversation makes thee an obloquy to the world. But let him whom his own
conscience defends and assures him, that whatsoever aspersions malevolent
people cast upon him are vain and false, let him (I say) not be contristated,
whatsoever it be which others sp^ake against him. For why should they grieve
him, when they hurt him not? But s^y they should hurt him; God, without doubt,
will recompense ten fold this damage, how great so ever it be He that has
offended indeed, and given just occasion of speech, let him accuse himself, if
he be ill reported of, but the just man shall be without fear, as courageous as
a Lion.

Baltas^r King of Babylon sitting amongst thousands of his noble men at a
royal banquet, saw a hand writing upon the wall over against him, wherewith he
was so terrified, that he waxed pale, and began to tremble in every joint of
him. What cause, I beseech you, was there of so great fear? He saw a hand.
What hand? A man's. Did the King so much fear a man's hand; if he had seen the
threatening paws of a Lion, Bear, or Dragon, there had been just cause of
fear. But why should the right hand of one poor man terrify so migh y^a
Monarch, at whose only be^ke an hundred wings of horsemen would have flowne to
have succored him? was there any sword or weapon brandisht by this terrible
hand; none but only a writing pen: should a stout man (I will not say a King)
be appaled at the wagging of a pen? If Joabs triple Lance, or the fiery
two-edged sword of a Cherubim had menaced him, there had been some cause of
fear. But perhaps it was the writing that terrified him; this he understood
not, and therefore called others to expound it. Why then feared he one single
hand, one pen, one writing, which he understood not?

Behold how often the like happens among us. There comes a mischievous
detractour, and with his tongue writes as it were upon the wall these or the
like words: Let none give credit to this man, he is not the man he seems to
be, and these vices are usual with him; he has a fair outside, but inwardly
he is not the man you take him for. This kind of writing sometimes so
terrifies us, that we take it for one of the greatest punishments that may be:
and to desire, and yet not to be able to revenge, this wrong seems more
grievous then death it self.

But why, O Christians! do these detracting words so much trouble you? upon so
light a wrong, turn you all your patience into fury. This is the property of
the Scorpion, provoke him not by touching, and he never darts forth his
poysnous sting; but if you once touch him, instantly he stings you with his
tail: Thus, many are silent, if you do not vex them, but touch them once, and
they spit fire that blastes and consumes all it lights upon.

In this case the wisest course is to turn a deaf ear to all detractions:
you may take example from the holiest men. David the best of Kings, was
wickedly standered by many; but I, said he, as if I had been deaf, gave no
ear to them. And albeit secret tale-carriers sometimes creep to you and say,
this he talks of you in public; as if you were deaf, give no ear to it. To
go about to confute all these injurious speech^s, were to take pains, to
disturb your self. For commonly the more a man strives to supresse these
reports, the more they are divulged. Epictetus very wisely admonishing us,
Epict. Ench. cap 48.
says, if any one shall tell thee that a certain man speaks ill of thee,
refute not what is said, but only answer that he was ignorant of your other
faults, or else he would never have published those alone. These are the
speeches of a wise man, but an undiscreete no sooner hears himself defamed,
but he presently cries out, I will use these lying knaves in their kind; do
they presume to divulge this of me? I will make every vein of their heart
repent those villainous words, I Will brand them with that mark of infamy which
they deserve. Ah dear Christian! Certainly thou never learned this in the
School of Patience.

It is reported that Aldegund a Virgin descended from royal parents, and from
her tender years, addicted to all manner of virtues, hearing that she was
(much to the offense of some of her friends) slandered by certain idle prating
companions, began somewhat to be perplexed in mind. But straightwares an
Angel was sent to comfort her, whospake thus unto her: Art thou troubled at the
envious prattling of those that bear thee ill will? why regardest thou the
vain and foolish speeches of men? why reflectest thou upon earth or earthly
things, thy spouse and judge is in heaven? art thou ready to shed thy blood for
Christ? learn first to digest slanderous and contumelious words; patience
overcomes all. Ever after Saint Aldegund armed her self with so much patience,
that of her own accord, she begged of her spouse she might be roughly
entreated. My good Jesus, said she, I am now well acquainted with thy manner of
proceeding, I know thou writ chastise every child thou receivest; scourge then
severely thy unworthy handmaid, purge and chastise me with injuries, griefs
and diseases: it will be most pleasing to me to suffer, that thereby I may
avoid everlasting punishment: her spouse condescended unto her prayers. For
shortly after a gangrene seized upon her breast, which after wards spread it
self all over her body. And this was sufficient matter to exercise her
patience all the dares of her life after.

Let us therefore learn to bear these scourges of the tongue with Spartan,
yea with Christian courage. Scarcely will he bear blows for Christ's sake, who
has not as yet learned to digest so much as words. Let every one say to
himself: Our Lord is my helper, I will not fear what Aug loco (...), vide
q^aeso que dicturi (...) in sine part 2. de (...) ^l^gell^.
man can do unto me. Saint Augustine confirming this Doctrine, says If thou
be exempted from suffering stripes, thou art not admitted into the number of
children.

Sect. V. A Sack.
BY a Sack is deciphered a heap of mischieves out of which nevertheless
either time or death delivers the prisoner. The Sack amongst the Japonians
Vide Nicolai Ti^gau^ii triumphus apud Iaponas mihi p. 138. 199.
is a horrible torment not unknown to Christians: they that are condemned to
this, are tied in a sack up to the neck, where they stand day and night
without any food, exposed to the storms and tempests of the rain and winds.
Thus being oppres'd with hunger, thirst, cold, heat, and want of sleep, this
miserable wretch finds in one torment, as many vexations as an helpelesse
state can inflict.

The sack is a frequent punishment in the Shoole of Patience, for sometimes
the calamities are so many which oppress a man, and lie so heavy upon him,
that he seems bound hand and foot in a sack, or set in a barrel like Regulus.

M. Attilius Regulus, that most rare example of patience and fidelity, that
glory of the first Punicke War, according to his pledged faith presented
himself to his enemies, who cutting off his eye lids, put him into a wodden
chest struck through on all sides with very sharp nails, which transfixed
his wearied body, so that on what side soever he sought to rest, he leaned on a
wound; his eyes deprived of their lids were condemned to perpetual watching,
and his whole body to sharp and lingering torments, till by these means they
cruelly murdered this most valiant man. A horrible k^nde of torture, and which
indeed may be called an epitome of hell.

And each of us now and then seems to himself a Regulus, for we are son etimes
in such d^stresse and misery, that we conceive our selves enclosed in his
restless ^ub, goa^ed on all sides with sharp nails: and which is worse,
seem to be destitute of all comfort, round about environed with a sea of
calamities, griefs and sorrows.

They write of Zoerardus an anchoret, that he combated against sleep in this
manner: He fixed many nails within a hollow tree, especially where he was wont
to lean his back or sides. Moreover he fastened over his head a large iron
ring, and great stones round about it, so that which way soever he nodded his
weary head, he found a sharp remembrance to awaken him, a strait and narrow
house, I confess: but an excellent symbol of manifold misery. Thus are we
sometimes environed with miseries, that which way soever we bend our eyes, or
mind, nothing occurres but that which torments us.

When Micheas had prophesied contrary to the humor of king Achab, he thus
wickedly commanded: Cast that man in prison, and feed him with the bread of
tribulation, and the water of distress. Micheas was well acquainted, with the
sack, for he was not only condemned of falsehood, but haled to prison,
derided and afflicted with hunger. This is to be shut up in a sack.

That most holy king David wearing this sack, as it had been his daily
garment: I have said, quoth he, to my self, my soul is troubled, and albeit I
endeavor with cheerful thoughts to reduce her to her wonted alacrity, yet she
returns again to her self, and falls into her formerg iefes: depth calls
on depth: showers rush upon me out of all quarters: one overtakes another, and
all light on me, calamity draws on calamity. All thy high things, and thy
waves have passed over me; All the world bands against me; I am never at rest:
war begets war, every where danger and enemies; vexations, losses and
ruins, every where great occasion of misery. Behold this kingly Prophet even
shut up in a sack!

The holiest men of all are sometimes put into this sack, for they are not
only sensible of the evils themselves, but they observe the dangers, they
consider the damages of the soul, they are not ignorant of the deceipts of the
gostly enemy, what a matter it is to fill from Gods grace, and to have him
their enemy; when therefore they are destitute of divine comforts they fear
least peradventure they are excluded also from his favors. By this means they
are in a sack, and perplexed with manifold griefs. For that cause likewise
king D^vid confesses thus with tears: O God thou have repelled us, and
destroyed us! Thou have showed hard matters to thy people; thou have given us
the wine of compunction to drink O my Lord! thou give us to drink out of
thy cellar, bitter wormwood wine, an exceeding bitter potion.

Much like these are the words of Ezechiel. When distresses comes upon them
they shall require peace, and it shall not be granted. Trouble shall come upon
trouble, and report upon report. Calamities shall beget calamities, we shall
never be quiet. We shall be in a sack. Job (if ever any knew this sack or
heap of miseries) was well acquainted with it. I, quoth he, sometimes that
rich man, was suddenly brought to nothing: he restrained my neck, he broke
me, and set me before him as a sign. He has environed me with his lances, he
has wounded my loins; he has not spared me, and has powered out my bowels
upon the earth. He has cut me with wound upon wound. Assuredly that most
patient man was in a sack, but he manifestly showed how great a proficient he
was in the School of Patience: certainly he was now to be counted rather a
master then a scholar.

Whosoever he be that is oppressed with this heap of calamities, and groans
to see himself shut up in this sack, let him deeply consider in his mind
these two things.

First that there is a place in the School of Patience a kind of hell, and
that thither God sends his servants to be enclosed in a sack. This is no new
thing, but a sign of Gods favor, and a cause of more ample reward. But this
hell is not eternal, nor this sack to be worre at all hours, or in all
ages. It is God who brings to hell and brings back again.

The other is: That the absolute will of God is, we should repose our greatest
hope and confidence in him, especially when our state is most desperate. The
inscription of the one and forty Psalm. is. Intellectus filiis Core, or
Canticum erudie^s: understanding for the children of Core, or, a canticle
instructing, for it teaches us most courageously to trust in God when the
least hope appears. And therefore David here many times inculcateth this:
Spera in Deo, Hope in God. Why pinest thou away with vain grief? Why art thou
vexed with fear of events? Why fear thou every pass of contrary wind?
Hope in God thou man of slender faith, hope in God. This is a hope that can
never deceive, nor be deceived.

Philo the Hebrew with others of his nation was accused by Appion to Caius
Caligula the Emperor, that he had not exhibited divine honor to Caesar. And
after when he was banished from the count, he said to his fallowes: now we may
be of a good courage, though Caius frowneth upon us: for divine help must
needs be present, where humane is wanting.

But if divine help seem also to be long a coming, we must opportunely with
king Iosaphat pray in this manner: when we know not what else to do, this is
our only refuge, to lift up our eyes to thee, O God. So that we should never
turn the eyes of our mind from God. But herein imitate a watchful spaniell
that waits upon his master, sometimes scrapeth, or fawneth, or with open
mouth beggeth till meat be given him: so when we are shut up in this sack and
oppressed with sundry miseries, let us implore his aid and help, till he
grant our suite. Are all humane helps wanting? Divine assistance, as Philo
says, must of necessity be present.

The time will come when we shall at once behold all the former passages of our
life. We shall then confess as heretofore Themistocles did: that we had
perished if we had not perished: doubtless many by suffering a slight
temporal shipwreck, are preserved from that which is everlasting. Wherefore
let us be of good courage, and think it even sweet to be in this sack for
Christ's sake. Before it be long every one will happily sing; Thou have
converted my mourning into joy, thou have rent in sunder my sack, and
environed me with comfort.

CHAP. VI. What faults are most to be eschewed in the School of Patience.
A Certain man objected to Bion the Philosopher, that he could not reclaim
that youth which he most desired to reform. Bions answer was: My good friend
let not this seem strange; that youth is like a soft green Cheese, a man can
not draw him with a hook, By which saying he wisely gave him to understand,
that those youths which are delicate and given to their pleasure, are least
fit for their books. Old cheese indeed has many faults, but that which is new
and tender, many more; whereunto you may very well compare some Scholars, which
like a soft green Cheese, are stored with ill properties, made of nothing else
but juggling and tricks, as if they had no other art but cousening and deceit.
Though Argus were their master, he would never find out their slights and
devices. It were infinite to reckon up all the ill conditions of Scholars, but I
will give you an abstract of them as near as I can. There are eight faults
especially which Scholars in schools are subject to. And in a manner as many
do the disobedient scholars ordinarily commit in the School of Patience. They
are these: 1. Not to get their lessons without book. 2. To prattle and chat.
3. To have no regard to their writing. 4. To play the trewants. 5. To brawle or
strike their fellows. 6. To be drawing pictures with their pens, sleeping or
loytering, whilst their lecture is read to them. 7. To counterfeit themselves
sick. 8. To lie or murmur when they are corrected.


These are eight capital faults never borne with, nor ever to be tolerated in
the School of Patience.

We will now briefly explicate these eight notorious faults, that we may
better beware of them.

Sect. I.
THE first fault in schools is to forget their lesson, or only make a show of
knowing it. The usual words of the master are: Repeat boy, recite your lesson.
But the sloathfull scholar mutters softly to himself; I know it not, or
begins stammeringly, and sticks at every third word, looks by stealth into
his book, pronounces most of the words false, and omits some. And in truth all
this is nothing else but gross ignorance.

Thomas a Kempis, that most religious writer, brings Christ speaking in this
manner. I am accustomed by two ways to visit my elect, by temptation and
consolation. I read unto them every day two lectures, by the one rebuking their
vices, by the other exhorting them to the increase of virtue. Thus Christ is
wont to read to his scholars: but when are these lessons to be repeated? In the
evening especially, when they are to examine their consciences. Here the master
commands, Repeat, Repeat, how have thou bettered or improved thy self?
What virtue have thou learned this day? What imperfection have thou reformed,
what vice have thou endeavored to root out? Repeat, review and call to mind

It belongs not only to religious persons, but to all whatsoever, to call
diligently to mind what every day they have done or said, or thought of. This
likewise did Anneus, Seneca, Publius Sexius and others out of the light and
dictamen of reason. This holy Vide tris^egisium m^^m ^. 3. de exam. conscien.
per plura capita.
men of former ages have taught by their example, and at this day it is the
custom of holy ^en diligently to look into themselves, and search all the
corners of their consc^ence.

And certainly it stands with reason, that, before we go to s^e^p, we make our
peace with God, whom we have that day estended, that if death surprise us
sleeping (which whether it will or no is most uncertain) we may not be cast
headlong to hell and everlasting death. And how conformable is it to reason,
that a man should, at least once a day, tender thanks to his creator for all
his benefits, ask forgiveness for his sins, and firmly purpose from thence
forward to think, speak, and proceed in all his actions more warily, modestly
and chastely. He is rather a beast then a man, who (not diverted by urgent
occasions) neglects this business, and bu^ies himself in a feather bed,
before he has so much as with one poor word reconciled himself to God.

Repeat therefore (O my dear Christian!) rehearse, I say, and examine thy
conscience how thou have spent that day. He is careless and neglects his
lesson, who lays him down to sleep, before he has cast up his accounts
between God and his own conscience.

But sometimes the scholar does ill pronounce the words of his lesson, and
recites it unperfectly. The like do they who omit not to examine their
conscience, and say their prayers, but are so distracted with diverse other
cogitations, that they stammer out false and unperfect words. For example: Some
men say our Lords prayer after this manner. Our Father which art is heaven,
while he transported in mind asks; what is done at home, in the kitching, but
tery or barn? Hallowed be thy name. His thoughts reply: I had this week a
wonderful affront put upon me. Thy kingdom come. A strange thing, that there
should as yet in likelihood be no end of this war! Thy will be done in earth,
as it is in heaven. I am shrewdly pinched with poverty; if I were richer I
might perhaps break through these difficulties; But thus as I am, poor
wretch, I lie in misery and contemned.

O Christians! what a prayer i^ this? This is no other then to huddle up words
unperfectly, to be mindlesse of your lesson, and to recite it in the worst
manner that may be. But he that prays ^ll, shall never carry his cross well.
Behold Manasses, a king in the whole course of his life most wicked, but in the
end repentant, who after he was distressed, prayed to his Lord God, and did
great penance, and prayed for pardon at Gods hands, and be sought him
earnestly. This indeed is that which God desires; he would be sought unto and
earnestly entreated.

Sect. II.
THe other fault in schools is to prattle and chat. What other is this, then
to go a begging to creatures for petty solaces and comforts, and to deafen
those men's ears with vain complaints, at whose hands you can neither hope for
help, nor counsel. He is a foolish beggar and not his crafts master, who
wandreth about begging at poor men's houses: what great alms can he hope for
of them? Dame poverty dwells there, and has none but beggars for her
tennants: And to beg of beggars is absurd and ridiculous. Get thee gone to
rich men's houses, there knock, there cry out: the bounty of one rich house may
afford thee a larger alms, then an hundred poor cottages.

So they very much deceive themselves, who think with vain contentments to
overcome calamities and afflictions. When matters go ill with them they put
themselves into company, appoint drinking matches, fall to banqueting,
revelling and dancing, spend their time in wandering up and down and gaming,
wast their best hours in barren discourses, and take upon them ^ole and
impertinent journeys.

O miserable men! what bed soever we lay a sick man in, be it of wood or gold,
he carries his disease about him. The true foundation of a peaceable mind, is
not to delight in vanities. They are light supersiciall pleasures to tickle
sense, not to fill the heart withal, they can give no solid cure to
afflictions* they are confused and troubled delights, so far from curing,
that the disease thereby becomes more violent.

Non enim gazae, neque consularis
Summovet Lictor miserestumultus
Mentis, et curas l^que^ta circ^m Hor. ^1. car. ^^e 16.

Tecta volantes.
No wealth, nor Consuls Lictors, who make way,
Can from the heart disturbed tumults fray;
Or cares which fly about gilt roofes, dispell.
True and solid joy is from a good conscience. It is neither travel nor change
of place, that can clear up a sad and cloudy mind. The mind not the climate
must be changed. Go whither th^^ wilt, thy sins pursue thee. This was the
very answer of Socrates to one that made the like complaint: what marvel (said
he) if thy travells avail thee not, seeing thou carriest thy self about with
thee? The cause it self that drives thee abroad lies heavy upon thee. What
help can thou have from strange countries? can the knowledge of Cities or
places rulielieve thee, which is but a vain and fruitless ostentation? do
ask why this flight does not help thee? Thou take thy self along with thee.
Thou must lay aside the burden of thy mind. Till Sen. apist. 21.
then no place will ever give thee content. It is in a man's power to live
happily wheresoever he will.

By these poor pleasures therefore grief for a little while is allayed and
silenced, but ere long returns again with more force; and, after that short
time of ease, vexes more sharply. Job utterly detested such vain
consolations. I have oftentimes given ear unto you (says he) but all you
comforters are burdensome. The same you may say of all things created: they are
burdensome co^forters. To what end then do we feed our selve with frivolous
discorses, why beg we help of creatures? be hold the Creator offers h^mselfe
for a comforter. I, I my self (quoth he) will comfort you. Come unto me all
you who labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you. Let us therefore, if
we be wise (or rather that we may be wise, and bend all our endeavors to the
obtaining of perfect patience) lay aside all vain consolations.

Sect. III.
THe third fault in this school is, to be careless of their writnig; which
made the careful father exhort his son in this manner:

Scribe pu^r, vigila, causa^ age, perlege ^ub^as
Majorum leges, aut vitem pos^e libello.
Write boy and watch, read ancient rubricke laws,
Or get a Captains place, or plead some cause:
And what other thing is meant here by writing, but a due and seasonable
premeditation? the mind is to be instructed and prepared for future events;
lest calamity with an unexpected shocke oppress us unawares. Seneca wisely
admonishes us: Let the mind in time of security prepare it self for
adversity. The Soldier, before he sees the face of the enemy, exercises
himself, raises bulwarks, casts up trenches, and wearieth himself with
excessive pains, that he may endure necessary labors. That which in the
encounter it self thou would not be afraid of, make it familiar before the
assault. Let calamity never take us unprovided.

More then once were the three Apostles admonished and reprehended by their
master in mount Olivet. Why so? Because they thought the matter was to be
debated with their swords, when they should have been peaceable; that they
were to fly, when they were to stand to it; to sleep when they should have
watched and prayed. They prepared not themselves for that which was to come,
albeit Christ carefully exhorted them, saying* watch and pray least you enter
into temptation: the spirit indeed is prompt, but the flesh infirm. But they
neither watched nor prayed and so a sudden whirle wind took them unawares.

The wise man much commending this premeditation says: Son when thou come
to the service of God, stand in justice and in fear, and prepare thy mind
against temptations. For unexpected disasters fall most heavilie, and even the
newness it self adds a great weight to calamity. But that which is daily
looked for, is more sufferable when it comes. No accident should befall us
unprovided: our mind should preoccupate them, and think rather what may, then
what is wont to fall out.

Let our mind clearly understand, and patiently suffer its peculiar state and
condition, knowing whatsoever happens to one, may also happen to another.
Make account then with thy self, if thou art a scholar in this school, to
suffer much: seems it strange to any one to be cold in winter? sick at sea?
yogged to and fro in a coach? spotted and bemired in a durty way? That mind is
most courageous that goes prepared for all.

But there are a sort of scholars, who deliver up a theme written, which is
none of their own: they copy it out of others. And this among Christians is
done after this manner. There are some so resolute in upholding their own
sloth, that you can no sooner admonish or correct them, but they presently
reply: am I only reprehensible? neither this man, nor that, nor the other take
these things otherwise: you shall never see such a man bear these kind of
words patiently; another you know that will endure no jest, and a third is
sensible of the least disgrace; these men dare oppose themselves upon like
occasions; these (and they have good reason for it) are not ready to fall at
every man's foot. Why is not this as lawful for me, as for this man, or that?
shall I alone be tied to harder conditions then other men?

An ill argument, and as ill transcribed. Thus we, as it were, copy out other
men's conditions, and imitate them in ours; thus we fashion our selves by bad
paternes, and are contented to perish with the multitude. O ridiculous people!
what defense i^ another impatience for ours? we have the most remarkable
examples of ancient sanctity to imitate.

Saint Paul invites us: be followers of me brethren: and observe them that
walk so, as you have our form; for many walk^ whom often I told you of (and
now weeping also I tell you) the enemies of the Cross of Christ; whose end is
destruction. Calamities therefore are to be premedit^ted, and the noblest
presidents of virtue imitated.

Sect. IV.
THE fourth fault is: to keep from school, and play the trewant^ what else is
this, but by unlawful means to avoid ^ffl^ctions? D^seases may be cured, but
by lawful remedies; a man may se^ke to eschew poverty, but without coz^ning
sh^f^s, or damage to his neighbour^ he may defend his honor, but not by pr^de
or impatence. Youths now and then for fear of the rod slip from their master,
and leave their gow^^ ^n his hands: so these men defend their honor and
dignity, but lose their garment of modesty and humility. O pride not beseeming
a Christian! how much better were it to retain modesty, and part with some of
thy credit?

Saint Peter exhorts in this manner: My dearest, think it not strange in the
fervor which is to you for a tentation, as though some new thing happened unto
you; but communicating with the passion of Christ, be glad, that in the
revelation also of his glory you may be glad rejoicing. This he admonishes,
when affliction rages most, think it not strange, wander not to seek any
other hold, then the School of Patience, there is no way to avoid afflictions
by flying. This that holy writer most religio^sly admonishes. Many, says he,
seek to Tho de Kent. l. 1. de Imit. Christi. c 13. num^. 3.
fly temptations, and fall more deeply into them. By flight alone we can
never overcome, but by patience and true humility we may get the upper hand of
all our enemies.

He therefore, says Saint Augustine, Aug. in Psa. post med mihi page 532.
who in this world seeks not himself, but Jesus Christ, patiently endures
labors, and confidently expects promised rewards. His heart is readily
prepared to hope in our Lord and is never broken with temptations.

But the worst course in all these matters, is to consult with wit^hes for the
cure of diseases, to u^e charms, spells, and magic superstitions. For this
is no other then under a fa^re pretext to make the D^vell our physician.

Elias the Prophet told the wicked King Ochozias to his face: These are the
words of our Lord: Because thou have sent messengers to consult with Beelzebub
the god of Accaron, as though there were not a God in Israel, of whom thou
might ask the word, therefore from the bed to which thou have ascended,
thou shall not descend, but dying thou shall dye. Most justly, and assuredly he
dyed indeed, and deservedly was death inflicted upon him, who sought to recover
health, and preserve his life by sorcery and witchcraft. Singularly well says
Saint Aug. in Psalm. 147. post in^t (...) p. 699.
Augustine. It is a great sign as well of piety as health, where man is sick,
and God cures his disease.

Sect. V.
THE fifth fault; to wrangle or strike his f^llowes. This is an usual fault in
schools, to salute one another with buffets, for this is the ordinary end of
chiding to make good words with bl^wes. Many times shall you hear these words;
treacherous villain thou were the cause of my whipping, I will be mere with
thee, thou shall carry it neither to heaven nor to hell: like Adams children,
they are ready to excuse the fault by accusing others, to purge themselves, and
with most cunning evasions transfer all the blame upon their fellows

An impatient man is always warring, he never wants matter of wrangling and
debate. Oftentimes for small triflles (even like those for which children fall
out) we swell up with wrath; poor and abject things incense us; the
slackenesse of our servant, the table not well covered, a wrinckle left in our
garment; yea, for a cough, ^^esing, fall of a key, boystrous shutting of a
door, or the like, we become furious. And how shall we be able ^o endure
taunts and reproaches, whose ears are oftended with the drawing of a stool or
a form; how shall we endure hunger, or thirst, whose stomach turns with a
little milk when it is burnt? A small thing displeases a mind ill affected,
insomuch that some are apt to take exception against oth^r^ salutations,
countenance, silen^e, laughter, questions and the like. The si^ke or sore are
never touched but they complain.

Our impatience stays not here, it complains of weather and tempests, yea of
God himself. One while we qua^rell with immoderate rain, at another time are
vexed with extremity of cold, with too much heat in summer, or sharpness of
wi^ter. We consider not that all ^his is done by the ordinance of God.
Certainly we too much prize our poor deserts, as though the heavens should
change their course, for us. These things are not thus disposed for o^r
prejudice; n^y contrariwise, they are done for our greater benefit. In vain
therefore do we expostulate with weather, if it be not d^y, in vain we^ ^^me
the earth, if our corn prosper not; in vain we storm against brute beasts,
if they refus^ to ^e subject unto us; and as vainly, and no less foolishly do
we charge others when we ourselves are faulty. H^w often do men bro^ke forth
into these furious speeches: That knave, that arrand thief, that man, the
ve^^est villain that lives, has combined and wrought this mischief against
me; it is that varlot that has brought me to destruction.

O ignorant and senseless men! The truth is, every one is author of his own
calami^y, every man fashions his own fortune: let every one therefore impute
his fault to himself and not to others. Epictetus answers such men Epictet:
Enchir. cap. 10.
after this sort: Ignorant men are wont to accuse others as cause of their
calamity: those that begin to know themselves, accuse themselves: and finally
those that are prudent, accuse neither themselves nor others.

Sect. VI.
THe sixth fault, to draw pictures, to sleep, trifle and gaze out of the
windows. It is usual with boys to love beyond measure, dice, cobnuts,
pictures and such kind of light trifles and even with tears to defend them.
It is a great inconvenience in the School of Patience, to be so exceedingly
besotted wi^h frail and transitory things. Hence comes all their grief and
mourning. Most truly said Saint Gregory: a thing can never be Greg. l 1.
moral. cap. 3. med.
lost without grief, unless it be possessed without love. Job had lost all
his wealth, his ten children also, yea it might even be said he had lost
himself, he was so full of pain^s, and overrunne wi^h ulcers; nevertheless
out living as it were his own funerals, he cheerfully sung: As it has
pleased our Lord, so ^s it done: the name of our Lord be blessed. He willingly,
says Saint Gregory, abandoned Greg. l. 1 moral. cap. 3. med.
his wealth which he possessed without taking contentment therein.

Excellently well of Job also said St. Augustine. A just man in being stripped
Aug. hom. 10 s^rm. 105. de temp. mihi page 294.
of all his earthly goods, escapes rich, in patience: with these riches holy
Job was stored. His house was dispoiled of all, all that made him seem so rich
a little before, was gone at a blow on a sudden he sat as a poor beggar on
the dunghill; what may be imagined more miserable then his calamity? What more
happy then his inward happiness? He had lost all the riches which God had
given him, but God himself who gave him all he possessed. O man corrupt and
sound! foul and fair, wounded and whole, sitting upon the dunghill, and
reigning in heaven! If we love let us imitate: and that we may imitate let us
labor. He helps our endeavors, who has commanded us to endeavor.

But h^w came it to pass that this man had his heart so strongly guarded,
whence proceeded this so great pat^ence? He lest without grief, that which he
possessed, without love. He was sensible of some grief, but that he easily
endured: he was inclined to love his own, but with moderation, he possessed his
wife, children and riches, as if he should not always enjoy them: or as if he
should not become more miserable by being deprived of them.

To possess the creatures of this world, and not through too much love to be
possessed by them, is a work and labor indeed. Therefore the royal psalmist
denounces: set not your heart upon them. All the goods that mortal men
possess are mortal. Whatsoever thou art entitled to as Lord, remains with
thee, but it is not thine: he that is unstable and frail of himself can have
nothing firm and permanent. We must of necessity both die our selves and lose
them: and this (if we rightly consider) may be our comfort; to lose that with
patience, which must be lost perfor^e.

What is the best remedy then for these kind of losses? not to love too much
the things which we must lose: set not thy heart upon them. Let the soul that
seeks after God, advance it self above all humane things, let it not lose
it self in any thing without it self: let her know her self to be too noble
by creation, to cast her love away upon perishing delights. Ah! we are vain,
and run after that which is fair and pleasing to the eye; we are in love
with gawdes and puppets, and when we are deprived of these trifles we wrangle,
and with floods of tears bewail our loss: we lose with excessive grief,
what with so great love we possessed* Let us therefore less regard these
transitory things, and our grief will be less in losing them. We must daily
curb and restrain our affection, and as king Tarquinius walking in his garden
struck off the tops of poppies with his staff, daily resist and suppress (as
soon as they put up their heads) these strong and violent affections. The way
to moderate thy griefs, is to qualify thine exorbitant desires.

Sect. VII.
THe seventh fault, to counterfeit sickness. It is an usual trick amongst
scholars to feign themselves sick, that they may not be enforced to study. St.
Augustine was much displeased with his ch^l^hood, and deplored it in this
manner: so little a boy, and so great a sinner! I played at ball in my
childhood, and thereby hindered my progres in learning, I sinned by neglecting
the precepts of my parents and masters. Aulus Persius when he was a boy, if at
any time he could not say his lesson which his master set him, he anointed his
eyes and pretended they were sore, which he thus confesses:

Saepe oculos, memini, ta^gebam p^rvu^ olivo: Pers. Sat. 3. v. 42*

Grandia si nollem mor^turi verba Catonis.
Discere --
When dying Catoes mighty words I would not get by heart,
I often feigned (mine eyes besmeared) With oil did prick and smart.
Boys find many excuses to absent themselves from school, which indeed
proceeds out of their own negligence. Upon a time a certain master asked his
scholar, why he came so late to hear Prayers: because, Sir (said the boy) I
stayed for my breakefast. The master presently replied: got now, and stay for a
rod. There is nothing more ready with boys then to excuse their faults: I
was sick, such an one would not suffer me, I could not, and a thousand such
devices.

Jonas the Prophet was commanded by his preachin^, to persuade the city of
Ninive to r^pentance; but he counterfetting himself sick, made as if he had
not been commanded, turned his journey another way, and by sea fled from
Ninive. In a word was willing to do all things, so he might be excused from
pre^ching. A disobedient scholar, and too apt to believe he wanted no will but
ability. But the the seas began to ^ore, the winds to rage, and a great
whale was sent from out the depthes, which taught Jonas what he was able to
do, and what through distrust of his own ability he had refused to do. Not
to be willing (my Jonas) and not to be able are far different. Assuredly our
want of confidence in doing many things makes us unable; we love and defend our
own imperfections, which we rather study to excuse then forsake.

How often shall you hear this idle excuse: I cannot, why press you me, I
cannot; the state of my body is not strong enough to fast, my stomach cannot
away with emptiness, I am not able to endure these labors, I cannot abstain
from things to which I have been accustomed, what I have hitherto used, I
cannot leave, why are are you so earnest with me? it is to no end, I say I
cannot.

These words were long since banished from the School of Patience: give care
to a Scholar who cries out courageously: I am able to do all things. How I
pray you? In him that strengthens me. The two brothers sons to Zebedeus,
questioned by our Lord whether they could drink his bitter Cup; boldly
answered, we can: we contrariwise when we are put to the trial of our
patience, utter these poor and pusillanimous words, we cannot, we cannot.

And this is the reason why we seldom lay a sure foundation for patience. For
we being partial, credit out selves in matters belonging to our own case:
when any thing seems difficult, without any shame we impudently cry out, we
cannot. F^e for shame! try thy self, recollect thy forces, begin, endeavor,
do what thou can. There is nothing more disgraceful in the School of
Patience, what d^ffi^ulties soever occur, then to br^ng this excuse, I
cannot. Saint Paul answ^r^^h resolutely, I can do^ all. The Apostles, we can.
One that truly love^h Go^ never utters such words as these, I will not, I
cannot. L^ve if it be true, is able to do all things, otherwise it is not true
as it pretends.

Sect. VIII.
THE eight fault in Schools is, to lie or murmur when they are rebuked. These
are capital faults in schools, and deserve no less punishment then the rod.
Impatience is as great a fault in the School of Patience, as a lie in the
School of Grammar or Syntax. For as a lie denies what should be affirmed, and
affirms what should be denied, making black white, so impatience makes a
small trouble great, and a great one insupportable. And this is the original
cause of impatience; namely, when a man thinks himself overcharged with
burdens insupportable, and vexed (being innocent) undeservedly. So iniquity
belyeth it self.

How much better were it for every one that is afflicted to reason thus with
himself: What say thou, impatient man, is it for this that thou have entered
thy name in the School of Patience, to proclaim thy self innocent when thou
suffer any thing? Away with these complaints; there is nothing thou
suffer, but what thou have deserved an hundred, a thousand, yea, ten
thousand times. How will thou be able to endure the fire it self when thou
can not abide a few poor sparkles or embers? Friend God does thee no injury,
take that which falls to thy lot; suffer what God injoynes thee to suffer. A^^
thou that guiltless, that innocent child, whom the good father chastizeth
without desert? Alas good soul! thou smoothly, but simply flatterest thy
self: foolish credulity persuades thee thou art a sheep, whereas indeed thou
art a wolf. Hence proceed these pitiful complaints: why falls every storm
upon my head? what sins have I committed? what have I done? I will tell thee;
if thou will but hear me with patience. It is reported by one Anthony, that
Peter a holy man, afterward martyred, was accused before his Superior for that
certain profane people were seen and heard to prattle in his chamber. For
which cause Peter was commanded to accuse himself publicly in the presence of
all the monastery, and exactly to perform the penance which others should
enjoyne him. This he did; but to say the truth, much against his will, for he
knew he had not herein offended, and that upon false suspicions this was forged
against him. Wherefore after he had retired himself into his chamber, with
tears in his eyes, he presented himself before a Crucifix, and to ease his
mind with complaints, said; Lord, what have I done, that being innocent I
should so severely be punished? Christ graciously pitying his innocence
forthwith replied: And I also Peter, what have I done, that being innocent I
should s^ffer so cruel a death? Peter presently was ashamed, and confessed
himself guilty, in comparison of such an innocent.

Sect. IX.
WHAT say thou then? (who art so ready to complain) why do so often
inculcate: what have I done? Tell me I pray thee, what had Christ done? what
had Peter and Paul the Apostles done? what so many hundred thousand Martyrs?
what the holiest men of all ages (burdened with so many impious slanders) will thou not yet give over these complaints? what have I done? How much rather
may thou say with that penitent thief crucified with out Lord? and we indeed
justly, for we receive worthy of our doings.

Let us be of the same mind. Are we punished? let us not so much call to mind
what we suffer, as what we have done. If we will rightly judge of all things,
let us principally persuade our selves that there are none of us without
faults. For want of which consideration we fall into these extremities: I have
not sinned, I have done nothing against a good conscience. Nay, we will not
acknowledge our selves sinners; we think much to be admonished, corrected, or
chastized, though in that very instant we sin, adding arrogance, excuse and
contumacy to our former misdeeds. For very well says Fabius; to excuse a fault
committed, is to com^it another Every good man is glad to be admonished, wicked
men are impatient of rebukes. And who is there that can profess himself in
all respects innocent? oftentimes we are punished for a matter wherein we are
innocent, to make satisfaction for some thing else wherein we were guilty.

The brothers of Joseph viceroy of Egypt, were innocent, when they were
recalled from their journey to be cast in prison for stealing a silver cup.
What shall we say in this case? Concerning the cup they were altogether
innocent, but all is not gold that glisters. They had committed a far greater
theft. It was not a silver cup, but their own brother Joseph, whom they had
stolen from his father. And this was the theft committed above twenty years
before, which was now at last to be punished. The like oftentimes happens unto
others.

Let us therefore love the truth, and whatsoever we suffer, say with the
brothers of Joseph: worthily do we suffer these things, because we have
sinned. He loved virtue who said: I will bear the wrath of our Lord, because I
have sinned against him.

But they that think themselves innocent, and undeservedly punished with so
great afflictions, gain naught else by this their murmuring, but a greater and
sometimes double punishment: like the scholar who by murmuring after he is
whipped, deserves a new correction. Wherefore what injuries or calamities we
now, or hereafter are to suffer, let us confess our selves guilty: let us
bear the wrath of our Lord, because we have sinned against him. Let him then,
whosoever he be, who is a scholar, in the Schole of Patience, in all
affl^ctions which he is compelled to suffer, speak in this manner: I
doubtless suffer justly, I am rewarded according to my deserts. This is the
way to profit, always to acknowledge himself worthy of the greatest
punishment that may befall him.

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. Affliction teaches us Fortitude and Fidelity.
I Have delared what kinds of punishment are used in the School of Patience.
That is to say, what sorts of affliction Almighty God is wont to punish men
withal, whilst they live in this world.

Now I purpose to set down what kind of learning we ought to gather out of
these punishments which are as books, what profit we should reap by
afflictions, and what virtues we may chiefly learn in adversity. For to say
the truth, men are made wiser by adversity, and infatuated by prosperity.

The principal virtues which offer themselves to be exercised in adversity,
are Fortitude and Fidelity; how these two virtues are sooner attained amongst
storms and difficulties, then pleasures and delights, we will begin to declare.

Sect. I.
THE education of children, under a discreet father, is wont to be far
different from that of an indulgent mother. The fathers words are daily these:
to school boy, to school. And when he returns from thence, urges him
again, saying, call to mind what has been read to thee; exercise thy memory,
practice thy style; anon I will take account what thou have learned. But when
the boy, called and examined by his father, stammereth, answers not directly,
shows himself unperfect in his grammar rules, or by holding his peace
convinces himself of ignorance: presently the father corrects him with
blows, scourges him with rods, sharply rebukes him with words, or at such
time as he should play, commits him close prisoner to h^s study, bitterly
rating him with these kind of words: study, slothful boy, study leave off
trifling and bend thy wits to that which is appointed thee. And so soon as
this boy has proceeded somewhat further in years and learning, his father
takes him from his mother, and sends him into foreign countries. And all this
he does for the good and benefit of his child.

But the mother always tender and indulgent, when she sees her child with
tears in his eyes, reasons thus with her husband: de are heart, why should we
thus contristate our children? Were it not better to have them cheerful and
merry? they are young and tender, why do we tiranize over them with stripes?
many times you shall see them made worse with beating. These are the mothers
words and with these blandishments she does not only weaken their masculine
vigor, but with sweet meats and licourish morsells, provokes them to
gluttony, and corrupts their wits and dispositions; for one while she secretly
conveyes into their pockets Sugarcakes and Simnells, another while Comfits and
Marchpanes: Thus by cherishing and cockering she utterly overthrowes them. What
wise man therefore is there, that had not rather be brought up austerely by his
father, for his greater good, then indulgently by his mother, for his future
destruction? just in the same manner God (our father in heaven) who exceedingly
desires to have his children virtuous, like the severe fathers, handles his
children roughly.

The Roman wise man discoursing very elegantly upon this point, says: Do
thou not see that the fathers and mothers carry a far different hand over their
children? the fathers call them up betimes in the morning to follow their
study; not so much as upon play-daies will they suffer them to be idle, but ply
them till they draw even sweat, and sometimes tears from their eyes: but the
mothers desire always to keep them in their bosoms, not permitting so much
as the sun to shine upon them; never would they have them labor, never shed
tears, or be contristrated. God bears a favorable mind toward good men,
he loves them entirely: let them, says he, that they may gather true and firm
strength, be thoroughly exercised with labors, griefs and adversities,
continual prosperity shrinkes at every storm; wondrest thou that God (that
entire lover of all good men, who desires to have them exceeding good and
excellent) should visit them with sinister fortunes to exercise their patience?
he had rather harden them with stripes, then with stroaking effeminate them. We
also are sometimes much delighted to see a resolute young man encounter with a
Stagge at bay, or courageously grapple with a Lion, and the stoutlier he
performs it, the more grateful is the spectacle. See a sight worthy of God,
wherein he may contemplate how man (the workmanship of his own hands) behaves
himself: behold a spectacle no less worthy of God; a courageous man stoutly
grappling with adversity.

Neither do I (Seneca) see any object God has in this world more amiable then
to b^hold some Tobias or Job, stand firm and unmovable amidst so many
funerals of their children, amidst so great havocke and destruction of all
their goods and substance.

Christ speaking out of the clowd to Saul, said: Arise and stand upon thy
fee^e. As if he had said: I cast thee down, that thou may rise and stand
more strongly.

Sect. II.
WHEN therefore thou see a man just and acceptable to God, laboring,
swearing, overcomming difficulties; and evil men wallowing in pleasures and
playing the wantons: th^nke that these are brought up mod^stly, as children
under severe discipline, and the other licentiously emboldned like abject
sl^ves and hirelings. Th^s custom God observes; he never cho^sly co^k^reth
holy men, he tries them, he hardens them and prepares them for himself. How
many Fountains, Springs, Floods, Showers, Snowes, Rivers, and Brooks, do you
see, discharge themselves into the sea which nevertheles continues brackish? so
no storms or tempests of adversity whatsoever, can alter or change a
courageous man's heart. He abides still in one state, and whatsoever falls
out, makes it suitable to his own color. He being good, by patiently bearing
and interpreting all in the best sense, turns it into good. As red Wine
mingled with a f^w d^opes of white, dies all with its own color: so a good
man takes all that happens in good part, turns all into good, and by suffering
makes all affliction profitable to himself. For his power transcendes all
exterior things, not for that he is insensible, but because he overcomes them;
and albeit at other times quiet and peaceable, raises himself against
incursions of ensuing difficulties. All adverse chances to him are either as
e^ercises, or medicines: the one (if his mind be sound) serves to maintain
and increase h^s strength: the other to recover him if he be sick, or drowned
in delights and pleasures. Just as it is in the cure of our bodies, when we are
lanced or cauterized to recover health or strength.

There is a kind of tree called Larix that grows very high, the leaves
whereof never fall; by nature it is as it were immortal, for it never corrupts
nor perishes; it can never be burnt nor altered into coals, the fire has no
more power to consume it then stones: painted tables made thereof are
perpetual; it admits no chinkes nor rifts; it rots nor, nor ever yields unto
age.

Celius Rhodiginus recounteth that he saw a Tower built of Larix, which Julius
Caesar (albeit he caused fire to be put to it) could never burn nor destroy. A
man remarkable for patience is fitly compared to this tree: he burns sometimes
amidst the flames of calamity, but loses not so much as a leaf, you shall
not hear the least impatient word fall from his lips. Such for all the world
was Job, a man like this wood, patient even in the midst of flames; In all
these things Job sinned not with his lips.

Behold a bush environed on all sides with fire, and yet not burned: a Tower of
Larix which all the power of hell could not set on fire nor demolish. This
certainly we are taught in the School of Patience, to bear with indifferency
those things which are not evils, unless we our selves be evil and repute
them such.

When Rebecca the wife of Isaac felt two infants struggling in her womb, she
went to consult with our Lord. This answer was returned. Two nations are in thy
womb, etc. and the elder shall serve the younger. From hence Saint Augustine
raising a great question, asks how this came to pass, for it evidently
appeared that the elder never served the younger, but contrariwise went about
to kill him. For Esau had determined thus in his mind; The days will come of
the mourning of my father, and I will kill Jacob my brother. How then did he
serve him, when he went about to kill him? whereunto Saint Augustine answers
very well: He will serve him (says he) not by obeying but by persecuting him,
after the same manner as evil men serve good men. As the file serves the iron,
the hammer the gold, the mill the wheat, and the oven the bread in baking it.

Jacob the son of Isaac had never proved such a man, had he not been so
p^rsecuted by his brother. He was tenderly brought up in his fathers house, was
most dear to his mother, and swayed all as he listed. But when his brother
threatened his death, he fled into M^sopotamia to his uncle Laban, and there
lived a shepeard above twenty years together. Here J^cob found the want of
his fathers house, for being most hardly entreated, he learned to endure hunger
and thirst, heat and cold, and to watch all night in the open air: here he
hardened his body and mind almost like non: here he was enabled to undergo any
labor and want whatsoever. The cause of all this was the envy and lewd
disposition of his brother. And what benefit was this to J^cob? Exceeding
much, beyond all me^sure. For by this means he saved his own life, shak'd of
^dlenes in which his indulgent mother had bred him, was inured to labors and
incommodities, heaped upriches, and had Rachel and Lia for his wives, from whom
af^erw^rdes sprunge the twelve patriarchs and Christ h^mselfe. See how the
elder brother served the younger, not by obeying, but by persecuting him. This
is the only way to attain to fortitude, by this means men become valiant. It
is a notable speech of a most courageous man: when I am weak, then am I strong.

Sect. III.
Virtue has always an eye upon the end whereunto she bends her course, not
what she ^s to suffer. God provideth for his servants, whom he would have then
to be most modest and humble, when occasion is given them to do any thing
stoutly and courageously, for which respect they must of necessity undergo
some difficulty. How can I (if thou abound in riches) know what patience thou
have to bear poverty? How may I (if thou be still applauded and flattered in
all thy actions) be assured of what proof thy constancy is against infamy and
ignomi^y? What testimony have I of thy obedience, if thou be only commanded
to do what is easy to be performed? How can I conclude thou art submisse and
humble, if thou be never assaulted with calumnies and affronts? How can I
commend thy patience, when I never see the oppressed with calamities, which are
the trialls and touch stones of virtue?

With good reason may they be said to be miserable, who wax dull and senseless
with too much felicity, who through a sluggish drowsiness are laid to sleep
as it were in a calm and peaceable sea. Whatsoever happens to them, is
unexpected and troublesome. Cruelties afflict them most who have not
experienced them: upon a young and tender neck the yoke presses heavily. A
fresh water soldier is appaled even with the conceit of a wound: but he that
is hardened in war, holdly beholds his own blood, knowing he has often
survived the like adventures.

Consider the Germans, says Seneca, Sen. l. de provid. cap. 4. ubi de pris^is
Germanis loquitur.
and the vagrant people that live about the river Ister. They are perpetually
infested with winter and foul weather, their barren soil hardly maintains
them, they are no otherwise fenced from rain but by the trees themselves and
poor thatched houses: finally they feed on such wild beasts as they kill or
take with their own hands. Do think these men are miserable? No course of
life can be reputed so, which by continual custom is become natural; why do
you marvel? good men are stricken that they may be the more corroborated.
There is no well rooted tree, but that which the wind often shakes, that it
may take deeper root and be consolidated by tempests. Those which grow in
warm valleys are tender and shallow rooted. So the corn which in seed time is
covered with frost and snow prospers best, and fire by often blowing is sooner
kindled: what, I pray, is gold and silver the worse for hammering? Certainly
you cannot otherwise have money coined, nor cups or goblets fashioned, but by
often knocking and beating. Away with that gold and silver that will not abide
the stroke of the hammer: and with that man who like metal will not be
wrought on.

Sometimes we seem virtuous in our own eyes, and would be called patient; but
very* fitly may that be applied to us, which Pyth^goras said to a certain man:
albeit thou art silver, yet, seeing thou ^rt impatient, there cannot so much as
one halfpenny of current money be made out of thee. The same with good reason
may we say unto ma^y: Although (brother) you are gold and silver, spend the
whole day in prayer on your knees, with your hands up to heaven; yet (excuse
me) you are of no value. And why so? because you are not tried and fashioned by
the hammer; and therefore like a pricelesse piece of dross, you shall be cast
into some forlorn corner. For let the hammer but once touch you, let but one
sharp word be cast out against you, it forces you to fury and impatience. O
gold! O silver! but base, but drossie, but counterfeit, because it will not
brook the hammer; ordained for no other use, save only some abject employment.

William Perald, Bishop of Lions, makes a pretty discourse, how a man may
knock out the Devils teeth, which are deciphered by slanderers, backbiters, and
detracters, to whom Isaias the Hebrew speaks: Why do you waste my people,
says he, and gri^de the face of the poor? says the Lord God of Hoasts. With
these teeth does the Devil bite just men. But by what means are these teeth to
be broken? By patience. Oftentimes the singular patience even of one Christian,
has converted thousands of Idolaters to Christianity.

Pontius Pilate, that Roman President, wondering at Christ's admirable patience,
with good reason thought he exceeded all other men in wisdom, and that he was
descended from high and noble parentage. This may daily be noted amongst
impudent pratlers, who only employ their time in taxing and censuring others.
When they observe a man to be patiently silent, they begin likewise to compose
themselves, and assume a modest look, which no sharp speeches could otherwise
have do^e. But th^s is the strength of a Christian, which is not learned by
haphazard, but only in the School of Patience. Affliction is the Mistress of
Fortitude.

Sect. IV.
THE School of Patience teaches not only Fortitude but Fidelity also, a
virtue so much commended in holy Scriptures. Well known are these words of our
Lord: Oh! thou good and faithful servant. The Disciples of Christ committed
many errors, and many times were they reprehended. Nevertheless, when Christ
took his sorrowful farewell of them all at his last Supper, he largely
commended them, saying: You are they who have held out with me in my
temptations: and I dispose unto you, as my Father has disposed unto me, a
kingdom. As if he should have said: O my dear Apostles! I forgive you all
your errors, let all that is past be forgotten. This I rather endeavor, to
make you an ample requital for your fidelity toward me. You only in a manner
alone took in good worth my humility and poverty. I acknowledge you not only
faithful servants, but also firm and assured friends. Therefore I dispose to
you a kingdom, that you may eat and drink upon my table in my kingdom. At
this word, doubtless, the Apostles hearts leapt for joy: and what other
thought possessed them all but this; Pray God we may reign in this kingdom. God
grant we may all eat and drink together upon this table. But Christ lovingly
instructing and warning them, not to anticipate these joys so unseasonably,
said: Behold, Satan has required to have you, to fifth you as wheat. You must
(O my dearest!) undergo hard trialls; you are as bells, which must yield a
sound to the whole world: but first these bells m^st be tolled, and this very
night w^ll begin with them. For as the Bell-Founder, when be has fin^shed his
work, hangs it not up presently in the steeple; but tries it first what sound
it gives, and how it answers the stroke of his hammer, and whether it be riven
or cracked: So, many trialls must be made of those who will be entertained for
my servants; to wit, whether their patience be solid, and of proof; whether
they be hardy and stout in adversi^y, and faithful in difficulties. For this
is the true touch stone to try the gold of fidelity.

Very well said Seneca: No man Sen. l. de Pro. cap. 4.
knows (otherwise then by trying) what he is able to do. None will ever know
how patient you are, not your self, but by incountering many adversaries.
Virtue languisheth if she have no adversary. What thy courage is, what power
and ability thou have, will then appear, when thy patience shows what she is
able to do or suffer. Therefore most truly says St. Gregory* Every man learns
by adversity, how much he has profited. Frank^n^ense shows its virtue upon
coals; spices smell the sweetest when they are pounded; unguents vent their
odours most when they are stirred. St. Mary Magdalens balsamum, when it was
powered upon Christ's head, perfumed the whole house; the Seaman is tried in a
tempest; a Soldier in battle; and a Champion in the lists. St. Hierom, Hier.
tom 9. ep 6. ad (...).
alluding to this, says: That the happiness of a Christian soldier is to be
fortunately improved by misfortunes; to grow under oppressions, and in growing,
to get the upper hand of them, and tread them under foot. A Christians life is
^ss^ulted and sh^ken with many storms, and amongst innumerable pressures
becomes joy^ull and vigorous. Thus, you see, true fidelity indeed is not in the
mouth of idle boasters, but in the hands of noble Ch^mpions; for it is one
thing to promise, and another faithfully to perform, and give testimony of
fidelity.

Christ our Savior, that he might invite his D^sciples to pray for increase of
faith, said unto them: If you have faith as a mustard seed. What faith, I
beseech you is this, so large, and yet so little, that it is compared to a
grain of mustard seed? Certainly, this is the least and cheapest grain that is;
but bruise it in a mortar, or chew it with your teeth, and you shall find how
sharp it is, and biting to the taste: Who would imagine so much fire could be
hidden in so little a seed? Such a faith like this, Christ requires of us; that
is, to show the fire of our love, and to breathe forth the quickest odours of
patience, when we are beaten with the pestell of calamity. The good, says S.
Gregory, which Greg. l. 1. mor. cap. 4.
we reap in peace, becomes apparent in the time of tribulation.

Sect. V.
Holy Scripture commends Josue, that warlike Captain of the Hebrews, after
this manner: All the Kings were gathered together to fight against Josue. Here
th^s most renowned Champion beg^n to declare, by evident examples, the fidelity
he had sworn to God; here he began to provoke his enemies: Come forth you
enemies of God, neither I, nor any of mine will ever shrink, or refuse to fight
with you: and albeit, your side so far exceeds us in number, yet we fear you
not: Draw forth your strongest armies, we are confident, God fights on our
side. Just after the same manner does the courageous Christian provoke his
enemies: Come hither, you afflictions, you innumerable troops of calamities;
hunger, thirst, poverty, diseases, griefs, injuries, calumnies, and all kind
of miseries: I fear neither your number, nor your strength: If whole camps
stand against us our heart shall not be afraid; the faith we have pledged to
God, we will never break; we are ready rather to suffer all that may be
inflicted upon us, yea, death it self; and if we had an hundred lives, rather
would lose them all, then violate our oath whereby we have bound our selves to
God.

Every man that is pious and faithfully devoted to God, is of this mind:
Although the whole power of hell should stand against me, the heavens fall upon
me; yea, though all the calamities of the world should show the utmost of their
rage and malice against me, yet would I, by Gods assistance, stand constant and
unmovable in my faith. I am ready for Gods cause to be cast in prison, burned,
slain, or slaughtered. For if we be dead with him, we shall live also together;
if we sustain, we shall also reign together; if we deny, he also will deny us.

And let us assure our selves (O Christians!) that it is not sufficient for us
to be members of Christs-Church, to hear Divine Service, to fast, or pray, or
give alms; but of necessity, God should find us faithful and worthy, as he
found Abraham, Joseph, and Job, truly faithful and worthy of him in the midst
of whatsoever adversity. For as the history of the Machabees testifies; Joseph
in all the time of his adversity kept the Commandments.

Albeit we be of silver or gold, if we be impatient, and brook not the hammer,
we are but little worth. And even as in a man's body, when he is suddenly
frighted, or his heart fails him, all his blood runs to comfort and succor
that distressed part: So in all anguishes and afflictions whatsoever, all the
virtue of a just man recollects it self, and animates him after this manner: If
thou fail now, when God goes about to make a trial of thee, where is thy
faith, where thy love? Where is thine obedience, thy hope, thy patience? Where
thy fortitude, thy fidelity? Is this the desire thou pretendest of suffering?
Is thy purpose and resolution of persevering come to this? Remember the oath,
which as a Soldier, thou have sworn; remember the faith thou have pledged to
God, and show thy self faithful to the end. He that has promised, without all
do^bt will perform with thee; he will neither deny thy reward, nor detain thy
crown; be thou only forward to sight, and confident of victory.

CHAP. II. Affliction teaches Commiseration and Abstinence.
KING Artaxerxes (one of his most intimate friends being dead) sent to
Democritus at Ionia, requesting him (if by any Art he could) to restore his
friend to life again; or at least wise, if by any medicinal means he saw any
hope of recovery, that he should put it in practice. Democritus answered, that
the Kings demand was important and difficult; nevertheless, he would effect
it, if his Majesty first would and could fulfill a request of his, which was,
to engrave upon his dead friends tomb, the names of thirty young men, who had
lived to the age of twenty years, without any cross or calamity. Diligent
search was made after these names; but as yet they cannot (and as we have just
cause to believe) never in any age hereafter are likely to be found.

Is there, I beseech you, any mortal man, who has lived (I will not say)
twenty years, but twenty days, without some adversity or other? All our life
is replenished with griefs and calamities. God him self, out of his infinite
providence, has by most equal weight proportioned it out to every one from
all eternity. There is none that has not his measure of wormwood, some a cup
full, some a whole gallon, others but a pint, as it pleases God to dispose;
and to this end ordained it, that every one might be sensible of his neighbors
afflictions, and withal learn moderation and temperance.

Now by what means affliction teaches Commiseration and Temperance, we declare
as follows.

Sect. I.
IT is a wonderful comfort to those that are in misery, to have companions in
their punishments, to know that others suffer the like, or greater; that none
escape, or are exempted from afflictions. Christ instructing his Disciples,
gave them this note: Blessed are ye (says he) when they shall revile you, and
persecute you, etc. For so they persecuted the Prophets that were before you.
And that he might give them a clearer testimony: If they have, says he,
persecuted me, you also will they persecute. By the same means, Saint Paul
comforting the Macedonians, says: For you, brethren, are become followers of
the Churches of God that be in Jewry, in Christ Jesus: for you also have
suffered the same things of your own lineage. So he pointet^ out, as it were,
with his finger to the Hebrews, that all good men had their trials by mockeries
and stripes, fetter^ and prisons; going about in sheepskins, in goat skins,
needy, in distress, afflicted, wandering in deserts, in mountains and dens,
and in caves of the earth; others he says, were tempted, stoned, cut in pieces
and beheaded.

And that we may the better be confirmed by the exemplar and generous patience
of others, Saint James wills us to think, that they who suffered so great
torments and miseries, were not men either of Iron or Adamant. Elias was a man
like unto us, passible: Neither this man, nor that, nor any one of the rest,
but were as sensible of pain as we; but for that they had profited better in
the School of Patience, they were more patient then we. Nor do the examples
only of the afflicted, but their words also comfort us in affliction. For in
adversity, we learn to commiserate others in the like; to comfort them, and
easily to credit those who are subject to the like adversities. And this is one
of the principal causes why we are shut up in the School of Patience, and lie
exposed to so many afflictions, that we may learn one to condole with another.
Assuredly he that has lived in poor estate, finds no difficulty to
compassionate another hunger and want; he that has been sick, and ill
disposed in his health, easily pittieth another infirmity; He that has found
by experience, what it is to be contemned, oppressed and disgraced,
commiserates those who suffer like affronts; he that is stripped out of all his
lands and possessions, quickly takes compassion of them that have suffered the
like. After we have been vexed with many miseries, we gain this knowledge with
the Tyrian Queen, who said:

Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco, I learn by harms to succor
miseries. Aeschilus the Poet says wisely, that every one is ready to condole
and sigh for company, with those that are in misery; but this grief never
touches them to the quick. To this we may annex that saying of Sophocles: They
only grieve at others afflictions, who have felt the like themselves.

Sect. II.
FRom hence we may well conclude, that whomsoever we see severe, sharp,
unmercifull or cruel, has doubtless never been put to extremities himself;
he knows neither humanity nor civil demeanor, and is so far from
combating, that he has never so much as seen the lists, but has spent his
time in case and delicacies, and by this means is become so inhumane and
merciless. For this cause God admonishes his people, that they should not
wrong aliens nor strangers, because they themselves had been of the like
condition: Thou shall not molest a stranger, nor afflict him: for you your
selves were likewise strangers in the land of Egypt. Let your own experience
tell you, how miserable a state it is, to be a stranger, a captive, surcharged
with labor, and loaded with stripes.

Saint Leo is of opinion, that Saint Peter a chief Apostle was suffered to
fall so grievously, that he might so much the more tenderly commiserate
sinners, and that a remedy by repentance might be followed in him. Hereupon the
master of the family was much offended with his servant, for that being
himself greatly indebted but a little before, and owing more then he was
worth, nevertheles, would not have the least commiseration of his fellow
servant, that was indebted to him: Ought not thou also to have mercy upon
thy fellow servant?

Hence came it, that Saint Paul also greatly comforting us, said: For we have
not a high Priest that cannot take compassion on our infirmities, but tempted
in all things. Let us go therefore with confidence to the throne of grace, that
we may ^obtain mercy. Whereupon he ought in all things to be like unto us his
brethren, that he might become a merciful and faithful high Priest before God.

For this cause God sends afflictions to many, that they may learn to
commiserate and relieve others more readily. You shall hear many blame
themselves in this respect: I thought that sick person counterfetted; I never
took compassion of that poor man's estate; I never pitied such an one that was
in sorrow and affliction; I laughed at another who wept and bewailed the death
of his friends: Justly therefore am I now visited with sickness, surcharged
with poverty, tears and sorrows; by this means I shall learn hereafter to take
compassion of others.

The Prophet Hieremy taxes the Moabites for their lewd conditions, after this
sort: Moab was fertile in her youth, and rested in her dregs, she was not
powered out of one vessel into another. He compares the Moabites to wine,
which, being long mixed with dregs, becomes musty and unsavory. It is a saying
amongst the Spaniards: This wine as yet is but new come from the mother; it
has not taken the pains to pass from one hogs-head to another: So the
Moabites, living rich and wealthy in a fertile country, were unacq^ainted with
that which hunger and penury would have taught them; Moab was fertile in her
youth, and rested in her dregs: For the Moabites, being near neighbors to the
Sodomites, became luxurious with plenty, bred up with wealth and vices,
despised all the wholesome lessons they might have learned in chaste poverty:
Moab was tunned out of the vessel of justice, into that of temperance,
chastity and mercy. In a word, they had never been Scholars in the School of
Patience; only trained up in eating, drinking, ^earing, sporting, and
intoxicated with all manner of delights; that drink wine in bowls, and are
anointed with the best ointment* and they suffered nothing upon the contrition
of Joseph. They are hard-hearted, merciless, and ready, upon every occasion,
to be fired with impatience. See how much it avails to learn manners, and to
be instructed in the School of Patience: and, that which much profits the
scholar himself and many others, they learn here to resent and compassionate
their neighbors miseries.

Sect. III.
Abstinence likewise and temperance are taught in the School of Patience. We
persuade our selves, whilst we possess many things, that we cannot be without
them; but being deprived of them, we our selves marvel with how little
difficulty we spare them. Take for example, a merchant, who, whiles he is rich,
goes like himself, magnificently attended; but being grown poor and needy,
begins to find how easy it is to go without a train. A traveller being
benighted, and forced, for want of an inn, to take up his lodging under some
tree in the field; and for supper, to content himself with one poor farthings
worth of bread, is compelled at last, to confess, that he knew not til this
time how to sup for less then two pence. A tradesman who formerly was wealthy,
and fared daintily, sometimes, through negligence in his trade, breaks, and
becomes a banquerupt, and is content at last to sit down to a dinner of
cabbidge or carrets; and for want of supper, either fasts, or contents himself
with a mess of homely water gruell: By this means, he (poor man) wondering at
himself, says: I never thought I could have lived so frugally. A Carrier, in
like manner, who was wont to ride in time of his prosperity, is, by his
unthriftinesse and drinking, forced to go on foot, and says: God be thanked,
who has once more brought me to my feet; I knew not before what footmanship I
had.

Thus God deals with many, by wholesome want reducing them to the golden mean
of temperance. Nevertheless, you shall find some so obstinate and blinded in
their opinion, that one will not stick to say: My stomach will by no means
endure fasting: Another, that his weak body requires more sleep then ordinary:
This man that he cannot possibly lead his life without company: And another,
without wine and strong bear, thinks he is like a fish without water. But when
poverty, or some other calamity, bereaves them of their companions or sleep,
and turns their wine into waer, then experience teaches, how easy a thing it
is to watch, to give the belly no more then his due, to observe fasting days,
and take their leave both of wine and company.

Calamity is the Mistress of temperance. By poverty, we learn sobriety, and
frugality, which often comes too late, when all is wasted and consumed. I my
self have known many persons of quality, whom the prison has taught to dine
for six pence, and sometimes for less, whose tables heretofore have been
laden with dainties.

Give ear to a strange, yea wonderful strange story, which makes very sit for
this purpose. Pecchius an inhabitant on this side the Alps, a man of great
courage and industry, incurred the displeasure of a certain Noble man of great
power and wealth. And being one day riding upon the way, was by a train taken;
and, like a cat, shut up in a sack, and so carried to his enemies castle.

Here Pecchius was thrown into a deep and loathsome dungeon. And, without
acquainting any other, charge was given to a servant of some trust, to feed him
every day with no more then a small crust of bread, and a little cup of water,
whereby this wretched man might sensibly suffer a lingering death, rather then
preserve a long life. In the mean season, Pecchius was sought for all about, in
towns and cities, and no where found, save only his horse he rode on, somewhat
besprinkled with blood, which caused strong suspicion of murder, and the
murderer thereupon was diligently sought after. Two men, with whom it was known
he had former quarrels, were laid hold on, and compelled by most cruel
torments to confess themselves guilty of his death* judgment past upon the
innocent persons, the one to be hanged, the other to lose his head. Thy
judgments (O my God!) are a bottomless abyss.

Mean while, Pecchius prolonged his miserable days in this loathsome prison;
and in this course of life, or rather death, spent nineteen years; without ever
changing or putting off his apparel; and having nothing to sustain life, but a
poor pittance of bread and water every day. Nevertheless, he himself, with
grateful acknowledge meant of Gods special favor, afterward confessed, that
he was always very confident he should at last be delivered from this den of
death. But his children, during his imprisonment, as if he had been dead,
performed all rites and obsequies, and parted the inheritance among them. So
when he had accomplished nineteen years in this cruel imprisonment, the Lord
of the Castle, his capital enemy, died* and his heir, that succeeded him,
going about to enlarge and beautify the Castle, commanded walls to be beaten
down here and there, till they came at length to this cave under the ground,
which had no door, but only a very narrow hole to pass into it; here they
found this miserable man like a Stygian ghost, with garments torn, his beard
grown to his k^ees, and his hair of his head hanging all about his shoulders.
At this spectacle, so unexpected, the workmen stood amazed; the rumor thereof
was straight divulged abroad; thither a multitude of people ran, as to see a
Faune or Satyr, or some such savage monster. Some of the discreeter sort,
advised not to bring this man too suddenly to the air, lest by that change he
should lose his eyesight or his life, So for certain days he was detained in
that h^s former darkness, and by little and little brought forth to daylight:
here they propounded sundry questions to him, as if he had been revived from
death to life: Asked who he was, of what family, what country man, how he came
thither, and how long he had layen there? Whereunto he made answer in order, as
all things had passed, which he audience quickly believed according to his
relation. Hereupon, he was not only restored to his liberty, but his estate
also, which his children had divided amongst them, was by the Princes command
surrendered unto him. One thing here is of great consequence, and much to be
noted, Pecchius, when he was cast into the prison, was troubled with the gout;
but this exceeding spare diet, wrought a cure of him; so that not only in the
prison, but all the days of his life after Simon Mai^lus Episc. vultur. In
diebu^ Canic. c^lloq. 4. mihi page 159.
he was free from that disease.

He that writes this History, affirms, that he spoke with this very man himself
at Millain, and had all this relation from his own mouth, Ann. Dom. 1566. in
the month of November.

See how God brings men into the depths, and brings them back again. See how
want and misery teache^h men not only abstinence and frugality, but bestows
upon them also their health which by no other remedies could be obtained.

But we, for the most part, are dull of capacity, and learn but by constraint,
those things which we should be ready to acquire of our own accords. And
thereupon with good reason our master in the School of Patience, urges us at
length with these words: Learn therefore, even against thy will, what thou
would not willingly. Galen is of opinion that Galen. l. 6. de medic.
sacilibus.
some little sickness and distempers are availeable to some. I easily believe
it, and that for the scholars of Patience it is not amiss sometimes to feel
the like.

Sect. IV.
Horace makes a pleasant discourse Hor. l. 2. ^^^sat. 1. med.
after this manner. Opimius, a citizen no less wealthy then covetous, was
oppressed with a greevous lethargy in so much that his heir in great jollity
began to lay hold on his bags and keys. Mean while Opimius, though he
were pinched and pulled, stirred not. But the physician being his faithful
friend, and tendering his good, wakened him by this means: he caused a table
to be set, and store of money to be powered down upon it, and many to come and
tell it; then he began to awaken him after th^s manner: Opimius, quoth he,
Opimius, aw^ke, and look to thine own, or else thy greedy heirs will
presently wast and imb^zle it. At these words Opimius, lifting up his dro^zie
eyes and perfectly waking, said: what is the matter, are these doings before I
am dead? Avaunt mischeivous vultures: are you already got together to tear and
devour me alive? Will you bury me before I am dead, to make your selves heirs
of my goods? Sir, said the Physician, to show that you are alive, I pray awake,
and look to the maine chance. Thus the sick man was cured of his lethargy.

My dear Christians, you know right well there are innumerable amongst us whom
our Heavenly Physician beholds in Opimius case, lying buried in a deep
lethargy, are less of their salvation, and foully corrupted with intemperance.
What should this expert and faithful Physician do heerin? He affaies sundry
means to restore us to our health, but all in vain. Wherefore at length he
either takes, or seems to take whatsoever we esteem most dear; but to no
other end, doubtless, then to awake us, that we may look to our own good,
mend our lives, and recover our health. At last the sickeman is forced to
confess: I thought indeed I could never have wanted this, abstained from that,
or contented my self when I was debard of another thing which I desired; but
now I see (either because I will, or because I must) all is in my power: this I
want, that I abstain from, the other thing I cannot obtain, and yet I live.
M^sery is the mistr^sse of temperance.

That prodigal young man who wasted all h^s patrimony, what a seasonable
opportunity had he afterward to suffer hanger, how fit a time to digest all his
surfets? So much was he distressed with hunger, that whereas before he
disdained the purest manchet, now he deemed oaten bread, yea bran and husks
cast out to the hoggs, as one of his greatest dainties. For he desired to fill
his belly with the hu^ks wherewith hoggs were fed, which none would bestow
upon him. And though he called to mind, how far hunger was exiled from his
fathers house, and what plenty there was of bread: yet he never exclamed: who
will help me to a crammed pullet, fat capon, or fine manchet? But who will
give me a moldy crust of the coursest bread? Where I beseech you, and of whom
did he learn so great temperance? certainly of hunger, and that in the School
of Patience. Very well said Eusebius: Hunger brings him back again, whom
saturity had expelled. And no marvel, for hunger brings the hawk to her
masters fist. We think hunger a great evil, but much greater is intemperance.
To a^^id therefore the one, God oftentimes sends us the other: he chastises us
with hunger to restrain us from intemperance. Thus calamities serve us for
remedies.

Sect. V.
A most elegant saying it was of Seneca, Senec. l. de Tranquil. c. 9.
that with light inconveniences, grievous mischiefs are cured, when the mind
giving small care to wholesome precepts, cannot by an easier means be healed.
Who is he that will not look about him when he is awakened by poverty,
ignominy, and havoc made of all he has? One evil drives out another. If thou
would not have a sick man meddle with unwholesome meat, the best way is,
either not to set it before him, or else so to pepper and salt it, that he
shall have no pleasure to taste it. God carefully goes about to cure us, and by
peppering and salting our affairs with miseries, makes those things unsavory
which he knows are ready to bring us to destruction. Saint Augustine reputing
this a singular benefit, says: He that is restrained from iniquity, is
overcome most to his own advantage. And this he had experienced in himself. I
have not escaped (said he) thy scourges, for what mortal man has ever been
free from them? Thou were always present, mercifully correcting, and
sprinkling with most bitter distastes, all my unlawful delights, that I might
seek those pleasures which are void of all distaste.

This God does, that we may not relish our miseries to our own destruction.
This causes me (O you wanton worldlings!) to see and not to envy your
delights: for without all question they are inwardly soundly salted and
peppered. Let him taste, that has a mind to be burned. God, like an expert
Cook, seasoneth with such unsavory sauce, those meats that are unwholesome, or
too cold, as Cucumbers, Mushromes, Melons and red Beets, that we may be well
contented to forbear them. And in stead of this dangerous and wanton fare,
sends us oftentimes royal dishes from his own table.

It might have seemed a great favor when David King of Jerusalem (as the
second book of Kings recounteth) sent dishes from his own table to his servant
Urias; The Kings meat followed him. Nebuchodonosor in like sort, appointed the
four Hebrew children, a certain provision for every day, of his meats, and of
the wine whereof ^e drank himself. And what is Christ's royal fare? what his
principal wine? Mary, poverty and want of all things. To be born, to live, to
die in extreme necessity: My meat, says our Savior, is to do the will of him
that sent me, to perform his business. What business is this? to be daily
crucified. For Christ our Lord, the very first moment that he took up his
habitation in the womb of the blessed virgin, knew he was to be crucified; so
that all the time of his life he was crucified through the daily memory of his
death. And hence came it, that going about to make trial, as it were, of his
two brothers, sons to Zebedeus, he said unto them: Can you drink the chalice
whereof I am to drink? that chalice I mean which my Father has given unto me,
that chalice which of all other is most bitter. He that says he cannot, let
him learn to drink it in the School of Patience.

Let us accustom our selves therefore to lay aside superfluities, let ordinary
meat satisfy our hunger, and drink, our thirst. Let us learn to be masters
of our selves, and not to imitate new fangled cookery in our diet, or fashion
in our apparel: Let us use our selves to sup without choice companions, or
dainty dishes; to wear apparel rather warm and fit, then fine and costly,
and to content our selves with mean habitations. Let us learn every day to be
more continent then other, to restrain sensuality, to moderate our appetites,
pacify our anger, with patience to embrace poverty, live frugally, and foresee
our near approaching eternity. All this is to be learned in the School of
Patience; but by them only that are willing and industrious. In the mean time
let us make good use of this maxim; Not to be dejected with adversity, nor
too confident in prosperity. It is the part of a wise man to beware of doing
evil, and of a valiant to bear with moderation what is past recalling, though
not amending.

CHAP. III. Affliction teaches Prayer and Mortification.
HIeronymus Cardanus, Cardan. l. 13. de Subtle. page 284.
a learned man, asks this question, Why Roses are armed and beset with
thorns. And after a large Philosophical discourse, at last concludes, that the
Rose would not be so sweet, were it not so thorny. For proof hereof he brings
the wild Rose, which for the most part has but five leaves, and nothing near
so many thorns as those in gardens; and therefore though it be somewhat sweet,
yet it is far inferior to the other. Prayer is a fair* and most selected
Rose; but yet, if it be not accompanied with thorns of mortification, the sent
it breathes will be nothing so odoriferous. All wise men in the School of
Christ, with one voice, agree, that prayer without mortification, is of little
or no worth; that the one cannot stand without the other, nor that these two
can by any means be separated. Hereupon, when a certain religious person was
commended, ^ibald. in vi^a S. Ignatii, l. 5. c. ^1. ante finem.
in the presence of Saint Ignatius, to be a man of much prayer, he changing the
word, answered: He is a man of much mortification. He meant (according to the
opinion of many others) that kind of mortification which consists more in the
subduing of the will and judgment, then in macerating and afflicting the body.
And this will I declare in the chapter ensuing; to wit, that prayer and
mortification are excellently well taught in the School of Patience.

Sect. I.
KIng David exhorting us to divine praises, says: Sing to our Lord on the
Harp, on the Harp and voice of Psalm: on Sackbuts and voice of Cornet. An
excellent exhortation to prayer, containing four principal points: A Harp,
which has many strings, must of necessity have them all carefully tuned, and
if there be but one out of tune, the whole music is spoiled. Just so it is
with us, Whosoever keeps the whole Law, and offends but in one, is made guilty
of all. Admit thou be chaste, and charitable to the poor; yet if thou be given
to wrath and envy, thou put all out of tune, and becomest guilty of all.
Contrariwise, if thou art mild, and enviest no man; yet if unchaste, thou
marrest the music, and art guilty of all. Wherefore sing unto our Lord upon
the Harp, upon the Harp well tuned on all the strings. Such as thy life is,
such shall be thy prayer.

The other Point is: In voice of Psalm. He would have the natural vo^ce
joined with musical instruments; but if there be but one note sung out of
tune, the whole song runs on discords. He that sets himself to prayer, let him
understand what he says: True prayer ought to be attentive and serious.

The third: On Sackbuts. This instrument is not made nor fashioned without many
blows, and much hammering, which signifies mortification. It is more difficult
for a man to overcome himself, then the most powerful enemy in the world. The
victory can never be glorious, where the combat is not laborious. He that
severely subdueth himself, both makes and plays upon the Sackbut.

The fourth point: And voice of Cornet. A small and narrow instrument, but
sweet and artificial, if it be winded by a skillful Corneteer. Here we are
admonished to fast and give a^ms. Therefore prayer is good, together with
fasting and alms. That prayer is good which is accompanied with mortification.
Often times we praise God with musical harmony, but all in vain, and without
either instruments or organs: we pray, but chastise not our carnal
concupiseences. Many cozen themselves with this deceit, who, because they pray
much and often, deem themselves men of much prayer. Is it so indeed, my
friends, are you such excellent fingers? I grant, a voice alone is delightful:
but where are your Sackbuts, where your instruments, where your Cornets? Prayer
does well, but where is your mortification? These must be joined, otherwise
your harmony is all in vain. Sing unto our Lord, but upon the Harp; Christ
taught us not only to offer up our prayers, but to hate our lives also; at
mount Olivet he commanded his Disciples not only to pray, but likewise to
watch, and not without some conflict to countermand their sleep. Prayer and
mortification are taught in the School of Patience.

Tell me (I beseech you) how many Seamen have you seen pray after the tempest
ceased, the sky clear, and danger of shipwreck past? How many Soldiers have
you seen heavily knock their breasts, while the ene^y was far from them, and
they sat jesting and sporting by the fire side? Most men, in prosperity esteem
of God, as we care for the heat of a stove at midsummer, for a candle at
midday, for a Soldier in time of peace, for a Musician when we have no mind
to dance, for an Architect when we are not at leisure to build; or as we care
for a well furnished table when our belly is full, for a Lawyer when we have no
suits, or a Physician when we are in good health. Very truly said the Italian
Poet:

Rarae fumant foelicibus ar^e. Seldom smoke the rich men's altars. Whilst we
flourish, and are fortunate^, the altars are left desolate; we are remiss in
prayer, and slack in sacrifices; but when we are once frost, bitten with
Winter, a fire is very acceptable; when we are benighted, a candle is most
welcome; when war threateneth, presently we press soldiers; when we fall
sick, we send for the Physician; when a tempest begins to rage, we hold up our
hands to heaven, and fall to our prayers. Thus by punishments we must be driven
to do our duties.

Sect. II.
THis caused the royal Prophet to say: Fill their faces, O Lord! with
ignominy, and they will seek after thy Name. Doubtless they will never seek
thee, before thou fill them with ignominy. Confirming this, he said: Their
infirmities were multiplied, and after that they made haste. When they were in
tribulation, they cried to our Lord. Why cried you not before? We were not
pinched with any calamity: miseries therefore are the best means to make you
cry out, like organ pipes, which are mute and speak not, till the bellows be
blown. So the Israelites would never seck him, till he slew so many of them,
then they returned, and came unto him early in the morning.

Wicked Manasses would never have learned to pray, had he not been cast into
prison: What shall I say of most holy men? Moses pressed with many injuries;
Jacob endangered through the secret spite of his brother; Sampson deluded by
the Philistines; To by having lost both wealth and eyes; Sara after she had
been grievously slandered; The three Hebrew children amidst the flames; Daniel
in the Lions den; Peter upon the sea; Paul and Silas in the dungeon; and a
thousand others were induced and taught to pray by adversity. So did Jonas in
the Whales belly learn the force of obedience.

The Apostles seeing themselves in a ship ready to be sunk, implored Divine
aid. The Deer, when the hounds are at his heels, runs speedily to the covert. A
large shadie tree stands the traveller most in stead, when either the Sun
scorcheth, or a sudden shower overtaketh him. So it is with us, as long as our
affairs succeed according to our hearts desire, we use not to importune God
with any importunate clamours; either we pray not at all, or at most, after a
cold manner; but when the whole cry of hounds is at our heels, then we mend our
pace, then we run to see what Sanctuary we can recover; when we are heated and
overcharged with miseries, or washed with showers of tears, then we cry out,
and invocate the Almighty God; To this man God may well say; Thou would never
have had recourse to me, had I not as a father called thee to an account under
the rod. So plain and sincere was King David, that he confessed as much,
saying: When I was in tribulation, I cried out unto our Lord.

King Pharaoh, a man wickedly obstinate, was not ashamed to say: I know not the
Lord, neither will I dismiss Israel. Without all question, he had not as then
felt the stripes of our Lord, seeing he confessed himself ignorant of him: but
when he had tasted the sharpness of his scourges, he was taught to speak
otherwise, and now more then once he willed his people to pray unto our Lord
that the hail and thunder might cease. Oh Pharaoh! know thou our Lord now?
Doubtless thou were taught this language, whether thou would or no, in the
School of Patience.

And albeit Pharaoh was a scholar neither docible nor hopeful, yet some thing
he profited under the rod. He began to be of another mind; his words
savored more of reason, when he had tasted of the whip. But why admire we
Pharaoh? The devil him himself speaking to Christ as unknown, said: If thou
be the Son of God command these stones to be made bread. But hear how he
changed his note after he had been scourged. For the devils went out of many,
crying out, Thou art the Son of God.

He who says he knows not God, after he has been scourged, is more obdurate
then hard hearted Pharaoh; more stony then very stones, yea and more wicked
then the devil himself: whosoever he be that behaves himself but like a man
shall learn (howbeit he knew it not before) to pray in affliction. She is the
mistress of prayer.

Sect. III.
IN the School of Patience, we learn not only how to make our prayer to God,
but the art also how to mortify our selves. To which purpose Clemen^
Alexandrinus said: the vine unless it be cut and pruned, waxes wild and
degenerates: So does a man grow extravagant unless he be scourged. For as the
sap in the branches, if it be not kept under, spends it self in leaves, and
brings but few and those sour grapes, till it be pruned and cut with
labors, griefs and afflictions; as the (...) the hook, he waxes wild, (...)
bursteth forth unmeasurably (...), like leaves; but when he is (...) with the
iron hook of adversi^y, he brings forth the plentiful fruits of prayer,
repentance, patience and mortification. Our appetite sometimes rusheth headlong
upon that which is forbidden, and with an unbridled longing posteth unto sin.
Sometimes it is so outraging mad, that you shall hear many say: I scorn the
bridle, I will be lawless and deaf to advice and counsel; I will follow mine
own lust and humor; I will have my will whatsoever it cost me. But doubtless
such a man as this breaks his own neck, if he have not some one or other to
restrain these mad frenzies.

God therefore oftentimes most benignly stays this fierce flinging jade, in
the midst of his course, laying in his way calamities, loss of goods, and all
the miseries which are most to be feared, to stop and reclaim this headstrong
and untamed colt. And as men cast a cloak over a horses head that will not
stand quietly to receave his rider; So Almighty God uses to hood-winke with
the cloak of sorrow and mourning, such outrageous men, till they submit
themselves to that discipline which they despised before.

It is a notable saying of Saint Augustine. Aug tom 10 de verbis Domini S^rm. 4
cap. 2. Principio.
The horse, the elephant, the lion, the aspe, are not tame of themselves; no
more is man, except he be even forced to subjection. To tame a horse, or ox,
a camel, elephant, lion, or aspe, man's endeavor is necessary: let man
therefore have recourse to God for the taming of himself. For our Lord, to
bring us to subjection, has his scourges, and most commonly deals with us, as
we do with beasts, which we tame and bring under with bridles, whips and spurs;
yea, sometimes we set upon them with long poles and dung forks: and if God deal
thus with us, what cause have we to complain? We are no other then Gods Beasts.
This David plainly pronounces: Man when he was in honor, understood it not;
he was compared to foolish beasts, and became like unto them. And shall not God
use his right and jurisdiction over these his beasts? Shall he not exercise and
afflict them with stripes; to wit, poverty, contumelies, sorrow, griefs, etc.

It is not one Nabuchodonosor, one Achab, one Manasses, one Antiochus, but many
such, like fierce and cruel lions have been tamed with stripes: they ceased
their raging, laid aside their mad and brutish affections, and returning to
themselves, resumed humane shape in their manners, who before you would have
said, were even bruit beasts. If thy beast (says Saint Augustine) suffer
himself to be broken or tamed by thee, what reward may he expect? Thou will not
so much as bury him when he is dead. But God will reward thy patience, even
with heaven it self, and after thy death recall thee to life; there shall not
any part of thee perish. This is the hope for which man is reclaimed, and shall
we think the reclaimer unsufferable? For this hope alone man is chastised, and
shall we murmur against so profitable a chastiser, if perchance he perform it
with scourges? At least, let us be as wise as horses and oxen, which when they
be put into the cart, wain, coach, chariot or plough, and lashed with the whip,
or pricked with the goad, they know it is done either because they are out of
the way, or go on slackly: and therefore either they instantly return into the
road, or mend their pace.

Let us at least have so much wit and understanding, when we are corrected by
our Lord, as to ponder seriously in our mind, and say: Assuredly I have erred,
and gone out of the way. See how I am recalled and beaten with mine own rod:
Alas! whither should I have gone if I had been suffered to hold on my course?
But admit I strayed not out of the way, at least I was too slack, and crept on
like a snail. Then welcome stripes, that have so happily put me in mind of my
duty; I purpose henceforth to go on faster. A man might hitherto have thought I
had been asleep. It is high time to awake and fall to my business. If we
discourse not after this manner, we are not so wise as bruit beasts, which are
at least brought back into the way by stripes.

Sect. IV.
IT was excellently well said of Saint Chrysostom; (that golden mouth of his
makes the thing it self most evident to our eyes) If you please (says he) let
us describe two houses; in the one a marriage celebrated, the other replenished
with mourners* let us enter in, view them both, and judge which is the better.
You shall find the house of mourners full of wisdom, but that of marriage full
of confusion. For there, as I have heard and observed, are loose and disordered
speeches, dissolute laughter, lascivious talk, proud and disdainful behavior,
superfluous fare, pompous apparel, riot and excess in all things. Here
gluttony, pride and drunkenness, domineer as goddesses; here Bacchus and Venus
have their habitation; here with one voice they cry; This day we may be even
mad-merry.

Thus men degenerate into bruit beasts; they drink and devour like swine, kick
and wince like asses, and neigh like horses. You would say they were in the
School of Intemperance, the Academy of all lasciviousness, turpitude and
wickedness. I condemn not marriages (says St. Chrysostom) but the abuses
usual at marriages: the devils pomp, cymballs, pipes, songs full of
fornication, adultery and such like songs full of ribauldry. But you shall have
none of this in the house of mourning; there all things are orderly and well
composed, much rest, deep silence, the memory of death, meditation of future
things, true wisdom, nothing inordinate, nothing dissolute. No man speaks
here, but softly, briefly and modestly. Such is the nature of grief and
mourning; they teach us to be wise, and to apply our selves to modesty and a
profitable course of life.

It is therefore much better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house
of feasting. From the one we return more modest and holy; from the other more
wanton, foolish and wicked. And even as a body full of humors and blood,
surcharged with grosnesse, is but an hospital full of diseases, unless it be
accustomed to labor and spare diet, which preserves it long from sickness: so
a man's mind becomes effeminate and prone to vices, amidst dances and
delicacies, except it be brought under by cares and griefs, which commonly free
us from vices, and make us stronger and more lively to encounter adversity.

Behold how mourning and affliction suppress all immodesty and lightness of
behavior; and for this cause God sends us sorrows and afflictions, to clip our
wings, lest we should, like untamed birds, fly from his protection.

And to what end should we deny this, seeing our own conscience bears witness
against us? For the most part we are too free and frolic, there burn in us
untamed desires and affections: and because we taste as sparingly of
mortification, as the dog does of Nil^s, God of his infinite goodness helps
us, and makes us take these wholesome potions, whether we will or no; exercising
us in such sort with troubles and miseries, that we may become daily more
reclaimed and orderly, and with more facility put on a good and virtuous
disposition of mind. O that thou would but once understand! how profitable
a thing it is for thee thus by little and little to die, that thereby thy vices
may not be suffered to live. Assuredly, the evils which surcharge us in this
world, are for no other end then to force us to return to God. Prayer is good,
but together with mortification. Both of them are sweetly and methodically
taught in the School of Patience. And this verily has been the fervent and
daily endeavor of all Saints, partly to mitigate and appease Gods wrath by
prayers, and partly by this daily mortification to break and subdue
themselves; let us but learn this, and we have profited much in the School of
Patience. I ad, for confirmation of what has been said, that which ensues.

Sect. V.
THE Emperor Constantine worthily called the Great, having unfortunately with
loss of many men assaulted the Bizantines, returned from the battle sore
wearied, and lamenting; night was drawing on, and the Emperor knowing not what
to do nor whither to turn him, fixed a steadfast eye upon Heaven, with deep
sights, begging assistance from thence. And see how miraculously he was aided.

For whilst with a pious and solicitous eye he beheld the heavens, he observed
a writing composed of stars, which expressed these words: Invoca me in die
tribulationis, and e^uam te, and glorifi^abis me. Call upon me in the day of
tribulation, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

At this so sublime a sentence, the Emperor was at first some what appaled:
but changing his fear forth with Niceph. l 7. cap. 19. post med. Berenius ex
e^, tom 3. An. 318.
into comfort, he fixed his eyes eagerly again upon that part of the heavens,
where he saw another wonderful vision, the perfect form of a cross fashioned
with stars, and about it these very words: In hoc fig^^ vinces: In this thou
shall overcome. The Emperor animated with these silent speeches from heaven,
within a few days after went forth again in battle against the Bizantines,
and obtained a famous victory, together with the sack and spoil of Bizantium.

O man! whosoever thou art, troubled and discontented with miseries and
misfortunes, lift up thine eyes, behold heaven, and those most express words,
a direct edict from God himself; Call upon me in the day of tribulation, and I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Overcome thy self, render God by prayers propitious unto thee, and whatsoever
enemies shall encounter thee, thou shall easily overcome them. Here Saint
Augustine carefully admonishes us, that we never be so bold as to expostulate
with God, and say others have hoped Aug tom 8. in ps. 43. post initium, mihi
page 158.
in thee, and thou have delivered them; I have hoped in thee, and thou have
forsaken me: and I have without cause believed in thee, and without cause has
my name been written with thee, and thy name written in me. This savoureth
neither of prayer not mortification, but of wicked exprobration against God.
Thou rather, if thou be wise, say as the same Saint Augustine advises: Thou
art my King and August tom. 10 Sermon. 4. doverbis Domini fine.
my God, thou art the very same, thou art immutable. I see the times changed
but the creator of times is not changed, Thou wast wont to lead and conduct
me, thou wast wont to govern me, thou wast wont to help and succor me. Thou
art our help and refoge, O Lord! by thy means we are borne, who before were
without being: thou art our refuge, by thee we are borne again, who were
wicked, and had an evil being before: thou art our refuge, thou have fed and
relieved us, who had abandoned and forsaken thee: thou art our refuge, by thy
means we thy children are erected and directed: thou art our refuge, we must
not part from thee: since thou have delivered us from all the evils that we
are subject to, and replenished us with all the good that was proper to thee.
By bestowing good things upon us, thou cherishest us, least we should faint,
and faulter in our way. By correcting, beating and chastising, thou directest
us, least we should wander and straggle out of the way. Whether therefore thou
cherishest us, lest we should faint in the way, or chastizest us lest we should
go astray; thou, O Lord, art become our refuge.

Thus Patience teaches us to pray. Very well, says, Saint Chrysostom. Prayer
is the rent and revenew that springs from calamities, and fasting is the helper
of prayer.

CHAP. IV. Affliction teaches Prudence and Modesty.
THere was a Citizen of Phil. Bosq. de carc^r^ Baptist^ conc. 2 mihi page 60.
Beauvaies in Picardy, a man much to be commended; who seriously to show
himself a careful father, at his first carrying his son to school behaved
himself thus: He took with him, under his cloak, a great bundell of rods, as a
present for the master; and to his son he said: Come hither my child, thou
must go along with me to the School. The Schoolmaster at that time, was one
Nicolas Sleeger, a famous man, unto whom this Citizen presented his child,
saying: To you, sir, I deliver this son of mine, to be instructed in good
literature; I beseech you to accept him, as specially recommended to your care
and charge. Thus much only I entreat you, that if he show himself
disobedient, you would make no spare of the rod; and with that, opening his
cloak, offered unto him a good bundell of rods, promising freely, that when he
had spent those, he would furnish him with more. This is to bring up children
carefully, and as they should be, for their greater good. This was recounted by
Philippus Bosquier, that famous Preacher, of the order of Saint Francis, who
was then a boy taught at the same School in Houdan.

Solomon discoursing of the disposition of children, says: Foolishness is
gathered together in the heart of children, and the rod of discipline will
drive it away. Christ, the wisest Schoolmaster of all, who perfectly
understands our dispositions, to reclaim us from all childish wantonness,
spares not the rod: for he scourges every child that he receives; yea, as
the wise man says, he makes scourges daily and familiar unto him: But this is
the benefit which children have by being scourged: for foolishness gathered
together in their heart, is driven away by the rod of discipline. And so they
learn Prudence and Modesty, or Humility, as we shall now declare.

Sect. I.
AND first adversity and chastisement teaches us Prudence. The Prophet
Ezechiel saw a wonderful beast, which had four several faces, a Man's, an
Oxes, a Lions, and an Eagles. And when this appeared to him the second time, he
saw in stead of the Ox, the Angelical face of a Cherubim What was the meaning
of this? What relation has an Ox to an Angel, or Cherubim? Thou will say,
perhaps, it was not the same creature that appeared, but some other. Not so,
but the very same; witness Ezechiel himself: It was, says he, the very same
beast which I had seen near to the river Chobar. By what means therefore was
the face of an Ox turned into the face of an Angel?

In the Hebrew tongue, Cherubim is as much to say, as Master, or a multitude of
knowledge and science. Behold the very meaning; We have now laid open the whole
mystery: An Ox, with the Ancients, was the symbol of labor, which this
creature, of his own nature, is most apt to endure: for he is put to Waines,
Ploughes and Carts, he is fit to till the ground, to draw, yea even to thresh
and tread out the corn; insomuch that he is the express emblem of a laborious
man. And to such an Ox as this the Spirit of God assigns the face of a
Cherubim, whereby he decipheteth a master, and a man of long experience. The
reason is given by the wise man: The man that is expert in many things, will
have his thought upon many matters, and he that has learned many things, will
manifestly discover understanding. Here, doubtless, the wise man commends
experience, which is gotten by many afflictions: he of himself is the best
interpreter: He who is not tempted, says he, what knows he?

By this it manifestly appears, that affliction is the mother not only of
eternal joy, but likewise of Christian Prudence. Affliction puts a taper
into the hands of Wisdom: The wise man confirming this by his own example,
says: I have seen many things by erring, etc. Sometimes I have hazarded even
to death for the cause of these; to wit, in seeking after wisdom. Behold how
the Cherubins face abolisheth the Oxes, how experience drawn from miseries, is
attended by Prudence! By that which a man suffers, he begins to know both
himself and others, yea and God himself; whilst he considers the vanity of
transitory things, the variety of humane dispositions, the inconstancy and
mutability of fortune, the innumerable frauds and deceits, and the infinite
miseries and calamities of this life. And by this means he learns by little
and little to eschew evil, and make choice of good. Whosoever he be that is
not like wool combed with an iron comb, what knows he else, but to spend his
time idly, and follow delights? Even at this day that saying of Seneca is most
true: we are best of S^^ epist 95.
all instructed by miseries. Felicity corrupts us.

Job propounding a most serious question, asks, where is wisdom found, and
where is the place of intelligence? And he makes this answer to himself. Man
knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in the land of those that
lead their lives sweetly. Assuredly that active wisdom, which points out
directly, how much transitory, how much eternal things are to be esteemed, is
not to be found in houses which are blessed with wealth and abundance, where
the custom is to live in daily feasting and banqueting: here riches and
abundance, carelessness, folly, and madness, goddesses nearely allied, are
always familiar and near at hand. For what, I beseech you, may be imagined
more foolish, then to rejoice at the gain of vile and transitory things, and
to lose eternal? S. Gregory affirming the same, says: they are to be
accounted so much the more stupid and foolish, as things are of greater value
which they lose, and of less which they enjoy.

That which the Roman wise man said of virtue, the same also may be affirmed of
this prudence, or wisdom whereof we speak. It is a certain thing, high,
royal, invincible, infatigable; it is without saciety, without repentance,
immortal. You shall find her in the Church, at the tribunal, in the court,
and sometimes standing before the walls of the city, all besmeared with dust,
and died in her own blood, with her hands all blistred, hard and brawny, with
labor. The Hebrew wise man warmed with a better spirit says, the rod and
correction gives wisdom.

Sect. II.
TOBY with the gall of a fish was recovered of his blindness. The gally
bitterness of calamity is the noblest and surest medicine, to recover that
dim and decayed sight, which sees not how miserable all this our life is, how
short and full of errors, how replenished with griefs, always the next door
to death, and ready to fall in a moment which sees not with what labor and
solicitude an eternal and better life must be sought after: to heal, I say,
and take away this dimnesse of the eyes, there is no medicine of more force,
none more wholesome, then affliction. For a man that is sick, or in misery
descends at last into himself, and makes these objections: Behold the
deceits of the world! this is all the reward it gives thee; this is all the sea
thou must look for: this is that thou so earnestly soughtest after; content thy
self now with what thou have gotten; it was a potion of thine own making;
drink as thou have brewed. And see thou not, perceivest thou not at length,
what a stench, what a bitterness, this foul pleasure leaves behind it? See
thou not how soon it had cloyed and wearied thee ou^, how after the first flash
it decayed and died, and how often times, when pleasure is at the highest, it
is suddenly extinguished? will thou even now at last be warned by experience?
Thou have hitherto thought thy self an Achilles, or some invincible champion,
such an one as might bid defiance even to the face of adversity: thou provest
thy self so indeed; thou fallest, before thou art scarcely touched. Art thou
that magnanimous, that patient, that stout and constant undertaker, who with
Peter sworest to go to prison and to death, and art thou thus with a poor
puff of wind overthrown? Has the enemy even blasted thee with a look? Thus
a man advises and exhorts himself in time of affliction.

See, I beseech you, how the gall of affliction clears the eyes that are dim,
how it opens those that are shut. Hieremie the Prophet plainly confirms this
in these express words: He has sent fire from above into my bones, and has
instructed me. Hereupon it was a most true saying of Saint Gregory: that
punishment opens those eyes which sin had closed.

I am a man seeing mine own poverty, in the rod of thy indignation. Thou have
chastized me, and I am instructed like an untamed young man, because thou art
my Lord God.

Many times we are wretched and miserable, and which goes beyond all misery,
are ignorant of our own misery, and deem those our enemies who esteem us
such. In this respect we do like unto them, who will never acknowledge their
house to be on fire, as long as they can keep it close, and smoother it within
the walls: but so soon as it flames out at the windows, and makes havocke of
the house, then they call for help of their neighbors; when the matter may no
longer be concealed, and the fire it self begins to speak. So we never wax
wise by adversity, till we seriously resent it. It is only vexation that gives
understanding. For, as the wise man says, he that vexes the eye fetches
tears, and he that vexes and pricketh the heart, makes it sensible. Let a man
be disparaged with some sudden contumely, affronted with some unexpected
injury, transfixed with some unlooked for calamity; then the time is come to
make trial of him. Then will it appear, how mild this man is being str^ken
with sudden calamity, how pat^ent, how modest, and how mindful of true
humility. And albeit he trip and stumble a little, yet will he, if he be wise,
forthwith recollect himself, gather sense and understanding out of that
vexation, discover patience, exercise mildness, and make show of modesty For
the scourge and doctrine, says the wise man, are at all times wisdom.

All the writings, in a manner, of Anneus Seneca, breath a kind of divinity,
worthy to be written in gold and cedar: notwithstanding the principal amongst
them, and which seems to challenge unto it self a preeminence above the rest,
is that which is he wrote to his mother Helv^a, he being then in banishment. So
we may see this Roman wise man was endued with more wisdom, when he had less
fruition of those things which should solace and comfort him. So the scholars
daily profit in the School of Patience, become more prudent, and are
instructed by the stripes of adversity. So the fisher after the sting of the
scorpion, learnes wisdom by his own harms.

Some relate, that a certain Fisherman, too greedy of his prey, laid hands
with more haste then good speed, upon his net, whence being stung by a lurking
Scorpion, he said: From this time forward I will never run so headlong on my
net; this sting shall teach me wisdom hereafter.

Thus must we reason with our selves. And, when the wound of our calamity being
healed, we find we have offended by impatience, let us turn straight to our
selves, and say: See, thou mad outrageous Bull, how thou have behaved thy self
in this affliction, how disdainfully and impatiently, with such fury as if thou
would have torn the Moon from her sphere. Is this thy Christian patience?
Aspirest thou to heaven by this means? Fear thou every little prick of a
needle? every flea-biting? See thou show thy self another manner of man
hereafter, be mindful of patience.

Sect. III.
GOd gave the Law to Moses amidst thunder and lightning, the heavens bellowed
and spit fire: What was the meaning of this? Mary, to signify that we are
never more attentive to the laws of God, then when the thunderbolts of
calamity fly about our ears, when the hail-stormes of many slaughters affright
us, then we stand attentive and vigilant, then we promise largely, that we will
do and perform all we can possible. Do therefore, now thou art well, what thou
promisedst in time of sickness. For if God be so terrible in giving the law to
be observed, how much more rigorous will he be in taking account of those that
have not kept it?

Here thou may question with thy self after this manner: How often, I pray
you, do we meditate on the ete^nall joys and delights of heaven, how often do
we attentively consider the torments of hell? Alas! but seldom, and for
fashion sake only. Seeing therefore we scarcely at any time bend our
cogitation upon these serious and wholesome subjects, Almighty God commiserating
our negligence, and propounding these things to be meditated by us in the
School of Patience, says: Fix thy mind, O man! and think advisedly, that if
so small a disease put thee to such pain, what will the torments of the damned
do for all eternity? if one poor worm-eaten tooth afflict thee day and night
even to madness, how will the worm of conscience tyrannize over those
desperate bondslaves? If the stone, the chollick, or gout, torture a man so
grievously upon a soft bed, how will eternal fire torment him with the flame
which shall never be extinguished? Consider, ah! consider, whatsoever thou
suffer now, is but the flight pricking of a pin: whatsoever torments thee
now, is but a trifle. But who of us is able to inhabit with devouring fire,
with ardours everlasting?

Sometimes we are of this opinion, and stick not to say: I can no longer endure
this fellow, I have endured him as long as possibly I can; what man can brook
him any longer? And how (O man!) will thou brook the company of Devils and
damned ghosts, with all the torments they endure, which are far greater then
can be imagined? If God punish so severly in a place of pardon and mercy, how
will he chastise where there is no hope of mercy? Whenever therefore thou
burnest, or art sick, think and say to thy self: Behold a pattern of hell, but
a painted one! See a little taste of hell, but the mildest that may be! It is
another manner of fire which buries and burns the wicked there, then that thou
suffer; this is sweet and pleasant in comparison of that eternal. Learn
therefore wisdom and knowledge whilst thou may.

The wise man wishing this, says: Who will set up stripes in my cogitation? To
feel these only, avails but little (for who is he there that does not?)
unless we also bend our cogitations seriously upon it, and with indifferency
compare our shorter torments with those that are perpetual; and so at last we
shall be driven to confess that our pains, in respect of those, are but
dreams and shadows.

But as God, in the School of Patience, offers us a taste of hellish tears,
so gives he us some relish here, before hand, of eternal joys in heaven. For
a well minded man, when he sees himself embroiled amidst so many troubles and
miseries, so many griefs and dolours, will say with Saint Paul, fetching a
deep sigh: We are oppressed above measure, above all humane power, so that it
is even irksome unto us to live. What then is our next refuge? To thee, O my
God! to thee from the very bottom of my heart do I sigh: thy house is wide,
spacious, and infinite secure. No irksomeness, miseries, griefs or
afflictions, may approach thy tabernacles there is no place for death nor
diseases, but pure, sincere, and eternal delights.

Contrariwise in this vale of tears, there is nothing but tediousnes, griefs
upon griefs without intermission, all the world replenished with sorrow and
mourning. Dissolve then, O Lord! (if this my request may be lawful) and
ruinate this cottage of my body: I reckon not what becomes of it, so I may take
my flight to thee. I have lamented my fill upon the banks of Babylon; my harp
long since is hung upon the willow boughs, and silenced; only the celestial
Sion is my hearts delight: To thee alone, my God, to thee my restless thoughts
aspire. And this is wisdom: this is understanding: thus the School of
Patience teaches wisdom.

Sect. IV.
AS Prudence, so Modesty, or Humility are taught in the School of Patience. He
that learnes not in this School^ to despise himself, will learn it no where.
In times past God commanded Moses to put his hand into his bosom; which
accordingly he performed, but drew it out infected with the leprosy. What
strange prodigy is this? And why rather was not some more notable miracle
wrought, that at least might not have caused so much horror and affrightment?
Theodoret answers this question. Almighty God, says he, admonished Moses, that
being to be chosen General over so glorious a nation, he should not behave
himself insolently, but with humility and submission: for with that hand he
was to work strange miracles: lest therefore he should adore and kiss it, as
an instrument of wonders, God represented it unto him defiled with the
leproprosie, that Moses (notwithstanding so many mavelous things done by him)
might say: Our hand is not to be exalted, but our Lord has done all these
things.

Alexander King of Macedon, when he harried all India, and wasted with
merciless war the nations scarcely known to their neighboring countries,
in the siege of a certain city, riding round about to discover the weakest
part of the walls, was wounded with an arrow, who notwithstanding sat still on
horse back, and pursued his enterprise. But afterward when the pain of his
wound increased, by reason of the dried and congealed blood, his thigh hanging
down from the horse, by little and little became stiff, so that he was
constrained to desist, saying: All men swear, I am the son of Jupiter, but
n^y wound proclaims me a man. Without all question, Alexander, thou art now a
man, who before deemedst thy self a God.

See with what facility we learn in the School of Patience to humble our
selves, and let fall our train. Whosoever is a scholar here, if he be not
altogether stupid and indocible, pronounces like sentence of all he enjoys,
saying: I am wealthy indeed, and favored by many, I want neither credit nor
honorable employment, I am of great authority, extolled, honored and
magnified: But alas! how often do I creep and crawle upon the bare earth? Many
things proclaim me a poor wretched man: here cares, there diseases and
infinite miseries vex and turmoile me, and what is the general outcrie out of
all these, but that I am a man, frail, mortal, subject to a world of miseries?

It was an elegant saying of Saint Chrysostom tom. 5. hom. 10. ad pop. Ant. med.
Chrysostom, discoursing of this inferior world. God, said he, made the
world, not only great and admirable, but likewise frail and corruptible. What
he wrought by the Apostles, the same he did in the whole world. And what
effected he by them? Mary, showed many signs, wrought great and wonderful
miracles, yet permitted them to be continually scourged, driven from place to
place, cast into prison, afflicted with corporal diseases, stoned, crucified,
and perpetually vexed with tribulations: Least perhaps they should be taken
rather for Gods then men, doing so many miracles and wonders above the power of
man. The Apostles therefore were sick themselves, yet cured the sick, raised
the dead to life, and died themselves. What wonder? we have our treasure in
earthen vessels which are broken with every little knock. So some of the
Apostles languished for the most part in continual diseases. For Timothy was
allowed to drink a little wine by reason of his weak stomach, and frequent
infirmities. Trophimus is left sick at Miletus. Epaphroditus is sick even to
death, But some will say, What Apostles are these, who are not in the pulpit,
but diseased and sick in their beds?

Let such know, that in the School of Patience, humility, before all other
virtues, is to be learned by the holiest men; yea, even by the Apostles
themselves. So Saint Paul, says Saint Bernard, by the motions and incitements
of the flesh, was restrained from insolency. So Zacharies tongue was tied, to
punish his infidelity. The Saints of God between honor and dishonor become
proficients, finding themselves amidst the extraordinary gifts they received,
subject to the ordinary imperfections of men, lest seeing themselves, by the
benefit of grace, somewhat above themselves, they should forget what they are
originally of themselves. For as a Chyrurgion uses not only ointments and
fomentations, but hot irons also, and cauterizing, to burn and take away all
superfluous and dead flesh, which oth^rwise would hinder the cure of the
salves: So God, the Physician of souls, suffers them to have temptations,
sends them tribulations, whereby afflicting and humbling them, he may turn
their joy into mourning.

Sect. V.
WHatsoever therefore is sent us to endure, let us submit our selves in all
things to the hands of God. Let no man say; I have not deserved so grievous
punishment; I am without fault; I suffer unjustly. Wicked, damnable, speeches.
These are much better: Doubtless, I am justly punished, I receive according to
my deserts; and although it seems to me, that at this time, or for this
fault, I should not be thus punished, nevertheless, to say the truth, I have a
thousand times deserved this, and more. I can never therefore be unjustly
punished, how much soever is inflicted, is for my greater good; for by this
means I make a trial of what I am, and learn to know my self. It is the saying
of the wise man: A man of much experience will have many things in his
cogitation.

Hannibal, the terror of the Romans, lived abroad (as Suidas reports)
seventeen years, a most expert captain in warlike affairs; and who might well
utter these glorious words of himself: I am now old, and by reason of my years,
so well instructed between prosperity and adversity, that I had rather follow
reason, then fortune. With good advisement does that man consider the
uncertainty of chances, whom fortune never deceives. I being mindful of
humane infirmity, weigh the force and power of fortune, and know that
whatsoever we take in hand, is subject to a thousand casualties. And if it
would please God, in prosperity to vouchsafe us a prudent and well disposed
mind, we should duly consider, not only those things which happened, but
those also which might have fallen out: by adversity we learn to bear all
fortunes. Give us leave therefore, with Secundus, openly to exclaim: O how
commodious a thing it is to pass through adversity, to the benefit of
prosperity! But, O how Christianlike is it, and conformable to modesty, to
acknowledge a man's self not unjustly punished in adversity!

The brothers of the Egyptian Viceroy (as before I have showed) were accused
of theft: for it was thus openly laid to their charge; The cup which you have
stolen, is the very same that my master drinks in. They might have answered
for themselves: We are no thieves, neither will we endare that slander, we are
guiltless, and accused wrongfully. But (O my Masters!) call to remembrance;
you have stolen much more then a thousand cups. You stole your brother Joseph
himself, three and twenty years ago, Do you not remember it? This is a foul and
grievous theft, worthy to be revenged with all the punishments that may be.
Here the brothers of Joseph, albeit otherwise rude and unskilful persons, yet
are to be commended, in that they confessed themselves guilty: God (said they)
has found the iniquity of thy servants: Behold, we are all the servants of my
Lord. This l^kewise was a notable good saying of theirs: We are well worthy to
suffer these things, because we have sinned against our brother.

Thus let every one of us think, and say in adversity: Justly do I suffer these
afflictions, deservedly, most deservedly.

In the Shool of Patience, humility is the beginning, middle, and conclusion of
all; without humility there is nothing to be learned, nothing to be retained,
nor any profit to be made. For the learning of this, the principal thing of
all others, daily to be thought of, is that blessed eternity in which we shall
sing amidst triumphs: we rejoice for the days wherein thou have humbled us,
for the years in which we have seen evil things. Those whom God afflicts
not, he either hates, or neglects them, as sluggish and slothful persons,
incapable of discipline.

CHAP. V. Affliction is most profitable for diverse respects; and for the most
part we are best taught by our own harms.
DAvid King of Hebron (having received thousands of benefits at Gods hands)
lest he should die ungrateful, cried out: It is well with me, my Lord, that
thou have humbled me. But why rather did he not remember far greater benefits?
Where are his thanks to God for having changed his sheep-hook into a scepter,
his straw-hat into a royal diadem; for having advanced him from a sheep-coat
to a throne, from keeping of cattle, to the government of men, and a purple
robe. These I say, had been far more worthy of most ample thanks. Doubtless
King Divid was not forgetful of those; he deemed it a singular great and
unspeakable favor to be made a King of a shepherd: but he took it for a
far greater, when it pleased God of a king to make him a beggar, as indeed he
was when he fled from Absolon his son.

This he thought a benefit exceeding all the rest: for this, rendering most
ample thanks, he sa^d; it is well with me that thou have humbled me. Let Joseph
say to Pharaoh: It is well with me that thou have exalted me: Ruth to her Booz:
It is well with me that thou have enriched me: let Ester say to the King: It is
well with me that thou have crowned me: let Mardocheus say to Assuerus; it is
well with me that thou have honored me: let Tobias say to the Angel: it is
well with me that thou have restored my sight: let Naaman say to Eliseus: it
is well with me that thou have cleansed me of my leprosy* let the lame man say
to Saint Peter: it is well with me that thou have cured me: let Lazarus say to
Christ: it is well with me that thou have restored me to life: but King David
(as for one of his chiefest favors) says: it is well with me that thou have
humbled me: it is well with me: it is well indeed. For this is far more
available to me, and therefore far dearer, then if thou hadest bestowed
mountains of gold upon me. Why, I beseech you, was this so great a good unto
this King? That I may learn thy statutes. Till now, said he, I understood not
sufficiently the style of the celestial court: I was ignorant what belonged to
the law of God; now at last by this means I come to know it, but in the
School of Patience; here no man becomes learned, but he that is humbled. It
is well therefore with me, O Lord! that thou have humbled me. With good reason
David renders great thanks, not for that he was enriched and exalted, but
because he was humbled. We may well say that humiliation and affliction are the
profitablest things to a man that may be. Affliction exactly teaches him
fortitude and fidelity, commiseration and abstinence, prayer and mortification,
prudence and modesty, as already we have showed. I ad moreover: that affliction
in general, to a man that is not over much subject to impatience, is exceeding
profitable; so that it is a true saying. Quae nocent docent. This Cresus
witnessed of himself in Herodotus. My mishaps, says he, albeit they have been
ungrateful unto me, yet they have served me for instructions. Quae nocent
docent, which the Grecians express as briefly as elegantly, (...). We grow
wise by being beaten with our own rod. And of this we shall now speak more at
large.

Sect. 1.
Job commends the admirable providence of God: who binds the waters in
their clouds, that they may not all break down at once. It is the providence
of God to shut up waters in the air, and bind them, as it were, in a cloth
and garment, that they may not issue out. The clouds are in stead of a chariot
to these waters, and the winds the horses which draw these vessels throughout
all the quarters of the world. Now if Almighty God should suffer these waters
at one dash to fall headlong upon the ground, without all question they would do
more harm then good; but falling by little and little, and drop after drop,
they fatten and fertile the earth. If he altogether withold the waters, says
Job, all things will be dried up, and if he let them absolutely at large, they
will overwhelme the earth, as they did in the general deluge; when being set
at liberty, they gathered together, and powered down amain. God therefore out
of his infinite providence, so tempereth the vaste Chaos of the waters, that he
deprives not the fields of them, by continual restraint, nor drowns the earth
by too sudden enlargement. He observes a mean.

Waters in the holy Scriptures are a symbol of afflictions: and therefore the
royal Psalmist said: The waters have entered even to my soul. As Almighty God
qualifies and proportions the rain for the benefit of the world, that neither
the want nor abundance thereof should be hurtful: (but in such cases when he
sends them as a punishment for men's offenses) so he moderates and mitigates all
our labors and griefs, in that for want of exercise we may not wax sloathful
of sluggish, nor yet be so utterly destitute of consolation therein, that we
faint or fall in the combat. And this was the request of the Kingly Prophet:
Leave me not destitute on every side. He desires not to be exempted from all
manner of desolation, vexation or affliction^ this his only suit is, he may
not be utterly forsaken and abandoned on every side, although his sins had
deserved it. But if God power down a violent and sudden shower, which seems
to wash away and destroy the fatness of the earth; it must be taken as a
punishment. Notwithstanding this may be no way prejudicial, but redound to our
good; seeing it pleases God by this means to humble us. Quae nocent docent.

There are certain trees that have their fruits growing so fast and close unto
them, that they will not easily let them go, unless you pull them off with a
violent and strong hand. Of this sort are Nuts, Almonds and Acorns. If you
shake these trees gently, as you do Pears or Plumbs, they will part with
nothing, not so much as a lease; you must fall upon them therefore with staves,
cudgels and stones, that they may afforod you by blows, what they refused to
give by entreaties.

We are like these trees; our fruits are the pious actions which we undertake.
God seeks, God requires these fruits, not sharply or by violence, but sweetly
and lovingly: for these fruits he asks a thousand times: My son, quoth he,
honor thy Lord, and thou shall be of great power and might: fear no other
strange Lord beside him. My son, forget not my Law. Give ear, my son, and
receive my words, that the years of thy life may be multiplied. Keep my
commandments, and thou shall live. Give, my son, thy heart to me, and let thine
eyes keep my ways. But for so much as this good God by these prayers, for the
most part, prevails but little, and that there scarcely falls any fruit from
this tree, he is even forced with stones and clubs to strike and fling at it,
that so, at least, it may render him the fruits he expected. A ^a^s conscience,
without all question, often admonishes, the preachers put him in mind, and
others do their parts to advise him, yet such is the contumacie of this tree,
that all these means will not suffice to make him yield his wished fru^t. Take
it not ill therefore, O tree! if thou be more hardly handled. Thus God dealt
with the Hebrews; he delivered them into the hands of the Gentiles, and they
who hated them, had dominion over them. And their enemies oppressed them with
tribulation, and they were humbled under their hands, that they might be taught
by their own harms. What reason then has this tree to think much if it be
pelted with cudgels and stones? It might have gone free from blows, if it had
freely given what was most justly demanded.

Naaman the Leper was highly offended, because Elizeus the Prophet gave him so
slender an answer. In so much that slighting and contemning the river Jordan,
he resolved to return again into Syria. But his servants appeased their master
in this manner: Father, said they, had the Prophet imposed upon you some
difficult matter, surely you ought willingly to have done it; how much more
seeing he has now only said unto you; wash and you shall be cleansed? Induced
by these reasons, he washed in Jordan, as he was willed, and so was cured of
his leprosy.

O that we would thus be persuaded! the same is said to us that we may obtain,
not corporal but spiritual health and salvation of our souls. And albeit God
had commanded you some thing of more difficulty, you ought certainly to have
done it. For of so great importance is eternal beatitude, that were we
commanded to endure even the very torments of hell for a time, we should not
demurre long upon the matter, but without delay readily endure even those
pains, that our soul might be happy for all eternity. Nay, admit the bliss
and beatitude of heaven might not exceed an hundred years, we should rather
endure any thing for many years in this world, then neglect the enjoying of
that. On the other side, say hell fire after an hundred years, were utterly to
be extinguished, nevertheless it behoved us rather to suffer all punishments
here that can be imagined, then to expect those future torments. How much more
ought all afflictions whatsoever, to be now cheerfully suffered, seeing they
pass away in a short time, in a moment, whereas the reward or punishment
continues to eternity?

Here Saint Chrysostom opportunely a wakeing us out of our sloth, urges in
this manner: What say thou. O man? Thou art called to a kingdom, a kingdom
of the Son of God: and like a sluggard do thou yawne, shrugge, and scratch
thy head? What if thou were every day to suffer a thousand deaths, were not all
these willingly to be endured? There is nothing thou would not undergo to
be made a Prince: and will thou not do the like to be consorted in a kingdom,
with the only Son of God; even leap into the fire, or run upon a thousand
swords? And yet all this were no great matter to be suffered.

Sect. II.
IN former times God commanded an edict to be published to this effect. Let a
man that is clean gather the ashes of a calfe, and power them out before the
tents in the purest place, that they may serve for the custody of the multitude
of the children of Israel, and for water of aspersion because the calfe is
burnt for sin. It was the pleasure of God that ashes to make lie off, should
not be gathered, indifferently by any man, but by him only who was clean; and
that they should not be negligently cast into a by corner, but into some pure
and clean place; why was so much honor done to these ashes? Mary, that they
might serve to be sprinkled with water on them that were unclean.

Hear, O Christians! and carefully attend, and see in what estimation this lie
of affliction was: sharp indeed: but most fit to purge and cleanse away the
filth of sin. None amongst mortal men are free from sin and corruption.
That most holy Job said; If I shall be washed as it were with the water of
snow, and my hands shall shine, as being most pure and clean, notwithstanding
thou will dip me in filthes, and my steps will make me abominable. If Job were
likewise to be washed, what shall we say of others? But as fire is to metalls,
the file to iron, soap to a cloth, so is affliction to sinners, that purges
and washes away all filth.

The Prophet Daniel foretelling great calamities to the Jews, said: They shall
fall by the sword, by fire and by captivity, and by the rapine of the times.
What, I beseech you, was the cause of so great mischief? That they might be
forged, and chosen, and whitened against the time prefixed; because as yet
there will be another time. This lie therefore of calamity refines and makes
us most pure from all filth and uncleanness, and thereby we are chosen and
whitened; And so indeed taught by our own harm. It is well that God humbles
us.

That most blessed King David says: I am environed round about with grief,
whilst the thorn is fastened. The briars and thorns of sin had so wounded
his soul, that he thought himself even like an hedgehogge, bristled with
pricks and thorns on every side. Insomuch that his mind was so afflicted with
grief, that neither his royal dignity, abundance of riches, nor all the
comfort or pleasure these could afford him, was able to assuage it. So
grievously David took it to the heart; That he had offended God; so much her
(...) he conceived out of the foulness and deformity of sin, that he rather
chose to wear the sharpest sackcloth, then the sofrest ermines, punished
himself with sasting, mingled his wine, and washed his bed with tears, and
interrupted his prayers with frequent sighs and groans.

O that we could behold the foul contagion of sin with such eyes as David
did! God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe us an exact balance, by which we may
weigh and examine the weight of sin. Doubtless all temporal miseries and
afflictions which are transitory, would appear very light, yea and of no
weight at all. We would deem all the adversities that happen in this life, as
light as a feather, compared with this huge mountain; the sharpest lie this
world could afford would be welcome, to cure the festered sores and leprosies
of our souls. It will go well with us, if God vouchsafe to humble us.

Sect. III.
AT Jerusalem there was the probatick pool, where beasts to be sactificed were
washed. This pool had five portalls, where lay always an infinite number of
men full of ulcers and incurable diseases, who expected that charitable relief
from heaven, which at certain times an Angel brought, by moving the water,
whereby he that first descended into the same was healed.

Behold a goodly type and lively figure of this world. For what is it else, but
an hospital full of innumerable diseased persons, for whose cure there ca^e
the Angel of great Covenant and stirred the waters? Certainly it is much to be
wondered at, there being in Jerusalem so many clear, chrystalline, and sweet
flowing waters, why Almighty God, in this muddy, foul and troubled pond,
polluted with the butchery of so many beasts, hair and blood of so many
slaughters, would place the benefit of health. Had it not been a more
illustrious miracle to have cured in the river of Jordan, or in sweet rose
water, then in this foul and noisome pond? Ah! Christians, how far different
are the judgments of God, from those of men? God was pleased to wash the soul,
not in the waters of Jericho, or Damascus, not in water sweetened with nard or
roses, but in the waters which he himself has moved and stirred with his
bloody Cross, in the salt sea of miseries, the vast ocean of calamities. This
is our washing place, these our bathes, thus we are cleansed. God in times
past, to expiate those that were unclean, prescribed to the Jews, waters
mingled either with ashes, or blood: no river is so sovereign for the washing
and purifying of the soul of man: fountains of blood spring unto us out of the
wounds of Christ crucified; our daily sins minister to us a sharp lie: to these
fountains therefore we have our recourse, here we expiate and wash away our
filth and corruption, here we rise again and recover strength. But as yet I
will not depart from this probatick pool of Jerusalem.

When therefore our Savior entered into one of the portalls, whereof we have
spoken, he found a great number of sick persons, but of all these cured but
only one. Some will say, How sparing was our Lord of his benefits? Seeing he
might have healed them all with the least word of his mouth: Why then, I
beseech you, did he restore but one of them to his health? Perhaps he would do
according to the use of the pool, which never healed but one at a time. But we
ask this question, Why God being infinitely merciful and potent, who pleased
to bestow this virtue of healing upon that pond, would not cure all those sick
and sore persons? For as the Sun every day with his cheerful rays, is
beneficial to innumerable creatures, without any hurt or damage to himself;
so the Creator of the Sun should suffer no loss, by bestowing health and
happiness upon many sick and miserable men at once. My answer is, that the Sun
with his pleasant beams fails not to illuminate and sweetly comfort all
creatures, but when the clouds interpose themselves. No cloud so thick and
gloomy, as that of sin, by which the Sun of mercy is shadowed over and
excluded. Hieremie, bewailing this evil, said: Thou have opposed a cloud
against thy self, so that thy prayer can have no passage. The multitude of our
sins often times is the cause that we cannot altogether acquit our selves of
all our miseries and afflictions. The reason why Christ cured but one at this
water in Jerusalem, was, perhaps, because he saw none of the rest worthy of
that benefit. But admit they were all free from sin, and of upright course of
life, why should then but one be restored to his health? We answer again* That
so it was expedient for them; it was good for them thus to be humbled. All
things are not convenient for all persons. Many thousands of men are sick, and
by that means make toward heaven, who if they were in health, and lived
commodiously, would take the ready way to hell.

A most true saying it is, Quae nocent, docent. It is good for me and thee, O
Christian! yea and for innumerable more that God does humble us. It is well
known to the schoolmaster himself, what is most expedient for each of his
scholars. How often has extreme calamity been the beginning of salvation? how
often has loss been the occasion of greatest gain? And therefore oftentimes we
may say with Themistocles: we had perished, if we had not been undone.

We account the silk worms happy, for that they have a silken house, and a
labor so near to rest. But if we better consider the matter, we shall find
their house, as we call it, to be their sepulcher, where those miserable worms,
amidst their own work, die and bury themselves: so often times our disordinate
appetite finds that distasteful and prejudicial, which it supposed to be
pleasant and profitable. Nay more, take this for a certain rule, that when the
appetite so hotly pursues any thing (which tends not directly toward God)
it is no other then a foul sin covered under a fair pretext. And therefore
Christ for the most part gives us with a bountiful hand, those things which
are most profitable for us; inviting all freely to the School of Patience, but
not so to the glory of this world: If any one (says he) will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me; not to a pleasant
garden, but to the horrid and noisome mount Calvary.

Sect. IV.
WHen the Savior of the world would manifest a little glimpse of his glory
upon mount Thabor, he admi^ted only three of his Apostles to be spectatours.
And why did he not invite many hundreds that were inhabitants of Jerusalem?
Or, at least, why did he not take with him all his Apostles? The counsels of
God are far different from those of men. To behold Christ crucified, hanging
all bloody on the Cross, came an infinite multitude of people; but to see him
glorified on mount Thabor, three of his dearest Disciples were only admitted.
Doubtless this was to teach us, that they are innumerable, who profit
themselves by crosses and afflictions, but few or none by earthly glory and
prosperity. And therefore St. Bonaventure said, he had rather ascend with
Christ to the mount Golgotha, then to mount Thabor. Thus assuredly, Quae
nocent, docent.

In times past, at Rome, the year of our Lord, 167. Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius
Verus, commanded all the soldiers in public triumph to be crowned with
laurel; which all obeyed, except one Christian, who would not wear his wreath
on his head, but on his arm: and being asked why he alone differed from the
^^shion of the rest, answered: It was not fit that a Christian should be
crowned in this life. Tertullian, in defense of this so generous an answer,
wrote a book, entitled, The Soldiers Crown; whereby he declares, with great
eloquence, how prudent an act this was of that soldier. The truth is, a
Christian should not be crowned, but with thorns; for so was our head Christ
Jesus. Alas! How unsuitable ^re tender and delicate members with a thornie
wounded and bloody head.

Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo, considering advisedly these words of Saint
James the Apostle: Behold, we beatifie them that have suffered. You have heard
the sufferance of Job, and seen the end of our Lord. Lest men (says he) should
patiently suffer temporal afflictions, to the end they may receive that which
we read was restored to Job: Who, besides his sores, and ulcers cured, had
doubly restored him what he had lost. To show therefore, that after the
suffering of temporal afflictions, we should not hope for like reward; he does
not say, You have heard the sufferance and end of Job; but, You have heard the
sufferance of Job, and seen the end of our Lord. As if he had said, Sustain
temporal afflictions, as Job did, but for this, expect not temporal benefits
which were given him with increase, but rather hope for eternal, such as our
Lord received. We therefore for our sufferings, must aim at a reward to be
given us, where there is no more to be suffered. Many are exalted, to be cast
down by a greater falls Contrariwise, God suffers diverse persons to fall the
lower, that he may thereby advance them higher. The more torment here, the more
reward there.

Oftentimes in holy Scripture a welminded man is compared to a Palm Tree. Hear
the speech of the heavenly Gardener himself, who says; I will ascend up to
the top of the Palm Tree, and gather the fruit thereof. What need is there (my
God) to ascend? are not thy arms otherwise long enough to gather the fruit? It
is as easy for thee to gather fruit on the top of the tree, as upon the lower
boughs. But observe (I beseech you) the wisdom of the divine counsel. A
Gardener standing upon his feet, gathers the lower fruit, by pulling the
boughs gently unto him: but when he means to pull the higher fruit, he climbs
up, and treads upon the tree, and so sometimes breaks a bough before he gather
the fruit.

A man, as we said before, is compared to a tree; his fruits are holy and pious
actions, high, ripe, and perfect works of virtue; as singular humility,
remarkable patience, transcendent charity: the heavenly Gardener, to get these
fruits, ascends up into the tree, treads upon it, and breaks the boughs; hence
it comes to pass, that one man is deprived of part of his wealth, another of
his honor, a third of his friend, another of his pleasure. Behold how the
Gardener, by treading upon us, gathers riper fruits, whereby invited and
stirred up to work with more fervor, we dispatch sooner, and every day become
more solicitous in divine affairs. Thus oftentimes, Qua nocent docent.

Sect. V.
SOmetimes God is pleased to bless us abundantly with store of all things, but
to no other end, then that as they increase, and become more dear unto us, we
may be more sensibly grieved for the loss thereof. S. Bonaventure says, that
Paradise even for this cause was planted by God, that our first parents being
excluded from thence, might suffer the more grief, and by that means the more
bitterly bewail and detest their sin, which was cause of their banishment.
It was therefore his pleasure, that Adam should sensibly perceive what
happiness he had lost by his sin; and consequently seek to recover the like
or greater bliss by repentance, that having lost Paradise, he might more
earnestly aspire to heaven.

Thus a thousand several times even at this day, God deals with us. For
example: he gives to some parents a son of an excellent disposition, comely,
docible and ingenious, who with those of his age ascends by learning to the
second or third Form: On the sudden, death crops this rose; this youth of so
great hopes, dies in the very flower of his age. Alas! what a grief is this to
the parents? They are ashamed openly to utter what they conceive secretly in
their hearts. Why did God give us such a son, when he meant presently to take
him from us again? Had we not affliction enough before? was it requisite to
add this sorrow to our former griefs? Yes indeed was it so (parents) and for
that cause was your son borne, that his untimely death might increase your
grief, and consequently the reward of your patience. Did not God, at the
intercession of Elizeus grant a son to his Hostess, and shortly after take him
from her again by death? Cauterizing seems to make a new wound, whereas indeed
it cure^ the old: Affliction seems to be a malady, when oftentimes it is a cure
for the malady. And are you yet ignorant that, Qua nocent docent.

But I am a man (say you) my heart is not made of iron, brass, or steel: I am
not able to endure such griefs. Say not so, I beseech you: the Schoolmaster
best knows what every Scholar is able to undergo: he commands one to learn
but five verses, another ten, some twenty: others he will have get by heart a
whole side of a leaf: and some he appoints to learn without book a long
oration. To him every ones ability of wit and memory is known. God is
faithful and trusty, who will not suffer you to be tempted above your power;
but together with temptation gives you profit. Oftentimes you shall hear men
say: How can this man possibly endure such grievous pains? Verily I could not.
It is the grace of God that enables him, which if thou had, thou would
endure as much as he whom thou admirest.

Saint Chrysostom says excellently Chrysostom. tom. ^. hom. 6. 7. initio mihi page
362.
well: There is no crown to be looked for without afflictions. For where
tribulation is, likewise is consolation, and where consolation, grace. And
contrariwise whom God afflicts not, he seldom or never visits with comforts.
For the soul, says Saint Chrysostom, Et hom. 67. page 358.
is purged, when for Gods sake it suffers tribulation, which suppresseth all
pride, banisheth flouth, disposes a man to patience, discovers the baseness of
earthly things, and instructs him in wisdom. And therefore it is most true,
Quae nocent docent. Consider Solomon, who as long as he was well employed about
serious affairs, was accounted worthy of that vision: but coming acquainted
with delights, he was plunged even into the abyss of impiety. What shall we say
of his father, when was he so admirable and glorious? Was it not in the time of
his temptations? Finally that golden Orator, speaking of himself and his
friends, says; what need we recount ancient examples? For if any man do but
consider the state of our affairs at this day, he shall easily perceive what
is gained by tribulation: for now through too much peace and ease, we are
grown slicke and careless, neglecting our charge, and thereby have filled the
Church with innumerable mischiefs: but when we were driven into banishment, we
were more modest, civil, studious, and more ready and fervent both in making
and hearing sermons. For tribulation is to the soul, as fire to gold, which
purges it from al dross, refines and purifies it. This is that which conducts
to a kingdom, the other to hell and everlasting damnation; The way hither is
large and spacious, the other narrow and strait. Therefore Christ himself said
(as if he had conferred on us a singular benefit) In the world you shall have
pressures and greevances. If then thou be his true disciple, walk in the
rough and narrow way without repining, since there is no living here without
pains, tribulations and miseries; Thou art not better then Saint Peter and S.
Paul, who never found ease, but lived in continual hunger, thirst, and
nakedness. If thou would with them attain to the same happiness, why
walk thou a contrary way? If that city, whereof they were thought worthy,
be the place thou desire to arrive at, forsake not the way that leads
thither. It is not ease, but tribulation, that must bring thee to everlasting
rest and happiness. The Isralites were no longer humbly modest, then while
they were afflicted; their insolency and prosperity Crysost. hom. 64. mihi page
351.
sprung up together. The Jews, says Saint Chrysostom, whilst they had their
hands in brick and mortar, were humble, and daily called upon their God: they
had no sooner possessed themselves of liberty, but they fell to murmuring,
provoked the wrath of God, and involved themselves in infinite calamities. Let
not therefore adversity dismay us, which is no other then a wholesome
correction. Let this then be inculcated a hundred times over: Sustain, my
Christian brother, whatsoever falls to thee in particular, be it never so long
and tedious, be it never so greevous and miserable, how prejudicial so ever it
be, sustain it: Quae nocent, docent.

Sect. VI.
ALmighty God abundantly declared, how he would have his servants treated in
this world. For if he suffered his only begotten son to be scourged, he will
much less spare his servants, who are but his adoptive children; Alas! how
can we excuse our selves? We are dissolute and disobedient children, prone to
filching and stealing, rude and exorbitant in the School of Patience; and
therefore must take in good part these our fathers strips, least we smart for
it eternally; let every one of us now say: I am prepared for stripes, and my
grief is always in my sight. I, for the name of my Lord Jesu, am ready not
only to be bound, but even to suffer death in Jerusalem. If therefore the
blows which fall upon the lion himself, strike a terror into the whelps, how
shall we (seeing this generous lion of the tribe of Juda scourged) be exem^^ed
from stripes? Assuredly they are most profitable unto us. For after the Father
has corrected his child, he str^kes up the rod in the window, that the very
sight thereof may terrify him; and from that time make him fearful of
committing the like fault. But I am innocent, faist thou, and am scourged
without cause. Turn, I beseech thee, thine eyes from thy self, and behold our
most innocent Jesus? For if thou would with thy Lord be crowned, thou must
with him be scourged, though thou be innocent. Aug tom. ^. ps. 37. mihi page
13^.
All this is for our greater good. Thou must of necessity, says S. Augustine,
be chastized here; refusests thou the scourge? Look for no inheritance; Every
child must needs be scourged; yea so impartial is God in this behalf to all,
that he spared not even him who was blameless and without all sin or
blemish. If children then be whipped, what less can wicked slaves and servants
expect?

We see the resty or dull horse is quickened with a spur; the dust with a wand
beaten our of garments, and the wall-nut tree after many cudgells better stored
with nuts: so we with blows of tribulation become wiser, and fructify with
more increase Q^a nocent docent. Let a Christian then rejoice in adversity,
which serves for probation, if he be just, or reformation, if a sinner: let him
fear whom God vouchsafes not to correct in this world, for doubtless in the
next he purposes to punish him.

It concerns us therefore to give ear to a good master, though the things he
teaches be difficult. It behooyes us to be thankful to so loving a Physician,
be his receipts and potions never so bitter. The midlest remedies are not
always the best; some by falling into a river in the depth of winter, have
recovered their health; others by stripes have been cured of a quartan, and a
sudden fear, diverting the patients mind, (as if he were not at leisure to
wait for his ague) has prevented his fit. And how mary should have been pressed
for souldien had not sickness excused them. Some have been detained at sea by
a cruel tempest, who at home had taken their death by the fall of their own
house, and some by suffering shipwreck have escaped the hands of pirates. So
they are innumerable who from under oppression and calamity have mounted to
heaven. Of this the ancient fathers have discoursed excellently and with great
prudence, but above all Saint Augustine, who inculcating this often into the
ears of his auditors, treats most divinely thereof in many places.

Sect. VII.
AND lest any man should repine against this chastizing hand of God, Saint
Augustine says: That which thou suffer, for which thou lamentest, is no
punishment but a medicine, not for thy condemnation, but reformation. Refuse
not stripes, unless thou set light by thine inheritance; think rather
what place thou have in thy fathers testament, then how much his scourges pain
thee; whom God loves he chastizeth; and every child he receives, he
scourges. He receives them after chastizement, yet thou say he repells and
rejects them; we may see like practice of parents, who now and then leave their
graceless children to take their own courses, those of whom they have some
hope, they scourge and correct; but whom they see altogether past hope and
correction, they cast off to live at their own liberty. Now what son soever
the father permits to take his pleasure, he purposes to disinherit, but the
heir and hope of his house he chastizeth and punishes. Let not therefore such
a son show himself so vain and childish, as to say: my father loves my
brother better, whom he has left at his own liberty: I can no sooner
trangresse his commandments, but I am punished. Rather rejoice in afflictions,
because for thee he reserves the inheritance; our Lord will never reject them
whom he has chosen for himself: well may he for a time chastise them, but he
will never damn them eternally. Choose which thou will: a temporal
chastisement or everlasting torment: temporal felicity, or to live and reign
eternally; what is that which God threatens? Everlasting punishment: what does
he promise? Everlasting rest and happiness. The punishment which God inflicts
on good men is temporal: the scope and liberty he gives to evil men is
temporal: if God therefore scourge evevery child he receives, without doubt,
he never receives him whom he scourges not. If thou refuse to be scourged,
why desire thou to be received? He scourges every son, who spared not so
much as his only begotten son. Be contented therefore to be under the hand
of thy Father, and if thou be a good son, refuse not a fathers discipline:
for whom can thou properly call a son, to whom the father gives not
discipline? Let him not spare to punish thee, so he take not from thee his
mercy, let him chastise thy way wardnesse, so he deprive thee not of thine
inheritance. If thou well remember thy fathers promises, fear rather to be
disinherited then punished; shall a sinful son scorn the whip, seeing Gods
only son scourged, who never did, nor could commit a sin? Every one
therefore must of necessity be scourged for his sins, from whom
notwithstanding, if he be a Christian^, the mercy of God is not estranged.
Assuredly if thou once become so hardened in iniquity, that thou shunnest the
rod and hand of him who should correct thee, if thou scorn the discipline of
God, and withdraw thy self from his fatherly chastisement, if thou will not
endure his stripes, because he punishes thy sins, it is not he that rejects
thee, but thou thy self abandonest thine inheritance: for had thou willingly
suffered thy self to be scourged, thou had not been disinherited. My mercy
(says he) I will not take from him, neither hurt him in my truth. For from him
the mercy of the deliverer shall not be taken away, that the truth of the
punisher may not hurt him.

Therefore, my Christian brother, both opportunely and importunely it ought to
be often inculcated: Trouble not thy self for whatsoever miseries or
perplexities thou fallest into, be not dejected in mind, nor discontented or
apt to murmr; let St. Augustine admonish thee: that the scourge is a
sovereign receipt and medicine against sin; the scourge of God teaches good
men patience Gods punishment is but for a time; he condemns not for ever. No
reason can be given more probable (says St. Augustine) why good men for the
most part suffer in this world, then that it is expedient and commodious for
them. Wherefore absolutely I conclude; Quae nocent, docent.

CHAP. VI. Every cross and affliction, by whomsoever it be imposed, comes from
God.
THe blessed Apostle St. Andrew was an extraordinary docible Scholar in the
School of Patience. Never scholar went to school with so excessive desire of
learning, as he when he hastened to the cross to suffer: O good cross! (said
he) long desired, dearly beloved, incessantly sought after, and now at last,
according to my hearts desire, happily prepared; with joy and contentment I
come to thee; take me from amongst men, and render me to my master, that by
thee he may receive me, who dying upon thee redeemed me.

Saint Gregory marvels to see Saint Peter and Saint Andrew so prompt and ready
to follow Christ, so zealous and servent to suffer death for Christ: How many
afflictions (says he) do we suffer? With how many threats are we terrified?
And yet we scorn, and neglect, to follow him; when he calls us from the love of
this world, we are neither by precepts diverted, nor stripes reclaimed. O most
stupid and indocible scholars! Ignorant, and unperfect, even in the A. B. C. of
our School. It is an ^xi^me of Aristotle: He that will learn, must of necessity
believe. In the School of Patience, this Lesson is in a manner the first: A
scholar ought to believe. None learn with delight, readily, or profitably,
unless they believe promptly. What must we then believe? Mary, that all
afflictions, all miseries, all whatsoever crosses and persecutions (inflicted
by this, or that man upon you, or any one) come from God. This is that we now
purpose to declare; to wit, that God is the Author of all punishment, of all
affliction and evil. Let no man (by the way) be scandalized at this speech: I
affirm God to be the Author of all evil, but of no sin: and this we will now
more largely treat of, because upon this foundation the whole discipline of
patience is grounded.

Sect. I.
PEter like a stout Champion of his Lord, to defend him at mount Olivet, drew
his sword, and cut off the ear of the high Priests servant: But our Lord
presently said to him; Put up thy sword into the scabbard. The Cup which my
Father has given me, will thou not suffer me to drink it? What say thou
here, my Lord! Why l^yest thou the fault upon thy Father? This thy Cup (the
bitterest by far that ever was drunk) did not thy Disciple Judas, did not Annas
and Caiphas, did not Herod and Pilate mingle it? These five Apothecaries made a
decotion of wormwood, aloes and gall, the bitterest that ever was tasted, this
Cup was of their tempering; What then, (might Peter say) what is this, my Lord,
that I hear from thine own mouth? The Cup which my Father has given me. Mark
(my dear Peter) this Cup is sent me from the hand of a special friend; it was
my Father gave it me; I cannot but accept it; many things make this Cup
acceptable: as the redemption of mankind, the vanquishing of hell, and
augmentation of heaven; but above all, the blessed hand of my Father makes this
Cup most grateful: it is a bitter potion indeed, but the profit is infinite.
Assuredly, all the power of this world could not have diminished the least hair
of Christ's head, had not the eternal providence and wisdom of his Father
voluntarily decreed, he should suffer so cruel torments. Our Savior himself,
says: As my Father has commanded me, so do I. And, Was it not expedient that
Christ should suffer thus?

Whosoever apprehends the efficacy of this Argument, whosoever acknowledges,
and absolutely believes, that God is the Author of all men's afflictions; that
it was the will of God from all eternity, and even now is, that he should
suffer whatsoever he now suffers; this man doubtless, even amidst the
greatest miseries, will embrace the blessed will of God, kiss his Divine hand,
and say: All this which I suffer is from the hand of God, he it is that causes
it, therefore it must be endured readily and cheerfully. This man thus fully
possessed of this undoubted verity, will never (I speak by good experience)
yield to any miseries or calamities: for nothing seasoned with so sweet a hand
can prove unsavory.

Saint John speaking of Christ in the midst of his passion, says: And carrying
his Cross, he went out into the place called Calvarie. Carrying his Cross, and
in carrying it, be embraced it; which Saint Andrew the Disciple learnt from
this his Master.

When we receive letters, or any thing else from a Prince, we kiss them,
although perchance they bite us to the quick; so Christ embraced the Cross his
Father gave him; so Job said: The Lord has given. But (O thou mirror of men!)
thou seem herein to have erred; for this ample patrimony, which thou have
lost, was left thee by thy ancestors; these riches thou have acquired by thine
own industry, these herds, and flocks of cattle, have been bred and brought up
by thy providence. I err not (answers Job) it was not my industry, it was
neither mine, nor my providence, but the bountiful hand of God which gave me
this great wealth; with good reason therefore has he which gave them, taken
them from me. Is it so indeed, Was it the Lord that deprived thee of them? This
seems injuriously spoken against God: for all your cattle were driven away by
the Caldeans and Sabeans; or, if you would know the chief author of these
mischiefs, it was Satan that made havoc of all; he brought fire, raised w^nds
and tempests, he incited the enemies to rob and spoil, and raze your house to
the ground; it was without question Satan that did all this; ascribe then all
your losses to Satan. But Job persists still in the same mind, a thousand
times he reiterateth these speeches: The Lord has taken away: The Lord has
taken away: The self same Lord that gave it, has taken it away. For had not
the Lord, knowingly and willingly, given Satan this power, no man could have
taken from my sheep so much as the least lock of wool. Our Lord therefore took
it away; for what a man with one only beck might, yet wittingly and willingly
he forbears to hinder, to that (doubtless) he willingly gives way. Thus
absolutely, no affliction, no temptation, no evil nor calamity comes otherwise
then from the hand of God, and by his special will and providence.

Sect. II.
WHen Christ was to enter into his fast of forty days, he was led by his
Spirit, that he might be tempted: So says Saint Matthew; Then Jesus was led
into the desert by his Spirit, that he might be tempted by the Devil. It was
the Spirit of God that led Christ to all things; to prayer, to pious
discourses, to Sermons, to work miracles; but here it is particularly said: He
was led by the same Spirit to be tempted. What else do the holy Scriptures
affirm in this place; but that even the dearest friends of God, are led with a
vail as it were before their eyes to the Cross. We are led, I say, for the
most part blindfold, otherwise, like mad furious bulls, we would hardly be
drawn to the slaughter. Behold therefore the Son of God led into the lists,
there to be assaulted. Why then do we so frequently and profanely use these
speeches? This man came of the Devils errand: The Devil has done me this
displeasure: This thunderbolt comes from Satan. Fools that we are, we deceive
our selves; these are fond and impious speeches; better it were to say thus;
This came from our Lord: It was our Lords pleasure: It lighted upon us from his
hand; for it is our Lord that does all this.

And when Gedeon threshed his corn, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him,
and said: The Lord be with thee, O most valiant of men! And Gedeon said to him:
I beseech thee, my Lord, if the Lord be with us, Why have these evils fallen
upon us? Where are his mavelous works, which our fathers have told us? But
now our Lord has forsaken us. For at the self same time the Israelites were
afflicted by the Madianites. Behold how absurdly and ridiculously humane
ignorance discourses: If the Lord be with us, how comes it to pass that
matters go so ill with us? As if, forsooth, these calamities were not from the
hand of God, as the best and happiest success. Therefore the Angel said; Go
armed with that valor thou have, and thou shall deliver Israel out of the
hands of the Madianites. As if he should have said: Know that God (albeit he
has sent enemies to invade his people) has not utterly abandoned them. It is
only the pleasure of God to make proof and trial of your love toward him.

So God visits us with diseases, and a thousand incommodities, to stir up and
establish our confidence in him, and the better to make us know our selves. Yet
as we may resist an enemy, so may we by lawful remedies seek to cure our
diseases, seeing we know not the determinate will of God, how long we must
continue in them. What should hinder a prisoner from going out when he sees the
prison door open? This is not to break prison, but to make his benefit of an
occasion offered.

And as one jalour easily keeps under a hundred or two hundred prisoners, so
they be in chains and fetters; none of them (albeit they have wings of
Dedalus) are able to escape; but if any of them file asunder his fetters, open
the prison door and break away, then not one man alone, but a whole band of
officers must pursue him, to see if happily they may apprehend him again. The
like altogether is to be observed in this affair: they questionless whom the
devil persecutes, tempts, vexes and afflicts, are none of his prisoners: he is
bound and lies captive who is fettered with the gives of luxury, pride, envy
and avarice. Those the devil needs never to hunt after, they are his own in
sure custody. But so soon as any of them endeavor to break prison and get
away, they shall find satan, and all the force of hell oppose them, many
wicked and malicious men will pursue and persecute them; who therefore can
ascribe this to their ill fortune, that they have many persecutours* and
enemies, seeing it is most certain that all that desire to live piously in
Jesus Christ, must of necessity suffer persecution.

Pharoa^ the king of Egypt with an oath threatened the Jews: I will persecute,
quoth he, and apprehend you. This certainly he would never have said at such
time as they were bemired, durtied, and wearied, but when he saw them ready to
fly and escape away. In like manner do our enemies deal with us: whilst we
ly wallowing in the mud of sin, they seldom or never make war against us:
but when we seek to save our selves by slight, then they either actually invade
us, or at least seek to terrify us by hostile incursions. For which cause the
wise man forewarning us, says: son when thou come to the service of God,
stand in justice and fear, and prepare thy soul against temptation.

Sect. III.
Would thou go to the School of Patience? Provide and make ready thy self
not for repose and ease, not to sit down and take thy pleasure, but for a
great conflict and much temptation. Art thou ignorant that whosoever goes to
the fencing, riding, or wrestling school, or to learn the art military, must
not look to sit still upon a soft cushion* with a book before him; but you
shall have the fencer give this man a blue eye, the horse throw the other, the
riding master, or he that tilts against him, set him beside the sadle: one
unfortunately breaks his thigh with leaping, another with wrestling puts his
arm out of joint, this man has his head rudely broken, another a tooth
stricken out with the pummell of a sword, another an eye put out with the point
of a spear: a man must here endure all kinds of wounds and incommodities.

Let us, I pray you, look for no other or better entreaty in the School of
Patience: we must not think here to sit still and take our ease: and as in
those Schools I spoke of before, of riding, fencing, and art military, the
masters themselves entertain their scholars with blows and wounds: so in the
School of Patience, all pain and anguish, all evil and punishment, is from
God himself the rectour thereof; Prepare therefore thy soul for temptation.
From God proceed not only mild, cheerful, fair and fortunate, but likewise
the unlucky, dark, duskish and dismal days; which Ecclesiastes plainly
affirming, says: for as God has made the one so also he has the other, that
a man may find no just cause of complaints against him. It was purposely the
will of God to set a foul day against a fair, adversity against prosperity,
and to temper and qualify the force and acrimony of the one with the mixture
of the other, that it might be more wholesome and medicinable to men's humors
and diseases; wherefore be mindful of adversity in prosperity, and of
prosperity in adversity; Think of poverty in time of plenty, and in the
midst of thy riches, of the poor man's necessity: from morning unto evening,
time shall be changed, and all these are sown in the eyes of God.

Let us therefore most attentively consider, that all adversity is sent us from
God, that most just and supreme Judge. Let us not impute the cause of our
miseries to that which is not, for they neither come from the east, nor from
the west, nor from the desert mountains; because God is judge. He humbles
this man, and that he exalts, because there is a cup in the hand of the Lord
of mere wine full of mixture. And he has powered it out of this into that, but
yet the dregs thereof are not emptied: all the sinners of the earth shall
drink.

Behold, O you Christians! and engrave deeply in your hearts these documents.
This man God comforts, that he afflicts; The cup of all miseries and
afflictions is in his hand; this cup of the Lord is full of pure wine as it
comes from the grape, but withal it has its mixture; for not one sort but
diverse kinds of wine are powered into this cup. Excellent wine when it is
mingled, not with water, but with wine more excellent then it self, becomes
infinitely strong. So the revengefull justice of God abounds with multiplicity
and variety of punishments, as with several kinds of wines. Many men have
suffered both great and manifold miseries: to these doubtless pure wine is
given, but mingled, as I said before. Let them be of good courage; all this
notwithstanding is gentle and tolerable. For by this means God inclines,
sometimes to this man, sometimes to that, one while he offers his cup to John,
another while to Peter, and sometimes to James: this honorable Cup passes to
all: every one must taste thereof more or less, as it has seemed good to our
Lord from all eternity; this speech is used to every one: either drink or get
thee gone.

But this may be a great comfort, that no man (especially in this world) is
compelled to drink up the dregs: The dregs thereof are not emptied. The
greatest punishments and revenges of justice, are reserved till the last day of
judgment: Then all the sinners of the earth shall drink. Whatsoever
tribulation we suffer now, is but momentary and light; it may seem but a sport
and jest in comparison of the bitter dregs which the fury and indignation of
God shall give eternally to the wicked to drink and never drink up. Let us now,
O Christians! joyfully drink up these cups, though somewhat bitter; seeing we
are excused from drinking up the dregs. The cup which most of us so much fear,
is filled with our Lords wine, he it is that offers it; the cup we refuse is in
the hand of our Lord; God is the author of all punishment and calamity.

Sect. IV.
ANd to go to the foundation of this verity, let us hear what may be objected
against it; some there are that ask this question: If God be the author of
all evil and punishment, he is so likewise of sin. My enemy by lying and
flandering, has extremely injured and damnified me; he has, contrary to all
law and justice, entered in, and made havoc of my estate; he has most wickedly
slandered and defamed me; he would, if it were possible, swallow me at one bit.
And, I pray you, i^ God the author of all this? He is, good sir, the author of
all this: not that God commanded him to lie or calumniate: God (says
Ecclesiasticus) has commanded no man to do impiously, and he has given no man
time to sin. But I urge further: What if I should say, that God commanded him
to do these injuries, should I say amiss? That most holy King David says even
as much: for when the wicked Shimier reproached him with words, nay, even cast
stones at him, and some of the Kings train were of mind to have cut off his
head: the King gave express charge to all his followers in ^his manner: Let
him alone that he may curse: for our Lord has commanded him to curse David:
and who is he that dare say, Why has he so done? Did therefore Shimei commit no
sin in doing this? yea doubtless a most heinous one: observe a while, and the
truth will easily appear.

When David, the wisest of Kings, saw this wretch Shimei all alone, and
unarmed, and yet heard him calumniate him resolutely, and without fear, he
presently was of opinion, that the first beginning or fundamental cause of
that injury, proceeded, not from Shemei, but from God, who had ordained the
slanderous and malicious speech of so wicked a man, to chastise and punish him.
By what means therefore did God command him this?

Be advised and understand the matter as it is. There are two things to be
considered in sin: The first is the natural motion of the body, or will, or of
them both jointly together: the other is the transgression it self of the law.
For example: One brother slanders another, a citizen kills a citizen, a
soldier sets an house of fire, a thief steals a thousand crowns. In these
acts the motion of the tongue, the deadly stroke, the setting fire to the
house, the taking away of the money, are done by Gods help and assistance: for
they are all natural actions, which cannot be done without Gods help. And this
is the first thing which ought to be considered in every sin, which without
doubt is by this means furthered by God himself. But the other is the very
nature it self of sin, as when this natural action is employed contrary to
reason, against conscience and the law of God; this God neither wills nor
commands: nevertheless, he directs the perverse will of this man, or that
sin and transgression of his laws, to the punishment, admonition, correction,
or increasing the patience of another man. Therefore of doing the thing God is
the author; and when it is ill done, he is a provident director.

So God assisted Shimei to utter his words, to cast dirt and stones (for these
were no other then natural motions) but for so much as Shimei showed a
malicious will against his Prince, thereunto God concurred not: but
nevertheless, directed it to a very good end, that by these calumnies the sins
of David might be punished, his patience and humility exercised.

And this may be seen and observed in all sins, and in all injuries whatsoever:
The evil of sin God tolerates, and the evil of punishment he orders and
directs to a good end; to increase patience, and to punish sin. Thus he permits
famine, war, plagues, deluges, burning, thefts, injuries, injustices and
enormous crimes; and withal, so disposes them, that even by these evils he
manifests to the world more and more his goodness, his justice, his power,
and his glory. After this manner God is the Author of all evils, as they are
punishments: of which Doctrine we produce truth it self for a witness.

God being highly offended with the Jews, said: I will gather evils upon them,
and glut my arrows with them. Lo, I will bring upon them evils, out of which
they shall not be able to escape. Behold, God even loads with evils, God
wounds us with his arrows. And we childishly are angry with his arrows and
darts; we never mark what arm it is that shoots and darts them: So the Painter,
when his picture is not to his mind, quarrels with his pencill; the Serivener
with his pen; the Carpenter with his ax; the Potter with his clay; so we accuse
those that malice and slander us as authors of our evils: but we are
infinitely deceived, it is not the pencill, but the Painter; the pen, but the
Scrivener, who are the authors of the writing or picture. Job was, in this
respect, of a better opinion, when he said; The hand of our Lord had touched
him: It was neither the Caldeans, nor the Sabeans, nor any other enemy
whatsoever, but the hand of God that has overthrown me.

Sect. V.
HAve we any doubt of this? It is the testimony of the wise man: Good things
and evil, life and death, poverty and honesty come from God. This the Prophet
Micheas clearly confirms, where he says: That evil is descended from the Lord
into the gate of Jerusalem. And that he might make them more cautelous whom he
admonished: Behold (quoth he) I purpose evil upon this family. The like
affirms the Prophet Amos: And where finally shall there be evil which our
Lord has not done? And that we may exactly acknowledge all these evils of
punishment, and innumerable kinds of affliction, to come from the Divine will
of God; let us call to remembrance, he woften he has by little contemptible
creatures, discomfited his enemies, in far more glorious manner, then he could
with great and puissant armies. Thus Almighty God is wont to suppress humane
pride, thus he sends poor abject worms, mice, bats, flies, lice, and such like
sordid creatures, to vanquish, not the scum, or dregs of the people, but to
triumph over Kings, Princes, Emperors. Thus he draws forth, as it were, whole
armies of gnats, flies, frogs, wasps and locusts; and with these troops
overthrows whole nations and countries.

The Book of Wisdom declares: Thou have sent wasps, forerunners of thine
host, that by little and little they might destroy them. The Book of Kings
witnesses (...) ^uch: And the towns and fields (...) forth in the midst of
that count^^^* and there came forth mice, and there was confusion of great
death in the city.

Genebrard relates of a King, who for poisoning of his nephews committed to
his charge, was, together with his wife, devoured by mice. Conies undermined a
city in Spain, and moles a city in Macedonia, as Pliny witnesses. When Sapor,
King of the Persians, a man greedily thirsting after the blood of Christians,
belieged the city of Nisibis, James Nisibita, their Bishop, brought down upon
them by his prayers, not an army of soldiers, but of flies and gnats from
heaven. These little creatures, more powerfully then the vast army of Xer^es,
impugned the enemy; for when the horses and elephants felt themselves
continually stung and vexed by those little vermins, in their ears, snow^^ and
nostrils, they became mad and furious; brake their bridles, and ran headlong
away: insomuch, that the King knowing not what to do, nor ^^ither to turn him;
left all, and withdraw himself from the enterprise.

The l^ke success had Charles king of Sicilie, and Puilip king of France, when
they took Gerunda a City in Spain, where the outrage and impiety of the
soldiers spared neither Churches nor Sepulchers, etc. But when they broke up
the tomb of St. Narcissus, a huge swarm of flies issued out of it, and made
such a slaughter amongst the army, that the residue were all pel mel forced to
take their flight. And at this day it is a proverb among the Spaniards: provoke
not Narcissus flies; who gave such forces to these poor little creatures? God
is the author of all calamities and slaughters; all this evil came from God.

But you may object: what if I be infested with a disease, which I am sure
proceeds from mine own intemperance, from a surfeit of meat, or drink, how
may I attribute this to God, when I know my self the author thereof? This
disense is indeed a great affliction, but is it from God? It is most manifestly
from God. For God from all eternity has determined to scourge thee, and for
this end makes use of this intemperance* of thine, which in (...) manner ^^
^^th foreseen from all eternity. So God scourges thee, but thou thy self
put a lash to the scourge: It is Gods will thou should be diseased, but
he makes thine own intemperance the isntrumental cause: in like manner it is
the pleasure of God that one should suffer injuries; and he makes use of his
enemy for an instrument thereof. And the same reason may be given of the rest.

What cause then have thou or any man else to repine at this? What matters it
whether thou be taught to boil in an other man's kitching or thine own, so
thou learn the skill of it? And if thou learnest not to be wise by an other
man's harms, why should thou think much to be advised by thine own?
Compose therefore thy mind by patience: God is the author both of thine and
all other afflictions in the world: as it pleases our Lord, so has it been
done, so it is, so it shall be done, and so it will best be done. Fear not, the
least hair of thy head shall not perish without the providence and will of
God; shall thou sustain any prejudice by having thy limbs torn in (...) by
thine enemies, when God himself has numbered all the hairs of thy head?
drink the potion thy father gives thee: what Apothecary soever it be that
prepares it: drink of that cup which God begins to thee, whatsoever the
servant be that fills it. All must be born with patience as long as God will
have thee bear it. This is truly to profit in the School of Patience, this
is the way to life everlasting.

Sect. VI.
BUt yet thou will object, and cry out: shall then mine own kinsfolks vex me?
shall they on whom I have conferred many benefits, load me with injuries?
Shall mine own master deal so with me, whom I have so many years faithfully
served? Shall drudges, slaves and the basest rascals in the world despise and
trample upon me? O poor dejected man! beyond measure raw and unskillfull; art
thou so grossly ignorant of the first principles of this sacred school?
Know thou not that he cannot be^ said to be truly patient, who is willing to
bear no more then pleases him, and by whom he lifts? There is no such
language may not be admitted there, with so many restrictions: I will suffer
this or that, but not at the hands of such or such a school fellow. Thou must
endure it at his hands of whom thy master will have thee.

It is the order in schools to give to some prime scholars of the forms,
jurisdiction over the rest of his fellows; and if some of the boys prove so
stubborn as not to recite their lesson to him, or not to give him their
exercise, the master by and by with a stern countenance says: how now proud
boy, do you begin to bristle and set up your crest? I Will make you stoop if I
take you in hand; repeat your lesson to this fellow of yours, give your theme,
else I Will make you find you have a master.

The same course does Christ observe in the School of Patience; he will have
one subordinate to another, yea one even chastise another, but all according to
his appointment. We, proud wretches, are wont to capitulate and article with
him thus: We would, forsooth, repeat our lesson, but not to this man; give our
theme, but not to that: we are contented to be corrected but not by him: we
refuse not to carry our cross, so this knave, or that base fellow may not make
it, not lay it upon us. Is it so indeed? what an insolency is this, that one
should take so much upon him, and not willingly submit himself to his School
fellows? This the Master will never tolerate. A man must bear his cross
patiently, whosoever frames it, or lays it upon his shoulders. The worst man
may make the best and most p^ofitable cross in the world. What is this to
thee? Follow thou me, says Christ.

Simon Cyrenensis constantly bare the cross of Christ, even to the top of
mount Golgotha, he repined not, but willingly offered his shoulders, and
submitted himself to their command who had no jurisdiction over him. And what,
I pray you, was Shimei? a seditious villain, the wickedst man in the world, yet
was it the will of God, that this very man should lay a huge massy cross upon
the most potent, the most holy King that was living at that day. Yet see how
King David acknowledges this most infamous man, not only his School fellow,
but even his Supervisour, set over him by his master: He repeats his lesson^
and submits himself unto him.

And what overseers (I beseech you) in this School were Attila, Tamerlen,
Totila? yet it was one master that put them in power, to them we were to recite
our lessons. Fly, then, Attila, from the utmost limits of the world, greedy of
spoil, and thirsting after blood; rob, kill, burn, waste and consume. By this
thy cruelty thou shall do good service to God our master, it will be an
exercise to Christians, who before were drowned in delicacies and buried in
vices.

And you two Vespatians, take, waste and spoil the Jews and Judea. To what
end? You doubtless: wage wa^ to win glory and enlarge your Empire: but you are
deceived, you are the ministers and executioners of Gods just revenge upon this
wicked nation, who could never have digested their prosperity, had not these
warm bathes of Nero helped their stomachs. Go then you Roman Emperors, and
whilst you slaughter the Christians at Rome, you, unawares, revenge Christ's
death in Judea.

The same absolutely may be said of all enemies, who envy or injury this or
that man, me or thee, my Christian brother. We repine and complain of God for
admitting such School-fellowes, such substitutes, who lie in wait to defame us,
spoil us of our goods and life, and seek our destruction.

But, O blind men! our conceits and judgments are much deceived. For what
matter is it, though they wish our ruin. Gods intention is much otherwise.
Joseph the viceroy of Egypt, clearly pronounced to his brothers faces, who
were much amazed with fear: You, said he, thought evil of me, but God has
turned it into good. Can we stand against the will of God?

Sect. VII.
But why (say you) does God make use of evil men for this purpose? why does he
not rather send upon them wars and flaughters, or at least do this by good
instruments? Why ar^ thou so curious to ask this question? It is doubtless
well known to God why he makes use of such, though we be ignorant thereof. The
master of a great family sometimes corrects his son himself, sometimes commits
it to a Tutour or Schoolmaster. The like does the master in a School, who
either whips a shrewd boy himself, or delivers him over to another to be
corrected. Why may not God do the same? Why may not he at his pleasure either
scourge us with his own hand, or by another? There is no injury done in th^s.
But peradventure, the servant is incensed against thee, and has a mind to
hurt and displeasure thee. What matter is it? Mind not that, but the intention
of him that commands it. Thy father himself is present, who appoints it, and
will not suffer thee to receive so much as one stripe more then he has
ordained.

After this manner a Magistrate commands a guilty person to be put to death:
the executioner perhaps hates this man beyond measure, and had rather pull him
in pieces with burning pincers, then take his life at one blow. But seeing
Magistrates commands must be executed, he takes no less pleasure in cutting
off his head. What hurt (I pray) had this man by the executioners hatred? No
more then if he had entirely loved him. He took his head off as the Magistrate
commanded, and further it was not in his power to touch him. Even thus our
enemies, how extremely soever they hate us, can no further annoy us, then God
freely permits them. Most excellently in this point Saint Augustine encourages
us. Fear not, quoth he, thine enemy, his act goes no further then he is
permitted by the power he has received. Fear him who does all as he will
himself, and yet does nothing unjustly: for every act of his is just and
reasonable.

Let sinners rage all that they will, and as much as is permitted them: our
Lord confirms and strengthens the just. Whatsoever befalls a just man, (note
this, I beseech you, note it most ^ttent^vely) whatsoever happens to a just
man, let him ascribe it to the will of God, not to the power of his enemy. What
then has the wicked man to boast of, but that our Father has made him my
scourge? he entertaines him indeed, as his slave and hireling, but me he breeds
up to inherit his patrimony. Neither ought we so much to observe what liberty
he gives to the unjust, as what rewards he reserves for the just. God deals
with us in this, as men do: They sometimes in their anger catch up whatsoever
switch or rod comes first to their hands, and therewith bear their child; but
this rod afterward they throw into the fire, and reserve their child for the
inheritance.

So God exercises us by evil men, and instructs us by their persecution. By
the malice of the evil man the good man is scourged; and by the servant the
son is reformed. For the goodness of just men is prejudicial to the evil,
and contrariwise the iniquity of ev^ll men is profitable to the good. But if
thine own frail and perverse will begin to encroch upon thee, saying: O that
God would k^ll and confound that enemy of mine, that he might not pers^cute me!
O that there were some possible means for me not to suffer so much under him!
Now if thou persist and please thy self in this will, notwithstanding thou
see it manifestly ag^i^st the will of God, thy heart is not upright as it
should be. And who are they that are just and upright of heart? Surely such as
are found in that state and temper wherein Jo^ was, who said: The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken away: as it has pleased the Lord, so is it
done; the name of our Lord be blessed. Behold an upright heart!

These sayings of Saint Augustine Aug to. 8. in Psa. 61 propius sinem: and in
Psa 36. Psalmi secund^ part conc. 1. mihi, page 116. Ps. 73. page 329. Ps 95.
p. 433. and p. 430.
are a hundred, a thousand, three thousand times to be inculcated, yet hardly
will men be induced sufficiently to imitate or make use of them. So God by this
man beats and chastises that man, and afterward throws the rods into the
fire. So when he determined by the King of Babylon to chastise the Jews: All
those nations (quoth he) for the space of seventy years, shall serve the King
of Babylon; and when those seventy years shall be expired, I will visit the
King of Babylon himself, whom like a twig I will throw into the fire.

Therefore all that eat thee (O my Christian!) shall be devoured, and all
thine enemies shall be led into captivity, and they that waste thee, shall be
wasted, and all they that rob and despoil thee, God will waste and consume. But
he will have care of thy wounds, and heal thee, as he did Job, who by his
enemies, and extreme poverty, was the more enriched. Be thou only confident,
and with longanimity expect, for thou shall as assuredly be helped and
relieved, as thine enemies (unless they repent) shall be punished and
tormented.

Sect. VIII.
BUt I produce now one infinitely more holy then Job, the Son of God, the
Savior of the world; who suffered idolaters to lay his Cross upon him, and to
cruc^fie him. The people of the Jews, the most selected of all nations, upon
whom he had heaped so many benefits, whom he had loved as his only begotten
sons, with this infamous burden requited their benefactour; neither did he
refuse it. The Romans crucified the Creator of the world upon that bloody
tree; nor did he ever resist them. When he was nailed upon the Cross, all men
that were present, yea even the thief himself that was crucified with him,
railed against him; yet he did never reply, or answer them. What said I? Nay,
he never replied, or returned so much as one sp^tefull word. Yea, so far was he
from this; that he earnestly prayed and besought pardon for them. This, with
good reason, is so much esteemed by the Church, that she celebrateth the yearly
memory of Christ's Passion with these words especially: Look, I beseech thee, (O
Lord!) upon this thy family, for which our Lord Jesus Christ vouchsafed to be
delivered into the hands of guilty persons, etc. Let no man call himself a
member of this head, unless he endeavor to imitate him. Saint Gregory
speaks Greg. part. 3. pastoral. 13. admonit. si^.
to the purpose: Why (says he) should it be thought so hard a matter for man
to suffer stripes at Gods hands for evil deeds, since God suffers so many
evils for his good deeds.

In the mean time we persist in our absurd error, casting out these or the
like fond speeches: This man is an eye sore to me, so odious to my stomach,
that I shall never digest him: O that I were but rid of this fellow! O that I
might once liquour my shoes with th^s knaves blood, whatsoever it cost me! I
can never be at quiet as long as this villain is in my sight. O most impious
speeches, fetched from hell, and thither to be sent again! Thus foolishly we
abscribe to our adversaries the disquiet of our minds. A soul error, against
which that golden Orator discourses: Suppose (says he) we had a body of
Adamant, albeit we were shot at on all sides with innumerable shafts, we should
never be wounded, seeing wounds proceed not from the hand that shoots, but
from the passibility of the body upon which they are inflicted. So in like case
injuries and contumelies take their being, not from the insolency of those lewd
fellows that offer them, but from the weakness and imbecility of those that
suffer them. If we had the true Art of Philosophy, we should never be sensible
of any injury, or take it in ill part. For example, Does a man offer thee an
injury? If thou resent it not, it never grieves thee, neither have thou
sustained any injury, but rather stricken him, then received a stroke. Why
therefore do we accuse our enemies, and those that malign us, as if they were
the cause of all our miseries? The fault is of our side; whenever we are
hurt, we hurt ourselves. Most true is that saying of the Church: No adversity
shall ever hurt us, if no iniquity have dominion over us.

But what marvel if there be in our mind so little quietness, seeing there
is in it so little temper of our tongue, or patience? In suffering we are in
every respect untractable, we can neither digest that with silence which is
displeasing, nor with patience, what is contrary to our disposition; and yet we
lay all the fault upon our adversary: we should be more holy (say we) were it
not for him O ridiculous men! Were it not our own fault, the wickedness of our
adversaries would be so far from making us worse, that it would render us much
better, and honester men. Thy perdition, O Israel! is from thy self, not from
thine enemies, impute thine impatience to thy self, and no^ to them.

And who is there that can molest or hurt us, if we be followers of good. This
is a remarkable speech of Saint Chrysostom; No man is hurt but by himself. It
was in the power of Decius, Aurelianus, Nero, Domician, Dioclesi^n to kill and
slaughter those courageous Champions, St. Vincent, Sebastian, George,
Mauritius, Tibu^^ius, but not to hurt them: which surely they had done, could
they have taken from them their celestial crowns. Well might Valerianus
torture St. Laurence upon a gridiron, but not bereave him of Christ or the
kingdom of heaven: Well might the Arian fury persecute Athanasius both by sea
and land, but not hurt or endammage him, whose virtue i^ amplified and
illustrated.

It was a learned saying of Origin: Orig hom. 25 in lib. Number.
All things are so ordained, that nothing in the fight of God (although it be
evil) is idle or in vain. There is no evil wrought by God, but when it is
contrived by others; albeit, he might hinder it, he does not, but concurs with
those that invented it, to make some necessary use thereof. Thus God is no
Author of sin, but of all punishment whatsoever: neither is it his will to
harm or prejudice, but, for our greater good, to correct and reform us.

Sect. IX.
COnsider here (I beseech you) what Aman did to Mardocheus: Aman insolent
through the favor of his Prince, stately and magnificent, touching, in his own
conceit, the very stars with his head; All the servants of the King bended
their knees, and adored Aman: for so the Emperor had given them in charge. He
like a cock upon his own dunghill, swayed all, and would be adored of
Mardocheus as he was by others. Vail bonnet Jew, (quoth he) bend thy knees,
kiss thy hand, adore Aman. It went hard with Mardocheus to have this exacted
of him, which according to the Religion he professed, he could not with a good
conscience perform: Whether it were that Aman had the pictures and figures of
the gods upon his garments, (as some men think) or that this adoration were to
be exhibited to him as to a god, it is not certainly known; sure it is, this
adoration seemed not due to a man: Mardocheus therefore sincerely appealing to
God, said: Lord, Lord, King omnipotent, for in thy dominion are all things, and
there is none that can resist thy will, if thou determine to save Israel. Thou
made heaven and earth, and whatsoever is contained within the compass of
heaven. Thou art Lord of all, nor is there any that can resist thy Majesty.
Thou understandest all things, and know I have not out of pride, or
contumely, o^ any desire of glory, refused to adore proud Aman (for gladly
would I be ready for the salvation of Israel to kiss even the steps of his
feet) but I feared lest I should transfer the honor of my God to a man.

By this example we are instructed to comply, even with the most wicked, in all
manner of courtesy, benevolence and observance, to exhibit unto them unfainedly
all obedience and reverence, and by this means not only to honor them all
that we may, but likewise to be ready to fall down before them and kiss their
feet; we must reform such like odious speeches and cogitations: this is my
enemy, a man full of spleen and rancour, a detractour, an envious person, I
cannot choose but hate him, he is not worthy to be seen, or so much as thought
off, having nothing in him but wickedness, and mischief; I will have nothing
to do with him: I know him well enough, and he me: loft and fair whosoever
thou art, be not so passionate, the master in the School of Patience has
subjected thee to this man, and committed thee to his charge; what just cause,
I pray, have you here to complain? If you be wise you will rather say: I am
ready with all my heart to kiss the very ground where he treads. And this the
more readily, for that God can with much facility cause an alteration, and
appoint Mardocheus usher over Aman, so that he may say with good authority:
recite Aman, recite.

Consider these wondrous changes. Aman a near favorite of the kings, abounding
in wealth, boasting his populous family, his multitude of children, the
prosperity of fortune, the kings especial favors, and the esteem even of a
God upon earth. This Aman, I say, is by the king suddenly adjudged to be hanged
on a gibbet, while Mardocheus, a little before condemned to the same death, was
in all haste clothed in princely garments, set upon a horse suitable to that
state, crowned and led through the principal street, Aman going before him in
the condition of a servant, and proclaming: this is the honor given to every
man whom the king is pleased to dignifie. O my God! what a sudden and
prodigious change is this? this is the usual manner of God: for it is easy in
the eyes of God suddenly to enrich the poor man. Mardocheus now ready to put
his neck into the halter, is exalted to a throne: and Aman, who was so near a
throne, is advanced to a gibbet. Wretched Aman take possession of that
structure which thou framest for thy adversary, climb up and adorn that
gallows which thou did efect for thine enemy. Behold how severely God is
wont to punish those who are not content to carry a cross themselves, but
would crucify their enemies. So sudden an alteration there is of fortune; the
sword and halter is drawn from the neck of Mardocheus, and he allotted to our
live Aman his persecutour.

Let us therefore love our cross, and not refuse to bear it, whosoever he be
that lays it upon us. Let us be of good courage; it is no matter whether the
master or the servant afflict us; but we must chiefly consider who commands or
permits it. It is hard indeed to be mortified by them from whom thou do least
expect it. But even the holiest men have often endured this kind of misery.

Job and Tobias were laughed to scorn by their own wives and kinsfolks; they
returned not scoff for scoff, nor taunt for taunt. The glorious martyr
Ignatius submitted himself to ten leopards; For being led from Antioch to Rome
by ten soldiers (whom I may rather call leopards then men) for these, his
keepers, were even by benefits exasperated: yet was not Ignatius dismayed with
this: for their iniquity, said this good martyr, is my instruction. So without
question our adversaries are our instructours: they instill much wisdom into
us even whether we will or no. I may well call our enemies goldsmiths, who make
us crowns, not of gold or precious stones, but celestial and composed of stars.

It is therefore a true saying: we must bear our cross, by whomsoever it be
imposed. All which I conclude with these divine words or rather oracles of
Saint Augustine: Esteem not, quoth he, those happy who Aug. to. 8. ps 70 mihi
page 309.
flourish only for a time. They are spared, thou chastised, for thee, happily,
as the child of God, is reserved an inheritance after thou art chastised and
refined; watch therefore, and be mindful what Job said: The Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken away, as it has pleased our Lord, so it is done:
blessed be the Name of our Lord. They were unjust men who sat about Job, lying
all putrified with scres and ulcers: and he (who afterward was to be received)
was scourged, while they were spared for future punishment. God reserveth all
till the time of his punishment. The good men live in labor and travel,
because they are scourged as children: the evil exult and are suffered to live
at their own pleasure, because they are condemned as strangers. The enemy is
outrageous indeed, but it nothing avails him. What is it then afflicts thee?
Well may he exercise thee, but he cannot hurt thee. Nay, his cutrage will
rather profit thee, and his cruelty crown thee with victory; which surely
should be none at all, had thou no adversary. And what need should we have of
Gods help, had we no combat? Let then our adversary do his worst, but the enemy
shall not profit therein. Let us therefore persevere patiently: the more pain
and punishment now; the more reward and glory shall we have in time to come.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I. That afflictions are to be endured patiently.
GEnerous and well bred horses learn sometimes of their riders many qualities;
as namely, to suffer with patience, not only their Master to back them, but
also to kneel down to him when he is to mount them; which quality we must not
look for of the cart, mill or plough horse. King Alexander of Macedon had a
horse called Bucephalus, bought for 7080. crowns. This horse after he had once
been adorned with the Kings furniture and trappings, and with a foaming mouth
champed his bit, would admit no other rider, but the King himself.

Whosoever has learned mild and gentle conditions in the School of Patience,
is the man who acknowledges Christ his Sovereign Lord, bends his knees to
him, and is most ready to do and suffer all things that shall seem good to this
his Lord and Master. But these so commendable and pleasing conditions, are
learned only in the School of Patience, whereof we have treated in two several
parts. First, what crosses, or what kind of afflictions are wont to exercise
mankind: The other, what use we should make of these afflictions. That which
follows is the third, and indeed the principal in this matter: to wit, by what
means we may endure afflictions. This is not only profitable, but even
necessary to be known. For what does it avail thee to know what thou suffer,
if thou know not how to suffer it? This we will set down in order, but as
succinctly as may be. The first document is: That affliction is to be endured
patiently: We are not worth speaking of in the School of Patience, if we be
impatient. What therefore it is to be patient, in the midst of misery, we will
now declare.

Sect. I.
IT is an excellent saying of the Ancients: A good man never cares what, but
how well he suffers: many trophies have been erected by force, but more by
patience. Christ, discoursing of the most happy liberty that may be, says: In
your patience you shall possess your souls. So far is an impatient man from
possessing himself, and that which is his, that he even overthrows himself, and
whatsoever is in his charge: he is not the master of himself, but a slave to
vices. Hereupon Bildad asks Job: Why destroyest thou thy soul in thy fury?
The impatient man gives way and free rains to his own passions, and thereby
thrusts, as it were, out of the windows, the freedom of reason, and sustaines
loss in many things. But the patient man preserves both himself and all he
has, and is more valiant then the valiantest; which Solomon confirming, says:
B^tter is the patient then a strong man: and he that rules his mind, then the
overthrower of cities. For a patient man sets a sure guard, not only over
his mouth and hand, but even over his cogitations. By patience anger is
suppressed, the will curbd, the sudden rashness of the hands restrained, and
the poison of the tongue abolished.

If it be said of a pratler, This man cannot rule his tongue, the same may be
verified of an impatient man; He has no government in his anger. Revenge and
wrath transport and drive him headlong whither they list; he has whole hoasts
of rancorous thoughts, all led by impatience. No man shall ever have perfect
dominion over his passions, but by patience. In your patience you shall
possess your souls: not in your policy or prudence; not in your fortune,
wealth, or riches, but in your patience you shall possess your souls.

But know you not the definition of patience? this it is: Patience is a
voluntary suffering without any complaint for what things soever happen or
b^fall a man otherwise then he expected. But we (forsooth) being men singular
in our own conceits, want not a cloak and fair pretext for our impatience and
complaints; these are the words of such delicate persons: Alas! those things
which oppress us, are too troublesome, too difficult, and too hard to be
endured.

O you Christians! it is not the huge weight of your cross, but the weakness
of you that bear it, which causes impatience. He that builds a house, when he
covers it, does it not with intent to keep the roofe-free from rain, hail, or
snow, but that it may without damage endure, and bear out hail, snow, and
rain. He that builds a ship, seeks not to secure it from waves and storms, but
to prevent all chinkes, and make it tite against leaking. He that fears the
sharpness of the weather in respect of his health, goes not about to hinder or
withstand the nipping northern winds, or hinder them from blowing upon him, but
keeps his head as warm as he can, and his feet free from cold and moisture.
The same should be observed in our manners and course of life, but we practice
the quite contrary. For our greatest care is to keep our selves from sickness,
poverty, and contempt, whereas we should be most careful to be patient in
sickness, poverty and contempt. Assuredly it is a sign of no great perf^ction
in Christian piety, for a man only to desire health, riches, and honors:
what great matter, I pray you, is there in these things? But to be able
prudently to bear sickness, want, and contempt, is virtue indeed, and true
magnanimity and greatness. We need use no Art to avoid miseries, but the best
use of Art is in suffering them patiently. Wherein I am of Bions opinion.

This Philosopher, as Laertius reports, was wont to say: That it was a great,
yea even the greatest misery of all, not to be able to endure misery. To which
purpose the ancient Poet speaks in this manner: It is no misery to suffer
misery; but to be ignorant how to suffer it, is a misery. And surely he that
knows not how to do this, knows not how to live. No man takes contentment in
this life, but he that has learned to bear the miseries thereof. For example:
The stone and gout are said to be the greatest and the most intolerable
torments in the world, pains which even make men mad: yet there have been
eminent persons who have patiently borne these pains how great soever.

Carneades came to visit Agesilaus when he lay grievously sick of the gout;
and fearing lest he might by discoursing exasperate him, spoke as compendiously
as he could, and took his leave. But Agesilaus said unto him: Stay, I pray you
Carneades, and withal pointed with his finger first to his feet, and then to
his breast: Nothing (quoth he) from these parts comes hither. By which speech
he made known that his heart was sound, merry, and able to endure pain, though
his feet were, as he saw, miserably swollen, and afflicted with the gout.

A Prince of the Empire visited Charles the fifth, Emperor of famous memory,
and finding him much tormented with the gout, used such words as he thought
might most mitigate his pains; and above other questions, was most importunate
in asking, Why his Majesty applied no remedies, having so many excellent
Physicians about him: To whom the Emperor answered: In a disease of this
nature, Patience is the best remedy. It is this that keeps the tongue, hands,
and thoughts, yea and the mind it self in their duties.

Sect. II.
THere are many speeches and documents of Patience, whereof some few we will
set down in this place, out of Tertullian, a writer (albeit he were of Africa)
very learned.

1. Patience in bearing injuries.
IT is the admonition of our Lord: If a man strike thee on one check, turn
also the other; thy patience will assuage the wickedness of thy adversary.
Thou give him a greater blow by bearing it patiently, then by revenging it;
for he shall receive sufficient pun^shment from him, for whose sake thou
endurest it. When bitterness shall break forth by way of railing, or
detraction, observe what is said, and if it be against thee, be glad of it.

2. Patience in forbearing to revenge.
THE chiefest provocation to impatience is the desire of revenge, which is set
a work either to preserve a man's reputation, or to satisfy his malice. But
glory and reputation, is no other then a vain opinion, and malice always
hateful in the sight of our Lord; especially in this case, when being provoked
by the malice of another, he assumes superiority to himsel^e in taking revenge.
For what difference is there between him that offers, and him that revengeth
an injury, but only this, that the one is an offender in the first place, and
the other after? Both of them are guilty of sin before our Lord, who forbids
us all wickedness and condemns it: for absolutely we are commanded not to
render ev^ll for evil.

What honor shall we offer up to our Lord, if we arrogate to our selves our
own revenge? How can we believe him to be a judge if not a revenger? He that
acts his own revenge, takes aw^y Gods honor, who ought to be the only
judge. What have I to do, then, with revenging mine own injury, seeing I can
use no moderation therein, through impatience of mygrief? And if I have
patience, I shall find my self not grieved, and if not greived, I shall never
desire to be revenged; nothing undertaken with impatience, can be performed
without violence; whatsoever is performed with violence, prooveth either
sinful, ruinous or headlong; And to conclude briefly, all sin whatsoever it
be, is to be ascribed to impatience.

3. Patience in the loss of goods.
PAtience in losses, is an exercise in giving. He will never stick to give,
who fears not to lose: otherwise how should a man who has two coats be
content to give one of them to cloth the naked, unless he be such an one as
can find in his heart to offer his cloak to one that has before taken his
coat? How shall we be able to procure our selves friends from our wicked
M^m^mon, if we be so far in love with it, that we cannot endure to lose it? we
shall even lose our selves in the loss thereof.

It is the property of Gentiles to be impatient in all their losses, and to
prefer their money before their souls; but we to show how different we are
from them, ought not to lay down our soul for our money, but our money for our
soul, either by giving it willingly, or losing it patiently. Let me lose the
whole world, so I may gain Patience. For whom but the patient alone did our
Lord call happy?

4. Patience in enduring other afflictions.
IT becomes us to rejoice and give thanks to Almighty God, when he vouchsafes
to chastise us. I, says he, chastise those who I love. O most happy is that
servant whom our Lord goes about serviously to correct, and with whom he
vouchsafes to be angry: happy whom he deceives not with fair entreaties, and
too gentle admonitions; patience is beautiful and comely in all sexes and
ages. The patient man fulfilles the law of Christ. We ought not therefore to
continue so much as one day without Patience: Patience never commits evil.
Love sustaines, endures all things, for this cause alone, for that it is
patient; Upon all occasions therefore we are bound to inure our selves to
Patience.

5. The habit and garment of Patience.
Patience has a mild and serene countenance, a smooth brow, not contracted
with frowns, or knit with wrinkles of anger or grief: she has cheerful and
large eie-browes, and eyes submissive looking downward, not basely dejected
with discontent o^ misfortune: a mouth in comely manner sealed up with silence:
a cou^oue in her cheeks such as may testify security and innocence: a
frequent bending of her head toward her adversary, and a threatening kind of
smile; as for her apparel, that which is about her breast is white and close
to her body, as one not puffed up with pride, perturbation, or discontent. For
upon her throne sits a mild and genl^ spirit, not encompassed with storms,
clouds, or whirlewinds, but clear and neat, simple, open and without guile;
which spirit, appeared thrice to Elias. For where God is, there likewise is
Patience his dearly beloved daughter.

6. The praises or attributes of Patience.
GOD Is a sufficient umpire for Patience. If thou lay open an injury before
him, he is a revenger: If thou acquaint him with thy loss and damage, he will
restore it: If thou manifest thy grief and sickness, he will be thy
Physician: nay, if thou be even dead, he will revive thee. How great are the
privileges of Patience, to which God himself becomes a debtour? And with good
reason: For she upholds and maintains all his decrees, and concurres with his
commandments. She strengthens faith, establishes peace, assisteth charity,
instructs humility, expects repentance, assigns time for confession,
governs the flesh, preserves the spirit, restrains the tongue, withholdeth
the hand, repells temptations, drives away scandalls, accomplisheth
martyrdomes, comforts the po^re, qualifies the rich, wracks not the infirm,
consumes not the strong, delights the faithful, invites the meek, commends
the servant to the master, and the master to God, adorneth the wife, and
approves the husband: is beloved of children, praised of young men, and
honored of old.

Let us therefore love the patience of God, the patience of Christ; let us
repay that which he has laid out for us; let us offer the patience of our
spirit, the patience of our flesh, we who believe in the resurection of the
flesh and the spirit. Thus Tertullian of Patience.

Sect. III.
THeodoretus recounts that the devil threatened most cruelly to beat James the
anchorite, who, being wholly armed with Patience, answered with a cheerful
look and mild countenance, such as Patience is wont to put on: beat me, and
spare me not, if God permit thee; most willingly will I receive blows, knowing
they come from our Lord, not from thee: and if thou be not permitted, thou
shall have no power to str^ke me, nor so much as to touch me, though thou fret
and chafe never so much, how mad so ever thou be. Let every one of us freely
say the like to all those whom he takes for his enemies. If God has given you
power, go on, beat me, tear me with your teeth, heap all the injuries you can
upon me, in vain were it for me to resist you: but if you have no power, gape
you never so much, whet your teeth never so much, you shall not bite, nor so
much as touch me.

That most blessed Bishop, Gregory the great, did not only write singular
documents of Patience, but also by example confirmed his doctrine: both taught
and practiced it. For to Mauritius the Emperor, by whom he was diversely
injured, he returned this answer in writing: for so much as daily I offend my
God, I verily hope that these incessant afflictions which I continually suffer,
will stand another day between me and his terrible judgment; and I believe,
most excellent Prince, you go as fat beyond me in pleasing that great Lord, as
you are rigorous in correcting me, who am so ill a servant of his

O my God! What patience, what a submission was this? He said most truly
indeed: Patience is a remedy for all griefs. What Saint was ever crowned
without Patience?

It is a saying amongst Grammarians, There is no general rule without some
exception; yet this rule of Patience is without exception. Therefore St. Paul
prescribed it so strictly: Be patient, quoth he, to all, with all humility and
patience. Patience is to be exercised without exception, in all things, in all
places, at all times, and to all kind of persons: for without patience there
can be no perfect virtue. Contrariwise impatience is the mother of all vice;
from whence, as it were from a fountain, are derived many streams of heinous
sins and offenses. The impatient man never condescendeth unto any, the patient
never resists or impugneth. The natural properties of impatience may be
found in the Devil himself. Impatience is the parent of absurd and sottish
madness. For what can be more foolish, what a greater sign of madness, then
for a man willingly to double his own evil, and reject the reward promised to
him that is Patient?

An impatient man, for the loss of a farthing, throws a whole purse of money
away: take but one care of corn from him and he will fire the whole sheafe.
Such a one lived in the court of the Emperor Rodolphus the second: a noble man
of his privy chamber, who bringing a crystal glass full of water, in the
morning, to wash the Emperors face, by chance let fall the cover unawares, and
with it dashed the whole glass it self against the ground, saying: let the
devil take the horse too, since he has the saddle; thus he cast away four
hundred crowns at one blow, for at so much the crystal glass was valued.
Thus a light loss is many times doubled with a far greater: thus small
inconveniences are through impatience augmented with great ^amages.

It is the saying of Solomon. He that is impatient shall sustain damage. The
more repugnance a man has in suffering, the more grievously he feels that
which he suffers; like wild beasts, which, whilst they strive and struggle,
pull the snare the closer; like poor birds, more entangled with lime-twiggs,
whilst for fear they flutter and seek to get out. There is no yoke so
strait, but hurts him less that is willingly led, then it does another who
strives against it. Therefore a wise man endeavors to be patient in all
things; a fool knows neither how to do, nor suffer; very well says Solomon:
he that is patient is governed with much w^sdome: the impatient man shall work
folly.

Therefore Saint Gregory said: every Greg* hom. 35. in Eva^.
one seems to be so much the less learned, as he is discovered to have less
patience; so it is directly, for every one the more foolish and simple he is,
the more he exceeds in impatience; which Solomon likewise expressly affirms:
that the learning of a man is known by his patience; but fools and impatient
men are mad and rage against themselves, overthrow the table, clatter the pots,
tear their hair, strike their breasts and thighs, and sometimes knock their
heads against a post; as Augustus Caesar knocking his head against a wall,
exclaimed: Restore my legions again, Var^s, restore them: Thus every man's
indignation lights heaviest on himself.

Sect. IV.
HEnce comes it, that we are exasperated many times for trivial and base
things: the negligence or slacknes of a boy; or a fire not kindled in due
season, sets us quite off the hooks; a table negligently covered, moves us
forthwith to choler, and provokes us to impatience: we quarrel with the pen we
write with, the horse we ride on, and the clothes we wear. From whence (think
you) arise these and such like speeches* What devil brought this man hither?
What unluckie hell hound has laid upon us this heavy burden? Whence comes
this troublesome and intolerable villain? O how I am wearied with this labor,
which is to such small purpose! O how these wicked men trample upon me! and why
do I not abandon them, and fly as far as I can from this troublesome work?
Thus we miserably wrestle and wrangle with our labors and crosses.

Very fitly here, as Balaams Ass said to him, may our labors that vex us,
our crosses whereon we are crucified, speak to us, as Moses and Aaron did to
the people: What, I pray you, are we? neither is your murmuring against us, but
against our Lord. Every cross may truly say; What have I done to you, that you
should so stomach the matter? have patience toward me, and I will render all:
give way a little (I beseech you) to patience, s^ffer your self for a while to
be in misery, and another day you shall be rewarded with an hundred fold.

But too many, say thou, and too grievous calamities infest us at one time.
Is it so indeed (my masters?) can we expect commendations for our patience, by
suffering so little, or nothing at all? It is learnedly said of S. Gregory, and
to the purpose: Think, I beseech you, what shall become of Greg to. 4. l. 9.
Epist. 39. post initium. mihi p 344.
patience, if you have nothing to suffer? I shall never repute any one an Abel,
that has not a Cain. For good men, if they be exempted from evil, can not be
perfectly good, because they are not purified and refined. The very company and
conversation of evil men purges the good.

Wherefore this daily must be inculcated: Have patience, I beseech you, have
patience, I pray, even for Christ's sake, be patient. Patience is a salve for
every sore. And as we must always call upon sluggish and slothful persons: Go
to, make haste, away, dispatch, be quick: So we, impatient creatures, must
still be put in mind: Go to, patiently, Christian brother, patiently: bear
this, or that, or the other thing, and all things patiently.

Here we had need to have the young man at our elbow, to admonish us, who every
day saluted Philip King of Macedon, with these words, Thou art a man. Let the
same youth, every hour, or even every minute, call upon us: Gently and
patiently I beseech you. Whatsoever vexes or oppresses us, is to be endured
patiently.

Sect. V.
WE many times forget our selves, we remember not that we are in banishment,
where all miseries whatsoever should be born with patience.

Ah! (Christians) why are we in such eager quest after delights? we have lost
paradise, from thence we have been long since exiled. It is true, we take our
journey that way again, toward Paradise we bend our course, but we are not
yet arrived. He that thinks this journey passable without patience, is like
him who goes in the rain without cloak or hat, or without a sword and target
amongst his enemies.

The patient man is armed on all sides, cap a p^; and, which is the most
glorious kind of victory, overcomes all his enemies, not by striking, but by
suffering. The patient man walks through coals, as through roses.

Isaias fortified with this strength of patience, calls upon our Lord whilst he
is cut in pieces: Stephen begged pardon for his enemies that stoned him: the
Apostles are scourged, beheaded, crucified, and yet triumph with Christ on the
cross. Patience has a perfect work.

Patience, as Saint Cyprian says, overcomes Cyprian. tract de Patient. sermon.
1. initio.
temptations, bears persecutions, and accomplisheth martyrdomes. It is she
alone which firmly strengthens the foundations of our faith. Patience, by the
testimony of Tertullian, is beautiful in all sexes, in all ages. Patience is
the guardian of all virtues. Patience is an impenetrable brestplate. Saint
Augustine gives her this Aug. in ps. 42. circa med. Plin. l. 21. not. hist.
cap. 11. initio. ubi haec Herba et^am Nict^gretum. and, Echonomychon app^llatur.
commendation: that all patience is sweet and acceptable unto God. Pliny says
there is a certain herb called Nyctilopa because it shines a far off in the
night, being of a fiery color, and having thorns instead of leaves: The
Parthian kings make use thereof, when they take their vows. Behold an
excellent symbol of patience. Patience is on all sides rather guarded with
thorns, then beset with leaves: she is of the color of fire, and in time of
affliction sends forth her native splendour, never more illustrious then when
she is for Christ's sake most disasterous.

The only remedy for all evils in the School of Patience, is to suffer Seneca
lib. 3. del^a cap. 16 Tho. de Kemp. J^^it. Christi l. 2. ca. 3. sine.
and give way to necessities. It is the saying of an excellent writer: he that
knows best how to suffer, shall hare most peace. This is the man that masters
himself, becomes Lord of the world, the friend of Christ, and heir to the
kingdom of Heaven. If thou E^ lib. 3. cap. 35. initio.
guard not every side with the shield of Patience, thou shall not be long
unwounded.

CHAP. II. That afflictions are to be born cheerfully.
PHARAOH King of Egypt was afflicted with di^e^s calamities, because he
contumaciously withstood the will of God, and would not dismiss the people of
Israel. But after the loss and slaughter of so many men and beasts, he, of
his own accord, forced the Jews to depart: arise, quoth he, and go forth
from my people, you and the children of Israel: go sacrifice to the Lord as
you say. And the Egyptians urged the people to go forth out of the land
quickly; the Israelites were as glad and willing to go, as they to urge them,
and with a cheerful countenance took their leave, for indeed they brought
with them away the best commodities of all Egypt.

Whosoever have profited in the School of Patience, most willingly and
cheerfully take their leave of Egypt, bid the world adieu, and all the
delights thereof, and are contented to suffer adversity. And this is a further
and higher degree of suffering calamity, to wit cheerfully. Wherefore in this
chapter we will declare, that all adversity is to be borne not only Patiently,
but even cheerfully.

Sect. I.
IT is an old saying among the Germans: he that stoutly draws his sword, has
gotten half the victory. And doubtless a good heart in a difficult business
helps much, therefore the greater a man's miseries are, with so much the more
courage let him say: shrink not at storms, but rather with more courage,
venture on: Fie; tears are vain, it is not they can wash away these harms;
but a cheerful mind, erected and confident is God, triumphs over all
miseries; What will it avail thee to punish thy self with grief? To be out
of heart, is willingly to yield the victory; none but cowards mourn and pine
away to death; he seldom overcomes, who despaires of victory before the
battle.

Be assured, no man will ever style thee Doctor in the School of Patience, if
thou want a merry and cheerful heart. Here doubtless if any where, it is
expected a man should boldly enterprise, and bravely charge his enemy. Go to
therefore, and bear that cheerfully which m^st be borne. Sing with the kingly
Psalmist; I will receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord. A sad and dejected mind is a bar and hindrance to all joy and triumphs.
Very well said Nicetas Chroniates: what may not alacrity do, and a good heart
in a cross and disastrous business?

Behold Christ our Lord! who when joy was proposed, sustained the cross,
contemning confusion. Our Savior obtained a double reward both for himself
and us: for himself, the glory of his humane body, and dominion over the
world: for us, grace and salvation both of soul and body; with this reward, as
a joy proposed, he so qualified and tempered all his torments, that being to
undergo a most bitter and ignominious death, he made show of admirable joy and
exultation. Therefore contemning all confusion, he said, with a desire have I
desired to eat this pasche with you before I suffer. Alas a bloody paschel yet
he desired it: and, as if he had gone to a most delicious banquet, hastened
joyfully and cheerfully to Jerusalem; like a giant he exulted to run his race;
What race I beseech you? surely, from Pilates house to Golgotha; and therefore
being on his way forbad all weeping.

For being in very deed to suffer a most cruel death, he offered himself, not
only as a sacrifice, with a free and liberal heart, with a cheerful and
serene countenance; but even from the first moment that he took flesh in the
womb of his mother, he had most clearly present before his eyes, the cross,
and all the passages of his passion. Note this well.
Thus Christ, during the whole time he continued in humane flesh, beheld still,
as it were with his eyes, his stripes at the pillar, and his nailing on the
cross. So that I may well say, Christ was tormented upon the Cross not only
three hours, but even three and thirty years and more; and yet, having joy
proposed, he endured all this pat^ently.

Sect. II.
AND so did the Disciples of our Lord: for though they had their fill of
stripes and ignominies, yet they thirsted after stripes and ignominies for
their Lords sake. For they went rejoicing, for that they were accounted worthy
to suffer contumely for the name of Jesus. The Bishops and high Priests of the
Jews seriously consult amongst themselves: What shall we do with these men?
The more cruelly they are afflicted with whips and imprisonment, the more
ardently they preach this crucified man: they contemn our threats: they go to
our prisons with alacri^y, and take stripes with infinite contentment: what
shall* we do with them? Saint Chrysostom Chrystom. 5. hom 54. ad Antio pop.
mihi p. 367.
says. The Apostles were scourged, and rejoiced; were cast in prison, and
rendered thanks; were stoned, and preached. This is the joy that I likewise
would have.

And this is to suffer cheerfully for our Lord, to repute ignominy an honor;
miseries, the truest pleasures and contentments. And if you suffer any thing
(says Saint Peter) for justice, you are blessed. Esteem it all joy, says
Saint James, when you fall into diverse temptations. Blessed is the man who
suffers temptation. Was it only S. Peter and S. James that said this? Christ
himself says: Blessed are you when men shall speak evil of you, and
persecute you, accusing you falsely for my sake: rejoice and exult, because your
reward is great in heaven. But some are so effeminate, that they will not
hearken to this Philosophy.

Henry Suso, a holy religious man, spoke with great confidence to God in this
manner: This (quoth he) O Lord! is that which troubles some so much, and
therefore they say thou have so few friends in the world, because thou handlest
them so roughly, and hence it comes that so many fall from thee. What answer
make thou to this, my Lord? But in very deed, that man well experienced in
divine matters, knew calamities to be benefits of so high a price, and worthy
of so cheerful an acceptance, that he doubted not to say: That one hundred
years of prayer to God daily upon our knees, would not be sufficient worthily
to beg so much as one only cross. Why then should we not rejoice, when God
vonchsafes this favor by fatherly chastisement? How joyful was S. Paul when
he uttered these words? I am replenished with consolation, I exceedingly abound
with joy in all our tribulation. And if I be immolated upon the sacrifice of
your faith, I rejoice and congratulate you all, and do you rejoice for the
same, and congratulate me. Heaps of snow (says Saint Chrysostom.) daily fell
upon him, and he is as it were in paradise. Saint Stephens face shone like an
Angels; the cause whereof Milarius Arelatensis assigning, says: This proceeded
from the abundant joy and comfort, and from a certain glory he had shining in
his heart: For Saint Stephen doubtless felt that which Saint James spoke of:
Esteem it (my brothers) all joy that may be, when you fall into sundry
temptations.

Sect. III.
ZAchary prophesying of these men, said, They shall be as the valiant Champions
of Ephtaim, and their heart shall be made cheerful with wine. So Josue, of the
tribe of Ephraim, out of hope of gaining the land of Promise, a most pleasant
and fruitful country, boldly exposed himself to all perils and dangers.
Whence (I pray you) proceeds this strength, this courage of mind? Their heart
shall be cheered up, as it were, with wine. Wine, the symbol of eternal
felicity, makes them so courageous against all adversity. For they shall be
inebriated with the plenty of thy house. Now we rejoice, but as it were with
wine: for we have not as yet possession of beatitude. Comforting our selves
only with hope, thither with all our forces we hasten. This caused the
Christian Martyrs to be so resolute and fearlesse, insomuch as even laughing
for joy, they advanced to crosses, wheels, fires and gibbets; their hearts were
cheered with this wine, Saint Augustine says of them: Doing and suffering such
things, they were most infinitely glad and joyful. It was a pleasure to them
to give themselves and their lives for him who had suffered much more for them:
and the inexplicable reward they expected, d^d wonderfully inflame them.

Let us therefore cheerfully, I beseech you, O Christians! let us cheerfully
run to this goal of suffering patiently. The cross is not extraordinary high
whereon we are to be extended, no rack to rend or wound our bodies, no red hot
gridiron to lie upon, no huge massy stones to crush us, or to be embrewed with
our blood, no frying pans to scort^h us alive. We have no other crosses but
daily miseries, and those exceeding gentle and tolerable: why shrink we at
them? The more labor, the greater shall be our reward; the more painful the
combat, the nobler the victory. Therefore on cheerfully.

The Germans in times past were wont to encourage their Minstrils at weddings
after this manner: Come on Piper, blow up lustily The greater our miseries are,
the more let us encourage our selves; Come on Stephen, John; Come on Paul,
cheer up: praise God even for this, that it is his pleasure to send us misery.
Take heed no bitterness possess thy tongue or mind. A merry heart makes a
flourishing old age; a sad and lumpish spirit dries the very marrow of the
bones. He that bears miseries with grief and dolor, does as if he dashed
against the walls a fair lute or harp, which he should rather sing to, or play
upon; which Saint Augustine most truly confirmed, saying, If thou be
dejected in tribulations, thou have broken thy harp. For doubtless through
grief of mind the spirit is dejected, says the Hebrew Wiseman; If thou shak
despair, being tired out in the day of distress, thy strength shall be
weakened. Then the lute and harp are broken, and the music marred.

Behold Paul of Tarsus, How far was he from breaking his harp? Nay, hear how
skilfully he played upon it. I rejoice (quoth he) in my sufferings. The same
example Saint Peter invites us to imitate. Rejoice (says he) when you
communicate with Christ in his sufferings.

That Angelical Messenger from heaven, entering Tobies house, said: Joy be
always unto thee Tobie: Where is thy harp? Why singest thou not to God? Why
drivest thou not thy grief away with gladness? Tobie answers, What joy can I
have, since I am despoiled of my goods, deprived of my sight, and destitute of
my friends? But the heavenly young man replied; Be notwithstanding always
joyful. Then Tobie answers: All joy is banished from so sorrowful a house.
The Angel assures no grief can be where Gods favor (the fountain of all joy)
resides. Tobie replies, that they who are miserable indeed can hardly suppress
their grief. But the Angel said again: Thou shall shortly be cured by the hand
of God, be of good courage.

Wherefore, (O my Toby! and thou my Christian brother) be joyful always, even
amongst tears. St. Chrysostom testifies that no armor is stronger, or more
of proof, then to rejoice in God. Let us rejoice, says he, when we are
afflicted with adversity; for this is the way to expiate our sins.

Sect. IV.
YEt we condemn not all sadness, nor blame that which works repentance, and
thereby sure salvation. Christ at the same time when he had said; My soul is
sorrowful even to death; uttered likewise: Arise, let us go. And thereupon,
stoutly advancing himself forward, encountered his enemies. Joy and tears are
no ill conjunctions, both are compatible in one place. Let thy mouth (whilst
the tears trickle down thy cheeks) sing and rejoice; let thy mind be resolute
and joyful, whilst thy face looks pale and wan. Let us be, as Saint Paul
says, sorrowful, as it were, and yet always rejoicing in all things; let us
show our selves, as the Ministers of God, in much patience. Sorrowful, as it
were: for all good men's sorrow, as Saint Anselme observes, is quickly at an
end, it is but as a dream or shadow. Let us then persevere constantly, for
dreams pass away, and shadows vanish.

Wild bullaces and green grapes may perhaps set our teeth on edge, but offend
not our stomachs: such are our miseries: they p^nch and trouble us, but,
unless thou will thy self, they deprive thee not of true comfort Mark the
fencers, you shall seldom see them come into the lists without some loss of
blood; Yet will they leap and caper amidst their wounds, and oftentimes the
more blood is shed upon the stage, the more laughter is caused.

We are also upon the stage, there cannot be a greater shame then to fall a
blubbering there. Let us then learn to behold manfully our own wounds bleed,
without weeping. He that wholly resignes himself to the will and providence of
God, reaps thereby perpetual contentment, even amongst the conflicts of most
grievous misfortunes. This man like an old soldier beholds boldly his own
blood with an undaunted spirit; what matter is it to rejoice when thou have all
the world at will? Every impatient man is able to do this; he will confess
unto thee, O Lord, so long as thou dealest well with him; but if he be not
satisfied he will murmur.

It is the advice of Saint James the great; Is any of you contristated? Let him
pray: Is he wellcontent in mind? Let him sing Psalms let him fly aloft, sing
cheerfully praise unto God, as those three Hebrew children did, to whom the
flames were no other then dewy roses.

Sect. V.
LEwis of Granada reports certain things of a religious man well worthy our
imitation; this holy man seeing himself on all sides environed with
tribulations, said: The happiness I expect is so infinite, that in comparison
of that, all torments, all affliction, seem a sport and pleasure to me. The
true and solid joy of a Christian, is to have it in his power to want all joy.

Stephen Bishop of Autun explicateth that place of Deuteronomy (they shall
suck, as it were milk, the Vixit hic author anno 950. scripta ^jus extant
tom. 6. bibliotheca S. S. P. P. editions secunda.
inundation of the sea) after this manner: The inundation of the sea is the
abundance of tribulation, which may be said to be sucked when it is reputed
sweet by just men. Milk is the nourishment of little children, and tribulation
the food of the Elect. He certainly sucked this inundation of the sea, who
said: But we likewise rejoice in tribulations.

This is the property of holy men, the more dejected they lie beaten down here
on earth, the higher they are raised in mind, and fly toward heaven. Scarcely
shall you find any of the kings better then Ezechias, and yet hardly any of
them more afflicted; notwithstanding he got the upper hand of all his
calamities, still making way toward God with an erected and magnanimous spirit.

It is reported that Wenceslaus king of Bohemia (when his army was put to
flight, and he himself taken prisoner) being asked, what he thought of his
own estate, answered: Never better: whilst I relied upon humane forces, my
cogitations were more seldom upon God; but now that I am deprived of all
these, I place my hope only in God, and admit almost no other thought but only
of his divine assistance, who never forsakes those that trust in him. Behold,
as I said before, how good men the more calamity they sustain, the more they
are advanced in divine affairs.

The Roman wise man often inculcates this question: What is the principal
thing to be required in humane casualities? And makes this answer: to be able
cheerfully to bear adversity: To suffer whatsoever shall happen, with such
magnanimity as if it had happened according to thine own liking; For surely
(presupposing that all comes from the decree of God) it is no less then thou
ought to bear: To weep, groan, and complain, is to revolt and rebel
against the divine ordinance: What is the foundation of all? A mind stout and
resolute against all calamity; against all excess and superfluity, not only an
opposition, but even a hatred: What is the chiefest virtue? To elevate thy
thoughts above all casual things, to be mindful of humane condition, to
consider if thou be fortunate that state will not long continue: if
otherwise, that thou are not indeed unfortunate, unless thou repute thy self
to be such.

Therefore, O you Christians! we must bear joyfully, and cheerfully what
adversity so^v^r comes from that supreme hand; not any way repining, or as if
we did it by compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver. We must make our
selves proficients, and not dwell always in the lowest form: we should never
think our selves to have profited so much, but that we may sing somewhat a
higher note. He is not to be accounted the prime scholar in the S^hoole of
Patience, who only bears that patiently which is to be borne, but he likewise
that bears it cheerfully and willingly, this scholar deserves the best, ^or at
least none of the worst rewards: God loves a cheerful giver.

CHAP. III. That afflictions are to be borne constantly.
THere is a sport amongst children to lash a top with a scourge. The manner of
it is thus; when the top tired as it were, with long standing begins to stagger
and reele, as if it would instantly fall, the boy fetches it up again with
his scourge, and sets it a going, and when it begins afterward to falter, he
fetches it about again and again with his scourge, making it sleep, and not
suffering it to die under his hands. This sport God plays with the world: God
handles us men like tops; many are ready instantly to perish, when behold God
is at their backs, and lasheth them up again with his scourge; he strikes to
confirm them, and wounds, to cure them; he pulls them down to see them up
again: he loads them with evils in this transitory world, that he may heap
all benefits upon them in the eternal. We are balls, we are tops: it is God
that strikes the ball, and whips the top: and this he does with so many blows,
with so many stripes, that we may not only bear our cross patiently and
cheerfully, but likewise constantly. And this is the third manner of carrying
our cross, to wit constantly. Which constancy and what kind thereof is
necessary in adversity, we will now declare.

Sect. I.
IT was an old saying of the Ancients, To keep still the same countenance, is
proper to Socrates. Which speech we may somewhat alter, saying: To retain still
one and the same mind, is peculiar to a Christian. And this for the most part,
is the greatest complaint in the School of Patience, that we begin many things
well, but end them otherwise. It is an ill end, when we finish our works before
they come to an end. What, I pray, may we think of him, who with infinite
forwardness takes upon his shoulders the cross of Christ, but finding it more
burdensome then he took it to be, leanes it against his neighbors house, and
confessing himself to faint under his burden, requests him to hire a Porter to
carry it for him. This man took up his cross amongst others, but he held not
out to the end. So shall you see now and then poor decrepit people take up a
burden of sticks in the forest to carry home to the fire; but increasing it
(as commonly they do by the way) leave it afterward in the plain field: So we
at last, having spent all our patience, break into these complaints: What man
living, say we, is able to endure such infinite, such intolerable labors? Is
there any heart in the world that will not break with these miseries* What man
(albeit he were of brass) can subsist amongst so many misfortunes? These
calamities are too too long, and even endless. Thus we faint, languish, and in
the end fall without recovery.

Who persevereth to the end, O you good men!) who persevereth to the end, shall
be saved. The constancy of Christ our Lord, how much and how diversely was it
tried on the cross? If he be the King of the Jews, say they, if the Son of
God, let him descend now from the cross, and we will believe in him. But,
because he was the Son of God (as most elegantly answers Saint Chrysostom)
therefore he descended not from the cross: whereas surely it had been as
easy for him to have descended from the cross, as it was to rise out of the
Sepulcher. But to the end he might instruct us in patience (says Saint
Augustine) he deferred his power. The children of God are constant, and end no,
before they have pronounced, Consummatum est.

They are permitted indeed to pray in these very words: Father, let this cup
pass from me; but this must still be added: Nevertheless, not my will, but
thine be done. This bitter cup, (O my God! if it be the blessed will) I purpose
to drink up even to the utmost dregs.

It is the Goldsmiths Art to know, how long the gold is to be tried in the
fire: he takes it not out of the furnace, before it be thoroughly purged. So,
doubtless, it belongs not to us to know the times or moments which our Father
has reserved in his own power. We are gold, and God the Goldsmiths, who will
take us out of the fire when it shall seem good to his divine Majesty.

And behold the obstinate constancy of many men in vile and transitory matters.
How often shall you hear them utter these or the like speeches? I slack not,
or give over what I have once begun, I mean to go thorowstitch, I will get the
upper hand in whatsoever I undertake; either a man or a mouse, I will either
dye or go away with the victory, I will take no rest till I bring this about.
Such paternes we may daily see of constancy.

How comes it therefore to pass, that our constancy in the School of
Patience slacketh and faints so suddenly, so easily? You shall find some
will say: I can endure this no longer. Say rather: I will endure it no longer.
For surely, you could if you would. But as horses ^ire in a long journey: so if
miseries and afflictions continue long, our patience is jaded: yea, which is
more shameful, sometimes we yield to afflictions before they come ^eer us,
desist and fall off from our enterprises, daily we alter our judgment, and
resolve of quite contrary courses, spending our lives in naught but diversity
of purposes.

For which cause Seneca prudently Seneca de ^tio Sapi^^^. cap. 1. and v. 20.
advises us; Look to this (quoth he) above all things, that thou be constant
in thy resolutions. It imports more to stic^ to thy purposes, then to purpose
that which is honest. But (...) men make but a sport of their life: o^
Judgments are not only erroneous, but also light and variable: we wave^ to
and fro, resolving one while one thing, another while another; rejecting what
we desired, and desiring again what we rejected: between liking and disliking
we keep level-coil. No man propounds to himself what he would have, or if he
do, he fleets from it before it be effected: and so far is he from only
changing it, that ^e does but leave it, and take it again, entertaining that
which before he had condemned and forsaken. Persist then in what thou have
begun, and persevere with patience. Know thou the saying of Ecclesiasticus;
A fool is changeable as the Moon. Such a Lunatic is grievously diseased.

Sect. II.
GOD loves constancy in every good man. And, I beseech you, let us but think,
where, and what we are. In this life we pass our novice-ship: for we are
novices, and this world, (the middle region between heaven and hell) is the
place assigned to do it in. As we now behave our selves uprightly and
constantly, or otherwise, so shall we have allotted us an eternal habitation,
either in heaven or hell. God here takes a trial of our constancy, and
deferres our reward, that he may render it afterward with interest.

With good reason does Saint Augustine wonder, why God, who was so intimate
with Jacob the Patriarch, would conceal from him so long, that his son Joseph
was yet alive. The good old man pined away with grief, deeming his son Joseph
torn in pieces, and devoured by wild beasts. Yet did not God so much as with
one word mitigate his grief What meant he by this? Surely to try the constancy
of Jacob. And therefore he doubled his grief, when he bereft him also of his
dearly beloved son Benjamin. With how many experiments (I pray) did God try the
constancy of Joseph? He was at the age of seventeen sold by his brothers; ten
years he past in service, where daily his wanton Mistress solicited his
chastity; but so constantly did he withstand her adulterous desires, that
neither threats, tears, nor entreaties could vanquish him; he persisted
unmovable in his purposed chastity. Afterward this most modest young man was
cast into prison amongst malefactors, where he spent one year with the Kings
Butler and Baker. After their delivery, he lived yet two years longer in that
prison, with mavelous constancy, patience, and integrity. For referring
himself with all innocence to Almighty God, he neither sought to defend, nor
clear himself by declaring how the whole matter had passed; but constantly
endured the necessity of his imprisonment, comforting himself with this one
only hope, that Almighty God (whose most vigilant provicence he had often
notably expetienced) was without all doubt infinitely more able to release him
when his blessed pleasure was, then they to hold him in prison; which evidently
appeared afterward: for having layen three years in prison, he was brought
forth and presented to King Pharao, who made him Viceroy over all Egypt. He
was then thirty years of age, after which time (in that eminent degree, next to
the Kings own person) he governed Egypt fourscore years. For such is the
usual manner of God, far to exceed men's merits with his rewards, and
infinitely to surpass their labors with recompenses.

Behold the ample honor and dignity of constant patience: Whosoever therefore
thou art, persevere faithful even to death, and thou shall receive the crown
of life.

Let us contemplate and consider the whole frame of Nature: What avails it a
man to learn superficially any Art or Science, if he attain not to such
perfection that he may show himself a skillful Artist therein? Why strivest
thou to run a race, if thou stayest before thou come to the end? Why
frequentest thou the School of Patience, if thou meanest not to be constant in
learning? He trifles away his time here, who wastes many d^yes, weeks, or
months under the government of patience, and at last breaks forth into
impatience, saying; I have been scholar long enough, I wax weary of these stale
and trivial school-points; hence forward I will be mine own man, and resume my
liberty. Let all such scholars get them from this School, they lose their time,
they neither know, nor profit any thing, though they learn never so much. In
vain they begin who persevere not till the end. They want constancy. And what
avails it thee to begin, if thou will not persevere? All Gods works are
perfect. King Solomon merited most commendation, not for that he began to build
the Temple, but because he covered it with a roof, and finished it. Solomon
built the Temple, and accomplished the work.

Christ, the most patient Master in this School, makes small account of those
scholars who are infinitely industrious at the beginning, observe the laws and
institutions for a time, give some hope of their proficience; but by degrees
fall off, neglect the School, give themselves wholly over to sloth; and at
last, know no more then old impatience which they brought with them at the
first. Avaunt you loiterers, pack hence unconstant creatures. He gains not here
any repute of learning, who has not carried himself with such applause, that
justly he may be said, Curs^m consumm^sse.

Consummatum est, is the lesson with which this School is first opened, and
finally closed; he that learns not this, has played the trewant in the School
of Patience. The Angel in the Apocalypse, warns us to hold what we have, that
no man may take our crown from us. This Saint Basil declares in an elegant
Oration, where he extolls the constancy of the forty Martyrs, who in the time
of Licinius the Emperor, at Sebaste, a City of Armenia, were compelled to
stand naked without doors in a frozen pit, and in the sharp and rough winter
season, there to be starved to death. These words and mutual encouragements
were heard amongst them all: Let us fight like Champions, and run this race we
have undertaken; at the end thereof we shall be crowned. This voice was
ratified by celestial visions. For one of the soldiers that guarded them, saw
Angels sent from heaven with nine and thirty crowns, to bestow upon as many of
those Christian Champions, which caused him to marvel, and say within himself:
Here are forty persons, but where is the fortieth crown? Whilst he was thus
revolving this in his mind, one of that blessed number, too indulgent to his
own life, and not able to endure the torments, stepped into a warm bath
adjoining. Alas, nice and tender Martyr! What do thou? Shunnest thou to
death? Nay, thou runnest into it in this place where thou seek to avoid it.
For soon after, the poor wretch, not able to abide the sudden change from cold
to heat, gave up the ghost. O miserable, thrice miserable wretch! Seeking to
shun Sylla, he fell into Charybdis. Short and momentary were the pains he
feared, whilst he incurred eternal; and all this, because he lost his
constancy. But the rest, even to the last gasp, continued constant, well
worthy of their crown, which they obtaned by their full perseverance to the end.

Sect. III.
ANd why should not we persevere in the School of Patience? It is even a minute
of time that shuts up all our miseries; a short period ends all our griefs;
eternal joy insue^ after our momentary sorrows. We expect that life (says
Tobie) which God is ready to give those, who never change their faith from him.
So run (says St. Paul) that you may win the prize.

Some questioned the Cynick Philosopher in this manner: Tell us Diogenes (quoth
they) why being now so old, do you still dwell in your tub, why renounce you
not this rigid course of Philosophy? Ridiculous men (answered he;) Would you
have me to stack and trifle in the end of my r^ce, and suffer another to snatch
the prize from me? Nay, I will rather mend my pace, and run faster.

And why are not we of the same mind? What greater folly then to faint when we
come near* to the mark? It It is almost within our reach, and d^ we faulter in
our course?

O passi graviora! Dabit Deus his quoque finem. Virg. Aen.
But much more wisely then Diogenes did St. Francis of Assisium, as it is told
of him, who coming near to the last conflict of death, after he had many years
before died most religiously to himself: Let us begin, O my brothers! (quoth
he) to serve our Lord God, for hitherto we have profited little.

Therefore constantly (O you Christians!) constantly, let us go forward in
whatsoever we have happily begun, and cheerfully end this momentary remnant of
our journey; whereunto, especially two things may greatly further us.

First, Let us accuse our selves. In whatsoever we suffer, let us confess our
selves guilty. Let every one answer thus for himself: I have well deserved to
suffer this; most justly am I afflicted. Thou art just, my Lord, and thy
judgment upright. Very truly said Saint Augustine: The judgments of God are
many times secret, but never unjust. It is an evident sign of small patience,
and a faint and languishing constancy, to believe our selves to be innocent,
and undeservedly punished.

Certainly the brothers of Joseph, the Egyptian Vice Roy, were not spies as
they were taken to be; they had faithfully paid for the wheat laid to their
charge; neither were they guilty of stealing the cup. Nevertheless, they stood
not upon their innocence: but said; We well deserve to suffer all this,
because we have sinned against our brother; for this reason, comes all this
tribulation upon us. Let us, I beseech you, imitate them: and say; With good
reason do we suffer this, although we be guiltless, and innocent of this foul
imputation that is cast upon us, by this suspicion and false accusation,
proceeding either from malice, or error. Yet it is not without cause that we
suffer, having deserved even this, and a thousand times more, for that we are
guilty of. But I (say you) am most innocent, in this matter I am accused of.
Admit it be so. What then? Will you therefore profess your self innocent? Call
to mind, I beseech you, that some thirty or forty years ago, you committed a
grievous sin, for which as yet you have never been punished. Lo^! now your
creditour presents himself, and demands satisfaction. And albeit you be not
guilty of this crime which for the present is laid to your charge, yet have you
long since committed that former fault, and as yet never satisfied for it: for
this cause therefore comes this tribulation upon thee drink then as thou have
long since brewed.

Sect. IV.
IRene the Empress, as Paul the Deacon recounts, being by her own servant
expelled her Empire, used this manner of speech: I said the, render to Almighty
God most humble thanks that he advanced me, being but a Orphan and unworthy, to
the Empire; and whereas he now permits me to be deposed, I attribute it to my
sins: howsoever, both in good and ill fortune, blessed be the name of our Lord,
A heavenly speech. This is to carry the same countenance in clear and cloudy
weather, and like the Heliotropium or sun-flower, still to have a man's eye
fixed upon this glorious sun: And this also advanced him to Paradise, even
before the Apostles themselves (who all his life before had been a desperate
thief) for that from the chair of the cross he preached and published his own
wickedness: And we indeed suffer justly; whereas the other thief by his
shameless suit for liberty, did as it were deny his own guiltiness.

When the enemy was at the very gates of Bethulia, and a pitiful houling of
all sorts of people heard throughout the whole city, Judith that most chaste
widow stepped out amiddest the thickest of them, to raise their hopes, and
wipe away their tears. Let us not, quoth she, be our own revengers: but
repute these punishments, even small scourges from our Lord in regard of our
sins, whereby we may rather think he corrects us as servants; for our
reformation, then that he sends them for our utter destruction and confusion.

When therefore we are afflicted or punished, let us not impute the fault to
others, but our selves, and confess our punishment much milder then we have
deserved at Gods hands, who according to his custom never equall^ the
punishment with the fault. Hence was it that Job so prudently wished that God
would vouchsafe to speak with thee, that thou might understand, how much
less is exacted of thee, then thy in quity deserves; Thou art forgetful of
thy manifold sins, but so is not God, Q^ pa^iens est red^it^r, Who requires
less then thou owe; Whosoever therefore is in misery let him daily say: I
have sinned and doubtless am justly punished; I have well deserved to suffer
this; I am put to less, then my iniquity deserves; this is too gentle a
correction, I have deservest infinitely more. And this is that first help of
constancy which I spoke off, to wit, the accusing of a man's self.

The other is, The confideration of the will and providence of God. All
whatsoever we suffer, is by the will of God. He from all eternity not only
foresaw; but also was willing that every one should fall into those miseries
which he now falls into; Let us therefore separate the fault from the
punishment, the sin from the affliction, and say, God, who is most just, though
he be not the author of any sin, yet of all affliction, and punishments he is
the principal; and as Divines say, the positive effective cause. It is not by
the will, but by the permission of Almighty God, that men commit sins which
are oftentimes the causes of many miseries and punishments; But after sin
committed, it is his will, because he is just, that pun^shment should follow.

It is therefore from God, and by his will and providence that all calamities
and miseries are fallen upon us. It is the pleasure of God, mark advisedly
what I say, that we should be oppressed with those miseries wherewith we are
oppressed: whosoever therefore thou art, thou must willingly suffer these
things; and for this cause as Seneca admonishes, for that you may rest assured
they come from the order and decree of God; This most loving father breeds his
children up severely.

We see sometimes boys play in the streets without the least fear of the rod:
but some honest man comes on the sudden unlooked for, and taking one of them
by the ear, leads him away from his fellows. No man sees this done, but
presently concludes that man undoubtedly to be the boys father, and that he
leads away his son, making no account what becomes of the rest. So oftentimes
while we sport, while we trifle, while we play the wantons, we are led away by
our good and careful Father: he interrupts our pastimes with afflictions, he
pulls and ^ugs us by ^he ear: he, I say, one well known unto us, no stranger,
but our loving and kind Father. For (this a thousand times we must inculcate)
whomsoever our Lord loves, he chastises, and scourges every child he takes
unto him. If you live without discipline, you have just cause to fear, that
you are rather imputative then lawful children.

Sect. V.
THere are certain kinds of wine in Spain, which are harsh and unpleasant to
be drunk in their own country; but being transported into another, become very
sweet and savoury. So our good God conveyeth us over the sea of ^ffliction, to
the end we may lay aside all sharpness and acerbity, and acquire the sweet
odor of patience. All this is done by the providence of God. Thus much have I
said concerning the means to make harsh and distasteful wine sweet; this
further I will add.

Hieronymus Cardanus, (a man of Cardan. l. 1. 3. de subtle. mihi, page 282.
much reading) affirms, it is ordinarily experienced, that the sweetness of
wine is preserved by stopping the hogshead with pitch, both within and without:
for then being filled with sweet wine, not racked from the lees, and sunk for
the space of a month in the bottom of a river, it is defended by the heat of
the pitch, and coldness of the water, so that for a whole year it retains it
strength and sweetness.

Even thus God deals with us: he sinkes us into the waters of calamity, lest
we should degenerate into ill manners, and become vinegar. Doubtless that King
was sunk in this river, who cried out: Deliver me from those which hate me, and
from the depthes of waters. But so soon as he was drawn forth of these waters,
he congratulates his delivery after this manner: He has sent from the highest
heaven, and taken and assumed me out of many waters.

That which Ludovicus Blosius spoke, was so to the purpose, that it seems
worthy to be witten in great capital letters of gold. These are the words of
that most holy writer: God (says he) washes some of his special friends, whom
his goodness has determined to adorn with singular gifts, and highly to
transform, not softly and tenderly, but douses them over head and ca^s in the
sea of bitterness.

Note this (O my Christian brother!) note this: thou must not look to be washed
in rose water; but to be plunged in the salt and bitter sea of tribulation.
This is the Bath thy sweet and loving Father has prepared for thee from all
eternity.

All therefore, as well adversity as prosperity, must be taken as from the hand
of God, and so thou must constantly persevere to the end. How many Psalms did
King David compose with this inscription: Psalm^^ ^^que in finem? That is to
say; A Psalm to be sung from the very first verse to the last. We have not
undertaken to sing in the School of Patience, a Players ^ig, or nuptial Song,
but a sad funeral threne; which without doubt, we sing not well, unless we
sing it to the end. We shall never want somewhat to suffer.

It is a most true saying: One temptation, or tribulation, is no sooner gone,
but another comes: and so we Thomas de Kempis l. 2. c. 13. number. 8. and lib 3.
c. 20 n. 3.
shall have always somewhat to suffer: Yea, even before one conflict be ended,
another comes unlooked for. We must therefore sing our Threnes in such manner
as we may still go on singing The Song of Patience must be sung even to the end.

A reward is promised to those that begin, but given only to those that
persevere unto the end. Judas Iscariot began very well, but ended much
otherwise: his beginning was commended, but his end condemned. Many are ready
to begin well, but few end so. The virtue of a good work (by the opinion of
Saint Gregory) is perseverance, which is only crowned. In vain is any work
done, if it be given over before the end of our life.

Saint Bernard using many speeches to inflame and incite us hereunto; faith,
That absolutely without perseverance no Champion can get the conquest, nor
Conquerous the prize. Perseverance is the true soul and quintessence of
strength, the consummation of virtue, and the sister of patience. Without
perseverance your obedience shall obtain no reward, your Almesdeeds no increase
of grace, nor your fortitude any commendation. The Devils chiefest drift is
always to prevent perseverance, which alone amongst all other virtues he
knows is to be crowned.

It is the end doubtless, not the fight that crowns us. Commend a man's
prosperous voyage by sea; but see him first in a safe harbor. It avails but
little to take the cross upon your shoulders, if you carry it not out to the
end. Woe be to those who have lost their sufferance. Ah! on courageously, O you
Christians! and constantly, lest the old saying be verified in us: Thou have
begun better then ended, and thy end has dishonored thy beginning.

Saint Paul taking his leave of those that wept at Miletum for his departure,
made this open profession: Tribulations and imprisonments are prepared for me
at Jerusalem: But none of all these I stand in fear of, I esteem my self much
above my life, so that I may consummate my course. Let us sing after him the
same song, every one for himself: Let heaven cost me never so much hatred,
persecution, vexation; let my God load me with whatsoever calamities he
pleases, I am ready to do and suffer all, so I may consummate my course, and
say at the end, Consummatum est. I am well assured, the fruit will correspond
to the labor, abundant, infinite, eternal.

CHAP. IV. That afflictions are to be born* with thanksgiving.
PHIDIAS, an excellent Artizan, most rare for his quality in making Statues,
could frame them of clay, wax, mortar, marble, wood, brass, Ivory, silver,
gold; in a word, of any matter or metal whatsoever: scarcely was there any
piece of wood, whereof he could not counterset the God Merc^ry. Seneca says of
him; Phidias skill was not to make Statues only of Ivory: he made them
likewise of brass: If you had put him to make them of marble, or baser
meterials, he made them as artificially as he could possibly. And surely, if a
rough unpolished piece of wood, could have spoken, it would have given infinite
thanks to this master, vouchsafing, with his skillful hand, to free it from
deformity. After the same manner God, that all knowing workman, polisheth man
by miseries and afflictions, till he reform him, and mould him a new again.
With good reason therefore should this deformed trunk render humble thanks to
his Phidias, who otherwise had never been transformed into so goodly a Statue,
ha^ he not lost man^ a chip, and been roughly and sharply treated by the axe.

We have said, That all adversity should be patiently, cheerfully and
constantly endured. To this we add; fourth manner of taking it, to wit, with
thanksgiving, or thankfully. Now it remains to declare, why thanks are to be
given for calamities, which otherwise are deemed ungrateful benefits.

Sect. I.
THe ancient Germans were wont to instruct their children by precepts,
delivered by certain signs and tokens; amongst others this was one: If at any
time thou baitest by the way in thine inn, part not thence till thou have spit
thrice: meaning hereby, that when they were travelers they should take heed
they left none of their furniture behind them. Moreover, they commanded them
not to point at the stars with their finger; not for that it is an offense to
point at the stars; but because they thought that curious frequent aspect was
hurtful to their eyes. This likewise was a prudent admonition of theirs: If
any thing hurt or vex thee, say, Deo gratias, God be thanked; or, Rependat hoc
Deus, God requite this. A golden precept certainly, and agreeable to this our
present purpose. Whatsoever burns thee, what adversity soever happens to thee,
what man soever injures or troubles thee, be sure to render him as ample
thanks, as if he had given thee a liberal reward.

In like manner, sober and discreet parents now a days teach their children to
kiss the rod, wherewith they have been beaten. So shall you see the most
towardly scholars in the school give thanks to their Masters after they have
corrected them: as if they should say; My most reverend Master, I take it not
ill at your hands to be chastised, I have deserved it; and I am the rather
joyed and comforted that my Master has such regard over me, and that he has
not as yet laid aside all hope and care of me: And why should I think much, or
find my self agrieved? It is the Masters part to correct his scholars when
they offend, that so they may be the more wary in time to come. O this is a
disposition as excellent as rare, to receive stripes and render thanks! Yet it
beseems us all to do so; In all patience and longanimity, with joy and
thanksgiving to God our Father, who has made us worthy to take part in the lot
of Saints. And this doubtless is to participate, this is to have our lot
amongst Saints: To suffer much, and render thanks that God vouchsafes us so
great an honor.

The divine eloquence of Saint Chrysostom. tem. 5. hom. 18. initio, c^jus
inscripti^, Quod maximum luc^um in tribula tionibus est gratiarum actio. mihi.
p. 165.
Chrysostom wonderfully labored forcibly to persuade all Christians to this.
Hear himself speak: This (quoth he) is the will of God, that we should always
give thanks; this is the sign of a soul well instructed. Have thou suffered
evil? It is no evil, unless thou will: Do but thank God for it, and thou
turnest the evil into good. Say as Job did: The Name of God be blessed for
ever. And what, I pray, have thou suffered in this nature? Thou have perhaps
been visited with sickness? This is no news, our bodies are mortal, and born
to suffer. Thou art pinched with want of money: Admit thou have plenty; What
certainty have thou? It may as easily be lost as gotten: Thy enemies calumniate
and seek to supplant thee: This is no injury to us that suffer it, but to them
that do it. The sin is his that commits, not that suffers evil.

What evil soever (therefore) oppresses thee, give God thanks, and thou
turnest the evil into good. And as the same Saint Chryspstome admonished: Let
us not repine, be vexed, or troubled in temptations. Job by giving thanks, when
he was stripped of all his goods, wounded more the devil, then when he
distributed them amongst the poor; For a far greater matter it is to bear the
loss of all with a courageous and thankful mind, then amidst store of wealth
to give alms, as appeared in this just man.

But suppose a sudden fire should consume all thy treasure, and burn thy
house to the ground, then call to mind those calamities that fell on Job: give
thanks to our Lord, who could, but did not save and prevent all this, and thy
reward shall be as great, as if thou had distributed it with thine own
hands amongst the poor; Again reiterating the same: Thou shall, says he,
have a reward equal to him who gives all his goods to the poor, if thou give
thanks for the loss of them: and whereas thou Idem ^o. 4 in 1. ad These. cap.
3. ^um. 3. post med.
mighst have gone to southsayers and wisards, thou art content rather to lose,
then by this means to recover them.

But perchance thou live in poverty, hunger, want, and infinite other
miseries and dangers? Remember Lazarus, environed with extreme poverty,
innumerable troubles, forsaken and abandoned by all, and this after he had led
so good and virtuous a life. Call to mind the Apostles that lived in hunger,
thirst and nakedness; the Prophets and just men; you shall not find that any
of them lived in riches or jolity, but in want, scarcity and tribulation.
Recollect all this with thy self, and render humble thanks to our Lord, that
makes thee partaker of the same poverty; that he is so far from hating thee,
that he vouchsafes to love thee: for, sure, he would not have suffered them to
endure so much, had he not exceedingly loved them. Nothing can be more
acceptable in the fight of God, then thanksgiving: This is the greatest
sacrifice, a perfect oblation. Therefore Saint Paul says, give thanks in all,
for this is the will of God.

The Hebrew youths condemned to the furnace in Babylon, rendered thanks to God
in the midst of the flames, as if they had been at a delicious banquet. That
dark and hideous prison seemed to them a pleasant summer bower and rich
Palace: that pitchy vapor like the sweet and purest dew of Heaven, the flames
as gorgeous robes to cloth them and their gyves and fetters like golden
chains and bracelets.

Sect. II.
AND for as much as this we speak off, to wit, that thanks are to be given to
God even in adversity, is a matter of so great importance, it will be expedient
to confirm it with most ample testimonies. Saint Chrysostom pursuing this
subject which he had undertaken, shows his singular eloquence therein, and
indeed himself to be Chrysostom; that is, a golden mouthed orator,
inculcating daily this one thing, as well beseemed him It is therefore most
convenient, quoth he, both for rich and poor, as well for sick as sound, for
those that suffer adversity as for others that live in prosperity; For what
marvel is it for a man to render thanks to God while all things go according
to his liking; but when he is tosled and tempest beaten, and in manifest danger
of shipwreck, then is his patience and equanimity most put to the proof? And
this was that which made Job so victorious, and stopped the mouth of his
shameless adversary the devil, making it most evident that whilst he was in
prosperity he rendered thanks to God, not so much for his temporal wealth, as
for the great love he bare to his divine Majesty.

This is the most apparent sign and testimony of a grateful mind, and the
truest proof of wisdom, when a man even in adversity gives thanks and
glorifies God for all things; not only for his benefits, but even for his
punishments, for this deserves a far greater reward: By rendering thanks to God
in prosperity thou payest only a due debt: but by being thankful for
adversity, thou make God a debtor to thee; for who receives a benefit, and
returns thanks, discharges a duty to his benefactor: but he that requiteth
injuries with good turns, makes a debt due to himself. Hence infer, that God
when he punishes, ought as much to be praised, as when he exempteth from
punishment; Both of them are arguments alike of his care and providence, both
of his goodness: as much ought he to be praised for exiling Adam out of
Paradise, as for placing him there. It is not for Heaven alone we should be
thankful, but even for hell it self, which he made to threaten and deter us
from sin.

Wherefore, as we do not only commend and comply with our Physician when he
feeds and nourishes us, but also when he punishes us with spare diet; not only
when he gives us leave to walk abroad and take the air, but likewise when he
confines us to a close chamber; not only when he anoints and foments, but even
when he cuts and burns us to the bone, seeing these contrary courses tend all
to one end; so ought we to praise God for all things, and so much the more,
because the one is God, the other but a man. Events amongst them happen
oftentimes contrary to their expectation, but the works of God never without
supreme wisdom and providence. Let us then not only thank God when he grants
our petitions, but even when we suffer the repulse; For God in denying is no
less our father then in granting our request, and knows we our selves are
utterly ignorant what is fit for us to ask.

Then whether we obtain our desires, or not, we must be thankful. Gratitude
is a great pleasure, great riches, and unexhausted good, an armor of proof; It
will mitigate a man's tribulation, to accompany it with thanksgiving. Virtue
doubtless of herself may be subject to many deceipts and illusions: where
mercy abounds, envy will never be wanting. But the strongest shield and
surest defense against all these incursions, is to give God thanks, and
glorify him in all. Have thou lost thy money? Be but thankful and thou
gainest thy own soul, and greater riches thereby, as having had an ampler
pledge of Gods favor and good will.

Saint Augustine is of the same opinion, Good and bad men, says he, are like
two vessels, the one replenished with precious spices, the other with stench
and rottenness, which being fanned with the self same fan, the one wherein
the spices are, breathes forth a grateful odor, the other an odious and
intolerable favor. So good and bad men are both vexed and troubled alike, but
by the deep discussion of Gods judgment a great difference is made between
the one and the other.

Good men, so soon as any tribulation begins to seize on them, like sanctified
vessels, render thanks to God for this chastisement he vouchsafes them: but the
proud, covetous and luxurious, blaspheme and murmur against him, saying; O God!
What evil have we done, that we suffer this at thy hands? Hence it often
happens, that these miserable wretches entangled in the love of this transitory
life, are not able to enjoy it; but (which is worse) are compelled to lose the
everlasting; where neither grief nor sorrow are to be found: and not being able
to avoid present evils, for their sins, fall into eternal torments.

Therefore Saint Gregory says: They which fear stripes are to be admonished,
that (if they desire not to be truly miserable indeed) they should rather fear
eternal punishment.

The Histories of the ancient Fathers report; That there was amongst them a
certain man, who without any fault of his became odious, and incurred all men's
displeasure: none would admit him into their society, or so muth as salute him;
he could neither borrow book nor bread; and in the evening, when he had ended
his studies, was never invited to any of their chambers. Notwithstanding all
this, (for which he is much to be commended) he rendered thanks to God. Upon a
time it happened, that this very man coming home from harvest, found no manner
of victuals to eat. What should he do in this case? It was in vain to hope for
any at his fellows hands: Should he then beg it at Gods? He did so indeed, and
from thence was furnished. For not long after, a stranger, with a camel laden
with bread, knocked at the gates. When this holy man perceived the excessive
bounty of Gods providence toward him, he wept, saying; Am I then my good God
(said he) am I unworthy to suffer a little penury for thy sake? But from that
time forward, all his fellows showed themselves respective toward him, and, as
the same Author says, were reconciled to him.

Sect. III.
TObias that excellent old man, so approved for his patience, found himself
nothing agrieved, nor any way repined against God for the sad distaster of his
blindness; but persisted, notwithstanding, immovable in his fear and
reverence, giving him humble thanks all the days of his life. This is a
pattern we should endeavor all we can to imitate. When we are despised,
laughed to scorn, and made odious; when we are cast headlong into many
miseries, let us render thanks to God: Whereby, moved through his infinite
goodness, he will either (as it has been often experienced) assuage the rage
of our enemies, or largely recompense, by some other means, this evil, how
great soever it be.

This is the opinion of Saint Paul, who exhorts us to give thanks in all
things; which Saint Hierome considering, says; The Jews and idolaters know how
to render thanks for benefits, but the Christians alone for calamities and
afflictions. Wherefore let us still say, according to the Apostle, in all
dangers and miseries, Blessed be God. This is the duty of a Christian.

Of which subject, the third book of the Imitation of Christ, in the fiftieth
chapter, discourses so notably, that I think it were expedient for all that
are afflicted, grieved, or by any means whatsoever molested, to read every day
this chapter, or at least some part of it. Out of which, we bring this for our
purpose: I render thanks to thee, my Lord God, for that thou have not spared to
afflict me with adversity, but have scourged me with sharp stripes, inflicting
punishment, and distressing me both inwardly and outwardly. Thy discipline is
upon me, and thy rod it self will comfort me.

A Prelate of great note recounts, that a certain man very remarkable for
learning, required of a certain religious Virgin a compendious way to lead a
holy life; which she comprehended in ten documents, whereof this was the fifth;
That how great soever were the affliction a man suffered, he should render
thanks, think himself unworthy of it, and desire to have a greater, and even
doubled: which she doubtless her self daily practiced. And what, I pray,
should hinder us from imitating a thing so well worthy imitation.

What we have said, may well be demonstrated by example. A poor miserable man
has coughed all night, counted every stroke of the clock; without taking any
sleep or rest, till even his very heart strings are broken. It were a brave and
bold resolution for this man to say; Give me, my Lord God, a more vehement
cough, to vex me more, for my sins have deserved it.

A man tormented with the headache, griping of the stomach, the stone, the gout;
and yet having these words still in his mouth: Double, good Lord, my pain, so
thou double my patience. Which, or where is this man, and we will commend him?

Let me see a man openly jeered and laughed to scorn by three or four mockking
companions, and yet say: O my Christ! how many times have thou been laughed to
scorn for me? Set more upon me, to deride and affront me* for I have surely
deserved it. Is it possible to find any one pray in this manner? Some certainly
there are, but concealed, who secretly solace themselves with patience. There
are likewise some, who will pray after this manner: My dear God! it is not one
affliction alone I suffer, I am molested with many: but I beseech thee (my
Lord) send me greater, augment my miseries: for I am well assured thou will
withal increase my patience. For the present I yield thee humble thanks for
these I suffer, and think my self unworthy to suffer for thee, my God.

Have we ever prayed thus in our lives? or shall we pray so hereafter? O
Christians! many times after we have said these or the like prayers, we flatter
our selves with a supposed kind of sanctity; But, alas! how far are we as
yet from true patience? we play the men, nay the giants, in our own conceits,
whilst we exercise these devotions; but no man here can rightly judge, none
rightly commend, but God himself, the only searcher of hearts, who amongst
all other musical instruments, chiefly commends two, the Taber and the
Organs; Tynipanu^ contributati spiritus, Organum laudis, and gratiarum
actionis. The Taber of an afflicted spirit, and the Organ of praise and
thanksgiving. The mournful stroke of the Taber is Ah! ah! how painful!, how
grievous is this? But forsake me not, O my God! O most mild and patient Jesu!
give me patience. This Taber, doubtless, is excellently played upon, and goes
beyond the rarest music. The Organ of praise quavers most sweetly. That
blessed Saint James, surnamed Intercisus, being in his martyrdom cut in
pieces, was a most skillful Organist. For every joint they cut in sunder, he
was heard to say, Deo gratias.

He had here in Job for his Master, who as often as any new disaster was
reported, gave to God a new Deo gratias. One brings him word, that his Oxen and
Asses were driven away by the Sabeans, Job answered, Blessed be the name of the
Lord. Another gives him to understand his flocks of sheep were consumed with
fire from heaven; again Job answered: Blessed be the name of the Lord. A third
man tells him, the Chaldeans had set upon his Camels, and driven them away; Job
still perseveres: Blessed be the name of the Lord. Finally, one brings him the
doleful news of his childrens destruction, all slain and buried under the
ruins of his house; Job answers as before: Blessed be the name of the Lord: as
it has pleased the Lord, so is it done. Behold an Organ of praise, behold a
most rare and skillful Organist, whom God himself commends, saying: Have thou
not observed my servant Job, that there is none like him on earth?

Sect. IV.
IT was the manner of the Persians, says S^obeus, when the King commanded any
man, were he never so innocent, to be called, and openly scourged, that the
party so punished, should render most ample thanks to the King, that he
vouchsafed so graciously to remember him. Is it such a matter to be thus in the
memory of a King? Have we even stripes in such reverence, when they are laid on
at the Kings command? why submit we not our selves in like manner to our most
mighty and most merciful God? Why fall we not prostrate, and adore with humble
thanks, those stripes which are no less then the price of heaven? This surely
all the holiest men have done before us.

Saint Laurence lying on his couch of burning coals, was broyled by degrees,
with a slack and lingering fire; which being done, he rendered thanks. Well
may thou so (most glorious Martyr) for thou wast a viand provided for the
table of the high and mighty King of heaven.

Saint Theodore, in the time of Maximian the Emperor, when his sides were torn
and pierced through, being almost breathless, did notwithstanding, tune his
Organ, and sang: I will bless the Lord for ever.

Many Saints, treated no better then dogs, have notwithstanding, like faithful
loving Spaniels, the more they were beaten, sawned so much the more upon their
master; and to gain his favor, readily offered themselves to suffer all
afflictions whatsoever. Is it not a remarkable speech of King David, who for
Gods sake ranked himself amongst brute beasts? I am, said he, made a brute
beast in thy sight, and I am always with thee.

Rufinus Aquileiensis recounts, that Rufin l. 4. number. 157. and Pelagius l^bel.
1 number. 10.
a good old man amongst the ancient Monks, cheered up a scholar of his, that
was sick, after this manner; Courage my child, let thy corporal infirmity
never trouble thee. It is the part of a good religious man, to render God most
humble thanks in his sickness. If thou be Iron, this fire will scour off
thy rust; if gold, refine thee. If it be the will of God to afflict thy body,
what does it avail to repine or stand against it? Endure it therefore, and
humbly beseech God to grant thee that, which may most stand with his will and
pleasure.

We must not fail to inculcate even a thousand times that divine admonition of
John Avila. One Deo gratias in adversity, is better then six thousand in
prosperity. Questionless, it is a high point of spiritual prudence, to be
thankful to God in adversity.

There is great difference between meats that are spitted, and laid to the
fire: for if a lean, dry Capon, or Chickens are to be roasted, the Cook must
of necessity oftentimes power upon them melted butter; and yet notwithstanding
all this, it will be but a poor dry dish of meat to send to the table; but if
it be an excellent Ghost, a crammed Pullet, a fat Capon, a piece of stall fed
Biefe, a well liking Pig, or a special fat Turkey; these will be so far from
needing any other basting then that they bring with them, that they will leave
behind them a great quantity of dripping. And these are choice meats indeed,
fit to be served in to a Kings table.

So for all the world is it with those kind of men, who have still been dry and
lean in spirit, who have neither mind, nor sense, nor devotion, nor fervor,
if you lay them to the fire of affliction; O what a poor piece of rostmeat
shall you find them! well may consolation, as butter, be powered upon them, but
it avails them little, they mourn and lament past recovery. They want the
fatness of a good spirit, bast them never so much, you cannot help them; no
comfort can you give them will ever persuade them to patience.

But they who have plentifully fed upon the precepts of Patience, and have
wholly devoted themselves to the will of God (being once scorched with the fire
of calamity) most of all show forth the fatness of their devotion; their mind
and courage is present with them, and undaunted; they are able to comfort both
themselves and others, they stick not to submit themselves to the meanest
offices that are, they give thanks for their miseries, and desire their
calamities may be increased. Thus do they bast themselves with their own
fatness. These, doubtless, are dressed and prepared for that great and royal
feast, whereunto the guests are invited in these words: Behold, I have made
ready my dinner, killed my oxen and fatlings, all is ready: come to my marriage.

But as the fat roast meat yields a better savor then boyld: so thanksgiving
is by those, who are daily roasted as it were, with the fire of grief and
tribulation, far more precious and acceptable unto God, then theirs who combat
only with light inconveniences, and sail in a calm and peaceable sea.

Noah, with his companions, after the deluge, wherein the whole world was
drowned, celebrated a solemn feast of thanksgiving: for he erected an Altar,
selected out of the herds of cattle, and flocks of birds, the choicest
victimes, and offered an holocaust. Odora^usqu^ est Dominus odorem suavitatia:
And the Lord smelled an odor of sweetness.

But think now with what miseries, and how long Noah had been formerly
exercised. During a great part of his life, whilst the whole world wallowed
securely in sin, and sensual pleasures, he labored about building of the
Arc: though he escaped death, it cost him much more trouble, then if he had
died an hundred times. For, to say nothing else of the tediousnes of the Ark,
which was no less to him then a ten months sepulcher, what may be imagined
more irksome, then to lie all that time, as it were, buried in the dung of
beasts. He had no sooner overcome these so great difficulties, but he fell into
a new misery: he perceived himself laughed to scorn by his own son, insomuch
that he was even forced with his own mouth to curse him, who a little before
through the great mercy of God had been preserved from the deluge. Thus God
received as a most acceptable sacrifice, Noah's constant patience and
thanksgiving, amidst adversity, and in requital rewarded him with far mor
ample benefits.

Sect. V.
Let us therefore, according as Saint Paul admonishes, still render thanks for
all things. And in truth, no words are oftener to be inculcated in the School of
Patience then these; Deo gratias, Benedictus Deus. These alone should be used
upon all occasions. But we are so indocible, that we cannot get by heart so
much as two words. It was excellently well said of Francis Petrarch; This is
the common use, men are quick to receive, but slow to give; Petrarch. l. 2. de
utraque fort. dial. 37.
the one they do cheerfully, the other heavily; the one in post haste, the
other as if they were asleep. We are commonly hot and earnest suppliants, till
we have obtained our petition; but remiss, and cold, when it is granted.

The contrary course is wont, and ought to be observed in this School of ours;
for when the Scholars of Patience see a cup brim full of bitterness, they pray
indeed with Christ, Father, let this Cup pass from me: But those very prayers,
how hot and vehement soever, are thus by restriction qualified: Let thy will,
notwithstanding, not mine be fulfilled. Thus they desire to be delivered, so it
may stand with the will of God. But when they render thanks, they do it
entirely, without the least restriction, with infinite fervor both of mind
and voice; after this manner: I render thee, O my God! infinite and immortal
thanks, that thou vouchsafest me so great an honor, by sending me somewhat to
suffer for thy sake; that thou reckonest me amongst thy children: And what
child is there, I pray, whom the father corrects not? What man well in his
wits (says Saint Gregory) will be Greg part. 3. Pastoral. admon. 13. fine
omni^^.
ungrateful for his chastisement, seeing Christ himself, who lived here
without all sin, was not exempted from the scourge?

It is therefore the part of an understanding man, to bless and praise God,
not only in prosperity, but also in adversity. For if through thy patience thou
appease God, by yielding him thanks in adversity, thou shall both recover that
which is lost, with great interest, and besides that, everlasting joy and
happiness.

And be assured of this, that with good reason thanks are to be given to our
Father for his chastisements, seeing his stripes are far better then our
enemies kisses. The words of our Father are well known: I chastise them whom I
love, I scourge all my children. Will thou be a child? Come and receive
chastisement. What answer here should children make to so excellent a Father?
Saint Augustine teaches them to answer thus: Thou art no less my father when
thou chastisest me, then when thou make much of me: the one thou do to
encourage lest I faint, the other to save me, lest I perish. Saint Augustine
adds this instruction to the same purpose, saying; Aug. tom. 8. in Psalm. 98.
^ prope finem, mihi p. 454.
Exalt and praise our Lord God. Again, Let us exalt him, because he is good.
For if he revenge not, but forsake us, we perish.

Praise then his mercy in prosperity, and his justice in adversity. What a
strange child art thou? When thy father goes about to reform thee, thou art
displeased: he would not correct thee, if thou did not displease him: and
were thou so far in his displeasure, that he hated thee, he would never go
about to reform thee. Render therefore thanks to him that corrects thee, that
thou may receive an inheritance from God who reforms thee. When he afflicts
one in this world, it is to admonish, not to condemn him. He bears patiently
with sinners, not exercising his anger, but expecting their repentance.

But do we not often give thanks for a poor trifle, which we would as willingly
be without, only because we hope to receive some better gift another time? For
he that is grateful for the first, deserves to have it seconded. For this
cause therefore, he that has but even the least policy or prudence in him,
will strive to be grateful, even for an ungrateful benefit: for he will
reason thus with himself: He certainly that gave this gift, did it out of a
good disposition toward me, and should I not take this thankfully, it were the
way to deprive me of all future benefits. This even reason it self teaches us:
But that which is a light above reason, tells us: That God in this world
scatters only copper and leaden money amongst us; he bestows crowns, but such
as are thornie and bloody; which doubtless he does to this end, that he may
ere long give golden Crowns beset with precious gemmes.

Why therefore do we not, as best beseems us, give thanks to this most loving
Father for this lead and thorns, which shortly shall be turned to gold and
precious jewels? Let us accept this lead, embrace these thorns, rendering no
less thanks for them, then if they were the greatest wealth and treasure.
These are most true pledges and pawns for the gold and precious pearls which he
will give us. He that shall be humbled, shall be in glory, and he that shall
incline his eyes, shall be saved.

CHAP. V. That afflictions are to be entered upon with Premeditation.
THere are two torturers, Fear, and Grief, which vex and torment this life of
ours. The one, or the other is always upon our back. In troubles and
adversity, Grief plays his part: In health and prosperity, Fear of loosing
that which gives us so great contentment, confounds us. This is the express
opinion of Saint Augustine: Aug. 10. tom de verbis Dom. sermon. 41. post. init.
mihi p. 62.
All this life, to those that understand it, is a tribulation; for there are two
tortures, which though not both at once, yet by turns, torment the mind: their
names are Fear, and Grief. When all goes well with thee, thou fear; when
ill, thou grievest.

Seeing therefore we are well assured that one of these officers will always
seize on us, we must carefully premeditate how to carry our selves toward
them. And this is the fifth means which availes much to the skillful bearing of
afflictions, to wit, if we enter upon them with Premeditation: we will
therefore declare how adversity is to be thought on before hand.

Sect. I.
ECclesiasticus carefully admonishes: Son when thou come to the service of
God, see thou stand in justice and fear, and prepare thy soul against
temptation; prepare it with watching and prayer; prepare it by withdrawing thy
self from all occasions, for he that touches pitch shall be defiled
therewith; prepare thy heart by strengthening it against all the incursions of
thy adversaries. For rest assured of this, that so soon as thou beginnest to
live well, and honor God piously and chastely, storms on every side will break
in against thee; Thine enemies, take this from me, will not be idle.

See therefore thou prepare thy self, and know this, that the whole world is
full of snares to catch fools in. And least the blandishments of this world
should deceive us, Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. tom. 5 hom^l. cum Sa^toninus and
Aurelianus acts of sent in ex^^um etc. mihi page 117. and s^q.
gives us an exact type and figure thereof, saying, that nothing is stable in
humane affairs, nothing without alteration, but the life of man is like a mad
outrageous sea, full of daily shipwracks; shipwracks, I say, as strange and
new, as perilous. And finally that we may be cautious and circumspect, and
consider in what place we stand, this golden Orator says further, that all
places are full of troubles and tumults, nothing but rocks, precipices,
intricate turnings and windings. All the world is full of terrors, dangers,
horrors, suspicions and vexations: every corner full of counterfeits and
cousening companions; innumerable wolves every where in sheep skins, so that
now a days a man may live more safely amongst enemies, then with such
counterfeit friends; They that yesterday fawned, flattered and kissed your
hands, are suddenly become, the day following, wolves and tigres; and of just
men, sharper accusers then all the world besides could produce against you.

Wherefore prepare thy soul to temptation, keep thy station, set a watch before
the doreof thy heart; thou live amidst thine enemies. In a calm expect a
tempest, in health sickness, in riches poverty, and in prosperity calam^ty; By
this means the patience of Job was much helped; for the fear, quoth he, that I
feared, hapened unto me, and what I feared came to pass. Whatsoever is looked
for long, lights more favorable at last; and the stroke of any evil thought
on before, falls more gently.

Nam laevi^^ ledi^ quicquid praevidimu^ an^e.
Et praevisa minu^ tela ferire solent.
The threatening shaft, though it be keen.
Wounds not so deep, when it is foreseen.
The wise man therefore is wont to look for future evils, and what some men
by long* suffering make light and familiar, he alleviates by daily thinking
thereon; we hear sometimes these speeches of fond and improvident people: I
never imagined this fortune was reserved for me: a wise man knows and considers
all that may befall him: whatsoever comes to pass, he says, I knew and
foresaw this before hand; all events therefore are to be thought of, and our
mind prepared and fortified against all that may happen. Think on exiles,
torments, wars, shipwracks, diseases. Set before your eyes the whole state of
humane condition: let us anticipate and foresee (if we desire not to be
oppressed on the sudden, or daunted at any thing as strange and unusual) not
only what does often, but even what for the most part may happen unto us.

It is the mind that makes a man's life either happy or miserable; An evil man
converts all into evil, even those enterprises which at first were most
hopeful: an upright and sincere man, corrects sinister fortune, qualifies
sharp and disastrous accidents, by a moderate and skillful bearing them.
Choose therefore whether thou will take thy observation from others, or thy
self, without partiality, and thou shall both find and confess, that nothing
how dear soever and desired by ^s, i^ any way profitable, unless we arm our
selves as well against the uncertainty of casualties, as the circumstances and
events that may ensue thereby; yea unless we often and that without repining
or complaint, accustom our selves to say in all damages and losses whatsoever:
Deo aliter visum est: It has pleased God to dispose otherwise.

To a mind thus composed, nothing shall fall out amiss, and so surely it may
be composed, if it consider but before hand how far the various success of
things in this world may extend it self. If he dispose himself to enjoy wife,
children and his whole patrimony, not as if he had a perpetuity thereof, but
with this resolution, not to repute himself any whit the more miserable should
he be deprived of them.

Plutarch reports that Ulisses, after he had spent twenty years in warfare,
returned to his country, and sitting with his wife Penelope, while she wept and
was drowned in tears, he shed none himself, nor was sensible of any passion;
so well was his mind established before hand and fortified against her tears:
but when he saw his dog was dead, he could not forbear weeping; It was
certainly this sudain and unexpected chance that caused those tears; He
therefore that would not grieve in adversity, let him foresee it.

Sect. II.
BUt we many times are so unconsiderate and improvident, that we forget where
we are, or whither we go; we wonder and think much to lose any thing, whereas
we shall one day lose all. So ill prepared are we, that we even tremble at the
least alteration; This therefore we must endeavor that nothing befall us
unlooked for, and for so much as all things seem the greater by reason of their
novelty, by this daily consideration we shall in short time be no strangers to
any mischief that may happen, nor wonder at those chances whereunto we are all
indifferently borne, we suffer nothing but what all mankind is liable to. This
may I well avouch, seeing whatsoever a man escapes might have befallen him; And
not only the law which is executed upon all, but also that which is made alike
for all, may be said to be indifferent to all.

Let us be endued with equanimity, and without complaint yield all duties to
mortality: when winter comes, we must be cold: when summer, hot, when
unseasonable and unwholesome weather impaires health, we must be sick: Here we
are set upon by one beast, there by another, yea even by man himself, the most
pernicious of all beasts: Here we see one burnt, there another drowned: The
course of these things is not in our power to help or alter: thus much only we
may do: make a firm resolution to bear these accidents stoutly and
courageously.

We must address and compose our minds to this necessity of suffering, we must
follow and obey, and suppose all that is done ought necessarily to be Except
sin.
done. Your best way is to suffer what you can not mend nor change, and without
murmuring walk along with God, from whose ordinance all things proceed. He is
an ill soldier who follows his Captain sighing and groaning. Let us therefore
follow our God cheerfully and courageously, speaking thus unto him: O my
Father! lead me whither thou will: behold, without the least shrinking or
delay, I present my self: vouchsafe, dear Lord, to draw also my rebellious
will unto thee, even whether it will or no. Thus let us speak, thus let us
live; let no calamity find us unprepared. This caused the wise man to bid us
not to be unmindfull of adversity, in prosperity; nor of prosperity in
adversity: when thou flowest in riches think of poverty, and the pinching
necessity thereof, even amidst thy wealth; From morning to evening the time
shall be changed, and all these things are summoned in the sight of God. Art
thou a Lord? a governor? It may come to thy turn to serve; Have thou wealth at
will? For all this thou may come to beg* Art thou strong and healthy? One
only fever, or a far less matter may cost thee thy life: Have thou children?
In one day thou may lose them all; Have thou friends? One hour, nay, one
moment may deprive thee both of them, and all things else.

Prepare then thy mind to these temptations, that when death shall take away
thy children or friends, thou may say with that Spartan woman; I knew they
were mortal whom I had brought forth: when thy money shall be wasted: I knew it
would not always be mine, the use thereof was only mine: when thine honor
vanishes: I was well assured, no honor was eternal in this world.

You shall find some will cast up a world of present businesses and affairs, as
a bulwark between them and future considerations. These whilst they do little
or nothing, would have you think they work wonders: If you persuade them to
retirement and spiritual recollection: their answer is, I am not at leisure:
If to hear a sermon, I am not at leisure; If to confess their sins, I am not
at leasures; If to set before their eyes the dreadful judgments of God, I am
not at leisure; If to think of hell fire which is everlasting, here I have no
time for it; If to contemplate heavenly joys, now my occasions will not suffer
me; If to provide for death, I was never less at leisure in all my life. And
for my part, I think they will scarce be at leisure to do it when they die.
Thus, miserable wretches, they have no regard at all of future things; So that
most men in this world put forth to sea, and never so much as dream of a
tempest.

But when a sudden thunderbolt falls upon them, an unexpected calamity
oppresses them, then shall you see them pitifully daunted, diffident and
distrustful of all helps, and incapable of any consolation. This, my dear
hearts, this mischief you should have foreseen before, and then you should
have been less damnified thereby.

Sect. III.
THey say if a wolf chance to see a man first, he strikes him presently dumb:
and the like befalls a wolf if he be first seen by a man, which Cardanus
supposes to come to pass by reason of the sudden fear, which takes away the
voice, or brings a kind of hoarsnesse. Even so if an unlucky chance like a
wolf first behold a man, poor soul, he is presently struck dumb, and loses
both hope and courage; whereas if he would first behold the mischief, he might
mitigate and lessen it. Seneca speaks very fitly to the purpose: in such
variety, says he, of accidents turning and winding up and down, if thou do not
repute whatsoever future accidents, as if they were come to pass, thou give
adversity the upper hand of thee, which another by foreseeing dissipates and
defeat^.

It is too late after dangers, to instruct the mind to Patience in dangers. I
never thought this would have happened, I never supposed this would have come
to pass: And why not, I beseech you? What honor or dignity is there not
waited upon with extreme contempt, with a thousand disgraces? What kingdom is
there in the world which is not reserved for ruin, or contempt, to be trampled
upon by some Lord or other, as also by his base executioner? Neither is the
time long before this comes to pass, there is but the distance of one minute
of an hour many times, between a kingdom transferred from one King to
another; know then by this, that all estates are casual and uncertain; and
whatsoever happens unto others, may befall thee likewise.

It was the saying of Socrates: that as mariners, that sail in calm and quiet
weather, go provided of instruments to serve them in a tempest: so those that
are wise make provision in prosperity for adversity. This if a man would
seriously consider, and behold other men's miseries (whereof he has an infinite
number daily before his eyes) as if they had a way altogether as open to him,
he would long before the blow comes, set a guard upon himself.

It is an ordinary saying, forewarned, forearmed; and labors foreseen, as
Saint Gregory says, are undergone with more ease. Saint Hierom was altogether
of the same mind; because this miserable life, quoth he, is altered and
perplexed every day with interchangeable events, let a just man prepare his
mind as well for adversity, as prosperity; that whatsoever happens he may bear
it with a free and resolute mind; And I pray, my Christian brother, think not
thy self called to the School of Patience to be laid upon a soft couch, or to
be cockered with sundry delights; thou art deceived; my dearst, thou art
deceived; Thou came to this School, to wrestle, to fight, to be tried, and
to be exercised with many incommodities. See then thou prepare thy mind to
temptation.

But the best preparation in this respect is, to treat often with God in
prayer. Hither in all calamities must you have your recourse, here must you
breathe forth all your sighs, hither must you chiefly address your selves to
have help from heaven. The Apostles pointed out even with their finger, whither
they would have you to hasten in all your distresses. For whilst they were
amidst the boisterous storms of the sea, they cried out to Christ, Save us, O
Lord! our God, our power, our refuge, our helper in all tribulations which do
exceedingly assault us.

Here Saint Augustine gives this interpretation: There are some refuges, (says
he) that yield no succor, a man shall find himself rather dis-inabled then
strengthened by them. For example: Thou strest to some great man in the world,
to make him thy potent friend; thou seem now to have gotten a secure refuge
(a weak one God knows) for whereas thou had not any reason so much to fear
or doubt thy cause, now thou art as fearful of him to whom thou fledst for
refuge. For many in flying to these men, fall together with them to whom they
have betaken themselves, and so are the sooner discovered, who would never have
been sought for, had they not shrouded themselves under their protection. We
have no such refuge, but ours is power it self; in flying thither, we are safe
and sure from all dangers.

This made King David sa^ with a mighty spirit: We will not fear therefore,
though the earth be troubled, and mountaiens transferred into the heart of the
sea. If God stand on our side, albeit mountains dash one against another, and
fall headlong into the sea, heaven and earth go together, hell it self gape
wide open, and the whole frame of the world be dissolved: all this ruin cannot
affright us, we will not fear.

The Sea-urchin, and the Cuttle*fish, when they perceive a tempest at hand,
mistrusting their own strength, and fearing lest by the violence of the waves,
they should be dashed against the rocks, lay fast hold of a rock, till the
violence of the storm be past. And what is more turbulent then this life? what
more tempestuous? One storm begets another: the clouds oftentimes are even
riveted in the skies.

In such outrageous tempests both of sea and winds, let us learn of these poor
fishes, to cleave fast to God, that sure and impregnable rock, that every one
may answer for himself: It is good for me to adhere to God; from whom no
violence of calamities, no not whole armies of Devils, nor all the power of
hell shall draw me. For thou art my foundation and my refuge. Thou art my
patience, O Lord! thou my hope, O Lord! from my youth. Let us (my God) deal it
thus between us. I, whatsoever I shall do or suffer, will never shrink from thy
cross; give me, I most humbly beseech thee, sufficient patience to bear it
constantly unto the end: for I am well assured, thou sendest^ us adversity to
exerc^se our patience, and to enkindle thereby a greater confidence in thee.
Place me therefore, my Lord, near to thee, and let the power of any whatsoever
fight against me. I fear not now any crosses whatsoever, no enemies can
terrify me, because thou art my patience.

Sect. IV.
PRemeditation (then) is a shield of Adamant against all adversity. It is no
great wound that all the mischiefs in the world can give us, if against these
(as Saint Gregory says) we be guatded by the shield of Providence. A wise man
is not exempted from humane casualties, but from their errors: for all things
happen unto him as he imagined, not as he would. And this is the reason why
nothing is said to happen to a wise man unexpected: for he providently foresee^
in his mind whatsoever impediments may fall out. Wherefore you shall often
hear him say: I will take that voyage if some accident do not cross me: I
will gea such an office, if I be not prevented* such a business will fall out
according to my desire, if no obstacle interpose it self; to morrow I will be
your guest, if by occasions I be no^ diverted; within these two or three days,
if I be in health. I mean to exercise my self in wrestling; the next year (if
God spare one life) I purpose to build. In fine, on this always he reflects,
that something may interpose it self between him and his purposes.

Zeno the Philosopher (armed wi^h this resolution) when he heard his whole
estate was drowned in the sea, answered: Fortune, I applaud thee, now thou
bidst me fall more close to my Philosophy.

It was most wisely and learnedly said of Epictetus: Never attempt any thing,
before thou have considered as well things precedent as subsequent; otherwise
thou shall set upon it rashly, and unadvisedly, as one that has not duly
considered the sequel thereof; and so when afterward any difficulty or
troubles occur, thou will basely give it over. Thou desire (thou say) to
win the Olympian prize. Consider then all circumstances, as well present as
future: and having so done, if thou find any advantage, undertake the
enterprise. Thou* must be precisely careful of thy diet: eat no more then
will suffice nature, abstain from dainy fare, exercise thy body forcibly at
certain hours, accustom it to heat and cold: in any case drink no water, nor
wine but springly: to be short, thou must put thy self into the hands of some
Fencer, to be thy Physician for a time. And after all this, make account to be
cut and mangled in the conflict, to hazard the straining of a hand, or putting
a leg out of joint; besides, thou must be almost choked with dust, soundly
basted and bruised; sometimes overcome, and foiled in the end.

After all these things considered, undertake the combat, if thou will: but if
thou carry not thy self with this circumspection, take heed thou play not as
boys use to do, sometimes the Wrastler, sometimes the Fencer; one while a
Soldier, another while a Tragedian: finally, every thing they see, or wonder
at. After this manner thou may be to day a Wrastler, to morrow a Fencer, the
next day a Philosopher, then an Orator, and indeed nothing in conclusion: but,
like an Ape, thou imitatest whatsoever thou see, pleased now with one thing,
now with another; yet still out of love with that to which thou art accustomed.
And all this, because thou undertakest nothing considerately, nothing clearly
sifted or examined; but rashly, out of the impulsion of a vain and weak desire.

Thou must watch, thou must labor: certain vain affections of thine must be
vanquished, thou must forsake and leave thy kindred and acquaintance: suffer
thy self to be contemned and derided by every boy thou meetest: to Epist. l.
3. dissert. cap. 15. distinctu l^ci^.
be put to the worst in point of Magistracy, honor, judgment, and all things
else. After all these considerations, come and spare not: if by these means
thou desire to vindicate to thy self tranquillity, liberty, and constanty of
mind.

Diogenes being asked, What he had learned in Philosophy, answered readily: To
foresee adversity; and, when it comes, to bear it patiently. Diogenes had
good reason to say so, and Anaxagoras made good proof of it, being apprehended
at Athens, received two messages, both heavy and doleful: The one declared,
That death was denounced against him; to which Anaxagoras answered thus: Nature
has long since decreed the same, both against me, and those that condemn me.
The other gave him to understand, That his children were dead. His answer was:
I was always sure my children were not immortal. These were deadly wounding
darts, yet could not wound Anaxagoras, because they were foreseen.

This is Christian Philosophy: That Christ sending his Apostles into the
theater of the world, said: Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves.
If they have persecuted me, you also will they persecute: They will betray you
in their counsels, and scourge you in their Synagogues; you shall be carried
before Kings and Presidents for my sake. The hour no^ comes, that every one
that shall kill you, will think he does God good service: but this I have said
to you, that when the hour shall come, you may remember that I told you of it.

This the Master has foretold, that the Disciples might consider of it before
hand, as one that is to take a journey, thinks of those things which are wont
to happen to a man in that case: to wit, foul and tempestuous weather, rough
and broken ways, poor, beggarly, and sharking Innes, rude and troublesome
companions, scarcity of money, uncertain weather, wind, rain, weariness, and
many such inconveniences, which doubtless would not seem to the traveller* so
insupportable, if he could truly say: I foresaw all these things.
Contrariwise, the words of those that lament for want of providence, are: I
never expected this chance: who would have thought this? I hoped for much
better: you shall never hear a wise man make these complaints.

I have heard a goodly story of an Abbot, whose custom was, before he received
any novice into his house, to carry him to the top of a tower, and bid him view
as far as he could with his eyes, and think, that if there were as many
crosses as could stand between him and the utmost of his prospect, yet would
they not be so many, as he must expect to bear. Know this, my son, quoth he,
and look for it before hand: Thou shall evermore have thy will crossed in all
things. When thou would pray, thou shall labor; when labor, pray; when
thou have a mind to sleep, thou shall be enforced to watch; when thou desire
to watch, thou shall be commanded to go to bed: when thou have a desire to
speak, thou shall be enjoined silence; when to be silent, thou shall be
commanded to speak. I must deal plainly with thee, thou art often like to hear
thy self ^ll spoken of: innumerable faults will be laid to thy charge, besides
the daily affliction of thy body. When thou shall think thy self to have done
well, to have sung thy part skilfully, thou shall sooner be dispraised and
controlled, then commended and applauded. Accusations many times, (and those
not always true) shall be brought against thee: No appeal, not so much as to
the Court of Chancery, will be admitted: all the amends and right thou will
get, will be thy patience. It may be, thou shall endure all this, fifty or
sixty years, perhaps all thy life. But in case thou meanest not to mortify
thy will, nor to endeavor daily to overcome thy self, get thee gone, my son,
get thee gone, thou will find no entertainment there, nor in any other the
like place whatsoever.

A most sincere speech surely and a wise. And can any admonition be more
properly inculcated to the scholars of this sacred school then this? Foresee
the infinite adversity you are like to endure: Do you think your selves able,
or at least, willing to bear it? If so, well; if not, get ye gone, pack ye
hence; this School is no place for effeminate persons, droans, sluggards, or
loyterers: men that seek their ease, and shun labor, come not here, or if you
do, you shall quickly be excluded; here are no such slothful creatures, Labor
and Patience are chief commanders.

Sect. V.
LET every one foresee the future chances and miseries which are incident to
his state, that he may say with Anaxagoras, I knew this, I foresaw that,
whatsoever happens is no news to me; Perhaps you will say, I have lost my
money, which had I not done, who knows whether I should not have lost my self?
I never posessed money but with a conceit I should lose it: and would to God
with it I had lost my avarice.

But I am poor, poverty I know is no fault: it behooves me therefore to take
heed there be none in the poor man himself.

But I have lost my eie-sight, a great part of innocence consists in blindness.

But I am deprived of my friend, I will seek another, and there, where I am
sure to find one; the firmest and the choicest friends are in heaven, there I
may choose both whom, and as many as I will my self.

But envy will oppress me: and who, I pray, is free from this annoiance, if an
unfortunate man, be not, whom few are wont to envy? but I have lost the favor
of my country: I knew it always to be unconstant, apt to wast and vanish in a
moment, sooner then snow against the sun.

But I am cast down by sickness, this is no wonder, no prodigy, for a man to
besicke who must resolve to die once.

Armed with these and such like cogitations of future chances, we are
restrained from furious phrensies in adversity.

Carneades a Philosopher of great wisdom and judgment, was of opinion that
all grief and discontent in hard and difficult affairs, proceed from this,
that the tempest rusheth upon us unexpected and unprovided for it; So as an
improvident cook i^ troubled at nothing more then when an unexpected company
of strangers suddenly, comes upon him, having neither fire, meat, fruit,
herbs, nor such like necessaries in a readiness: then shall you see him run
about the kitchen, stamp, stare, and scrarch his head, quarrel with all he
meets, stir and scatter the fire all about, throw the pots, skellets, and
platters up and down, thunder out oaths and execrations against the guests,
and amidst these mad furies, make ready their supper, to whom he wishes
plague, famine, and destruction in this choleric ruffle. But much less would
this Cook have been shaken with this sudden tempest, had he but foreseen and
provided for it before hand: we may, and it is in our power to mitigate such
like storms, by foreseeing them, especially by referring them and all things
else, to the will and providence of God.

Felicitas, the mother of seven children, a woman highly commended by Saint
Augustine, being a prisoner, and sharply traveling in childbed, could not
withold her self from s^riking and crying out: One of the Jaylours men
hearing her cry out in that manner, bitterly scoffing, said: O woman! if thou
be not able silently to bear these pains, what will thou do when thou shall
be burned, cut, mangled, and torn in pieces? Know what thou suffer now, is
but in jest, then we shall fall to plain earnest. Her answer to this was most
prudent and Christian like. Rest satisfied, my friend; now I suffer only for
my self, but then Christ will suffer in me. And as she said, so it came to
pass: for when she was afterward thrown to the wild beasts, she neither
shrik't nor cried, nor so much as fetched a sigh. A man would rather have
thought she had been taken out to dance, with so cheerful a countenance did
she welcome death: And all because thou (my Lord) wast her patience.

Just after this manner must we fight, if we look to get the victory. So soon
as any tempest of adversity begins to rise, forthwith let us fly, with all our
heart, to God, and wholly submit our selves to his divine will; yea, even
drench and ingulfe ourselves therein, be sorry, with all our hearts, that we
have sinned and offended him, humbly beg his divine assistance, and firmly
purpose never to depart from him in adversity, trusting in him, and committing
all things else to his providence. This augments our patience, this is that
which makes us bold and fearlesse.

Vitruvius recounts, that Aristippus, when he was, by the violence of the sea,
cast upon the Isle of Rhodes, in a torn and weather-beaten ship, found, after
he had a while curiously looked about, certain Mathematical figures drawn with
a compass upon the shore; whereupon, turning to his companions, Be of good
comfort, my friends, quoth he, there is yet some hope: for we may see here have
been men.

Whenever we turn our selves to God in prayer, we read in him the characters
of his immense power, and our own beatitude, written and engraved there. Let
us therefore hope well and be consident, even after shipwreck: let neither
loss of money, fame, nor any thing else grieve us, having heaven it self
promised us.

What a poor thing is it to grieve at the loss of a few farthings, being to
receive a kingdom? why fear we to dye, being to be transferred to
immortality? After all tempests and shipwrackes, our good God will bring us to
a safe and sure haven if (my dear Christian brother) thou do but offer thy
self, how poor and miserable soever to his divine goodness.

The Acaronites being infested with mice, made images of those creatures in
gold, and offered them to God; and found thereby a remedy of that mischief.
The Israelites likewise, stung by Serpents, were cured by the brazen Serpent:
so it goes with us; the very same weapon that inflicts the wound heales it;
calamity whilst it oppresses us, erects us to Godward, (supposing the fault
be not in our selves) if we prepare our soul to temptation. For God is clement
and merciful, and will remit our sins in the day of tribulation; he is the
protector of all that seek for him in truth.

CHAP. VI. That all afflictions are to be suffered with conformity and
resignation to the will of God.
THey say, an Egg swimmes in brine, but sinkes in sweet fresh water. David
King of Jerusalem, amongst so many public and private calamities, amidst the
funerals and slaughters of his fr^ends, involved in so many miseries and
desolations swamme always, as it were, in most salt and brinish waters, with a
brave and heroi^ke spirit. A man according to the heart of God, who conformed
and fashioned himself most exactly to his divine will and providence in all
things. But contrariwise his son Solomon was like an Egg drowned in the
sweet and fresh pooles of pleasures and delights. It was not for that Solomon
knew not the will of God, but because he conformed not himself unto it.

In our third part we have set down five means by which all kinds of
adversities are to be endured. 1. patientently. 2. cheerfully. 3. constantly.
4. with thankes-giving. 5. with premeditation. the 6. and last, but the most
profitable and necessary, is this which follows, to wit, with conformation of
our will to Gods. And allbeit I have already treated of this conformity to the
will of God in my five books entitled Helitropium, yet I will here in as
brief a manner as I can confirm it, seeing it is so necessary for the
instruction of patience, but will not make any repetition of that which has
been said before.

No will either of men or Angels could ever be termed good, or well directed,
unless it were correspondent and conformed to the will of God. And the more
fully and sincerely it is resigned, the more perfect and better it is. And
consequently the less absolute and resigned the will is, the more unstable and
unperfect. The will of God alone is the square and rule of all wills both in
heaven and earth. There is no will praiseworthy, which is not conformed to the
will of God.

That most blessed King David often commends those that are of an upright
heart: Show, says he, thy mercy to them that know thee, and thy justice to
those that are upright of heart. This, Saint Augustine, a most learned
interpreter, explicateth in this manner: They, says he, are upright of heart,
who in this life follow the will of God. It is the will of God thou should
sometimes be sick, sometimes well. If when thou art in health the will of God
be sweet and pleasing unto thee, and if sick, harsh and distastefull, thou art
not upright of heart: why? because thou will not square and direct thy will to
the will of God, but rather seek to pervert and wrest the will of God to
thine. His will is straight, thine crooked. Thou must rectify thy will
according to his, not wrest his to thine; and thus doing thou shall have an
upright heart. Do al! things succeed according to thy hearts desire? Bless
God who comforts thee: Suffer thou in this world? Bless God who corrects
and tries thee. And by this means thou shall be upright of heart, saying I will
bless God in all times; for he only is thought to have an upright heart, who
wills always that which God wills.

This one document in this respect goes beyond all other precepts; this is the
sum and principal effect of all admonitions; the abstract and epitome of
holy Scripture: the compendium of all virtues: the chiefest solace in
whatsoever griefs; the highest pitch of divine love: the only thing that
intitles the disciples of the cross to Paradise, and advances men to the
seats of Angels: This one lesson, namely, for man to conform his will, to Gods
will, is all in all, and before all to be learned of all men: For whosoever
has learned this alone in the School of Patience, may in a manner give up
school, and of a scholar become a master and teacher of others.

This certainly King David might by good right challenge to himself before all
others, being a man so well acquainted with the will of God; of which divine
knowledge he gave many most remarkable proofs, but then chiefly, when flying
from his son Absolon, he willed the Priests to return with the arc, and said:
If I shall find favor in the eyes of my Lord, he will bring me back, and show
it me again, and his tabernacle: but if he shall say to me thou please me
not, I am ready prepared, let him do what seems good to himself.

Behold here King David, who even in a flight so full of danger and difficulty,
put to his utmost plunges, when his whole kingdom seemed to lie at stake, was
undaunted, and so much himself, that attending resolutely to the will of God
alone, yea and to the least sign thereof, he willed only that which God
willed. Is it the will of God I should return? It is my will also. Would he not
have me return? I will not go back; Let my Lord do what seems good in his own
sight, I am prepared.

Sect. II.
O Christians! if we could but once sufficiently apprehend this, if we would
but deeply imprint it in our minds, the whole matter were absolutely effected:
calamity perhaps might touch us, but from thence forward should never hurt us,
nor affliction oppress us, nor mortal man be able to annoy us: we should
stand invincible, impregnable, fortified only with the will of God, our goods
perhaps, our money, our health, our fame might go to wrack; But we should
stand: Cities and Kingdoms might fall to ruin; But we should stand; Atlas, and
all the world with him might fall to destruction; But we should stand; The
heavens themselves might be dissolved; But we should stand immovable, as long
as this conformity of our will with Gods, should stand in us. This most
evidently appeared in Christ at mount Olivet, the day before his passion; For
after he had wholly resigned his will to his Fathers, he forthwith made toward
his enemies, as an innocent lamb goes toward the butcher to be slaughtered;
before he made this prayer, he was all appaled, pusillanimous and troubled at
the approach of so horrible a death; but after, when he had absolutely
conformed his will to the will of his Father: Arise, quoth he, come, let us go
and throw our selves into the arms of our enemy, and receive his kisses.

This prompt resignation and conformity with the will of God, makes a man
undertake all: he is thereby so strong and mighty, he performs all, so stout
and courageous he vanquishes all enemies, so invincible and inexpugnable, he
gets the upper hand and overcomes whatsoever he encounters. And therefore the
more devoted and ready a man is to accomplish the will of God, the more
powerful and able he is to do or suffer whatsoever he undertakes. There is no
calamity, no grief can draw other words from him then these: As it has
pleased our Lord, so is it come to pass, so let it come to pass; for from him
is my patience; which Saint Augustine excellently well expresses, saying; what
patience could ever hold out so many scandalls, were it not for hope of that
which as yet we see not, but expect with patience? My pains and griefs now
approach, my rest and quietness are likewise at hand: my tribulation now
assailes me, and the time will come ere long I shall be clearly purged from it:
would you have gold bright and pure before it comes out of the goldsmiths
forge? content your self, you shall shortly see it shine in a jewel or golden
carcanet: let it a Gods name pass the forge, that, when it is purified, it may
come to light. In the forge there is fuel, gold and fire, which the goldsmiths
blows: the coals burn in the forge, the gold is purged, the one is turned to
ashes, the other tried and refined. This world is a forge or furnace; wicked
men are fuel, just men the gold, tribulation the fire, and God the Goldsmiths.
Wherefore as the Goldsmiths pleases to dispose of me I am content: my part is
to suffer, and his to purify: let the fuel burn till it even melt and seem to
consume me, when it is burnt to ashes, I shall be purged and refined: and why?
because my soul shall be subjected unto God.

Behold an entire and perfect concordance of the will of man with the will of
God: whereof that religious writer spoke most truly: There is not, says he,
any sacrifice greater or more acceptable to God, then for a man in all
tribulation to conform himself to Gods blessed will and pleasure.

Oftentimes did God, as one would have thought, show himself mutable and
unconstant toward Abraham, as if he would do one while one thing, another
while another, and cross and command contrary to his own commandments; which
he did, doubtless, to this end, to increase in so faithful a servant, this
conformity of his will with his Lords. Mark advisedly the mind of Abraham: How
often soever God varied his commands, were the labors never so troublesome,
that he enjoined him, the trials and exercises never so bitter that he put upon
him, Abraham was still ready at every turn, every the least beck and sign of
Gods will, to will or nill the same with God.

Sect. III.
We may observe a great difference between the Scholars of Patience: Some you
shall see come to the School bare-headed, and without a hat, barefoot and
bare-leg'd, and without a cloak, after the manner of poor people; others
without any use of feet at all, rather creeping then going to this School:
Another sort of them that come indeed on their feet, and in apparel decent
enough, but without either paper, pen, ink, or books, quite destitute of means
to learn: Others accommodated well enough with these accomplishme^ts, but not
so much as a penny in their purse to pay their master. Others have pay
sufficient to entertain their master, but want wit themselves to entertain
learning. Finally, there are some great men's sons, who come on horseback, or
in coach to the School of Patience, with much ease, and very commodiously.

Those of the first sort come to this School, without either hat, shoes, or
cloak, as being yet impatient, having not so much as learnt to bear adversity
patiently: they cannot so much as dissemble or hide their impatience; men
without hat or cloak; too apparently unperfect.

The other sort creep miserably to this School, some patience indeed they have
learned, which would prove none at all, were it not perforce; and fear, or
money persuades them to that patience which they make show of. These,
doubtless, suffer nothing with a cheerful heart.

The third sort come indeed to the School of Patience, but utterly destitute of
all Scholastic furniture, like Scholars that come at all adventures, and ex
tempore they will sit, perhaps, an hour or two and hearken attentively; but
soon will they wax weary, unconstant, and in fine forsake the School: they have
a wandering mind, indocible, and constantly not capable of any thing.

Now some there are that come better prepared to hear their master, but
without stipend to consider him for his pains. The due entertainment and salary
which Scholars in the School of Patience should give to their master, is,
Thanksgiving in adversity: this many of them, through dullness of wit,
apprehend not; or if they do, regard not. Notwithstanding these bear the show
of constant proficients, and capable enough of other School-disciplines; but to
render thanks to God for stripes and afflictions, this surely they have not
yet learned; and consequently are much hindered by poverty, from paying dues to
their master.

But, perhaps, others there are, that want not so much pay* for their masters,
as wit themselves; insomuch that they suffer grief and adversity without all
premeditation. This argues a great defect of wit, not to foresee those things
which may and are wont to befall every man, and to use those poor silly words:
I would never have thought it.

Finally, others are carried on horseback, or in wagons, both to and from the
School of Patience; men highly enriched with divine favors, and who resign
themselves wholly to Gods will in all things; but especially in adversity;
which, doubtless, works this effect in them, not so much to render them not
sensible of the cross, as to bear it with facility, having always a most
attentive eye upon the will of God. These do not only patiently, cheerfully,
constantly, but even with thanksgiving, and not without premeditation; and,
which is the chiefest matter of all, with great conformity of their will to
Gods, bear all adversity whatsoever. All things go well with these men, even
when they go worst* for they are carried safe and sure in the chariot of divine
providence. Every one of these have in their mouths these words: The Lord
rules m^, and nothing shall be wanting to me. The Lord is careful of me. All
things correspond to these men's wishes; all things sort to their wills, and even
before they will it; seeing the main scope of their wills is, To will that
which God wills. Are they sick, or ill at ease? they know that this is part of
Gods will. Do they undergo labors, fears, endammagements? They know th^se
things usually come to pass, and are rather decretall, then accidental. Do
they behold the heavy departure of some of their friends? the immature death
of other some of them? They acknowledge life, death, and whatsoever passes in
the course of our life, to be the will of God. Thus they assent to God in all
things, they follow God: not upon necessity, nor by compulsion; but willingly,
and with all their hearts. They never entertain any thing (how bitter soever it
be) with sad or sour looks: whatsoever tribute is exacted from them in this
life, they yield it willingly.

For all things which we fear or groan under in this world, are but tributes
of this life, whereof we must neither hope nor f^^ for immunity. To conclude,
these people, who are so observing of the divine will, do like a skillful
harper, who straineth, sets up and lets down the strings of his harp,
till he brings them at last to perfect concordance: So whosoever desires to
make his will consonant to Gods, must never cease to incite, urge, instruct and
correct his own, till it be perfectly subjected to the will of God.

According to that expostulation which the Kingly Psalmist used in singular
manner with himself: shall not my soul be subject to God? for of him is my
salvation. As it has pleased our Lord, so is it done: as it shall be the will
in heaven, so be it done. Shall not therefore my soul be subject unto God? The
Hebrew has it: Shall not my soul be silent to God? As if he should have said:
In all things that befall me, I am most religiously silent, I utter not a word,
resting most content with Gods blessed will and decree. To God it belongs to
command and govern, to me to obey: Thus I go upon sure grounds. But if I find
my will refractory, then I fall to asking that, which that most faithful
servant of God did: Behold, my loving Father, I am in thy hands, under the rod
of thy correction, I submit my self; strike this back, this stubborn neck of
mine, make my crookedness pliant to thy will, vouchsafe Thomas de Kemp. ^mit.
Christi l. 3. C. 50.
me above all things to seek always after thy will and good pleasure.

Sect. IV.
NEither ought this conformity of man's will to Gods, seem hard to any one.
What have we more in our power then to will or nill? And what is more familiar,
or less troublesome to a man, then to grant or deny?

Alexander King of Macedon undertook the study of Geometry, having a great
desire to know how big the circuit of the whole earth was, whereof then he
possessed but the least part. The precepts which were given him were subtle, and
not to be learned without diligent attention, a thing not so easy for a
military man, whose cogitations, for the most part, were wandering beyond seas.
This scholar therefore wil'd his master to teach him only some easy
observations. His masters answer was, that these precepts were to every man the
same, and of like difficulty to all.

I may in a manner say the same, concerning the conformity of man's will with
Gods: these are to al men one and the same, to Will or Nill ought seem to every
one of like facility: We are all indifferently both poor and rich of equal
ability, without any labor or cost of ours, to Will or Nill infinite things:
yea, every day we infinitely Will or Nill. But to Will or Nill many things, is
no commendation to us, unless both the one and the other be conformable to the
will of God: this is virtue, this is praiseworthy indeed.

Palladius and Ruffinus recount a wonderful story: Paphnutius persuaded
himself he had so profited in the way of our Lord, that out of a sincere and
pious curiosity, he besought God to declare unto him whether any man in the
world were equal to him in piety of life. The divine goodness condescended to
his request, and commanded an Angel to signify unto him, that there was a
poor Piper in a village not far off, who was altogether his equal in
sanctity. Paphnutius stood amazed at this message, and musing much with
himself: Is it so indeed (thought he) have thou endeavored so many years
with so little profit, that thou art only equalled now with a poor minstrell?
And forthwith he undertook, with all the industry he might, to find out this
man, and seriously enquired of him, what course of life he led, and what
virtues he most practiced? The poor man smiling at so curious a question,
began plainly to confess the truth: In times past, said he, I was a thief
and robber on the high way, now a Piper. For my virtues, good man, it is in
vain to ask of them; I have none, and therefore can give you no account of
their names. Paphnutius persisted still to urge, wishing him at least to tell,
whether he had at any time done any good or notable act. Alas, sir! quoth he,
it is lost labor to sift into my conscience; you shall find it utterly barren
and fruitless. I have been a slave to lust and drunkenness: yet this one
thing I remember, that once we took a religious woman, to whom my fellows
would have offered violence, had not I delivered her, and conducted her safe to
the next town: Another act of mine likewise comes to my mind, seeing you
press me so far, and are pleased to hear, what perhaps is not fitting for me
to utter.

Some few years since, I found a fair comely young woman wandering in the woods,
bitterly weeping; and asking the cause of her tears: Question me not, said
she, who am the most unfortunate woman living: but if you can help me to any
service, dispose of me at your pleasure; my poor distressed husband, bound for
a huge unpayable debt of another man's, lies in prison almost at the point of
death: neither have I any hope of his liberty; Three sons of late I had, which
now, alas! I can no longer call mine, the creditours having seized upon them to
serve as slaves in lieu of the debt; I my self, sought after to be used in the
same manner, have fled hither almost consumed with hunger and misery, destitute
of all counsel, help or comfort. At this doleful relation, I, said the
minstrell, being ready to commiserate persons so unmercifully handled,
supposing it to be the blessed will and pleasure of God to give so good an
occasion and object of charity, brought this poor woman almost famished to my
house, where when I had refreshed her with meat, relying on the great goodness
of God, I brought her back to the city from whence she came, and with a sum of
money redeemed and set at liberty both her husband and children.

Now, reverend Sir, ask me no more questions, I beseech you, I have given you
already a list of all my virtues; I could much sooner have given you one of my
vices.

But I, said Paphnutius, fetching a deep sigh, have understood that thou art
nothing inferior to me, who inhabit the desert, and afflict my body with
rigor and austerity; seeing therefore thou art so much in Gods favor, that
scarcely any of his servants are in more, and seeing a zealous will and desire
only to be holy, is the prime sourse and welspring of all sanctity, have a
care, I beseech thee, of thy self; do but once seriously will and desire it,
and it is as good as effected; this only is to be done, deny thy self, take
up thy cross, and follow Christ; At this the minstrell, as if he had clearly
heard these words spoken and commanded by God himself, throwing away his pipe,
which he had then in his hand, performed it presently, and followed Paphnutius.

Here may I with just cause exclaim. Take heed; O you scholars! who persuade
your selves you have profited so much in the School of Patience; take heed, I
say, lest these very punies go beyond you. It is the custom now and then in
Schools, to call a petty out of the lowest form, to tell some blockish scholar
of the highest, wherein he has grossly erred; we may almost see the like in
this. Thieves and pipers, scholars of the lowest class, oftentimes shame those
who are high, proud, and impatient.

This man bears away the prise, that wills all as God wills, and nills as he
nills. This doubtless is the most learned, the most patient, the most singular
of all the rest, who has his will most resigned and united to God; He carries
all clearly before him, who resignes his will wholly to the will of God. Do but
say, I will, and the palm of Patience is thine.

Sect. V.
BUt this mischievous word why, troubles many in the School of Patience; why
does God this, why that? Why punishes he innocents, and dismisseth guilty
persons? Why permits he so many, and such wicked enormities? Why will he have
all done according to his will and pleasure? This was the question the serpent
asked the mother of mankind in Paradise: why has God given you this
commandment, that you should not eat of all the trees of Paradise?

That, why, proceeding from the serpent, must be utterly banished from the
School of Patience: it is a serious charge from our master: that it should not
be so much as named amongst you.

Saint Augustine gives a most exact answer to these serpents, saying; why do
thunderbolts strike sometimes the mountain, and spare the thief? Because
perhaps God expects as yet the theefs conversion, and therefore strikes the
mountain that fears not, to convert that man who is capable of fear; thou
do now and then the like, striking the ground when thou give correction,
that thy child may be frighted thereat. But thou answerest me: behold he
punishes sometimes the innocent, and pardons the guilty; what wonder? a good
man always and in all places is ready for a good end; but how can thou
possibly know what punishment is reserved, for that wicked person, unless he
repent him? How much rather would they (who at the day of Judgment shall hear
these dreadful words, go ye cursed into everlasting fire) be consumed with
thunder and lightning? It behooves thee to be innocent. For what matter is it
whether a man die by shipwreck, or by a fever? we can neither say the one is
an il death, nor the other a good; But whether he die by one or other, enquire
of what course of life the man is that dies, whither he shall go after death,
not by what accident he came to his death; Howsoever it be, live thou in fear,
and see thou be good, by what death soever it pleases God to take thee hence,
let him find thee provided.

Whatsoever therefore, as the same Saint Augustine says, happens in this world
contrary to our will, know it happens not without the will of God, by his
providence, by his ordinance, and express order; and albeit we neither
understand it, nor the end for which it is done, yet let us ascribe so much to
his providence, that it is not done without cause. For when we presume to
dispute the works of God: as, why did h^ this, why that, and, he should not
have done thus, he has done amiss in so doing; where I beseech you, is your
praise of God; you have lost your Alleluja. Consider all things in such sort
that you may please God, and praise him that made them. When you enter into a
Smiths forge, you would not, doubtless, presume to find fault with his
bellows, his hammers or anvill; presumest thou not to question a rude smith in
his forge, and will thou be so bold with God in his workmanship of this world?
It is the property of an unskilful man to reprehend all he sees; you shall
have another more skillful then he, albeit better acquainted with the
artificer, and consequently might be more familiar, yet knowing him to be a man
that understands his trade, will say; Questionless he had some reason to place
his bellows rather here then in another place; the workman himself knows why,
although I do not.

That we may be therefore willing to embrace the will of so dear and loving a
Father, the same Saint Augustine encourages us, and lays before our eyes the
hereditary delights of eternity, saying; Thy God, thy Redeemer, he that, for
thy good, has brought thee under, and chastised thee, as a father instructs
thee. To what end? Mary, to settle upon thee an inheritance, to which thou art
no^ to succeed by dispossessing thy Father, but by possessing thy Father
himself for an inheritance. This is the hope for which thou art instructed,
and do thou murmur? Whither will thou go from his Spirit? Admit he should
leave thee at thine own liberty, and not chastise thee; Say he should suffer
thee to blaspheme at thy pleasure, shall thou not at l^st feel the smart of his
judgment? Is it not much better thy Father should afflict, and receive thee;
then spare, and forsake thee?

Do rejoice? Acknowledge thy fathers cherishing. Art thou in tribulation?
Acknowledge thy Fathers correction. And remember this, that whether he cherish
or correct, he instructs him, for whom he prepares a kingdom.

Moreover, Almighty God, as witnesses the same Saint Augustine, orders and
disposes so of the sins of all men, that all those things, which were objects
of delight to them in their sin, may be instruments for our Lord in his
punishment. For God said, Be darkness made, and it was made: yet did he
dispose of it when it was made: He likewise permits sins, albeit he commit
none, and orders and disposes of them afterward, and by this means executes his
will efficaciously in all things. But now I request all to mark attentively:
for I purpose to make a brief recapitulation of whatsoever I have said before.

Sect. VI.
BEfore the creation of the world, there was nothing but a mere vacuity; yea,
there was nothing else besides the most mighty and most merciful God, who
alone was most sufficient to himself, and without all things created most
blessed and happy, having in himself from all eternity, and to this very
instant, the Idea of all things; so perfect, that not one jot, point o^ tittle,
as I may say, was wanting either in his will or understanding. According to
this Idea of his will and understanding, he created all things in perfection;
all good, doubtless, very good. All which he cease not to govern, preserve
and dispose every moment in a most singular order.

That end which God from all eternity has prescribed to himself in all things,
he acquires from time to time. And which most declares his infinite power and
goodness; he as carefully directs the least things, as the greatest; he as
provident every moment directs every man in particular, as all men in general;
yea, he so tenderly and lovingly diverts even the least things belonging to
each man, that there is none of them, but are designed for an excellent end,
were it not that the will of man does prejudice it self, dissenting from the
supreme will of God.

No one, be he man or Angel, can ever alter or hinder what God has registered
from all eternity, what he has determined to do or permit. He has numbered and
considered the very hairs of all creatures, the sands of the sea, the leaves of
the trees; even the least birds, the Sparrows, the Wrens, the motes of the air;
all, even all the cogitations both of men* and Angels.

What then can thou complain of, as if God regarded not thy calamities, as if
he did not providently enough govern thee and thy affairs, or give too much
liberty to thine enemies, or amongst such a multitude of men and matters,
neglect thee alone? Foolish man! Will thou still be muttering these things to
thy self? Know that God disposes all things in number, weight, and measure,
even thy affairs, even the least thing thou take in hand.

Call to mind, I beseech thee, and consider thy life past, and note whatsoever
thou would have had, in the whole course thereof, to have happened
otherwise. Observe withal, that even this thing was by God brought most
exactly to his own Idea; that is to say, to what has pleased him from all
eternity, so has it succeeded, so shall it hence forward succeed. Not so much
as one jot, or one tittle, has passed, nor shall pass in time to come, till
all be performed according to this Idea of God.

The sacred will of God shall stand most steadfast and inviolable. And tell me,
I pray thee, what availed it thee then, to vex, grieve, and perplex thy self
in vain, and to trouble others so much? What will thou get now by tossing or
turmoiling? Let me persuade thee not to stumble again at the same stone; put on
a mind of resignation, submit thy self freely and entirely to the will of God;
mount up into this Chariot of Gods providence; fear nothing, it is impossible
to miscarry: without Gods will and permission, the least thought, the least
finger, the poorest more in the world is not able to stir against thee.

And as well for what is past, as for what is to come, let my persuasion take
place: Consider, I beseech thee, what small interest thy will or power has in
any of them: So little, that thou can seldom foresee what will happen
hereafter. Tell me, what kind of Summer shall we have next year? If a dry and
barren one, dearth, plague and famine will ensue. What then will it avail thee
to foresee or grieve at this? The like may be said of all things else. In very
deed thou can neither obtain what is good, nor foresee or shun what is
evil, unless it be the will of God; refigne therefore thy will to his.

It is in vain to vex and trouble thy self; to strive or strugle; it is lost
labor to plot or build, unless the will of God concur thereunto: Thou shall
not prevail, thou shall not profit, unless thou will that which God wills.

Be sure therefore to perform this; submit thy self in all things to the will
and pleasure of God. And I most earnestly crave this one thing, that thou
would every day serioufly weigh and consider in thy mind, as most certain,
That God from all eternity has prepared for thee this cross, and determined
to lay it upon thee, together, with all the circumstances of place, time and
persons; and that he has, according to his infinite wisdom and goodness,
squared and proportioned it agreeable to thy forces. It remains now only, that
thou should be willing to make benefit thereby; and this assuredly will be
very great, if thou will but resign and accommodate thy will to Gods will.

Wherefore, upon every such occasion, discourse thus: This, doubtless, comes
from God, and therefore is for the best. This injury, this disease, this
poverty, this trouble or misery, is directly from God, and therefore can import
no evil unto me, unless my will dissent from Gods will. But take heed thou
never utter such kind of words as these: Were it but this or that cross, it
would never grieve me. A poor and idle complaint. This cross or that cross,
how terrible soever unto thee, embrace, and for this cause only, that it is
the will of God to exercise thee with this and that, and with no other. See
therefore thy will be one and the same with Gods: or if thou will follow thy
own, be sure to perish.

Sect. VII.
AS for that pernicious Serpents, Why, as why does God oftentimes show himself
so benign to those that are estranged from him; and, for the most part, so
severe to his servants? etc. We must exactly know this, that it is the most
just and upright w^ll of God; by adversity questionless many thousands of men
are corrected and reformed, but scarcely any one by prosperity. Felicity is the
stepmother of virtue, she flatters her favorites, that she may have the more
advantage to hurt them.

There are some that seem happy to themselves, but it is only in their own
opinion, which being false, ad ^ little to their felicity, but much to their
misery. For to be ignorant of a man's own misery, is the height of infelicity.
Pompey the great deemed himself happy. But if we seriously consider the
matter, he was never so indeed, no no^ even then, when he was in a flourishing
estate esteemed most happy. His end made proof thereof, being forced to yield
up his head and life to the executioners sword.

Policrates, King of the Samites, was thought in his time the very darling of
Fortune, he had never any adversity in his life; heavens, sea and land, all
favored him. All his enterprises had a facile and happy success: whatsoever
he hoped for, he reaped the fruit thereof; it was no more but wish and have,
his will and power were all one. Fortune but once frowned upon Policrates, when
he had a short pang of grief; and (forsooth) to appease the Goddess Nemesis,
lest he of all men should be said to be altogether exempt from misfortunes, he
threw a ring of great value, and much esteemed by him, into the sea.
Nevertheless, this he soon after recovered, it being found in the belly of a
Fish which had devoured it. Notwithstanding, at length, he ended all his
felicity upon a high cross, whereon he was put to death. For by Orontes, one
of the Noble men belonging to King Darius, he was fastened upon a cross on the
top of mount Mycalis, where he was made a miserable, but an eminent spectacle
of false and deceitful felicity.

But these, say thou, are profane stories. Behold then, Aman tottering aloft
in the air, near allied to Policrates, enshrined in a monument not much
unlike, and altogether as high. Aman had long abounded in wealth, was most
h^ppy in a wife, and a flourishing off spring; friends he had many, and King
Ahashuerus himself the principal: Aman had all the world at will. But what, I
pray you? The Epilogue of all this so great felicity was knit up on a gibbet.
This was the fabric which Aman had built for himself, whether he would or no:
So the corn falls with too much rankness: So the boughs of trees,
over-burdened with fruit, are broken: So the greatest calm at sea, foreshews
the fiercest storm. The same may be said of men's lives and manners.

Men's minds with wealth, ease, and dainty fare, run riot. The Moon ever
waneth, when she is come once to the full: and the further from the Sun, the
fuller she i^; the more you feed and pamper your horse, the less tractable
will he be to his rider: So man, for the most part, the more he is in
prosperity, the further he is from his God.

Hence was it that God in times past complained of his people: I satiated them,
and they became adulterers: They were pampered and fattened, and foully
transgressed my words. Where felicity reigns, there virtue commonly is exiled.

Saint Ambrose, Bishop of Millan, as Paulinus recounteth, visited a certain
rich man upon the way as he traveled; who, when he had entertained and
refreshed him, as well with pleasant discourse, as good cheer, he made a long
relation of his own course of life, alleging, that he had never had any
cross, or adversity, that all things had succeeded, not only answerable, but
even beyond his expectation, before he desired them; yea more then he could
desire, so that he never knew what belonged to calamity. Saint Ambrose was much
astonished* at this, and forthwith, as if some* sudden occasion had called him
away, took his leave of that fortunate man and his house both at an instant.
The reason he gave to his followers, of this his speedy departure, was this;
That he feared the rest of his entertainment would be but bad, in a house so
extremely happy, and with a man who all his life time had never tasted
adversity. Wherefore he thought it expedient to fly thence in all haste, lest
they together with such an host should be involved in the same ruin. Saint
Ambrose had not gone far from thence, before the house with a sudden and
unexpected downfall, overwhelmed and buried all the inhabitants.

How much better is it then to dwell with them, who are in this world tossed
and turmoiled with storms, to acquire thereby rest and happiness, where ruin
and destruction are not to be feared? Here we lead a life continually infested
with temptations, always exposed to great and mafold dangers, and till we
depart out of this world, are never secure; but this (whether it be known or
unknown to those who dream of having their felicity here) exempts them not from
being altogether as miserable. There can be no true felicity subject to error
and peril. He is only happy, who resigning himself wholly to the will of
God, sits aloft in the chariot of divine providence.

Sir Thomas Moore, a most illustrious example of patience, submitted entirely
his will to the will of God, after this manner: At his return from an Embassage
wherein he was employed beyond seas, and attending the King far ^^om his own
house, in the month ^^ August, word was brought him from his wife, by his
son-in-lawes letters, that part of his house, and all his barns full of corn,
were by the negligence or some neighbor, burned to the ground. Sir Thomas
wrote back thus to his wife in a most Angelical manner:

Much health and safety (Lady Aloysia;) I understand that our, and some of our
neighbors barns are burned: the loss, doubtless, of so plentiful a
provision of corn (but that it is the will of God) were much to be lamented.
But seeing it has so pleased God, we ought surely to take this punishment as
from his hand, not only patiently, but even willingly. Whatsoever we have
lost, we have received from our Lord. And seeing it has pleased him to take it
from us again, our Lords will be done. Let us not murmur, or repine at this
accident, but (...) h^c, Christian^ lector, n^^^, no^^*
take it in good part, and render great thanks to God as well in adversity as
prosperity. And if we consider the matter as we should, this loss is a greater
benefit from God, then whatsoever gain: for how much it imports to our
salvation, it is better known to God then our selves.

I beseech you therefore, not to be dismayed, but take with you all your family
to the Church, and give most humble thanks to God, as well for that he has
given us, and now taken from us, as for that which he has left us. God can
with great facility, when he pleases, increase that which remains; and if it
seem good to him to take more from us, as it shall please our Lord, so let it
be done.

Moreover let enquiry be made what damage our neigbours have sustained, and
wish them not to be contristated therewith; for I will never suffer any
neighbor of mine to be endammaged by any loss or mischance that may happen to
my domestical estate, tho I should forgo all my household furniture, even to
the value of a spoon.

I pray thee, my dear Aloysia, rejoice with all my children and family in our
Lord. All these commodities, and we our selves are in the hands of God, let us
depend wholly on his will, and ^^ loss shall ever prejudice us. Farewell, from
the Court at Woodstocke this 13. of Sept. An. 1529.

O my God! what a sincere resignation was this to thy will? what a letter was
this of a true upright hearted man? Here we may see a father of a family, a
great proficient in the School of Patience: here was a man, here was a man
indeed, who was able, through an entire conformity to the will of God, so
sweetly to bear a loss of such importance. Behold here an Ostrich, that could
devour and digest iron; His barns were fited, but not his mind. This
patience, preserved and firmly fortified.

And see how the infinite liberality of God repaired this loss, as he did the
calamities of Job, with manifold increase. In the month of September this
sorrowful news was brought to Saint Thomas More, and in October next ensuing
he was declared high Chancelour of England; and not only that dignity was
conferred upon him, but a new addition also was made to his revenues; whereby
he might both reedifie his old barns, and build new if he pleased. This is the
usual manner of God; He brings men down even as low as hell, and reduces
them again.

To this Lord Chancelour of England, I annex a Prince of Spain, Francis
Borgias, the third General of the Society of Jesus. This Borgias took his
journey toward Septimanca, where the Society had a noviceship, and being
benighted in the way, a cold piercing wind, a huge driving snow, and the
darkness of the night intercepted his passage.

At last through snow and darkness, very late in the night, he came to the
place; yet was he not here free from the sharpness of the weather; for when he
was now at the College gates, all the Colledgiates being in bed, and fast in
their first sleep, he knocked again and again, and many times, and no man made
answer, insomuch that they seemed all rather dead then asleep, and which was
another inconvenience, the house it self was far distant from the gates; all
this wh^le the wind blew bitterly, and pierced this weary travailer: hunger
afflicted him, snow covered this good father and made him all white, after long
attendance, at last the novices awaked and opened the gates: when he was let in
so far was he from reprehending or blaming them, or showing an austere
countenance, or giving sharp words, that he seemed rather full of
cheerfullnesse, and to take comfort therein; the brothers of the society on the
other side stood all abashed at their sleepines and negligence, humbly begging
pardon of the good father, that they had suffered him in so bitter a cold night
to stand so long at the gates; but Borgias, albeit he were almost starved to
death, answered with a clear and smiling countenance you have no reason, my
dear children, to grieve a^ what happened to me; for my meditation whilst I
stood so attending was this, That even as a great Prince would be delighted to
see a bear, a lion, or some such like beast hunted in the chase or baited at a
stake, so my God solaceth himself to see me, no better then a beast, pelted
with soft flakes of snow, which cannot hurt, but somewhat efflict and perplex
me. It was the will of God, and his providence that this should fall upon me;
let us likewise will that which God wills; and rejoice when he extends his
favor toward us, although he please to put upon us a sharper trial then
ordinary.

This is true magnanimity indeed, and the only way to mitigate adversity, by
resigning thus our wills to the will of God, with a true conformity, and
perfect resignation, without the least contradiction.

But to this Duke of Gandia, I will ad the most renowned Princess Lady
Magdalena Neoburgica, that the examples the newer they be, may the more
effectually move us. This Princess worthy of all praise and happy memory, whom
I purpose elsewhere to commend more at large, was sister to Maximilian, that
most famous Electour, and wife to William Neoburgicus, the most honorable Duke
of Wolfangium, she died in the year 1628. upon the five and twenty day of
September. This most choice and singular Lady, I say, constantly exercised
herself in all virtuous actions, but above all, her principal endeavor was
most exactly to join her will with Gods will. All adverse chances, whereof
many happened daily, she cheerfully accepted from the hand of God, as special
favors; she was invincible in suffering courageously all sinister actions
whatsoever for Gods sake. In which Art, by continual practice, she had at last
so inured her mind, that in the four last years of her life, wherein she
happily endeavored to attain to perfection in this virtue, it was oftentimes
found in a little note-boke of hers, that she conformed her will with Gods,
more then an hundred times in a day.

Questionless, to live according to the will of God, is a true life indeed,
and death to live otherwise: whereof Saint Augustine speaks most elegantly,
Aug. tom iosorm de verb. Apost. c. rca med.
saying; That certain Philosophers of the Epicures, who lived according to the
flesh; and certain of the Stoics, who lived according to the soul and spirit,
contended with Saint Paul the Apostle, who lived according to God. The Epicure
said, My chiefest good is to enjoy the flesh. The Stoic, Mine to enjoy my
spirit and soul. The Apostle said; But my chiefest good is to adhere to God.
The Epicure erres, the Stoic is deceived, the Christian, who adheres to God
and the divine will, can neither err nor be deceived. For then the soul may be
said to live well, when it neither lives according to the flesh, nor according
to it self, but according to the will of God. For as the soul is the life of
the flesh, so is God the life of the soul.

Sect. VIII.
WHy then should we not freely embrace this one only will of God, being most
assuredly the best, and the holiest; Why should we not rather conform our
selves to it of our own accord, then be drawn to it, whether we will or no? Why
do we not so firmly and absolutely resolve to accommodate our will to his, that
we may do or suffer whatsoever is his holy will and pleasure?

Finally, that man is the true scholar of patience, and truly patient indeed,
who in all his sufferings, repeats this one saying; I will only the will of
God. God knows what is expedient, both publicly and privately, for his glory
and our salvation. But for so much as I am ignorant of this; What can I justly
fear, or hope for, what can I more piously rejoice or grieve for, then for thy
will (my God) and the most holy decrees thereof? Let whatsoever happen; let
heaven and earth go together, let all be turned upside down; let all the world
be troubled and confounded, nothing happens (I am well assured) not so much as
the least hair from my head, the least sand or stone can fall from a mountain,
without thy providence. I have no reason then to complain of any thing, or any
man in this world: Thy will be done (my God) yea, even my will, since I have so
often transformed it into thine.

Here let me entreat thee (gentle Reader) to read, or if thou have already, to
read over again, what I have set down in my Book, entitled Heliotropium,
especially that which I have briefly summoned up in the last Chapter of the
fifth Book; as likewise that which I deliver in my Aeternitatis prodro^o, the
second Chapter, Sect. 28. and in the third Chapter, Sect. 47. and 49. where I
have carefully set forth this conformity of man's will with Gods? Moreover I
teach in the fifth book of my Heliotropium, the third Chapter, by what means
we should in adversity elevate our minds to God, and with firm and assured
confidence establish it in him; all which might seem superfluous here to
repeat again.

But to conclude this matter in a word. If you do not either apprehend this
doctrine (O Christians!) or, which I fear more truly, may be said, you will
not conceive it, you do but vainly trifle out your time in the School of
Patience; you will always fall short of him you undertake to imitate you do
nothing; your profit will be none at all; always learning, and never arriving
to the knowledge of that verity you seek to learn.

Conform then (to speak in plain terms) resign, I say, your will to Gods
will, or else you shall be shut forth of this school, as non-proficients and
indocible scholars, without any hope for the time. But if you once possess
your selves perfectly of this document, you shall be for ever happy, even
amongst the greatest afflictions. They are the words of the eternal truth: If
any one be willing to perform my will, let him know and understand my
doctrine. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is
my brother, my sister, and my mother.

THE EPILOGVE, Or Recapitulation of all that has been said.
WHAT I have said of the conformity of man's will to the will of God, especially
in adversity. S. Augustine most evidently confirms, where he discourses
concerning the tolerating of wicked men, saying: Become mild therefore and
patient, as thou do when thou understandest that the reason, why evil men
flourish, is, because God will have it so. It is his will to spare wicked
persons; but those whom he purposes to reform, he reduces to repentance; the
other are never reformed, nor so much as corrected. He knows well hereafter
how to judge them. But that man is not mild nor patient, who will contradict
the goodness of of our Lord, his patience, his power, or the justice of the
judge.

Who then are called the upright of heart? Mary they who will that which God
wills. God spares sinners, thou would have him destroy them. Thou have
therefore a crooked heart, a depraved will, seeing thou would one thing and
God another. It is Gods will to suffer evil men to live, but thou would not
have it so. Almighty God is patient and bears with sinners; thou would not
tolerate them. But, as I said before, thou willest one thing, and God another.
Convert thy heart, and direct it unto God, because our Lord does compassionate
those that are infirm. He sees in his mystical body (his Church) some
infirm persons, who at the first apply themselves wholly to their own will:
but finding the will of God to be otherwise, they convert themselves and their
heart to entertain his will, and to follow it.

Seek not therefore to wrest and draw the will of God to thine, but
contrariwise correct thine according to the will of God. The will of God is a
square and rule not to be altered. As long as there is a straight and direct
rule, thou must have recourse to ^e, thereby to correct thy crookedness.

But what would men have? It is not enough for them to have their own will
crooked, they would also make the will of God crooked, according to their own
heart, that God might do their will, whereas they should do Gods will. Thus
far Saint Augustine.

What shall I say (O you mortals!) do you not yet conceive this doctrine of
conforming your will to the will of God? which the ancient fathers, which the
holy Scriptures so often inculcate. Do we yet run so confidently of our own
heads, or stand so peremprorily upon our own opinions, that we dare repine at
that which God wills, or will that which God will not? What we suffer, God will
have us suffer; there is nothing more certain then this, and this he wills
for our good, as a singular favor. These favors (say thou) I am nothing
ambitious of. O thou, whom I can scarcely call man, but rather a beast,
ignorant and incapable of what belongs to heaven! look I beseech thee, how
many even of the Noblity every where, ambitiously seek after labors, so that
they may thereby gain riches and honors. And they hold it a singular favor
to obtain that they seek after. And do thou who art to pass through short
and easy labors, to the great festival of overlasting delights in heaven,
stand pushing and resisting with thy refractory horns like a wild Bull or
Stagge at bay? Give ^are to a wonderful story, most certainly avowed and
approved by infallible testimony, which Leontius Neopolio^. Bishop of Cyprus
relates in this manner.

A certain Citizen, whom Leontius calls Philochristus, gave a good large
sum of gold to John, Patriarch of Alexandria, as an alms to the poor, and
affirmed it was all the gold he had, and therefore besought this holy father,
that he would be pleased to recommend to God in his prayers a son of his who
was absent, and upon condition he might return safe, he should think thi^
gold very well bestowed.

But to testify how serious his petition was, he oftentimes with bended knee
submissively made obeisance to the Patriarch, thinking thereby he should sooner
obtain his suite. This child of his, whom he so earnestly commended, was his
only son not above fifteen years of age, whose return he expected in a
ship from Afric. The Patriarch accepted the gold, and withal his suite,
wondering at a mind so noble and generous, that could despise and set so light
so great a sum of money. Wherefore he wished him all good fortune, and a^
Leontius says, prayed much for him whilst he himself was present, and so
dismissed him. Afterward he ceased not to offer up his prayers for him, who had
so earnestly begged them; for going forthwith into the Church, and laying the
gold under the altar, he celebrated Divine service; and according to his
promise prayed to God, with all the fervor he could, that he would vouchsafe
to restore unto him his son and ship in saftey; some thirty days after he had
thus prayed, this liberal citizens son died, and the ship fraught with
merchandise was cast away; three days after the sorrowful news was brought,
that his son was dead, the ship with all the merchandise lost, and some few men
escaped with the empty boat that belonged to the ship.

Consider here the extreme and excessive grief of this poor distressed father:
he had parted with his gold, lost his son, and the ship which he expected:
behold the reward of his piety and good disposition; grief without measure,
and not capable of any comfort. How well might then the Kingly Prophets saying
be applied to this most woeful and afflicted parent: If our Lord had not
succored him, his soul had even dwelt in hell. The loss of such a ship, one
would have thought, had been sufficient to have daunted his manlike spirit,
besides the untimely death of his son; two wounds, alas! so deadly, that the
least of them might have brought him to utter desolation.

When this relation was made to John the Patriarch, the good Prelates grief was
little less then his whom the heavy disaster did most concern; whereupon
knowing not well what to do, nor whither to turn him, he most earnestly
besought God Almighty to yield this sorrowful father some comfort, he thought
not fit to send for him overwhelmed with grief, but sent one that was discreet
to say thus unto him as in his name, Good Sir, be not dejected; do not in any
wise tax God for want of mercy: take courage, elevate your eyes to heaven, and
behold there everlasting joys and delights: our momentary and light
tribulation works in us an eternal weight of glory; whatsoever is done on
earth is by the most just judgment of God; nor is there any disaster or
chastisment so great, that redounds not to our good, if we overcome it by
suffering patiently. God our most provident Father not only foresaw, but also
determined from all eternity what was most expedient for us; We, like silly
infants, not knowing what is good or bad, often desire and seek after those
things which are most hurtful for us; Be therefore confident in God, in whose
hand are thy ship and son.

This doubtless was a pious and well grounded consolation: yet scarcely could
these words penetrate a heart so deadly wounded; wherefore all humane comfort
failing, the help of God was ready to assist. For the next night John the
Patriarch seemed to appear to this afflicted citizen in his sleep, and to
utter these words: What troubles thee, my brother, and why do thou pine away
thus with grief? did thou not desire me to petition God for thy sons safe
return? Behold he is safe for all eternity; and know this for certain, if he
had lived, and returned safe to thee he had been everlastingly damned; as for
thy ship know thus much, had thou not obtained mercy by so liberal an alms,
she with all the passengers in her had been sunk, and thy brother like wise
been buried in the sea, who for thy comfort yet survives. Arise then and render
thanks to God, for that thy son is saved, and thy brother restord to theo alive.

Philochristus, waking out of his dream, found himself much more lightsome
then before, and almost cleared of all his grief; he ran forthwith to the
Patriarch, and threw himself at his feer, declaring the vision that had
appeared to him that night, and how much he had been comforted by those words;
for which, quoth he, I yield most humble thanks ^o God, who for my own good
has exercised me, and showed himself no less a Father in these his
chastisements, then heretofore in his comforts and rewards. Straightwaies the
Patriarch brake forth into these words: Glory be to thee O most benign and
most merciful God! Who despisest not the prayers of thy servants; and turning
to the citizen: ascribe not this, said he, to my prayers, but to the goodness
of God, and thy faith.

Let us then learn, O you men of small faith! to trust in God, and not to be
daunted in adversity or affliction; Let us learn to suffer adversity not only
Patiently, but likewise Cheerfully, and with thanksgiving, Why fear we? Why
hang we back? All is in vain; Let us rest assured, and look for it before
hand, that we must suffer much; Let us prepare our mind for things of this
nature, and let Patience be accompanied with constancy; Let us absolutely
conform our will in all things, great or small, to the will of God.

Pope Pius the first, enduring, with invincible Patience, most grievous and
deadly pains of the stone, was heard often to pray thus: Increase, O Lord, my
pain, so thou give me more patience; Let us imitate him, and albeit our minds
and bodies be on all sides afflicted, let us confidently say: Increase, my Lord
Jesu, my pain, but increase it so, that therewith thou be pleased to give
increase of Patience.

Much after the same manner did Saint Francis Xaverius, that famous Preacher to
the Indians and Japonians; a man so infinitely desirous of suffering, that even
amidst greatest dangers and difficulties, he was wont most earnestly to beg of
God, not to be delivered out of those miseries, unless for his glory he might
be reserved for greater. And when he was at Rome in the Infirmary, and knew
before hand he was to undergo for Christ's sake, manifold labors, want, hunger,
thirst, cold, heat, persecutions, perils, treacheries both by sea and land,
with an ardent spirit he exclaimed: Yet more, my Lord, yet more. For so great
was his confidence in God, that he certainly believed, he who had given him
that desire, would also give him strength to suffer all. Hence proceeded those
courageous words: Yet more (my good Lord) yet more, let me suffer for thy sake.

Let us also (O you Christians!) let us, I beseech you, attempt something
worthy of heaven; and when we shall be in whatsoever miseries, let us, with
this blessed man cry out: Yet more, my Lord Jesu, yet more: Increase our pains:
for we are confident thou will increase our patience.

But I end this whole discourse of Patience with that blessed Martyr Melitho;
who, albeit he were the youngest of those forty brave Christian Soldiers,
gave, notwithstanding, a notable testimony of his manly courage and constancy.
His mother, a most resolute Christian woman, of a masculine spirit, seeing her
son with his thighs broken, and even gasping for life, animated him most
courageously after this manner: Hold out yet, my child, a little longer, lo!
Christ stands ready at the door, to succor and reward thee: yet, my son, a
little longer. He did so, and all inflamed with his mothers encouragement, gave
up the ghost.

Our good mother Patience, calls upon us after the same manner: Suffer (my son)
a little, Christ your helper is at hand, and your reward even almost in sight:
your pain and grief will end in a moment: your eternal beatitude is even now
nigh at hand, which will continue with you for ever. Behold, an infinite
company of blessed souls. All these by a little time well spent, have gained
immortality: By patient suffering, and by dying, they have obtained an endless
life.

Why do we therefore refuse and fear to suffer? By patience the mind is
brought to contemn all afflictions and miseries whatsoever. If thou will not
suffer, thou refusest to be crowned. This life (says Saint Chrysostom)
Chrysostom tom. 5. hom 5. and hom. 62. post initium,
is not to be led without misery; but the more our tribulations are increased,
the more shall our rewards be amplified.

Heaven is bought with labor and pains. It is an old saying, Labor goes
before meat. So Suidas reports, Suldas, v. 1. mihi page 87.
that the Soldiers of Cyrus never came to dinner without sweat; which, as a
sauce, made them to relish their meat the better, and kept their bodies in
health. And would we have that heavenly feast drop into our mouths, amidst
pleasure and idleness?

And now, to the end we may learn to be better acquainted with that immortal
life, let us first inform our selves well of this mortal life. Why propose we
pleasing and delightful things to our selves? We are in exile, we live in a
wilderness. There is no living here without innumerable inconveniences: if
thou bear them ill, they are great burdens: if well, great comforts.

As there is no immortal man (says Saint Chrysostom) to be found Chrysostom. tom
5. hom. 67. med. mih^, p. 363. and* priu^. 361.
in this world, so none without grief and misery. But he adds for our
comfort: When we are oppressed with adversity, let us rejoice. No generous
Champion looks for bathes in the lists, or for a table furnished with wine and
dainty meats. This were effeminate, not Champion like. He fights with toil and
anguish under the hot scorching Sun, besmeared with sweat and dust.

This is our time of fight and combat: and therefore a time for griefs, and
bloody wounds. A Soldier is to be known in the battle, a skillful Pilot in a
tempest, a swift Footman in the race, and a stout Champion in the lists.

Let us think our whole life no other then a combat, there is no rest nor ease
to be looked for; neither let us Idem ^^d. ^om. hom. 62
ever hold our selves, in respect of tribulation, ill dealt with: for she must
be our teacher. Not in tribulation, but in sin only is the eyill. It is no sin
to suffer, but to do evil.

Nay, as the same S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. tom. 4. in cap. 1 ad Philip. hom. 4
mihi, page 1031.
most expressly affirms: To suffer for Christ is a free offering, and indeed
more worthy admiration, then to raise the dead, or work miracles: for there I
am a debtor to Christ, here I have Christ a debtor to me. Moreover, a Christian
in this respect should differ from an Infidel, by suffering all things
courageously; mounting, as it were, with wings, above the reach of humane
disasters. A faithful man is placed upon a Rock, and therefore inexpugnable,
what waves soever shall beat against him.

Saint Paul declaring this as a great gift, and a singular favor, says: To
you it is given, not only to believe in Christ; but also to suffer for him.
For, according to Saint Gregory, Christ has not promised to his elect in this
world, the joy of delectation, but the bitterness of tribulation, that by
means of this bitter potion, as by Physic, they may recover their eternal
health.

But what needs any further testimony? They are the very words of our Lord, the
Oracle of eternal truth: He that takes not up his cross and follows me, is
not worthy of me. Here is no sparing of any, no exception, or prerogative; no
privilege. He is unworthy of Christ, who casts away his cross, and will not
follow Christ. Thy cross, be it never so heavy, must be patiently taken up.
The dearest friends of Christ, even his mother, yea Christ himself lived under
the same law.

In times past Judith, that widow full of all sincere candor and integrity,
publicly commended patience with a most elegant oration, saying: But they who
have not accepted of temptations, with the fear of our Lord, but have
discovered their impatience, and the scorn and reproach of their murmur against
God, are utterly banished: Let us therefore with humility expect his
consolation, because our fathers have been tempted, that trial might be made
of them, whether they did truly worship their God. As your father Abraham was
tempted; and after he had been by many tribulations tried, was made the friend
of God* So Isaac, so Jacob, so Moses: And all the faithful people who pleased
God, passed through many tribulations.

Why strive or struggle we any longer? Thus all have passed: All, all,
whosoever they were, that pleased God. Not one is ever to be accounted
faithful, or approved, who is not marked with this brand of Patience and
Affliction.

This Oracle of Judith, has, and always shall stand most assuredly true and
inviolable. All the faithful that at any time have pleased God, have passed
through many* tribulations. This is to suffer for Christ, this to reign with
Christ. This is the Kings high way to heaven, narrow indeed, and rough, but
secure. Let us suffer and endure but a little; succor shortly will come, doubt
ye not, if you do but stand to it in the battle; and reward, if you overcome.

FINIS.
Patientiae scriptae,
Initium sit exercendae.

Imprimatur.

Tho. Wykes. R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. domest.


