IDEAS MIRROVR.

AMOVRS IN QVATORZAINS.

Che serve e tace assai domanda.



AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts, for Nicholas Linge. Anno. 1594.

Gentle Reader correct these faults escaped in the printing.
Amor 13. line 13. for by Tempe, read my Tempe.
Amor 16. line 3. for deluered, read delivered.
Amor 34. line 13. for forforne, read forlorn.
Amor 40. line 14. for Go Bastard, read Go bastard go,
To the dear Child of the Muses, and his ever kind Mecaenas, Ma. Anthony
Cook, Esquire.
VOuchsafe to grace these rude vnpolish'd rymes,
Which long (deer friend) have slept in sable night,
And come abroad now in these glorious times,
Can hardly brook the pureness of the light.
But since you see their desteny is such,
That in the world their fortune they must try,
Perhaps they better shall abide the tuch,
Wearing your name their gracious livery.
Yet these mine own, I wrong not other men,
Nor trafique further then this happy Clyme,
Nor filch from Ports nor from Petrarchs pen,
A fault too common in this latter time.
Divine Sir Phillip, I avouch thy writ,
I am no Pickpurse of another wit.
Yours devoted, M. Drayton.
ANkor triumph, upon whose blessed shore,
The sacred Muses solemnize thy name:
Where the Arcadian Swains with rytes adore
Pandoras poesy, and her living fame.
Where first this jolly Shepherd began rehearse,
That heavenly worth, upon his Oaten reed,
Of earths great Queen: in Nectar-dewed verse,
Which none so wise that rightly can areede.
Now in conceit of his ambitious love,
He mounts his thoughts unto the highest gate,
Straynd with some sacred spirit from above,
Bewraies his love, his faith, his life, his fate:
In this his myrror of Ideas praise,
On whom his thoughts, and fortunes all attend,
Tunes all his Ditties, and his Roundelaies,
How love begun, how love shall never end.
No wonder though his Muse then soar so hie,
Whose subject is the Queen of Poesy.
Gorbo il fidele.
Amor. 1.
Read here (sweet Maid) the story of my woe,
The drery abstracts of my endless cares:
With my lives sorrow enterlyned so,
Smok'd with my sighs, and blotted with my tears.
The sad memorials of my miseries,
Pend in the grief of mine afflicted ghost:
My lives complaint in doleful Elegies,
With so pure love as time could never boast.
Receive the incense which I offer here,
By my strong faith ascending to thy fame,
My zeal, my hope, my vows, my praise, my prayer,
My souls oblations to thy sacred name.
Which name my Muse to highest heaven shall raise,
By chaste desire, true love, and virtues praise.
Amor. 2.
My fair, if thou will register my love,
More then worlds volumes shall thereof arise,
Preserve my tears, and thou thy self shall prove
A second flood down rayning from mine eyes.
Note but my sighs, and thine eyes shall behold,
The Sunbeams smothered with immortal smoke:
And if by thee my prayers may be enrold,
They heaven and earth to pity shall provoke.
Look thou into my breast, and thou shall see
Chaste holy vows for my souls sacrifice:
That soul (sweet Maid) which so has honored thee,
Erecting Trophies to thy sacred eyes.
Those eyes to my heart shining ever bright,
When darkness has obscured each other light.
Amor. 3.
My thoughts bred up with Eagle-birds of love,
And for their virtues I desierd to know,
Upon the nest I set them, forth to prove,
If they were of the Eagles kind or no.
But they no sooner saw my Sun appear,
But on her rays with gazing eyes they stood,
Which proou'd my birds delighted in the air,
And that they came of this rare kingly brood.
But now their plumes full sumd with sweet desire,
To show their kind, began to clime the skies:
Do what I could my Eaglets would aspire,
Straight mounting up to thy celestial eyes.
And thus (my fair) my thoughts away be flowne,
And from my breast into thine eyes be gone.
Amor. 4.
My fair, had I not erst adornd my Lute,
With those sweet strings stolen from thy golden hair,
Unto the world had all my joys been mute,
Nor had I learned to descant on my fair.
Had not mine eye seen thy Celestial eye,
Nor my heart known the power of thy name,
My soul had never felt thy Divinity,
Nor my Muse been the trumpet of thy fame.
But thy divine perfections by their skill,
This miracle on my poor Muse have tried:
And by inspiring, glorifide my quill,
And in my verse thy self art deified.
Thus from thy self the cause is thus derived,
That by thy fame all fame shall be suruiued.
Amor. 5.
Since holy Vestall laws have been neglected,
The Gods pure fire has been extinguished quite:
No Virgin once attending on that light,
Nor yet those heavenly secrets once respected.
'Till thou alone to pay the heavens their duty,
Within the Temple of thy sacred name,
With thine eyes kindling that Celestial flame,
By those reflecting Sunbeams of thy beauty.
Here Chastity that Vestall most divine,
Attends that Lamp with eye which never sleeps,
The volumes of Religions laws she keeps,
Making thy breast that sacred relics shryne,
Where blessed Angels singing day and night,
Praise him which made that fire, which lends that light.
Amor. 6.
In one whole world is but one Phoenix found,
A Phoenix thou, this Phoenix then alone,
By thy rare plume thy kind is easly known,
With heavenly colors did, with natures wonder cround,
Heap thine own virtues seasoned by their sun,
On heavenly top of thy divine desire:
Then with thy beauty set the same on fire,
So by thy death, thy life shall be begun.
Thy self thus burned in this sacred flame,
With thine own sweetness all the heavens perfuming,
And still increasing as thou art consuming,
Shall spring again from th'ashes of thy fame;
And mounting up, shall to the heavens ascend,
So may thou live, past world, past fame, past end.
Amor. 7.
Stay, stay, sweet Time, behold or ere thou pass
From world to world, thou long have sought to see,
That wonder now wherein all wonders be,
Where heaven beholds her in a mortal glass.
Nay, look thee Time in this Celestial glass,
And thy youth past, in this fair mirror see:
Behold worlds Beauty in her infancy,
What she was then, and thou or ere she was.
Now pass on Time, to after-worlds tell this,
Tell truly Time what in thy time has been,
That they may tell more worlds what Time has seen
And heaven may joy to think on past worlds bliss.
Here make a Period Time, and say for me,
She was, the like that never was, nor never more shall be.
Amor. 8.
Unto the World, to Learning, and to Heaven,
Three nines there are, to every one a nine,
One number of the earth, the other both divine,
One wonder woman now makes 3. od numbers even.
Nine orders first of Angels be in heaven,
Nine Muses do with learning still frequent:
These with the Gods are ever resident:
Nine worthy men unto the world were given.
My Worthy, one to these nine Worthies, adds,
And my fair Muse, one Muse unto the nine:
And my good Angel in my soul divine,
With one more order, these nine orders gladdeth.
My Muse, my Worthy, and my Angel then,
Makes every one of these three nines a ten.
Amor. 9.
Beauty sometime in all her glory crowned,
Passing by that clear fountain of thine eye:
Her sunshine face there chaunsing to espy,
Forgot herself, and thought she had been drowned.
And thus whilst Beauty on her beauty gazed,
Who then yet living, deemd she had been dying,
And yet in death, some hope of life espying,
At her own rare perfections so amazed;
Twixt joy and grief, yet with a smyling frowning,
The glorious sunbeams of her eyes bright shining,
And she on her own destiny divining,
Threw in herself, to save herself by drowning.
The Well of Nectar, pau'd with pearl and gold,
Where she remains for all eyes to behold.
Amor. 10.
Often taking pen in hand, with words to cast my woes,
Beginning to account the sum of all my cares,
I well perceive my grief innumerable grows,
And still in reckonings rise more millions of dispayres.
And thus dividing of my fatal hours,
The payments of my love I read, and reading cross,
And in substracting, set my sweets unto my sowres,
Th'arerage of my joys, directs me to my loss.
And thus mine eyes, a debtor to thine eye,
Who by extortion gains all their looks,
My heart has paid such grievous usury,
That all her wealth lies in thy Beauties books.
And all is (...) which has been due to me,
And I a Banckrupt quite undone by thee.
Amor. 11.
Thine eyes taught me the Alphabet of love,
To con my Cros-rowe ere I learned to spell:
For I was apt a scholar like to prove,
Gave me sweet looks when as I learned well.
Vows were my vowels when I then begun
At my first Lesson in thy sacred name,
My consonants the next when I had done,
Words consonant, and sounding to thy fame.
My liquids then were liquid crystal tears,
My cares my mutes so mute to crave relief,
My doleful Dypthongs were my lives dispaires,
Redoubling sighs the accents of my grief:
My loves Schoole-mistris now has taught me so,
That I can read a story of my woe.
Amor. 12.
Some Athiest or vile Infidel in love,
When I do speak of thy divinity,
May blaspheme thus, and say, I flatter thee:
And only write, my skill in verse to prove.
See miracles, ye unbelieving see,
A dumbe-borne Muse made to express the mind,
A cripple hand to write, yet lame by kind,
One by thy name, the other touching thee.
Blind were mine eyes, till they were seen of thine,
And mine ears deaf, by thy fame healed be,
My vices cured, by virtues sprung from thee,
My hopes revived which long in grave had line.
All unclean thoughts, foul spirits cast out in me,
By thy great power, and by strong faith in thee.
Amor. 13.
Clear Ankor, on whose siluer-sanded shore,
My soule-shrinde Saint, my fair Idea lies:
O blessed Brook, whose milk-white Swans adore
That crystal stream refined by her eyes.
Where sweet Myrh-breathing Zephyre in the spring,
Gently distills his Nectar-dropping showers:
Where Nightingals in Arden sit and sing,
Amongst those dainty dew-empearled flowers.
Say thus fair Brook when thou shall see thy Queen,
Lo, here thy Shepherd spent his wandering years:
And in these shades (deer Nimphe) he often has been,
And here to thee he sacrifiz'd his tears.
Fair Arden, thou by Tempe art alone
And thou sweet Ankor art my Helicon.
Amor. 14.
Looking into the glass of my youths miseries,
I see the ugly face of my deformed cares,
With withered brows, all wrinckled with dispaires,
That for my misspent youth the tears fell from my eyes.
Then in these tears, the mirrors of these eyes,
Thy fairest youth and Beauty do I see,
Imprinted in my tears by looking still on thee:
Thus midst a thousand woes, ten thousand joys arise.
Yet in these joys, the shadows of my good,
In this fair limmed ground as white as snow,
Painted the blackest Image of my woe,
With murdering hands imbrud in mine own blood.
And in this Image (...) dark clowdy eyes,
My life, my youth, my love, I here Anotamize.
Amor. 15.
Now Love, if thou will prove a Conqueror,
Subdue this Tyrant ever martyring me,
And but appoint me for her Tormentor,
Then for a Monarch will I honor thee.
My heart shall be the prison for my fair,
I Will fetter her in chains of purest love,
My sighs shall stop the passage of the air:
This punishment the pitiless may move.
With tears out of the Channels of mine eyes,
She'st quench her thirst as duly as they fall:
Kind words vnkindest meat I can devise,
My sweet, my fair, my good, my best of all.
I Will bind her then with my torne-tossed hair,
And rack her with a thousand holy wishes.
Then on a place prepared for her there,
I Will execute her with a thousand kisses.
Thus will I crucify my cruel she,
Thus I Will plague her which so has plagued me.
Amor. 16.
Virtues Idea in virginity,
By inspiration, came conceau'd with thought:
The time is come deluered she must be,
Where first my Love into the world was brought.
Unhappy Borne, of all unhappy day,
So luckles was my Babes nativity:
Saturn chief Lord of the Ascendant lay,
The wandering Moon in earths triplicitie.
Now, or by chance, or heavens hie providence,
His Mother died, and by her Legacy,
(Fearing the stars presaged influence,)
Bequeathed his wardship to my sovereigns eye;
There hunger star^en, wanting looks to live,
Still empty gorged, with cares consumption pynde,
Salt lukewarm tears she for his drink did give,
And euer-more with sighs he supt and dynde.
And thus (poor Orphan) lying in distress,
^yes in his pangs, God help the motherlesse.
Amor. 17.
If ever wonder could report a wonder,
Or tongue of wonder worth could tell a wonder thought,
Or ever joy express, what perfect joy has taught,
Then wonder, tongue, then joy, might well report a wonder.
Could all conceit conclude, which past conceit admireth,
Or could mine eye but aim, her objects past perfection,
My words might imitate my dearest thoughts direction:
And my soul then obtain which so my soul desires.
Were not Invention stauld, treading Inventions maze,
Or my swift-winged Muse tired by too hie flying,
Did not perfection still on her perfection gaze,
Whilst Love (my Phoenix bird) in her own flame is dying,
Invention and my Muse, perfection and her love,
Should teach the world to know the wonder that I prove.
Amor. 18.
Some when in ryme they of their Loves do tell,
With flames and lightning their exordiums paynt,
Some invoke the Gods, some spirits of Hell,
And heaven, and earth, do with their woes acquaint.
Elizia is too hie a seat for me,
I will not come in Stixe nor Phlegiton,
The Muses nice, the Furies cruel be,
I like not Limbo, nor black Acheron,
Spightfull Errinis frights me with her looks,
My manhood dares not with foul Ate mell,
I quake to look on Hecats charming books,
I still fear bugbeares in Apollos Cell.
I pass not for Minerua nor Astraea,
But ever call upon divine Idea.
Amor. 19.
If those ten Regions registered by Fame,
By their ten Sibils have the world controld,
Who prophesied of Christ or ere he came,
And of his blessed birth before foretold.
That man-god now of whom they did divine,
This earth of those sweet Prophets has bereft,
And since the world to judgment does declyne,
In steed of ten, one Sibil to us left.
This, pure Idea, virtues right Idea,
She of whom Merlin long time did foretell,
Excelling her of Delphos or Cumaea,
Whose life does save a thousand souls from hell:
That life (I mean) which does Religion teach,
And by example, true repentance preach.
Amor. 20.
Reading sometime, my sorrows to beguile,
I find old Poets hylls and floods admire.
One, he does wonder monster-breeding Nyle,
Another, meruailes Sulphur Aetnas fire.
Now broad-brymd Indus, then of Pindus height,
Pelion and Ossa, frosty Caucase old,
The Delian Cynthus, then Olympus weight,
Slow Arrer, frantic Gallus, Cydnus cold.
Some Ganges, Ister, and of Tagus tell,
Some whir-poole Po, and slyding Hypasis,
Some old Pernassus, where the Muses dwell,
Some Helycon, and some fair Simois,
A fools think I, had you Idea seen,
Poor Brooks and Banks had no such wonders been.
Amor. 21.
Letters and lines we see are soon defaced,
Mettles do waste, and fret with cankers rust,
The Diamond shall once consume to dust,
And freshest colors with foul stains disgraced.
Paper and yncke, can paynt but naked words,
To write with blood, of force offends the sight,
And if with tears, I find them all too light:
And sighs and signs a silly hope affoords.
O sweetest shadow, how thou seru'st my turn,
Which still shall be as long as there is Sun,
Nor whilst the world is, never shall be done,
Whilst Moon shall shine by night, or any fire shall burn.
That every thing whence shadow does proceed,
May in his shadow my Loves story read.
Amor. 22.
My heart imprisoned in a hopeles I Will,
Peopled with Armies of pale jealous eyes,
The shores beset with thousand secret spies,
Must pass by air, or else dye in exile.
He framd him wings with feathers of his thought,
Which by their nature learned to mount the sky,
And with the same he practiced to fly,
Till he himself this Eagles art had taught.
Thus soring still, nor looking once below,
So near thine eyes celestial sun aspyred,
That with the rays his wasting py^eons fired.
Thus was the wanton cause of his own woe.
Down fell he in thy Beauties O^^an drenched,
Yet there he burns, in fire that's never quenched.
Amor. 23
Wonder of Heaven, glass of divinity,
Rare beauty, Natures joy, perfections Mother,
The work of that united Trinity,
Wherein each fairest part excels other.
Loves Methridate, the purest of perfection,
Celestial Image, Lodestone of desire,
The souls delight, the senses true direction,
Sun of the world, thou heart reuyuing fire.
Why should thou place thy Trophies in those eyes,
Which scorn the honor that is done to thee,
Or make my pen her name imortalize,
Who in her pride sdaynes once to look on me.
It is thy heaven within her face to dwell,
And in thy heaven, there only is my hell.
Amor. 24.
Our floods-Queene Thames, for shyps and Swans is crowned,
And stately Seuerne, for her shores is praised,
The crystal Trent, for Foords and fish renowned,
And Auons fame, to Albyons Cliues is raised.
Carlegion Chester, vaunts her holy Dee,
York, many wonders of her Ouse can tell,
The Peake her Dove, whose bancks so fertile be,
And Kent will say, her Medway does excel.
Cotswoold commends her Isis and her Tame,
Our Northern borders boast of Tweeds fair flood,
Our Western parts extol their VVilys fame,
And old Legea brags of Danish blood:
Ardens sweet Ankor let thy glory be,
That fair Idea she does live by thee.
Amor. 25.
The glorious sun went blushing to his bed,
When my souls sun from her fair Cabynet,
Her golden beams had now discovered,
Lightning the world, eclipsed by his set.
Some muz'd to see the earth envy the air,
Which from her lyps exhald refined sweet,
A world to see, yet how he ioyd to hear
The dainty grass make music with her feet.
But my most marvel was when from the skies,
So Comet-like each star aduaunc'd her light,
As though the heaven had now awaked her eyes,
And summond Angels to this blessed sight.
No cloud was seen, but christaline the air,
Laughing for joy upon my lovely fair,
Amor. 26.
Cupid, dumb Idol, peevish Saint of love,
No more shall thou nor Saint nor Idol be,
No God art thou, a Goddess she does prove,
Of all thine honor she has robbed thee.
Thy Bow half broke, is peec'd with old desire,
Her Bow is beauty, with ten thousand strings,
Of purest gold, tempred with virtues fire:
The least able to kill an host of Kings.
Thy shafts be spent, and she (to war appointed)
Hydes in those crystal quiuers of her eyes,
More Arrows with hart-piercing mettel poynted,
Then there be stars at midnight in the skies.
With these, she steals men's hearts for her relief,
Yet happy he that's robbed of such a thief.
Amor. 27
My Love makes hot the fire whose heat is spent,
The water, moisture from my tears deriueth:
And my strong sighs, the airs weak force reuiueth
This love, tears, sighs, maintain each one his element
The fire, unto my love, compare a painted fire,
The water, to my tears, as drops to Oceans be,
The air, unto my sighs, as Eagle to the fire,
The passions of despair, but joys to my desire.
Only my love is in the fire ingraued,
Only my tears by Oceans may be gessed,
Only my sighs are by the air expressed,
Yet fire, water, air, of nature not deprived.
Whilst fire, water, air, twixt heaven and earth shall be,
My love, my tears, my sighs, extinguished cannot be.
Amor. 28.
Some wits there be, which like my method well,
And say my verse runs in a lofty vain,
Some say I have a passing pleasing strain,
Some say that in my humor I excel.
Some, who reach not the height of my conceit,
They say, (as Poets do) I use to feign,
And in bare words paynt out my passions pain.
Thus sundry men, their sundry minds repeat.
I pass not I how men affected be,
Nor who commend or discommend my verse,
It pleases me if I my plaints rehearse,
And in my lines if she my love may see.
I prove my verse autentique still in this,
Who writes my Mistres praise, can never write amiss.
Amor. 29.
O eyes, behold your happy Hesperus,
That luckie Load-starre of eternal light,
Left as that sun alone to comfort us,
When our worlds sun is vanished out of sight.
O star of stars, fair Planet mildly moving,
O Lamp of virtue, sun-bright, ever shyning,
O mine eyes Comet, so admyr'd by loving,
O cleerest day star, never more declyning.
O our worlds wonder, crown of heaven above,
Thrice happy be those eyes which may behold thee,
Loved more then life, yet only art his love,
Whose glorious hand immortal has enrold thee.
O blessed fair, now veil those heavenly eyes,
That I may bless me at thy sweet arise.
Amor. 30.
Three sorts of Serpents do resemble thee,
That dangerous eye-killing Cockatrice,
Th'inchaunting Siren, which does so entice,
The weeping Crocodile: these vile pernicious three.
The Basiliske his nature takes from thee,
Who for my life in secret wait do lie,
And to my heart send'st poison from thine eye,
Thus do I feel the pain, the cause, yet cannot see.
Faire-mayd no more, but Mayr-maid be thy name,
Who with thy sweet aluring harmony
Have played the thief, and stolen my heart from me.
And like a Tyrant make my grief thy game.
Thou Crocodile, who when thou have me slain,
Lament'st my death, with tears of thy disdain.
Amor. 31.
Sitting alone, love bids me go and write,
Reason plucks back, commanding me to stay,
Boasting that she does still direct the way,
Else senceles love could never once endite.
Love growing angry, vexed at the spleen,
And scorning Reasons maimed Argument,
Straight taxes Reason, wanting to invent,
Where she with Love conuersing has not been.
Reason reproched with this coy disdain,
Dispighteth Love, and laugheth at her folly,
And Love contemning Reasons reason wholly,
Thought her in weight too light by many a grain
Reason put back, does out of sight remove,
And Love alone finds reason in my love.
Amor. 32.
Those tears which quench my hope, still kindle my desire,
Those sighs which cool my heart, are coals unto my love.
Disdain Ice to my life, is to my soul a fire,
With tears, sighs, and disdain, this contrary I prove.
Quenchles desire, makes hope burn, dryes my tears,
Love heats my heart, my hart-heat my sighs warmeth,
With my souls fire, my life disdain out-weares,
Desire, my love, my soul, my hope, heart, and life charmeth.
My hope becomes a friend to my desire,
My heart imbraceth Love, Love does embrace my heart,
My life a Phoenix is in my souls fire,
From thence (they vow) they never will depart.
Desire, my love, my soul, my hope, my heart, my life,
With tears, sighs, and disdain, shall have immortal strife.
Amor. 33.
Whilst thus mine eyes do surfeit with delight,
My woeful heart imprisond in my breast,
VVishing to be trans-formd into my sight,
To look on her by whom mine eyes are blessed.
But whilst mine eyes thus greedily do gaze,
Behold, their objects ouer-soone depart,
And treading in this neuer-ending maze,
VVish now to be trans-formd into my heart.
My heart surcharged with thoughts, sighs in abundance raise,
My eyes made dim with looks, pour down a flood of tears,
And whilst my heart and eye, envy each others praise,
My dying looks and thoughts are peiz'd in equal fears.
And thus whilst sighs and tears together do contend,
Each one of these, does aid unto the other lend.
Amor. 34.
My fair, look from those turrets of thine eyes,
Into the Ocean of a troubled mind,
Where my poor soul, the Bark of sorrow lies,
Left to the mercy of the waves and wind.
See where she flotes, laden with purest love,
Which those fair Islands of thy looks afford,
Desiring yet a thousand deaths to prove,
Then so to cast her Ballase over board.
See how her sails be rent, her tacklings worn,
Her Cable broke, her surest Anchor lost,
Her Marryners do leave her all forforne,
Yet how she bends toward that blessed Coast.
Lo where she drownes, in storms of thy displeasure,
Whose worthy prize should have enritcht thy treasure.
Amor. 35.
See chaste Diana, where my harmles heart,
Roused from my breast, his sure and safest layre,
Nor chaste by hound, nor forced by Hunters art,
Yet see how right he comes unto my fair.
See how my Dear comes to thy Beauties stand,
And there stands gazing on those darting eyes,
Whilst from their rays by Cupids skillful hand,
Into his heart the piercing Arrow flies.
See how he looks upon his bleeding wound,
Whilst thus he pants for his latest breath,
And looking on thee, falls upon the ground,
Smyling, as though he gloried in his death.
And wallowing in his blood, some life yet laft,
His stone-cold lips does kiss the blessed shaft.
Amor. 36.
Sweet sleep so armed with Beauties arrows darting,
Sleep in thy Beauty, Beauty in sleep appears,
Sleep lightning Beauty, Beauty sleeps darkness cleereth,
Sleeps wonder Beauty, wonders to worlds imparting.
Sleep watching Beauty, Beauty waking, sleep guarding,
Beauty in sleep, sleep in Beauty charmed,
Sleeps aged coldness, with Beauties fire warmed,
Sleep with delight, Beauty with love rewarding.
Seepe and Beauty, with equal forces stryuing,
Beauty her strength unto sleeps weakness lending,
Sleep with Beauty, Beauty with sleep contending,
Yet others force, the others force reviving:
And others foe, the others foe embrace,
Mine eyes beheld this conflict in thy face.
Amor. 37.
I ever love, where never hope appears,
Yet hope draws on my neuer-hoping care,
And my lives hope would die but for dyspaire,
My never certain joy, breeds euer-certaine fears.
Vncertaine-dread, gyues wings unto my hope,
Yet my hopes wings are laden so with fear,
As they cannot ascend to my hopes sphere,
Yet fear gyues them more then a heavenly scope:
Yet this large room is bounded with dyspaire,
So my love is still fettered with vain hope,
And lyberty depriues him of his scope,
And thus am I imprisond in the air;
Then sweet Despair, awhile hold up thy head,
Or all my hope for sorrow will be dead.
Amor. 38.
If chaste and pure devotion of my youth,
Or glory of my Aprill-springing years,
Unfeigned love, in naked simple truth,
A thousand vows, a thousand sighs and tears:
Or if a world of faithful service done,
Words, thoughts and deeds devoted to her honor,
Or eyes that have beheld her as their sun,
With admiration, ever looking on her.
A life, that never ioyd but in her love,
A soul, that ever has adored her name,
A faith, that time nor fortune could not move,
A Muse, that unto heaven has raisd her fame.
Though these, nor these deserve to be embraced,
Yet fair unkind, too good to be disgraced.
Amor. 39.
Die, die, my soul, and never taste of joy,
If sighs, nor tears, nor vows, nor prayers can move,
If faith and zeal be but esteemd a toy,
And kindness, be unkindness in my love.
Then with unkindness, Love revenge thy wrong,
O sweet'st revenge that ere the heavens gave,
And with the Swan record thy dying song,
And praise her still to thy untimely grave.
So in loves death shall loves perfection prove,
That love divine which I have borne to you,
By doom concealed to the heavens above,
That yet the world unworthy never knew,
Whose pure Idea never tongue expressed,
I feel, you know, the heavens can tell the rest.
Amor. 40.
O thou vnkindest fair, most fairest she,
In thine eyes triumph murdering my poor heart,
Now do I swear by heavens, before we part,
My halfe-slaine heart shall take revenge on thee.
Thy Mother did her life to Death resign,
And thou an Angel art, and from above,
Thy father was a man, that will I prove,
Yet thou a Goddess art, and so divine.
And thus if thou be not of human kind,
A Bastard on both sides needs must thou be,
Our Laws allow no Land to basterdy:
By natures Laws we thee a Bastard find.
Then hence to heaven unkind, for thy child's part,
Go Bastard, for sure of thence thou art.
Amor. 41.
Rare offspring of my thoughts, my dearest Love,
Begot by fancy, on sweet hope exhortiue,
In whom all pureness with perfection strove,
Hurt in the Embryon, makes my joys abhortiue.
And you my sighs, Symtomas of my woe,
The doleful Anthems of my endless care,
Like idle Echoes ever aunswering: so,
The mournful accents of my loves despair.
And thou Conceit, the shadow of my bliss,
Declyning with the setting of my sun,
Springing with that, and fading straight with this,
Now have thou end, and now thou wast begun.
Now was thy pryme, and lo, now is thy waine,
Now wast thou borne, now in thy cradle slain.
Amor. 42
Placed in the forlorn hope of all despair,
Against the Forte where Beauties Army lies,
Assayld with death, yet armed with ghastly fear,
Lo thus my love, my life, my fortune tryes.
Wounded with Arrows from thy lightning eyes,
My tongue in pain, my hearts counsels bewraying,
My rebel thought for me in Ambushe lies,
To my loves foe her Chieftaine still betraying.
Record my love in Ocean waves (unkind,)
Cast my deserts into the open air,
Commit my words unto the fleeting wind,
Cancel my name, and blot it with despair,
So shall I be, as I had never been,
Nor my disgraces to the world be seen.
Amor. 43.
Why do I speak of joy, or write of love,
When my heart is the very Den of horror,
And in my soul the pains of hell I prove,
With all his torments and infernal terror.
Mine eyes want tears thus to bewail my woe,
My brain is dry with weeping all too long,
My sighs be spent with grief and sighing so,
And I want words for to express my wrong
But still distracted in loves Lunacy,
And Bedlam like thus rauing in my grief,
Now rail upon her hair, now on her eye,
Now call her Goddess, then I call her thief,
Now I deny her, then I do confess her,
Now do I curse her, then again I bless her.
Amor. 44.
My heart the Anuile where my thoughts do beat,
My words the hammers, fashioning my desires,
My breast the forge, including all the heat,
Love is the fuel which maintains the fire.
My sighs, the bellows which the flame increases,
Filling mine ears with noise and nightly groaning,
Toyling with pain, my labor never cease,
In greevous passions my woes still bemoning.
Mine eyes with tears against the fire stryuing,
With scorching gleed my heart to cynders turns:
But with those drops the coals again reuyuing,
Still more and more unto my torment burns.
With Sisiphus thus do I role the stone,
And turn the wheel with damned Ixion.
Amor. 45
Black pytchy Night, companyon of my woe,
The Inn of care, the Nurse of drery sorrow,
Why lengthnest thou thy darkest hours so,
Still to prolong my long time lookt-for morrow?
Thou Sable shadow, Image of despair
Portraite of hell, the airs black mourning weed,
Recorder of revenge, remembrancer of care,
The shadow and the veil of every sinful deed.
Death like to thee, so live thou still in death,
The grave of joy, prison of days delight,
Let heavens withdraw their sweet Ambrozian breath,
Nor Moon nor stars lend thee their shining light.
For thou alone renew'st that old desire,
Which still torments me in days burning fire.
Amor. 46.
Sweet secrecy, what tongue can tell thy worth?
What mortal pen suffyciently can praise thee?
What curious Pensill serves to lim thee forth?
What Muse has power, above thy height to raise thee?
Strong lock of kindness, Closet of loves store,
Hearts Methridate, the souls preservative,
O virtue, which all virtues do adore,
Chief good, from whom all good things we derive.
O rare effect, true bond of friendships measure,
Conceit of Angels, which all wisdom teach,
O richest Casket of all heavenly treasure,
In secret silence, which such wonders preachest,
O purest merror, wherein men may see
The lively Image of Divinity.
Amor. 47.
The golden Sun upon his fiery wheels,
The horned Ram does in his course awake:
And of just length our night and day does make,
Flinging the Fishes backward with his heels.
Then to the Tropicke takes his full Careere,
Trotting his sun-steeds till the Palfrays sweat,
Bayting the Lion in his furious heat,
Till Virgins smyles do sound his sweet reteere.
But my fair Planet, who directs me still,
Unkindly, such distemprature does bring,
Makes Summer Winter, Autumn in the Spring,
Crossing sweet nature by unruly will.
Such is the sun, who guides my youthful season,
Whose thwarting course, depriues the world of reason.
Amor. 48.
Who list to praise the days delicious light,
Let him compare it to her heavenly eye:
The sunbeams to that luster of her sight,
So may the learned like the similie.
The mornings Crimson, to her lyps alike,
The sweet of Eden, to her breathes perfume,
The fair Elizia, to her fayrer cheek,
Unto her veins, the only Phoenix plume.
The Angels tresses, to her tressed hair,
The Galixia, to her more then white:
Praising the fairest, compare it to my fair,
Still naming her, in naming all delight.
So may he grace all these in her alone,
Superlatiue in all comparison.
Amor. 49.
Define my love, and tell the joys of heaven,
Express my woes, and show the pains of hell,
Declare what fate unlucky stars have given,
And ask a world upon my life to dwell.
Make known that faith, unkindness could not move,
Compare my worth with others base desert,
Let virtue be the tuch-stone of my love,
So may the heavens read wonders in my heart.
Behold the Clouds which have eclipsed my sun,
And view the crosses which my course does let,
Till me, if ever since the world begun,
So fair a Morning had so foul a set?
And by all means, let black unkindness prove,
The patience of so rare divine a love.
Amor. 50.
When first I ended, then I first began,
The more I travel, further from my rest,
Where most I lost, there most of all I wan,
Pyned with hunger, rising from a feast.
Me thinks I flee, yet want I legs to go,
Wise in conceit, in act a very sot,
Ravished with joy, amidst a hell of woe,
What most I seem, that surest am I not.
I build my hopes, a world above the sky,
Yet with the Mole, I creep into the earth,
In plenty, am I starved with penury,
And yet I surfeit in the greatest dearth.
I have, I want, despair, and yet desire,
Burned in a Sea of Ice, and drowned amidst a fire.
Amor. 51.
Go you my lines, Ambassadors of love,
With my hearts trybute to her conquering eyes,
From whence, if you one tear of pity move
For all my woes, that only shall suffice.
When you Minerua in the sun behold,
At her perfection stand you then and gaze,
Where, in the compass of a Marygold,
Meridianis sits within a maze.
And let Invention of her beauty vaunt,
When Dorus sings his sweet Pamelas love,
And tell the Gods, Mars is predominant.
Seated with Sol, and wears Mineruas glove.
And tell the world, that in the world there is
A heaven on earth, on earth no heaven but this.
FINIS.
THE EIGHTH EGLOG.
Good Gorbo of the golden world,
and Saturns reign does tell,
And afterward does make report,
of bonnie Dovvsabell.
Motto.
Shepherd why creep we in this lowly vain,
as though our muse no store at all affordes,
Whilst others vaunt it with the frolic swayne,
and strut the stage with reperfumed words.
See how these yonkers rave it out in rhyme,
who make a traffic of their rarest wits,
And in Bellonas buskin tread it fine,
like Bacchus priests raging in frantic fits.
Those myrtle Groves decayed, done grow again,
their roots refresht with Heliconas spring,
Whose pleasant shade inuites the homely swayne,
to sit him down and hear the Muses sing.
Then if thy Muse has spent her wonted zeal,
with Iuie twist thy temples shall be crowned,
Or if she dares hoyse up top-gallant sail,
Amongst the rest, then may she be renownd.
Gorbo.
My boy, these yonkers reachen after fame,
and so done press into the learned troop,
With filed quill to glorify their name,
which otherwise were pend in shameful coupe.
But this hie object has abiected me,
and I must pipe amongst the lowly sort,
Those little heard-groomes who admired to see,
when I by Moone-shine made the fayries sport.
Who dares describe the toils of Hercules,
and puts his hand to fames eternal pen,
Must invoke the soul of Hercules,
attended with the troops of conquered men.
Who writes of thrice renowned Theseus,
a monster-tamers rare description,
Trophies the jaws of ugly Cerberus,
and paynts out Styx, and fiery Acheron.
My Muse may not affect night-charming spells,
whose force effects the Olympicke vault to quake,
Nor call those grysly Goblins from their Cells,
the euer-damned frye of Limbo lake.
And who erects the brave Pyramides,
of Monarchs or renowned warriors,
Need bath his quill for such attempts as these,
in flowing streams of learned Maros showers
For when the great worlds conqueror began,
to prove his helmet and his habergeon,
The sweat that from the Poets-God Orpheus ran,
foretold his Prophets had to play upon.
When Pens and Lances saw the Olympiad prize,
those chariot triumphs with the Laurel crown,
Then began the worthies glory first to rise,
and plumes were vayled to the purple gown.
The grauest Censor, sagest Senator,
with wings of Justice and Religion,
Mounted the top of Nimrods stately Tower,
soring unto that hie celestial throne:
Where blessed Angels in their heavenly queares,
chaunt Anthemes with shrill Siren harmony,
Tuned to the sound of those aye-crouding spears,
Which herien their makers eternity.
Those who foretell the times of unborn men,
and future things in foretime augured,
Have slumbred in that spell-gods darkest den,
which first inspired his prophesiyng head.
Sooth-saying Sibels sleepen long agone,
we have their reed, but few have cond their Art,
Welch-wisard Merlyn, cleueth to a stone,
no Oracle more wonders may impart.
The Infant age could deftly caroll love,
till greedy thirst of that ambitious honor,
Drew Poets pen, from his sweet lasses glove,
to chaunt of slaughtering broiles and bloody horror.
Then Jove's loue-theft was privily discri'd,
how he played false play in Amphitrios bed,
And how Apollo in the mount of I Would,
gave Oenon physic for her maydenhead.
The tender grass was then the softest bed,
the pleasant'st shades were deemed the statelyest hals,
No belly-god with Bacchus banqueted,
nor painted rags then covered rotten walls.
Then simple love with simple virtue way'd,
flowers the favors which true faith reuayled,
Kindness with kindness was again repaid,
with sweetest kisses covenants were sealed.
Then beauties self with her self beautified,
scornd payntings pergit, and the borrowed hair,
Nor monstrous forms deformities did hide,
nor foul was vernisht with compounded fair.
The purest fleece then covered purest skin,
for pride as then with Lucifer remaynd:
Deformed fashions now were to begin,
nor clothes were yet with poysned liquor staynd.
But when the bowels of the earth were sought,
and men her golden intrayles did epsy,
This mischief then into the world was brought,
this framed the mint which coynd our misery.
Then lofty Pines were by ambition hewne,
and men sea monsters swamme the brackish flood,
In waynscot tubs, to seek out worlds unknown,
for certain ill to leave assured good.
The starteling steed is managed from the field,
and serves a subject to the riders laws,
He whom the churlish bit did never weeld,
now feels the courb control his angry jaws.
The hammering Vulcane spent his wasting fire,
till he the use of tempred metals found,
His anuile wrought the steeled cotes attire,
and forged tools to carue the foe-mans wound.
The City builder then intrencht his towers,
and wald his wealth within the fenced town,
Which afterward in bloody stormy stours,
kindled that flame which burnt his Bulwarks down.
And thus began the Exordium of our woes,
the fatal dumb show of our misery:
Here sprang the tree on which our mischief grows,
the drery subject of worlds tragedy.
Motto.
Well, shepherd well, the golden age is gone,
wishes may not revoke that which is past:
It were no wit to make two griefs of one,
our proverb says, Nothing can always last.
Listen to me my lovely shepherds joy,
and thou shall hear with mirth and mickle glee,
A pretty Tale, which when I was a boy,
my toothles Grandame often has told to me.
Corbo.
Shepherd say on, so may we pass the time,
There is no doubt it is some worthy ryme.
Motto.
Far in the country of Arden,
There wond a knight hight Cassemen,
as bold as Isenbras:
Fell was he and eger bent,
In battle and in Tournament,
as was the good sir Topas.
He had as antique stories tell,
A daughter cleaped Dowsabell,
a maiden fair and free:
And for she was her fathers heir,
Full well she was ycond the leyre,
of mickle courtesy.
The silk well couth she twist and twine,
And make the fine Marchpine,
and with the needle work,
And she couth help the priest to say
His Mattens on a holyday,
and sing a Psalm in Kirk.
She ware a frock of frolic green,
Might well be seem a maiden Queen,
which seemly was to see.
A hood to that so neat and fine,
In color like the colombine,
y wrought full featuously.
Her feature all as fresh above,
As is the grass that grows by Dove,
as lyth as less of Kent:
Her skin as soft as Lemster wool,
As white as snow on peakish hull,
or Swanne that swims in Trent.
This maiden in a morn betime,
Went forth when May was in her prime,
to get sweet Ce^ywall,
The hony-suckle, the Harlocke,
The Lilly and the Lady-smocke,
to deck her summer hall.
Thus as she wandered here and there,
Y picking of the bloomed Breere,
she chanced to epsy
A shepherd sitting on a bancke,
Like Chanteclere he crowed crancke,
and pip'd with merry glee:
He leard his sheep as he him list,
When he would whistle in his fist,
to feed about him round:
Whilst he full many a caroll sung,
Until the fields and meadows rung,
and that the woods did sound:
In favor this same shepherds swayne,
was like the bedlam Tamburlayne,
which held proud Kings in awe:
But meek he was as Lamb might be,
Y like that gentle Abel he,
whom his lewd brother slaw.
This shepherd ware a sheep gray cloak,
which was of the finest look,
that could be cut with sheere,
His mittens were of Bauzens skin,
His cockers were of Cordiwin,
his hood of Meniueere.
His aule and lingell in a thong,
His tar-boxe on his broad belt hong,
his breech of Coyntrie blew:
Full crispe and curled were his locks,
His brows as white as Albion rocks,
so like a lover true.
And pyping still he spent the day,
So merry as the Popingay:
which liked Dowsabell,
That would she ought or would she naught,
This lad would never from her thought:
she in loue-longing fell,
At length she tucked up her frocke,
White as the Lilly was her smock,
she drew the shepherd nie,
But then the shepherd pyp'd a good,
That all his sheep forsook their food,
to hear his melody.
Thy sheep quoth she cannot be lean,
That have a jolly shepherds swayne,
the which can pipe so well.
Yea but (says he) their shepherd may,
If pyping thus he pine away,
in love of Dowsabell.
Of love fond boy take thou no keep,
Quoth she, look well unto thy sheep,
lest they should hap to stray.
Quoth he, so had I done full well,
Had I not seen fair Dowsabell,
come forth to gather May.
With that she began to veil her head,
Her cheeks were like the Roses red,
but not a word she said.
With that the shepherd began to frown,
He threw his pretty pypes adowne,
and on the ground him laid.
Says she, I may not stay till night,
And leave my summer hall vndight,
and all for long of thee.
My Coat says he, nor yet my foulde,
Shall neither sheep nor shepherd hold,
except thou favor me.
Says she yet lever I were dead,
Then I should lose my maydenhead,
and all for love of men:
Says he yet are you too unkind,
If in your heart you cannot find,
to love us now and then:
And I to thee will be as kind,
As Colin was to Rosalinde,
of courtesy the flower:
Then will I be as true quoth she,
As ever maiden yet might be,
unto her Paramour:
With that she bent her snow-white knee,
Down by the shepherd kneeled she,
and him she sweetly kissed.
With that the shepherd whoop'd for joy,
Quoth he, there is never shepherds boy,
that ever was so blist.
Gorbo.
Now by my sheep-hooke here is a tale alone,
Learn me the same and I will give thee hier,
This were as good as curds for our Ione,
When at a night we sitten by the fire.
Motto.
Why gentle hodge I will not stick for that,
when we two meeten here another day,
But see whilst we have set us down to chat,
yon tikes of mine begin to steal away.
And if thou will but come unto our green,
on Lammas day when as we have our feast,
Thou shall sit next unto our summer Queen,
and thou shall be the only welcome guest.
THE NINTH EGLOG.
When cole-blacke night with sable veil
eclipsd the gladsome light,
Rowland in darkesome shade alone,
bemoanes his woeful plight.
WHat time the wetherbeaten flocks,
forsook the fields to shroud them in the fold,
The groves dispoyl'd of their fair summer locks,
the leaueles branches nipt with frostie cold,
The drouping trees their gayness all agone,
In mossie mantles do express their moan.
When Phoebus from his Lemmans lovely bower,
throughout the sphere had ierckt his angry Iades,
His Carre now passed the heavens hie welked Tower,
began dragge adowne the occidentall slades,
In silent shade of desert all alone,
Thus to the night, Rowland bewrayes his moan.
Oh blessed stars which lend the darkness light,
the glorious paynting of that circled throane,
You eyes of heaven, you lanthornes of the night,
to you bright stars, to you I make my moan,
Or end my days, or ease me of my grief,
The earth is frail, and yields me no relief.
And thou fair Phebe, cleerer to my sight,
then Tytan is when brightest he has shone,
Why should thou now shut up thy blessed light,
and sdayne to look on thy Endymion?
Perhaps the heavens me thus despite have done,
Because I durst compare thee with their sun.
If drery sighs the tempests of my breast,
or streams of tears from floods of weeping eyes,
If downe-cast looks with darksome clouds oppressed,
or words which with sad accents fall and rise,
If these, nor her, nor you, to pity move,
There Is neither help in you, nor hope in love.
Oh fayr'st that lives, yet most vnkindest maid,
o whilome thou the joy of all my flock,
Why have thine eyes these eyes of mine betrayed,
Unto thy heart more hard then flintie rock,
And lastly thus deprived me of their sight,
From whom my love deriues both life and light.
Those dapper ditties pend unto her praise,
and those sweet straynes of tunefull pastoral,
She scorneth as the Lourdayns clownish lays,
and recketh as the rustic madrigall,
Her lips profane Ideas sacred name,
And sdayne to read the annals of her fame.
Those gorgeous garlands and those goodly flowers,
wherewith I crowned her tresses in the prime,
She most abhors, and shuns those pleasant bowers,
made to disport her in the summer time:
She hates the sports and pastimes I invent,
And as the toade, flies all my meriment.
With holy verses heryed I her glove,
and dew'd her cheeks with fountains of my tears,
And carold her full many a lay of love,
twisting sweet Roses in her golden hayres.
Her wandering sheep full safely have I kept,
And watched her flock full often when she has slept.
Oenon never upon Ida hill,
so often has called on Alexanders name,
As has poor Rowland with an Angels quill,
erected trophies of Ideas fame:
Yet that false shepherd Oenon fled from thee,
I follow her that ever flies from me.
There Is not a grove that wonders not my woe,
there is not a river weeps not at my tale:
I hear the echoes (wandering too and froe)
resound my grief in every hill and dale,
The beasts in field, with many a woeful groan,
The birds in air help to express my moan.
Where been those lines? the heralds of my heart,
my plaints, my tears, my vows, my sighs, my prayers?
o what avails faith, or what my Arts?
o love, o hope, quite turned into despayres:
She stops her ears as Adder to the charms,
And lets me lie and languish in my harms.
All is agone, such is my endless grief,
And my mishaps amended naught with moan,
I see the heavens will yield me no relief:
what helps care, when cure is past and gone,
And tears I see, do me avail no good,
But as great showers increase the rising flood.
With folded arms, thus hanging down his head,
he gave a groan as though his heart had broke,
Then looking pale and wan as he were dead,
he fetched a sigh, but never a word he spoke:
For now his heart waxed cold as any stone,
Was never man alive so woe begone.
With that fair Cinthya stoups her glittering veil,
and dives adowne into the Ocean flood,
The eastern brow which erst was wan and pale,
now in the dawning blusheth red as blood:
The whistling Lark ymounted on her wings,
To the gray morrow, her good morrow sings.
When this poor shepherd Rowland of the Rock,
whose faynting legs his body scarce vpheld,
Each shepherd now returning to his flock,
alone poor Rowland fled the pleasant field,
And in his Coat got to a vechie bed:
Was never man alive so hard bested.
Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcock, dwelling in Paul's Church-yarde, at
the sign of the black Bear. 1593.


