THE LAMBS SPOUSE Or The Heavenly Bride.

A theological discourse, wherein the contract betwixt Christ and the Church;
the preparation against the marriage; and the solemnization it self, and the
exclusion of hypocrites and temporizers, is plainly and profitably, with the
particular uses, set forth.

Whereunto is annexed an exact preparatiue to the Lords Supper.

By T. D. Minister of the word of God

Imprinted at London by G. Eld, dwelling in Fleet- lane, at the sign of the
Printers Press, 1608.

To the Worshipful company of Drapers in Couentry, his very good benefactors,
peace and prosperity.
IF we duly and diligently as we ought (men, brethren and fathers,) consider
and observe, Gods unspeakable mercy and goodness toward our English nation;
not only in the fruition and continuance of such incomparable peace and
prosperity above other countries and king domes, and in the exquisite and
excellent knowledge of liberal Arts and the learned languages: but also (and
that most eminently) in the pure and public preaching of Christ his blessed
Gospel, in so many places and parishes. We cannot but judge and acknowledge
our selves to be highly beloved, and admirably blessed of Almighty God. But
contrariwise, if we mark and take notice of the merueilous abuses of our
peace and prosperity, the exceeding contempt of Arts and good learning, and
(that, which most aggrauateth our judgment) the general neglect of piety, and
the horrible hypocrisy of many in the profession of sincere religion, and
withal call to remembrance the sundry and fearful (if not ominous,)
warnings and judgments that God has inflicted upon us in these few last
years, we then have just cause to fear, that God has reserved us to some
more dangerous plagues, and that he will by degrees strip and deprive us of
all his mercies. Wherefore least we should take overmuch offense at the
profaneness and hypocrisy of the mvltitude, and hereby fail and shrink in
our holy courses and exercises of godliness, or else should deceive our own
souls, because we retain an outward form and profession of holiness, and
because our outward tranquillity and happiness yet continues: two points and
conclusions must heedfully be considered of us. First, that the number of
sincere Christians and vndissembling Gospellers, is very rare: they are in
comparison of them that perish, but a remnant, a gleaning after the harvest or
vintage, a small flock, one of a Tribe, and two of a City. The truth of this
assertion most evidently appears in the time of any general Apostacy and
persecution, 1. Reg. 19. 14. Apoc. 12. ver. 5. and 6. and chapt. 13. ver. 7.
and 8. and shall be made manifest to all the world, at Christ his second
coming, when he shall scarcely find saving faith upon the earth. Luke. 18.
ver. 7. 8. Therefore we may not define and measure the truth of religion by the
esteem and practice of the erring multitude, but we must make Gods word the
only rule and touchstone of our faith and life. Secondly, for the avoiding and
preventing of hypocrisy, which makes us odious both to God and men, we must
not so much (in a curious humor) desire to know strange mysteries, as to know
that which most concerns us, and to make a good use and apply of our
knowledge. Again, we must in all our actions and profession of religion,
propound to our selves no sinister ends. As for example, we must not intend
gain but godliness, not credit amongst men (only) but the glory of God; not
policy, but piety, and not the advancing of our outward state, but the
amendment of our lives, and the salvation of our souls; and hereby we shall
notably and infallibly distinguish our selves from all hypocrites whatsoever.
Lastly, we must with the woman in the Apocalips, cloth our selves with the
sun of righteousness, and tread the Moon, that is, all changeable and
transitory things under our feet, and we must with the wise Virgins, whiles
it is the time of grace, and the day of salvation, provide our selves of the
oil of true says, get the garment of true holiness and keep it undefiled;
and in hope and patience wait long, and wish for, the second coming of
Christ, when the marriage shall be eternally solemnized between the Bridegroom
and us in the highest heavens. This doing we shall be happy and blessed here in
hope and beginning, and after this mortal life ended, in act and perfection.
And because, next unto the sacred ministry of the word, and the spiritual
exercises of Christians, the publishing of sound and elaborate treatises, are a
singular help and furtherance hereunto, I, (in the mediocritie of my skill)
for the direction of those that be well disposed, have compiled and framed this
small work. Moreover, because the argument of it so fitteth your affections,
being (generally) men of religion and conscience, and instruments of good, and
because your liberal kindness and long continued beneficence has bin so amply
extended to me, I do most humbly and devoutly dedicate it unto you all; most
submissiuely, beseeching you courteoussy to accept of it, and to use it for
your edification and comfort. In assured expectation whereof, I here take my
leave.

The GOD of heaven, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, remember in goodness
all your kindnesses showed to his house, and unto so many of his servants, fill
you with all wisdom and spiritual understanding, make you fruitful in all
good works, prosper you in this world, and make you everlastingly blessed in
the world to come. Amen.

Couentry. Ianu. 1608. Your worships in all duty to command, Thomas Drax.

Venerabili and Doctissimo viro Domino Hintono sacrae Theologiae Doctori,
Couentriae Archidiacono and Michaelis ecclesiae pastori vigilantissimo, (...).
CVm totum and beneficentissimu^ Maecenatum meorum ordinem, iustissimis de
causis, compellare and salutare ausus sim; non committendum putaui, vt te (vir
vere obseruande) meum ^ingularem Patronum and perueterem amicum (...)
praeterirem. Malo igitur importunus quam ingratus videri, and libelluli
vestibulo (licet menus decore) aliquid adiicere, quaem de officio meo tantillum
imminuere. Huc addatur etiam, quod argumenti vsus and praestantia, tua magna in
ecclesia, existimatio and authoritas, and tui iudicii non tam exquisiti quam
candidi expectatio, me (alioqui ^b invitum) ad te alloqu^^dum, a^^iciunt ^
inu^tant. Quocirca (...) etiam digni^^ti, idque, meritissimo* has meas
qualescunque comn^e tationes, consecrodedicoque. ^e ideo subiectissime and
demisissime ^ro, vt eas in optimam partem interpreteris, tuamque erga me
beneuolenti^m retineas and confirms. Sed de tuae propitiae voluntatis
propensione nequaquam dubitans and quia molestus esse nolim, h^c sane dicendi,
at te diligendi finem numquam fac^o. Christus opt: Max: pastorum princeps, te
quam diutissime valentem and vigentem conserue^, (...) sacrum mi^isterium
prosperet, tuam ecclesiasticam praefecturam dirigat, teque tandem summa and
sancta senectute confectum, in sempiternae be^titudinis portum and paradisum
perducat.

Couentriae, Ian. 1. 1608. Tuae dignitatis studiosissimus Thomas Drax.

The Lambs Spouse, or the Heavenly Bride.
Math. 25. 10. And they that were ready went with him to the wedding, and the
gate was shut.
Our Savior Christ the only head and Br^de-groome of the Church, having in
the former part of this allegory, under the metaphorical and borrowed terms
of Wise Virgins, that were inwardly called, furnished with saving faith and
godliness, and watchfully expected his coming: and under the appellation of
Fool^sh virgins, that were hypocrites and temporizers, called only outwardly,
and contenting themselves with the outward profession and blaze of faith and
godliness, the pith and substance whereof they wanted, described and depainted
unto us the estate and condition of the visible Church, (wherein amongst the
believers are intermingled hypocrites, and only seeming Christians) he does in
this tenth verse set down their contrary events and judgments: for the Wise
Virgins, the sincere and vndissembling Christians went with Christ to the
wedding, that is, they were received into heaven, and unto the immediate
fellowship and presence of Christ, but the foolish virgins, void and destitute
of justifying faith and inward holiness, were shut out, that is, debarred from
entering into the kingdom of heaven, and consequently adjudged and cast into
hell. Whereupon our Savior exhorts all men to watch, and carefully to wait
for his coming to judgment: least being unready at his coming, they be shut
out from the heavenly marriage: unto which duty they are so much more to
attend, because that they know not the day, nor the hour wherein he will
come; Thus much of the dependence and order of the text.

Now according to the difference and diversity of persons, viz. the wise
virgins, and the foolish, their diverse and different events and judgments, are
to be observed and handled.

In the wise virgins, three heads or points are to be considered First their
contract with Christ (in these words) wise virgins. Secondly, their readiness
and fitness thereunto in these terms, they that were ready. Lastly, the
consummation of the marriage in these words, Went with him to the wedding. Of
all these points I will speak in order, and afterward ( God assisting)
proceed to propound and handle the most different estate and judgment of the
foolish virgins. In the contract diverse points are contained. As first, that
there is such a contract betwixt Christ and his Church. Secondly, the form and
nature of it. Thirdly the benefits and prerogatives of it: lastly the uses of
the doctrine.

Touching the contract, that there is such a contract between Christ and the
Church, it is plain and demonstrable by sundry places of Scripture. The Lord
by the ministry of Esaias the Prophet, whom he sent unto Ezechies to comfort
him and his people against the blasphemies and threatening speeches of railing
Rabsaketh, the servant of the King of Assure thus styles and saluteth the
Church. This is the word that the Lord has against him. The virgin, the
daughter of Syon has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter
of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee, Isay. 57. 22. The Church is
distinguished and adorned with the title of Virgin. Because she was
consecrated and espoused to God alone, and his true worship; as a virgin to her
only bridegroom or husband. Likewise Psalm. 45. 10. Hearken O daughter and
consider and incline thine ear, etc. So shall the King have pleasure in thy
beauty for he is thy Lord and worship thou him. Here Solomon represents
Christ, and King Pharaoes daughter that was married to him, the Church of the
Gentiles espoused and affianced to Christ. Thirdly the Lord by Hosea speaks;
I will marry thee unto me for ever, I will marry thee unto me in
faithfulness. Hos. 2. 19. 20. In the Canticl^s, the Church by force of this
contract makes claim to Christ, saying; My beloved is mine, and I am his,
etc. Cant. 2. 16. Paul showing his unfeigned affection to the Corinthians, who
in part (missed by false Apostles) began without cause to distaste him, makes
this protestation. I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, for I have
prepared you for one husband to present you as a pure virgin to Christ. 2. Cor.
11. 2. In the Apocalypse the Church is called Virgins that are not defiled with
women, Apoc. 14. 4. and the Lambs Wife or Brid^. Chap. 19. 7. and Chap. 21. 2*
All these places euince and demo^strate a spiritual conjunction and contract
between Christ and the elect. Lastly, not to dwell long upon authorities,
Saint John most notably and manifestly in the allegory of the Vine and the
branches, John. 15. 1. 2. 3. 4. shadoweth and sets out unto us, the nature
of the conjunction, for as the Vine does yield and communicate life and
nourishment to the branches, and the branches receive and partake it from the
Vine: so Christ the noble Vine, that has life in himself, and of himself,
and that is full of grace and truth, does infuse and communicate spiritual
life, comfort and grace unto his several members; and the Church being
ingrafted into him, draws and receives the same from him by the hand and
instrument of faith.

Whereas therefore the true Church of God, consisting as well of married persons
as unmarried, yea for the greatest part in all times and ages of those that be
married; thus the holy scriptures, and experience and practice of all pure and
holy Churches do testify; is in respect of their sound faith only, and
firm hope in Christ, and sincere love; styled by the name of Virgins: it
serves to check and condemn the error of the Church of Rome, who from these
and like places of Scripture takes occasion, and would needs prove, that
virginity and single life, is a state in it self far more holy and
acceptable before God the^ marriage, yea that it is meritorious and a type of
the perfection of eternal life* and here-vpon they forbid their Bishops,
Ptiests, Deacons, Monks, Jesuits, etc. to marry, tollerating notwithstanding
and allowing the Stews, concubines, hatlots, and all manner of uncleanness.
They urge and commend Virginity, with as much conscience and equity, as the
thief does truth, the drunken man sobriety, and the glutton abstinence. For it
is notoriously known to the world, not only what unchaste hearts they carry,
and in what lusts they burn; but how filthily they live, that amongst the rest
would be accounted the most holy and exquisite.

But briefly to refute their error, we thus prove, that virginity is not a
state more holy in it self before God then marriage, much less meritorious.
First God in the old Testament, and Christ in the New, allowed and permitted
marriage to Priests, Prophets, Patria^kes, Apostles, Evangelists and Ministers*
as well as any others. If there had been any unholiness in their marriage, or
virginity estate for them, so incomparably better or more necessary, God in his
wisdom would have otherwise ordered it. Secondly, marriage is honorable in
all men, it has his chastity, it is for the comfort of man, the medicine of
incontinence, the mean to preserve the world, and the seminary of the
faithful, therefore in it self not inferior to a single life.

Thirdly, if single life were so holy and meritorious a state before GOD, as
they would make it, then all unmarried persons should be so. But the examples
of Absolon, Adoniah, and Judas, etc. euince the contrary. Secondly, it should
be without the least taint of concupiscence. Thirdly, the Scriptures would
auerre and avouch it. Fourthly, albeit virginity and single life in times of
general persecution be more to be wished, and more convenient then marriage;
yet then Paul rather wishes that all men in respect of the time present were
such, then commands and inioyneth them. 1. Cor. 7. 7. For he leauerh them to
their liberties* And this occurrence of affliction and trouble, seems to be
a principal cause why Bishops and Ministers so sparingly were married in the
Primitive church, for some 200 years after the Apostles decease. Lastly, I
conclude with Saint Augustine; Melius est humile coniugium, quam superba
virginitas.

Secondly, in that the true Church is called by the name of Virgin, 2. Obser.
in respect of her sound faith, and pure affection to Christ: we are first
admonished hereby to beware of, and to shun, as the very plague or poison of
our souls, the dangerous and damnable errous and heresies of al Papists,
Turks Anabaptists, Schismatikes, P^gans and^. For these like a gangrene and
cankar eat into and corrupt our souls, they put out the light of our
understanding and wound the vital parts of spiritual life. Matthew 6. 23. 2.
Pet. 2. verse. 2. 3. Apoc. 13. verse 7. and 8. 2. Thessa 2. verse. 9 and 10.

Secondly we must entirely and unfeignedly love Christ. Ioh 21. He must be our
love as Ignatius says (...), that is that Christ his love was crucified: he
alone must have our hearts. Pro. 23. ver. 26.

We must account al things but loss and dung in comparison of gayning him
Phil. 3. 8. He is the precious margarite or pearl, we must sell all that we
have to purchase it. Mat. 13. 46. Finally our love or affection to Christ, his
word and Sacraments must be so fervent, so fi^y and so vehement that no water
should quench it, nor the floudes drown it, and we should greatly contemn al
substance in respect of it. Cant. 8, 6, 7.

This meets with those that have a form and show of godliness; Use.
yet they would serve God and Mammon, two contrary masters if they be
worldlings, or if they be licentious, they are (...). 1. lovers of pleasures
more then God. Wherefore let us avoid all hypocrisy and love Christ sincerely,
for as Christ himself is simple and sincere in his nature, and in his
promises, love and works, toward us, so let us labor in some good conformity
to behave and carry our selves to him.

And thus much touching the first branch viz. that there is such a contract and
of the uses of it.

2. The second point to be considered in this spiritual contract or union, is
the definition, nature and form of it.

This contract therefore is that mistical and spiritual, yet real and
substantial union and conjunction between Christ and the Church, whereby they
are made one flesh, and by special compact and consent have right and interest
one in another, yea and abide and dwell one in an other.

In the clearing and manifestation hereof* three particulars are to be
handled, first that this conjunction is only spiritual, not natural, or
carnal. Secondly, that it is real and substantial, and lastly the order and
manner of it is to be touched.

It is mystical and spiritual, first because the persons between whom it is
made, viz. Christ (as man) and the Church militant, are far distant in place,
and therefore it cannot be any natural or carnal conjunction.

Secondly, because the means and manner of working it are spiritual, it needs
must be spiritual also. Now it is wrought and effected not by nerves, bonds,
^inews, as this natural conjunction between the body and the soul is caused,
but by the spirit of Christ, which he sends from heaven into us; and by our
faith, stirred up by his spirit, whereby we send it up again to him: so that
this conjunction must needs be as spiritual, so relative and mutual. First
therefore that Christ sends his spirit into us, and that the same spirit that
dwells in his manhood, and fills it with all graces above measure, is
derived thence and dwells in all the true members, raising up and working in
us faith and strength whereby we apprehend him* love whereby we affect him,
and all other graces needful for every man's salvation, it is pregnantly
proved by these places of scripture following* and the like. He gives us of
his spirit and hereby we know that he dwells in us and we in him, John 4.
14. God has sent forth the spirit of his son into our hearts which cries
Abba father Gal. 46. Lastly the church is the habitation of God. Ephesians. 2. 22.
and the temple of God. 1. Cor. 6. 19. Secondly our faith ascends up to
Christ. Acts. 7. 56. does incorporate us into him. Ephesians. 3. 12. 17. and hereby
we both live and dwell in him, Galath. 2. 20. But this our faith is spiritual
and invisible, for we walk by faith and not by sight, 2. Cor. 5. 6. And faith
is the ground of things that are hoped for, and the evidence of things which
are not seen. Heb. 11. 1. 2.

Object. But some perhaps will object, that we feed upon Christ in the
Sacrament, we indeed eat his flesh and drink his blood. John. 6. 55. 56. Ergo
our union is not spiritual. etc.

Ans. Albeit, we really, corporally and substantially receive, partake of, and
ear the elements and outward signs, namely the bread and the wine, according
to Christ's institution in memory and representation of his body broken and his
blood shed, and yet we receive and feed upon Christ by faith. For not every
one that eats the bread and drinks the wine in the Lords supper does feed
upon Christ, but only the true believers; who feed of him both in the
Sacrament and also out the Sacrament as may appear. Ioh. 6. 17. 51.

Secondly as the Fathers in the time of the Law did all eat the same spiritual
meat (that we do) and drink the same spiritual drink, but they did it only
by faith, which apprehends things to come as present, (for Christ was not
then incarnate, much less was he dead,) even so we receive and partake of
Christ, that is spiritually by faith and not carnally and substantiallye, as
the Papists imagine. 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4.

Thirdly Christ is now in heaven and there contained, Ioh, 6. 26.
and his body there glorified, therefore cannot he be eaten carnally,
corporally, substantially, for he is many millions of miles distant hence.
Secondly His body is impassible and not subject to any such indignities.
Thirdly then Judas and all reprobate and wicked men who receive the Sacrament
of Christ's body and blood, should be saved, for they that eat of the bread of
life live for ever. Ioh. 5. 57. They that eat his flesh and drink his blood
dwell in him and he in them. verse. 56. But they do not feed upon the body
and blood of Christ because they want the mouth and stomach of faith, to
receive and digest it. John. 6. 63.

Lastly, the elements of bread and wine retain both their names and natures,
even after the words of consecration, as is perspicuous and evident by the
Scripture. 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28. 29. And hereunto accord the ancient Fathers,
as Augustine, Theodoret, Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, yea and some of
later times among the Papists, as Gela^ius and Bertram.

Ergo. Christ is not there bodily present, neither is the bread and wine
converted substantially and really into his body and blood, therefore as the
absurd doctrine of transubstantiation is an invention of later times, and here
overthrown: so must it needs also follow that our conjunction with him in this
mortality must needs be altother spiritual.

The second thing to be considered in the diffinition, is, that albeit this
contract and union is not feigned, supposed, imagined, or by touching and
commixion: yet it is a true, a real and a substantial union, for we are
substantially united to him; our body, to his body, our soul to his soul, and
our whole person to his whole person, so that we are flesh of his flesh and
bone of his bones. Ephesians. 5. 30.

And as Adams whole person was really and substantially coupled with the whole
person of Eve. So is it betwixt Christ and the Church. He is the head and we
the members, he is the husband, and we the wife.

Now in that this contract and union is real and substantial, Obs.
it is also indissoluble and eternal. For first the Lord says by Hosea (as I
have before mentioned,) I will marry thee unto me for ever. Secondly Christ
his power is infinite, and none can take any out of his hands, John. 10. 28.
Thirdly, his love is constant, whom he loves he loves to the end. John 13.
3. Fourthly the saving graces of his spirit, the proper endowments of his
elect, are without repentance and irreuocable. Romans 11. 29.

Fifthly Christ is an effectual and continual mediator unto God his Heavenly
Father for them. Luke. 22. 32. Heb. 7. 25.

Lastly if any true and lively member of Christ's body should be lost, then
either Christ should want either power, love, or wisdom, to preserve and save
it, but he wants none of them: or else his body should be maimed and
imperfect, which can never be, for it is his fullness. Ephesians. 1. 23. and
he will in the life to come make it unto himself a glorious Church Without
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. Ephesians. 5. 27.

Use. Therefore let every man try by the touchstone of Gods word, whether he
feel the spirit of God in lightning and renewing him, and faith purging his
heart, and firmly apprehending and applying Christ withal his benefits unto
himself, if he find himself in this estate let him thank GOD and by the
continual and serious use of the word, Sacraments, prayer and practice of
good works, maintain and confirm it, for doubtless he is a true member of
JESUS CHRIST, ingrafted into him, and shall thus continue for ever. For these
are not the works of flesh and blood, and mere Nature, but of the Spirit of
GOD and grace.

The third thing in the deffinition to be explained is the Order of the union,
touching which we are to note that the Church is first united unto the body
and flesh of CHRIST. Secondly to his soul, and lastly to his Godhead, and so
to his whole person: and therefore the Scriptures commonly speak of first, and
propound Christ's humanity unto us and afterward his deity. Romans 1. verse 3. and
4. Chap. 9. ver. 5. and 6.

The reason hereof is, because we cannot be united unto his deity but by his
flesh, wherein he wrought our redemption, for the humane Nature of Christ is as
it were a door to let us into the communion of his deity, and the conduict
pipe of deity to convey and derive it unto us. And as in the sacraments, the
true-beleeuers do by the outward signs and symboles as by instruments receive
the thing signified viz, Christ and his merits: so they also by the means of
his humanity, are made partakers of his Godhead, and so are united unto him.

The third thing to be considered in this: contract, is the rare and royal
benefits and prerogatives, that hereby flow and redound unto us. First we
have from Christ, and from his merits and sufferings, the foundation and
beginning of our new birth and being: he is the root, and we are the plants,
he the Vine and we the branches: of his fullness we all receive grace for
grace: finally, we are in him, who is made unto us of God, wisdom and
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, Ioh. 15. 2. John. 1. 16. 1. Cor.
1. 30. Ier. 2^. 5. 6.

Secondly, we being contracted unto Christ our head and husband, are interessed
in and partakers of all his royalties and benefits so far forth as may be, (the
proportion and difference beweene the husband and the wife beting retained) for
from the fountain of his Godhead and conduit of his humanity, are derived
unto us, his righteousness; santification, triumph, glory. From Christ we have,
redemption through his blood, even remission of our sins according to his
rich grace, by his sufferings we are ^reed and delivered from the guilt of our
sins and the fear of condemnation, and by his obedience to the Law imputed
to us we are accepted as just before God and fit for eternal life. 2. Cor. 5.
19. 21. Apoc. 12. 1, Now what an unspeakable benefit is remission of sins,
which sin draws upon us all temporal and eternal plagues and can be by
noe other means obtained then by our conjunction with him Psalm. 32. 1. 2.

Thirdly communicating with Christ in the union of nature, we also (in some
proportion and similitude are partakers of his prophetical, priestly, and
Kingly Office. We are made prophets to confess him and to teach and comfort
others, Priests to mortyfie sin, to suffer for Christ, to offer sacrifices of
praise and thanksgiving unto him, and to consecrate our selves, souls and
bodies wholly unto him. Rom 8. 39. Apo. 1. 6. 1. Peter. 1. 9. We are Kings to
fight against the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and by faith in him to
overcome them. 1. John. 4. 5. And here we receive that right in whole, and
dominion in part which we wholly lost in Adam. Math. 19. 28. 1. Cor. 6. 2. 1.
Tim. 4. 4. 5.

Fourthly all Plagues, Adversities, Crosses, Punishments, are made but only
temporary and fatherly corrections unto us, tending to our correction, and not
our destruction, and they are medicines to cure our infirmities and not means
to increase our miseries. Heb. 12. 6. 10. 11. Pro. 3. 11. Apoc. 3. 19.

Fifthly we have all the Angels of GOD in this life for our good to attend
upon us and to defend us. Heb. 1. 14. 2. Kings. 6. 16. 17. Psalm. 34 7. And in
the life to come, especially by reason of this near and admirable conjunction
with Christ our head and husband, and because we are made kings to rule with
him, we are and shall be superior to the Angels, for there is no such conjunction
betwixt his nature and theirs as between his and ours, neither shall they
reign as Kings with him in the life to come as the Saints shall; Apoca. 2
verse. 26. and Chap. 3. verse. 21.

Sixthly Satan cannot indite and condemn us, for as no man can sue the wife in
the law, the husband living and not giving his consent* So CHRIST our husband
living and always justifying us, who shall condemn us? Romans 8. 33. 34. or
who shall separate us from his love? verse. 35.

Lastly when the husband, especially being a mighty Monarch is highly offended,
the wife may and has free access unto him when none other can or may have the
like liberty; So may and has the true Church free acces^e unto Christ by
prayer when the wicked are debarred from him, and cannot or dare not approach
near to him.

Thus much of the benefits and privileges.

Now in the last place follow the manifold uses of this contract and union.

1. Use. First seeing our union with Christ is Real and substantial and
continues for ever, (for we are made one flesh with him, bone of his bones and
flesh of his flesh) Heb. 2. 14. Ephesians. 5. 30. Ergo he still (albeit he be
glorified) reteineth the essential parts of a true human body, the quality
is only altered, but the substance and dimentions remain, for otherwise we
could have no fellowshippe with him, and so the foundation of all our comfort
should be rased and ruinated. And therefore here is condemned the absurd and
gross error of them that defy Christ's humanity by making it infinite,
omnipotent and knowing al things, and ours only finite and circumscribed in
power place and knowledge, whereas between that which is finite, and that
which is infinite there can be no such union and substantial conjunction.

Secondly we must labor and endeavor always to continue in this union and
communion with Christ, and not depart an hairs breadth from him; for
remaining and abiding in Christ we find all comfort, refreshment and peace;
and being out of him we run headlong into all evil; for even the Godly
themselves, being out of it, and the efficacy of it but alittle, feel
themselves as it were tormented with a flame of fire. Psalm. 77. 2. 3. Job. 6.
verse. 1. 2. 3.

Wherefore we must beware of and shun all Idolatry, error, atheism,
fornication, uncleanness, drunkenesse, schism, and all other reigning sins
whereby we dissolve and cut in sunder this union.

Thirdly by reason of this mystical and strait conjunction betwixt Christ and
the Church, he has a simpathy and feeling of all their wants and miseries,
and though now he be exalted to the highest degree of glory in heaven yet does
he in nothing (as worldly men in their exaltation usually forget and neglect
their old and poor friends and acquaintance) remit and abate of his care and
compassion toward his poor and afflicted members in earth, but he
succoureth them in all their extremities, imputes and rewards any good done
unto them as done to himself, and censureth and reuengeth the wrongs and
indignities offered them as done to his own person.

Hence we learn diverse lessons and duties. First we in all our afflictions
and necessities must flee unto him and to the throne of grace, in confidence
and assurance of faith, and we shall find rest unto our souls and help in
time of need. Math. 11. 26. Heb. 4. 16. For as Philo said to the Jews his
country men, when he could find no favor with Caius the Roman Emperor) Vbi
deficit humanum praesidium, ibi necesse est inciperem diuinu^ auxilium, that
is, where man's help fails, there Gods must needs begin.

Secondly we must do all possible good to Gods Saints, we must comfort his
bowels, show them all kindness, and supply their wants, for then are we
lively and feeling members, and Christ will take notice of all the comfort we
yield them, and reward and regard it both in this life and in the life to come,
be the offices of charity never so mean so they be unfeigned, Mat. 25. 35. 36.
40. Luke 21. 34

Thirdly me must take heed that we never grieve, wrong, vex, and persecute
Gods dear servants and saints; for then we do but fight against God, kick
against the pricks, touch the apple of GODS own eye. Zacha. 2. 8. grieve hi:
spirit, and procure to our selves many Judgments, and if we are and continue in
the number of open and professed enemies we besides temporal plagues most
justly, draw upon our selves eternal vengeance.

The last use is, that being joined and united to Christ the fountain of all
good works, we wust contend and endeavor to conform our selves to his example
and bring forth timely and plentiful fruits of piety, charity, and justice.
Phil. 1. 11. Tit. 2. 14 Psalm. 13.

The second section.
They that were ready.
NOw (as order requires) we are to treat and dispute of the fitness and
preparation that ought to be in the true Church of Christ and is required of
them against his second coming: For as these wise Virgins were beforehand
prepared in faith, grounded only upon the scriptures and relying upon Christ's
only merits, in fervent love and sincere affection to Christ, and in hearty
desire and earnest expectation of his coming: so must we also, if we would be
assured of our contract and union which Christ in this life, and enjoy his
glorious presence and have perfect fellowshippe with him in the world to come;
trim prepare and make ready our selves against the solemnization of the
marriage: and therefore it is said in the Apocalypse; the marriage of the Lamb
is come and the bride has made her self ready. Apo. 19. 7.

And so they are presented as a chaste Virgin unto one husband Jesus Christ. The
truth and necessity of this preparation is plainly and plentifully set forth
in the scriptures, whether we r^spect Christ as the princypall and inward
trimmer of the Bride, or the ministers of the word as his agents and
instruments, or the B^ide her self, as the proper subject of it. First Christ
trimmeth his spouse the Church, and therefore the holy company of his elect are
said to come down from heaven, prepared as a Bride trimmed for her husband.
Apoc. 21. 2. that is, purged from all corruption, GOD through Christ does make
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. Col. 7.
12. Christ sanctifies and cleanses his Church by the Washing of water through
the word, that he may make it unto himself a glorious Church, without spot or
wrinckle etc. Ephesians. 5, 26, and 27. The graces that Christ bestows upon her are
as chains to adorn her, as Myrrh, Incense and the spices of the Merchants to
persume her, as Purple and Skarletto clothe her, and as precious Jewels to
beautify and enrich her, finally she as Queen stands, at his right hand in
a vesture of the gold of Ophir, Psalm 45, verse. 9.

More particularly Christ trimmeth and prepares his spouse. First by offering
and affording unto her the means and ministry of grace and salvation, as the
Preaching of the word, Ephesians 4, 11, 12, 13. the seal of the Sacraments.
Matthew 28, 19. 1. Corinthi. 1, 23, 24, 25, 26. Hereunto may be added troubles,
crosses, and afflictions, which albeit in their own nature they be evils and
plagues for sin, yet the quality and property being altered by Christ his
death; they are made means to humble us, medicines to purge us, sour sauce to
make us to relish better the Heavenly food of our souls, bridles to curb and
restrain us from sin, and spiritual directers to guide us to the Kingdom
of heaven.

Secondly Christ trimmeth his spouse by the continual and effectual in working
and efficacy of his blessed Spirit. For without this all the outward means
should be only for conuictment of men, and for their more just condemnation,
and not for conversion or consolation) for by it he alone gives the increase.
1. Cor. 3. hereby he epeneth men's understanding to understand the scriptures,
Lu. 24. ve. 32. he opens their hearts (as he did Lydias) to attend unto good
doctrine. Acts 16. ver, 14, he co^uerteth their hearts as he did the heart of
Cornelius: and all that heard the words with him. Ac. 10. ve. 44, hereby he
leads them into all truth. John 16. 13, he dwells in them. 1. Cor. 3. 16,
he regenerateth them. Ioh. 3. 5. and. 8 finally he comfort and strengthens
them. Ioh. 16. 8, in that he is the principal in trimming and preparing the
Church his spouse, and that unless he give grace and success al other means
(albeit never so good and holy) be vain and frustrate, it must teach ernestly
and continually by prayer, to desire and entreat the Lord, to prepare us: to
make us meet for his kindome, and to make the ministry of his word and
Sacraments, and all other good means profitable and effectual unto us, and
herein we must say with the Church in the Cantikles, arise O North and come O
South, and blow on my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: and (then)
let my beloved come to his garden, and eat his pleasat fruit. Ca^tickles 4.
v. the 16. The isntrumental trimmers, adorners of the Bride are specially and
most singularly, the ministers and Preachers of the word. For these do with
Paul labor to present their congregation as a chaste Virgin unto one hul band
lesus Christ 2. cor. verse 1. 2. They have the ministry and embassy of
reconciliation committed unto them. 2. cor. 5. ver. 18. They are the Preachers
of faith and repentance Mark. 1. ver. 15. Math. 3 2. Act. 26. 20. They have the
keys and authority subordinatly under Christ to bind and to loose, to remit
and to retain. Mat. 16. 19. Ioh. 20. ver. 23. finally they are the outward
organes and means of illumination, conversion and salvation as may appear.
Act. 26. 18. 1. Tim. 4. 16. 1. cor. 1. 21. Hence it is that Philip must teach
and convert the Enuch. Act. 8. 35. Ananias, Paul: Paul Lidia; and Peter
Cornelius. Act. 9. 10. 11. Act. 16. 14. Act. 10. ver. 7. and 3. 4

The use hereof is to teach in no wise to neglect, despise or distaste the
Preaching of the word, and other Holy means of our Salvation (as many and
most do upon the peril of their own salvation) but use them with all care,
reverence diligence and constancy.

And therefore what a shame is it for most men, yea what an occasion to
aggrauate their condemnation that they will for supply and obteyning of
earthly food, provision and advancement, trudge, and travail far and
near, almost to euetie market and fair, and in the mean time neglect the
food of their Soul: suffer it to pine, and to perrish, they are more churlish
to it then Nabal was to David: more without compassion then the rich glutton
was to Lazarus, and more hard hearted and merciless then the Iayler to
innocent Paul and Sylas, who put them into the dungeon or inner prison, and
locked their feet fast in the stocks. Act. 16. 24.

And thus much of the principal preparer of the Bride, and also of the
isntrumental.

Thirdly the subject or person that is thus prepared of Christ and his
ministers, that is also as a voluntary and understanding creature, by removing
the bar and encumbrances of infidelity, idolatry and impenitency: and by using
and frequenting all the holy means of begetting, confirming and increasing
the saving graces and gifts of God: is this spouse of Christ, the Church, the
elect, the believers, and (in a word) all that desire and seek to be saved.
For these are often and continually warned and persuaded in the Scriptures: to
watch, Mark 13. verse 35, 36. to be sober, and to watch unto prayer, 1. Peter
4, 7. and to have fervent Charity amongst themselves. verse 8. to repent. Act.
17. ver. 30. to purge themselves. 1. John. 3. 3. to put on the breast plate of
faith and love 1. Theff. 5. 8. and hope of salvation for an helmet, ibidem. to
beware of surfeting, dronkennes and the cares of the world Luke. 21. 34. to
wail yea sigh and mourn for the redemption of their bodies. Romans 8. verse 20.
21. 22. 23. To use the world and all things thereof, as though they used them
not, 1. Cor. 7. 27. to fear God and give glory to him Apo. 14. verse. 7. to
make an echo and cry with the Bride in the Apocalypse, come even, so come Lord
Jesus Apoc. 22. verse. 14. and 20. and lastly at the discerning of the near
approach of Christ by the accomplishment of the last signs such as are the
ruin of Romish Babylon, the conversion of the nation of the Jews in the
kingdom and countries into which they are dispersed, the roaring of the Seas
and waters etc. reioysingly to look and li^t up our heads because our ( full)
redemption draws near Luke. 21. verse. 28. Apoc. 19. 7. This espoused virgin
or Bride therefore, must of necessity being stirred up and assisted by the
spirit of GOD, and having the means of grace so abundantly ministered unto her,
get the wedding garment (of faith and holiness) Math. 22. verse. 11. 12. 12, make
her self ready Apoc. 19. verse. 7. to desire to be dis^olued and to be with
Christ Phil. 1. 23. and to endeavor to be acceptable to him. 2. Cor. 5. Reasons
and arguments further to induce and persuade her hereunto are these first the
transceudent and incomparable dignity and majesty of the person, to whom she is
contracted, and to whom, she is to be married, and that is Jesus Christ, the
Kings son, the King of Kings: and Lord of Lords: the natural heir of heaven
and earth; the mighty Iehoua: the everlasting father he that has all power in
heaven and earth; and God has so he ighly exalted him at his right hand and
giuuen him a name above all names, that at the name of JESUS should every knee
bow of things in heaven, of things in earth, and things under the earth,
Philip. 2. verse. 9. 10.

Wherefore if King Pharaoes Daughter being wedded to earthlye Solomon, must
hearken unto him, consider and incline her ear. Yea forget her own people, and
her Fathers house; Psa. 45. Psa. 45. 10.
verse 10. how much more must every good Christian, espoused and affianced to
the heavenly Solomon JESUS CHRIST our Savior, perform these duties.

And if the Maids and Virgins that went in by course and appointment to great
King Ahashuerash, that reigned from India unto Aethiopia, over a hundred and
twenty seven Provinces, Hester. 1. verse. 1. were before hand six months,
purified with Oil of Myrrh, and six months with sweet odours, Hester. 2.
verse. 12. So much more must the members of the Church, before they shall or can
enjoy CHRIST JESUS his presence in glory; not for a few days or months; but
all the days of their life, they must purge, sweeten, and prepare themselves;
for he alone is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and no power or Ma^estie in
earth can compare with him. And by our conjunction and marriage with him, we
shall be exempted and freed from all evils what-so-euer, and possessed with
all good things unspeakably for euer-more.

Secondly, by the strange judgments of Almighty GOD, especially in the four
or five years last past, whether general, or more particular, we ought, as
by so many voices and signs of our omnipotent GOD preaching from heaven unto
us (and almost at the end of the world) teaching and exhorting men to seious
repentance, and to be moved and stirred up more speedily, and specially to
prepare our selves to meet GOD in the way, we must submit and humble our
selves before him, forsake our sins, give glory to him; and entreats him by
prayer and by repentance, to quench the fire of his begun wrath and
indignation. For it is an undoubted truth, that if to all our other sins
there be adjoined security and deadness of heart, that punishments from God
are both hastened and doubled: and the remouall and ceasing of one plague, is
nothing else but the occasioning and beginning of another, as we may read in
Exodus against Pharao and the Egyptians, Chap. 8. 9. 10. 11.
in the 4. of Amos against the Israelites, and in the 15. 16. 17. chapters of
John's Apocalips against* Antichrist, and the experience of former and later
times in many countries does verify it. Hereupon Gods destroying Angel; and
his killing Arrowe, the consuming pestilence has (not long sithence) destroyed
so many thousands in this Island, and yet is not ceased. All the four Elements
which otherwise would fight for us, have been armed against us; First the
air, partly by his often Eclipses portending perhapps the eclipting and
darkning of the glory and soundness of the truth, and other temporal evils,
partly by prodigious and unusual storms and tempests, giving warning of the
wrath to come. Secondly the fire by consuming and burning so many houses and
habitations within these few years: seems to presage either the fire of the
last judgment, or else some fearful and strange event. Thirdly the Seas and
waters in diverse parts of the kingdom, have most horribly roared, swelled,
broken their banckes; and encroached upon the maine land, and firm continent,
so terrified the people the beholders, and done so much harm. Add hereunto
the unwonted, sudden, and wonderful inundations of Rivers and Brooks, as
though like unto the men of the old world we all deserved to be drowned.
Lastly the earth by his moving and shaking sensibly perceived in many places,
has declared the Lord to be angry, Psalm. 18. 7.
and seems to proclaim against us that we are unworthy to live upon it, we
must generally and particularly return unto him, by unfeigned repentance; and
then they shall be but fatherly corrections, and gentle warnings unto us. But
if we persist and insist in our sin and security, then let us beware and
fear least they be but the beginning of (further) evils. And even Herodotus
an heathen historian divinely speaks: Cum Deus puniturus est gentem vel
vrbens, prodigiis id prius solet significare. That is, when God will punish a
Nation or City, he uses to give signification of it by prodigies* and this
does the destruction of Icrusalem and the dispersion of the nation of the
Jews, witness and warrant plainly unto us.

Thirdly, the approaching and neernesse of the day of the LORD, must be a
Trumpet to fore-warne and waken us, and as the voice of thunder to terrify us
from our security, and to compel us to watch and pray, that we may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come, and that we may
stand before the son of man. Luke 22. verse 36.

Signs and forerunners of our Savior JESUS CHRIST'S second coming already
fulfilled, are these, not only the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Temple of
GOD many hundred years ago accomplished, but more specially, the discovery,
revealing, and the decay of the Romish Antichrist, that false Prophet, and
King of the Locusts, within this four score and sixteen years last expired.
2. Thessalon. 2. verse. 8. Apoc. 17. verse. 16. and his ruin and the
overthrow and utter desolation of his Babylon and Metropolis surely is at
hand, as the Scriptures foreshew it to come to pass. Apoc. 18. verse. 8. For
their sins of Idolatry, of filthy and abominable living, of the bloodshed
of so many millions of GODS elected saints, of most horrible and unmatchable
conspiracies and treasons against Christian Kings and states, as their most
execrable and damnable plot of powder treason, wherein they purposed at one
blow to have blown up and destroyed, both our most excellent and mighty
Sovereign, the most hopeful Prince Henry, together with all the honorable
personages, and the state of the kingdom there assembled, do to their public
and eternal shame, (amongst infinite other their villainies) demonstrate, are
(as it were) come to the full: and GOD has (in part) and will remember their
iniquitye.

Add hereunto their shameless corrupting and mangling of the writings and
volumes, both of the ancient Fathers, and also later writers, yea those of
their own faction, as Iansenius, Ferus, Bertram, etc. together with the
burning of so many old copies: both of the ancient and also of the later
writers of their own, that in ought made against them.

Lastly, their late, yet most lewd, lying, sophistical and hellish doctrine of
Aequiuocation, shifting euasions, and mental reseruations, when they are
called into question before civil Magistrates, does by their Books and
practice euince.

A third sign, already in great measure fulfilled, is the abundance and
shameless defense of sin, deadness, and dullness of heart, whereby men are
neither sensitive of their sins, nor aware of Gods judgments; and want of
true faith on the earth; as may be discerned by so much Atheism and
Hypocrisy, Luke 18. 8.
so little invocation of Gods name, so horrible and usual Blasphemy, and such
vile practices of injustice and oppression: wherefore CHRIST that sits on
the ^lowde, must needs shortly thrust in his Sickle and reap: for the Grapes
of sin, and the har^est of iniquity is ripe.

A fourth and dreadful sign and forerunner of the last judgment: are
strange Meteors, Comets, new, or blazing stars which have been evidently
seen and noted, Luke 21. ver. 11.
as anno Christi, Math. 4. 7.
1572. and anno 1577. many Countries and kingdoms, beyond the Seas anno 1604
and 1605. about the beginning of October in 17. degrees of Sagittarius shinyng
forth gloriously after the sun setting; in figure and color not unlike unto
that which thirty and two years ago was seen in Cassiopeia, without beard
our tail, round, pure and bright, so that many of the learned thought it to
be Venus Star and the most excellent Astronomers, in the beginning of it,
took it also for the evening Star: Keckermanus, Disp. Philos. Extraord. page
373. and 406. add hereunto a late Comet appearing Northwest, 1607.

Use. 1. The noting, seeing and contemplation of these and the like fearful
and ominous signs and occurrences, should drive and draw to fear almighty
GOD, Isa. 47. 13 and 14.
and stand in awe of him, that causes and sends them; as Lodowicke the first
Emperor the Father of Charles the great answered one Edmund and Astrologer,
that abusing words of Scripture, exhorted him not to fear the Comete which
he then saw: let us not fear the Comete says he, but the creator of it,
and let us praise his clemency, who does vouchsafe by such judgments to
remember us of, and to reprove us, for out dullness and sluggishnesse.

Secondly let us (taking also as a praesagium and forerunner of the last day)
be advertised and induced hereby to prepare our Lamps, to furnish the Oil
and to make ready for our Lord JESUS CHRIST at his coming, that we may go
with him unto the marriage and enter into his joy. Amen.

Thirdly the consideration of infinite loss, detriment and torment that will
follow (if we do not in this life, the time of grace and reconciliation
prepare our selves) must drive and compel us hereunto, for they shall be
excluded out of Heaven, and be punnished with everlasting perdition, form the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. and the
shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Apoc.
21, ver. 8, and the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore and they shall
have no rest day nor night, Apoc. 14. verse. 11. Wherefore if the former
argument cannot like an heavenly Adamant and Loadstone draw us to preparation,
(as this Argument is most effectual and preualent with the regenerate,) yet
let the threatening of damnation, like a terrible thunderclap, or a great peale
of ordinance rowse and awake us from sin, and drive and enforce us to make
our selves ready. And if the fear hereof in very Reprobates, can work so far
forth as to compel Simon Magus to desire Peter, and John to pray to the Lord
for him, that none of the things that they had spoken might come upon him, Act.
8. 24. and when Paul disputed of Judgment, it could make Faelax to tremble.
Act. 24. 26. much more must it prevail with those that make a better
profession, and wait for eternal redemption.

Lastly our Savior Christ, and Paul etc. by this argument endeavored to awaken
the secure. Matthew 23. 33. 2. cor. 5. 11.

And thus much in general of the person that is to be prepared and to pr^pare
her self.

Now that we may proceed more orderly in this point, and the reader may take
the more benefit, and profit by it. We are first to propound the principal
heads of this preparation, and Secondly the proper and set time of it. The
principal heads are these four, faith in Christ; Secondly purity and
innocence of life. Thirdly the duties of charity and good works, and lastly a
fervent desire, and huely hope in the patient expectation of the consumation of
the marriage.

The first head is faith, which is nothing else but a persuasion of the favor
of GOD toward us in Christ, or as Saint Paul to the Hebrews defines it, the
(...) or substance of things hoped for, it is called a substance, not for that
in very deed it does subsist, and has abeeing, but because it does present,
and as it were set before our eyes that which is promised by GOD. Hebrews 11.
1. Apoc. 1, 8. and it is (...) that is a demonstration of things not seen; the
word signifies properly a conuincing of the conscience, for faith does so
convince him that doubts he can doubt no more, not otherwise then if he
saw them with his bodily eyes, and hereunto is to be referred that saying of
Christ. Thomas because thou have seen thou have ^eleeued, but blessed are they
that have not seen, and (yet) have believed. Ioh. 20. 29. Therefore says that
gives us an assurance of the accomplishment of Gods promises, whether
corporal, or spiritual, temporal, and eternal, must needs be the first,
and the principal part of this preparation: this is the entry door whereby we
are admitted unto God, and into his house. Ephe. 3, 12. without this it is
impossible to please God for he that comes unto God must believe Hebre. 11,
5. and what soever is not of faith (that is done in a conscionable knowledge of
Gods will) is sin To. 14. 23. faith is the eye of the body, if the eye be
single id est the faith sincere, the^al the body shall be light: but if the eye
be dark id est the faith corrupt, and unsound, then the whole body is dark, so
that neither hand, foot etc. can execute and perform his function. This faith
is the stomach of the Soul to attract, digest, and convert into good blood,
and norishment, the Heavenly food of Gods word, and if it either want appetite,
to desire, power to digest, or strength to retain etc. the whole body must
needs by degrees languish, and decay: finally it is the root, foundation, and
the isntrumental cause of our justification, regeneration, victory over sin,
and satan, peace of conscience, and eternal salvation. col. 2. 5. 6. Ephe. 6.
16. Act. 15, 9. 1. John. 5. 4. Romans 5. 1. Mar 16. 16. Ioe. 3. 15. 16.

Thus we see by the properties, effects, and uses of faith it is necessary,
and there can be no preparation acceptable to God without it; wherefore if we
want it, we must use the means to get, and obtai^e it: and if we find our
selves possessed with it, we must then preserve, cherish and norish this holy
flame with the knowledge of Gods word, with the use of the Sacraments, by
conference, by meditation, by prayer, by practice of good works, and by hope,
expecting, and waiting for the end of it, even the salvation of our souls.
For first our faith through the frequency and violence of temptations, is often
fore assaulted and weakened, and therefore it had need be repaired and
confirmed.

Secondly only that faith that usually does grow and increase, is the saving,
and lively faith, and shall never be extinct, for defect of oil; nor pine away
by any spiritual consumption, but continues firm, and immovable, and
obtains the promises Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13.

Lastly if faith have not (as before specified) his continual supply of food,
it will fail as the wine did at the marriage in Cana of Galil, if it be not
norished, and preserved, it will wither like the corn sown in the stony
ground for want of moisture, and it will be lost as we see how it was in the
foolish virgins at the Bride grooms coming, and that argued that it was not
true faith in existence; but only in appearance, and that it was rather an
opinion then a deep impression: for otherwise the faith of Peter, and so of
Gods elect, shall not fail, and the gifts of God (namely that directly
concern salvation) are without repentance. Luk 22. 32. Romans 11. 19. never
extinct, or taken away.

But that neither with the ignorant, nor with the hypocrites, nor yet with the
Papists and other heretics we content, and deceive our selves with a mock
faith* an historical and temporary faith, or with a cracked, and erroneous
faith, instead of that which is saving, and justifying, we must found and
search our souls, whether we be Orthodoxe, and vncorrupt in the principles
of faith, whether we rest wholly upon the right object, whether it be joined
with particular application, and lastly whether we discern and find in our
selves the inward and outward signs, and evidences of it, for then undoubtedly
we have that faith that justifies the sinner, purges the heart, engrafteth
us into Christ, and saves our souls. But of these, and the like particulers
briefly, and in order.

Principles and foundations of faith are these, preaching of the word of God,
is the ordinary and principal means of salvation. Romans 10 14. Christ is both
God and Man in one person, perfect GOD and perfect man: man to suffer and dye,
and satisfy for sin in our nature that had offended, and God to support his
humanity, to give efficacy and power to his doctrine and miracles, and to
add infinite merit and desert to all his actions, and sufferings. Thirdly,
only faith is the hand and instrument to apprehend, and apply CHRIST unto us
with all his blessing^, and so to justify us.

Faith is like the eye, which albeit in the act, and virtue of seeing, it is
alone: yet not solitarye and alone in the body, but joined to other parts: so
faith, albeit it alone justifies us before GOD, yet it is not solitary, and
alone, but always according to the proportion of it accompanied with holy life
and good works. Gal. 5. verse. 6.

There are only two Sacraments which Christ instituted, and left unto the
Church, Baptism the sacrament of our new birth, and entrance into
christianity, the outward sign whereof is Water: and the Lords Supper, the
sacrament of our growth and perfect nourishment, and increase in Christianity,
the outward signs and matter whereof are Bread and Wine, remaining both Bread
and Wine for substance, both in the sacramental use of them, and afterward as
Paul makes it manifest. 1. Cor. 11. 26. 27. That no man perform and fulfill
the law, and therefore no man is to hope and look for righteousness and
salvation by that obedience which he shows to the law, Romans 8. 3. Gal. 2.
15. 16. That we cannot make satisfaction to God for the least of our sins,
but that Christ alone has most fully, and only performed it. 1. Pet. 2. 24.
Apoc. 1. 5. 6. That the salvation, of all that believe is certain and
infallible, not only in Gods decree, but also to themselves, Romans 8. 38. Heb.
10. 22. and therefore that the opinion of the Papists is wicked, which make
faith uncertain, and so hold our salvation to be doubtful.

That all doctrine necessary to salvation is contained in the Scriptures, so
that nothing is either to be added to it, or detracted from it, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Apoc. 22. 18. 19. Gal. 1. 8.

That the knowledge of the Scriptures are necessary for all sorts of people for
their salvation, and therefore that they ought to read them, that they may
thereby learn and understand, what God would have them to believe, and do,
John. 5. 39. Mar. 12. 24. Math, 22. 29.

That God alone is to be adored of us, and that no part of divine worship is to
be given unto any creature, Math. 4. 10.

That holiness of life, and good works as effects, and consequents of faith,
and the way wherein we should walk, Ephesians. 2. 10. is necessarily required of
all that will be saved, Hebr. 12.

That the Sacraments are only signs and seals of righteousness, and not
causes of salvation, and therefore our salvation does not so depend upon them,
that they that want them must needs be damned, whereas our salvation
consists only in Christ his merits, Marc. 16. 16. which none can dispoile
and dismantle us of.

That Christ his body was but once conceived of the substance of the Virgin
Mary, and cannot be made of any other matter, and that CHRIST has only one
body, and therefore it is not made of Wheat bread (as the Papists say it is
daily) for it is not the seed of David, and bread is not the flesh of the
Virgin.

That the human nature of Christ is now only resident, and contained in
heaven, and therefore it is not to be adored in earth, Acts. 3.

That the whole force, virtue, and efficacy of our salvation, and redemption,
is in the only, and once offered sacrifice of CHRIST, Heb. 10. 12. 14. and
that this sacrifice could be offered of none but Christ, who was to be a
Priest for ever.

Lastly (to omit diverse other articles, which be more plain, and confessed)
it is a foundation of faith, to know, believe, and hold, that then immediately
after the dissolution from the body, the souls of the righteous are carried by
the Angels into heaven, Luke. 16. verse. 22.
and the souls of the wicked and impenitent, are carried by the diuill into
hell: and that the same bodies with all their perfect parts, and demensions
shall for substance be raised up by CHRIST at the day of judgment, Job. 19.
25. 26. Of this maine and principal article many are ignorant, or at least not
iuditiously and soundly persuaded, as may appear by the examination of the
ignorant people both in their sickness, and otherwise. These heads, and
foundations viz. they that shall either with Atheists deny al, or with the
Church of Rome deny, or by consequence overthrow most of them, or with the
common, or vulgar protestant be ignorant of them; cannot possibly (for the
time present) have true faith, for faith can no more then a temple, a house, or
any other edifice be without his many grounds, and foundation. Wherefore if we
err, or be ignorant in these, or in the like principles of faith, let us by
diligent hearing of the word, reading of the Scriptures, and Orthodoxe books,
by consulting the Godly learned, and by earnest prayer to GOD for illumination
and understanding, seek to be better informed, and resolved.

The second point to be considered, is whether Christ with his only merits,
and obedience be the only Object of our faith, so that in matter of salvation
we utterly disclame, and renounce all other feined merits, satisfactions,
intercessions of men, and Angels, for Christ alone is our perfect redeemer,
and mediator. Act. 4. 12. Heb. 7, 25. Phi. 3.

The third point, whether our faith do not only rest in abare and naked
knowledge, and history of Christ, (as the faith of the devils, and reprobates
does) but also apply, and appropriate Christ, yea and enclose (as it were) him,
and all his merits unto themselves, and their own salvation: for as without
use, and application of the weapon there is no defense, or anoyance: without
use, and application of medicine no cure, without use, and apply of meat and
drink, no continuance of life, without putting on of apparel no warmth, or
hiding of our unseemly parts, without acceptance, and particular
acknowledgement of the Kings general pardon, there is no forgiveness: so
unless we apply and appropriate Christ with all his obedience, and merits
unto our selves we have no comfort; help, and benefit by him we do ebut
beat the air, run at random, and shoot at the rouers.

Wherefore to conclude this point, we must say with David, O Lord my strength
and my redeemer, Psalm. 19. 14. Job. 20. ve. 21.
and with Thomas the Apostle, My Lord and my God, and with the Church in the
Canticles my well-beloved is mine, and I am his. Cant. 2. 16.

Fourthly we are a little to consider, and take a view of some pregnant, and
remarkable signs, and effects of true faith, whereby (as by certain trusty
intelligencers) we may be informed, and certified whether we have true faith,
or not.

First it is one sign of a believer to join, and associate himself to those
assemblies and those people wherein, and amongst whom the true, and sincere
worship of God is professed, and established: for in the 2. of the Acts of the
Apostles it is said the Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should
be saved. Act. 2. 47. And it is a note of perdition for a man to forsake the
holy assemblys, and so to withdraw himself and his faith from GOD. Hebrews.
10. 25. and 39.

Thomas absenting himself from the Apostles and their fellowship but some
eight days, or there abouts was so hardened in unbelief that he would not
believe the testimony, and asseueration of the rest of the Apostles that told
him that Christ was risen, except he might see the print of the nails, Ioh.
26. ver. 25.
and put his finger into the print of them, and put his hand into his side, and
had not CHRIST been so merciful unto him, as to condescend to his infirmity,
and withal to molli^ie his heart he had perished in his obstinacy. What then
is to be said of them that seldom, that negligently, yea that never come into
GODS Chamber of presence to hear the blessed Preaching of his word, and to
partake of the Heau^nly Manna of the Sacraments, surely they are in a most
dangerous and desperate case.

A second note of faith is, constantly, wisely, and boldly to confess and
maintain the doctrine of salvation, and all the foundations of faith when we
are thereunto called: For we must believe with the heart, and confess with the
mouth. Romans 10. 10. We must have Christ his name written in our forheads. Apoc.
14. 1. We though we live wheresathan has his throne, must keep Christ's name
and not deny the faith. Apoc. 2. 13. Whereso ^ it stands us upon to look to
our selves, and to beeware that we be not daunted with scoffs, and
slanders, terrified with fear of trouble, and persecution, seduced with
flattery, overcome, with false persuasions, and corrupted with offer of profit,
and preferment. For if we be ashamed of Christ our good Lord, Master, and
Redeemer, he will be ashamed of us, if we deny him, he will deny us before his
Heavenly Father, and all the Holy Angels: and contrariwise if we confess,
and honor him before men, he will confess and honor us. Finally we are
(then only) made partakers of Christ if we keep sure unto the end (...)
(...), id est, the beginning of our assurance, (or whereby we are vpholden.)
Heb. 3. 14.

A third evidence of faith is to show and make known our dislike, and hatred
of error, and false doctrine, yea to set, and oppose our selves against it, so
far forth as our calling will warrant.

Thus David professes that he hates all false ways. Psalm. 119. 104. and
128. Thus Paul being at Athens, and seeing the City (...) id est that is
addicted to Idolatry, it is said that the Spirit in him (...) was provoked to
indignation. Acts. 17. 16. and thus the Angel of the Church of Ephesus is
commended, because he could not forbear them that were evil, because he did
examine the ^alse Apostles and found them out. Apoc. 2. 2.

A (...), and that a more inward, and in^allible note of faith is with
Ezechias, David, Job, Anna, Gedeon, and others to believe, and depend upon God,
even then when we have (for the present) no feeling, and when in trouble we
see no mean of deliverance, for this is a demonstration that we rely wholly,
and only on his help, and therefore is most acceptable to his majesty, yea, if
God in our seeming, and apprehension should wound us, be an enemy unto us,
write bitter things against us, yea, and kill us, yet must we trust in him. 2.
Chro. 32. 31. 32. Isay. 38. ver. 2. 3. Psalm 77. 7. 8. 9. Job. 13. verse. 15. 1.
Sam. ver. 15. ^udg. 6. 13. 2. Sam. 15. 26.

For God many times leaves his Children without sense, and feeling of present
comfort, and that partly to bring them to repentance for sins past. Job. 13.
26. partly to make them know themselves for the time present. Deuteronomy. 13. 2. 3.
partly to prevent sins in time to come. 2. Cor. 12. 7. 8.

A fourth, note is the gift, and practice of prayer, or the invocation of Gods
name in the only mediation of Christ, for this is a special character, and
note of an elect of God, whereby he is discerned from an Infidel, or
reprobate, and is known to be one of Gods Children. Romans 10. 14. 1. Cer. 1.
3, 2. Tim. 1. 19. and contrariwise it is a brand of an Infidel, or an Atheist
never to pray. Jeremy 10, 25. Psalm 14, 4. But that we be not deceived
herein, for ignorant people may mutter over, and say by rote certain prayers,
and the hipocrite, may make a goodly show, certain rules must be observed and
heeded.

First that our prayers be made in knowledge of Gods will, otherwise they are
not made in ^ayth, and so cannot please God. Romans 14, ver. 4.

Secondly that in private we pray not so much by prescript for me, as according
to the present sense, and feeling of our own wants, and imperfections craving
the supply of them.

Thirdly, that it do not consist in a few words of course, but be enlarged as
time, and our present necessities occasion us. 1. Sam. 1. verse. 15.

Fourthly, that the matter and subject of our prayers be chiefly, and in the
first place, the advancement of Gods Gospel and kingdom, the remission of our
own sins, and the salvation of our souls, and then in the second place to
pray for temporalls, and outward things, but always conditionally, and with
subiecting our wills to Gods will. Math. 26. ver. 39.

Fistly, it must not be only for a brunt upon a sudden motion, or only in time
of great trouble, but daily, and continually, for thus are we taught to pray
incessantly, and never to give over until God grant our requests. 1. These. 5*
Luke. 18 7

Sixthly, we must pray in humility, and in unfeigned love to God and men, for
the proud man's prayer God rejects, Luke 18. verse. 14. and the malicious man's
prayer, and sacrifice is abominable. Lastly, (not to be tedious,) we must not
pray only for our selves, and kindred as carnal men (in their manner)
sometimes do, but for the whole church of God upon earth, and for every state
and condition of Christians, as Kings, Counselors, Rulers, Judges,
Magistrates, the reverend Prelates, Pastors, Preachers, Ministers, commons, and
most earnestly and compassionately, for those whom we know afflicted, hated,
persecuted for the truth, and Gospels sake, or for any good cause whatsoever,
or where-soeuer.

If thou find all these signs of faith, or most of them in thy selfc, be
thankful to GOD for them, and which of them thou feel, and perceiuest thy
self to be destitute of, in part, or whole, seek for the obtaining of it,
and if thou be wholly void of them, then it is high time, whiles opportunity
serves, to labor to procure them by all holy means. Look therefore to the
maine chance, get and nourish faith, and thou can* not perish: but want, or
neglect thou it, and thou can not be saved, I am horum mauis accipe.

To the former notes, and testimonies of faith, may very well be added purity,
and innocence of life, and a lively hope of eternal glory, for these are
certain and infallible notes of faith, and peculiar effects of it, but of
these I purpose to treat distinctly, and more at large in the two next points
of preparation, whereof these are branches. And thus much of faith, the
foundations object, application, and notes of it.

The second principal head in this preparation, is purity, and innocence of
life and conversation. This is a notable and peculier work, and declaration of
faith, and it proceeds, as naturally from it, as the beams from the sun,
the waters from the fountain, and the fruits in their season from the
fruitful tree, hereupon faith is said to purify the heart, Acts. 15. 9.
faith, and repentance are both preached together, and so ought to be
practiced, Mark. 1. 15.

The necessity of this holiness, and innocence appears plainly: without
holiness, no man shall see God. Heb. 12. ^4. except Christ wash us we have
no part with him, ^ohn. 13. 8. except a man be borne of water, and the holy
Ghost, he shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven. John. 3. 5. Finally
no unclean thing shall enter into the heavenly City, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or lies, Apoc. 21. 27. Likewise innocence and harmless
simplicity is a cognizance and badge of them that are prepared for Gods
kingdom; for they must be innocent as Doves, Math. 10. 16. harmless as young
children, Mat. 18. 3. without guile in their mouths, Psalm. 32. 2* suffering
wrong rather then offering it, and doing no man iniurye, but laboring to do
good to all men; and no marvel, for being borne a new and cast into a new
molde, we must operari secundum formam renouatam, according to our new nature,
so must be our actions; and if we be rightly regenerate, the effects that do
retain the similitude of the cause, must needs entertain some correspondencie
with it.

Secondly, Christ Jesus the unspotted Lamb of GOD, will never marry with the
Church, until she be first washed and sanctified, Ephesians. 5. 26. 27. and they
only that have not defiled their garments, idest, corrupted their conscience
with gross and grievous sins, shall walk with Christ in white, Apoc. 3.
verse. 4.

Thirdly, being contracted, and ingrafted into Christ, that is, holiness it
self, we must not walk after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. 1, we
must be conformable unto Christ his death by mortification, and to his
resurrection, by newness of life, or else we are no lively members of his
body, but dead and rotren flesh. It is an axiom in Philosophy, quo quid
propinquius bono^eo melius, Aristo. 3. Top. wherefore if we be in Christ, and
contracted to him, we must needs be better, for we are not only near him,
but of him, and he in us, and we in him. And that our holiness and innocence
of life be not rather in the flower, then in the fruit, and in pomp more
then in proof, we must sce that it be constant, and increase; (...) as we
continually, partly by ordinary slips, and infirmities, and partly by
spiritual conflicts, and combats, receive some loss, foiles, decays; so
must we daily endeavor to strengthen our selves, to repair our decays, and to
mend our garments, and to regaine, and recover our losses, And as generatio
vnius est corruption alterius, so we must see how by the engendering of
holiness, sin does decrease; for as one kingdom cannot endure two Kings, so
the kingdom of Christ cannot consort with the dominion of Satan.

Wherefore we must not please, and content ourselves with the out-ward show of
holiness, or deceive our selves with the opinion that men may conceive of us,
out-ward shows are like Sodom Apples, goodly in color, and appearance, but
if a man crush, and open them, they are nothing but powder, or ashes, and as
for men's opinion of us, it is no certain evidence of our inward holiness, for
Hypocrisy is spunne with so fine a (...), that it can deceive the most Godly,
and judicious (at least for a long time) in the world, thus David was deceived
in Achitophell his ^amiliar and counselor, the Apostles in Judas, and the
whole Church in Nicolas, one of the seven Deacons.

Secondly we must not only be innocent our selves, and holy, and here-vpon
think we may endure filthy speech, horrible blasphemye of GODS sacred name,
false imputations laid upon just men, open drunckennesse, and notorious
profanesse in others; but we must (if we have any dram, or spark of grace
in us, or any partickle of zeal for God,) rebuke them, and show our hatred,
offense, and opposition against them. Ephesians. 5. 11. Herein our love to God, our
hatred of evil, our strength, and resolution in Godliness is evidently
discryed, and discovered Luke. 23. 41. Act. 14. ver. 14..

Thirdly we must beware, and shun ill company and fellowship; for if we be
not armed with special grace, and also most chary how we come into their
company, they will soon infect, cool, and corrupt us. They are as the
pestilent vapor to the apt and open body, as fire to the tynder, as pitch to
the hands, as Dalila to Sampson, and as Iesabel to Achab; they are so ready and
forcyble by their ill president, and persuasions to infect, and our nature so
weak, and impotent to resist if it be not always assisted with special
grace, and the spirir of God, that the Holiest, the Wisest, the Strongest have
hereby soon been defiled, and polluted, how much more those that either have
very little grace, or none at all, and that make no conscience, and choice of
their company.

The third head, or principal part in preparation is Charity, and the Fruits,
and effects of it, charity, or love is the fulfilling of the law. Romans 13. 10.
it is the bond of perfection. Colo. 3. 14. For it knitteth, and binds all
other virtues together, that they be not dissolved, and it prefereth them; this
charity depends upon the love of God, and cannot be in any hethen, the
shadow of all other virtues (besides this) may be in Pagans, as pi^ty,
bounty, modesty, patience etc. but not this, and this does unite, and join
all the members of the Church together. Finally without this, if we have all
other rare perfections yet before GOD we are nothing. Cor. 13. 2. Charity is
in respect of the eternity of it greater, yea preferred before says, and hope.
1. Cor. 13, 13. for says, and hope determine with this life, but love abides
for ever.

Again in respect of the object, and the visibility of it, it is greater then
either says, or hope, for faith, and hope have for their object only GOD, and
Christ, but love extends it self to God, and man. Romans 8. 25. faith is in it
self invisible, but love, and charity perspicuous, and apparent. Iac. 2. 16.
18. this charity, and love is not only in tongue, in promises, and in
affection, and welwishing to men, but also in truth and indeed, as 1. John. 3.
18. Charity is bountiful and seeks not her own. 1. Cor. 13, 4, 5. it is
communicatiuum sui, that is, imparteth that which she has to others, and here
that principle of Philosophy is verified, bonum quo communius eo melius; the
more common it is the more comfortable. It does not (as many of our inclosers)
impale, imparke, and hedge in the common grounds, and fields to her private
use, to the weakening of the State, and the ruinating of the Communalty, but
like a fountain, sends, and streameth forth her waters unto others, she is
so far (as it is to be feared many practice) from appropriating to her self
in part, or in whole the poor men's stock, and collection-mony gathered, and
given for building, or repaireing of Churches, or Towns, that have been
consumed by fire, that she liberally gives of her own. But (to end this
point) the practice whereof should never end. As faith works by charity, so
there are certain particulers wherein her Offices are most conspicuous, and
obseruable. First we must be lights, and lamps to others by our examples, and
not look who will begin first, as Matthew 5. 16. 2. Cor. 9. 2.

Secondly when our brother offends, we must in charity, and discretion
admonish him, and not to suffer him to perish in his sin (as many do) rather
deridyng him, then directing him, Mat. 18. 15.

Thirdly, we must exhort, and persuade others to Godliness, and good works,
Heb. 3, 13. Fourthly we must by Simpathy, and fellow-feeling, and especially by
words of Scripture rightly understood* and well applied, comfort, and cheer
the afflicted. 1. Thessa. 5, 14, and therefore we must not post, and put off,
all to the minister, as though it co^cerned not us at all. Fifthly we must pray
for others, and especially for their conversion, and salvation. 1. Timot. 2. 1
2. and that both publikly, and privately. And lastly every man must according
to his ability, and other men's wants and necessities willingly and seasonably
impart of his worldly goods for their releife, Acts. 2. 21. 2. Corinthi. 8.
Galla. 6. 10. 1 John. 3, 16. This is the touchstone of many, and most men's
religion in these last and worst days, for herein they are most fauty and
defective, but let them that will not do good with their temporalls, beware
least they for omission hereof, justly be condemned with the two rich
worldling, in Luke Chapter 12. 17. 19. and Chapter 16. 24, and with infinite
others at the day of Judgment. Matthew 23. 42. 43. 45.

The last point, and branch of the preparation is hope, desire, and expectation
of the marriage, and the glory, and joy of it, and hereupon it is that hope
is called the Anchor of the Soul, sure, and steadfast, to stay, and sustain us
in all storms, and tempests of temptations, Hebre. 6. 19. yea the kingdom of
Heaven, which we wait for, is called, A blessed hope. Titus. 2, 13. this hope
of eternal glory), is a notable means to stir up men to purge, and reform
themselves. 2. John 2. 3. with the expectation of which bliss, we must
comfort one another. 1. Thesalonians 4, 17. and we must both in temporal, and
spiritually trials not grow impatient, as the rebellious Jews that could not
expect, and stay for Moses forty days, but would needs in the mean time
play the Idolators; but with the woman of Canaan, after a first, second, and
third repulse hope still Mat. 15. 27. 28, we must with the Creeple, in John
sometime before we be cured wait thirty eight years. Ioh. 5. 5. 7. We must
with Abraham against hope, believe under hope, Romans 4, 8. And as the Jews
patiently (many of them) waited in hope of the accomplishment of Gods promises
many years, both their deliverance out of Egipts tirranny, and afterward out
of Babilons captivity, yea and expected, and desired many hundred years the
Incarnation of Christ before that they in their posterity enjoyed it: so must
we also tarry the Lords leisure, in patience, and in hope fustaine our souls.
Psalm. 37, and wait all the days of our pilgrimage until Christ come unto us
by death, or the last judgment, for our full, and final redemption. Shall the
husbandman wait for the precious fruit of the earth, and have long patience
until he receive the first, and the latter rain, and shall not we be much
more patient, and settle our hearts, seeing the coming of the LORD i^ so
near. Iam. 57, 8.

To this hope we must annexe, and adioyne an earnest desire, and ardent
prayer; as for the accomplishment of other promises, so specially for the
second coming of our LORD and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

Hence it is that we are tought to pray thy Kingdom come, Matthew 6, 10 to
hasten unto the day of the coming of GOD, 2 Peter 3, 12. to desire to be
clothed with immortality, yea, to si^h for it. 2. Co^inthi. 5. 9 We must say
come LORD JESUS, come quickly, Apoc. 22. 19. 20. How long LORD JESUS, how
long? Apoc. 6. 10. 11. We must with the creatures (...) that is carefully, and
desirously look for. Romans 8. 19. as he that out of a prison grate, or
casement, puts forth his head to behold a far off him that is expected.

Reasons in brief to kindle and increase this hope, and desire of this
solemnization, and per^ect conjunction with Christ, are especially four: First
the example, and fervent desire of the creatures, who albeit they be sin-lesse,
yet because man's sin has corrupted them, and does continually pervert and
abuse them; they in their kind fervently desire to be freed from this
bondage, and to be restored into the glorious lib^rtie of Gods children; much
more we that have received the first fruits of the spirit must long and look
for a far more glorious estate. Roman. 8. 19. 21. 22. 23.

Secondly, the infinite miseries, troubles, persecutions of the world, and the
vanity, ticklish and sickle estate, and mortality of all things herein
contained, must stir up our hearts desire, and expectation of full
redemption, and glorification, Phil. 3. 20. Heb. 13. 13. 2. Cor. 4. 8. 9, 17.
Collos. 3. 1. 2. 3. to this purpose does the triumphant Church in heaven, (in a
general sort) desire the end of the world, that the Lord may judge, and avenge
their blood that was shed upon the earth, Apoc. 6. verse. 10.

A third reason, and that more principal, is that an end may be put to all
sin, and we may have perfect victory over it, yea, and tread down Satan
under our feet; for then we shall be delivered from all the relics, stumps,
root^s, and remainders of sin. 1. Cor. 15. 55. 56. Romans 16. 20. Apoc. 3. 4.
and 19. 8. Whereas in this mortality, we daily, and every moment, sin
against, and offend our GOD, break all his commandments, and provoke his
anger, and pull down many judgments upon us. Romans 7. 17. 18. 19. and 23 24.
Gala. 5. 17. yea all our obedience, and our best actions, are tainted with
sin, and so imperfect, Isa. 63. Tit. 3. 5. 1. Cor. 13. 10. 11,

Lastly, the fruition and enioyment of Christ his glorious presence, and
perfect fellowship, must be a forcible, and effectual means to confirm our
hope and inflame our desire, Phil. 1. 23. Hebr. 11. 25. 27. for here is the
banquet that never ends, the marriage that lasts for ever, the triumph that
is perpetual, the absence and remouall of all evil, and the presence and
possession of all good; but hereof we must speak more at large in the third
general section.

Here, Use. 1.
by this doctrine are condemned all Sadduces, Athe^sts, Nulli-fidians, and
Scorners of Christ's coming, who because they walk by sense, and not by faith,
by reason, and not by Scripture, and follow their own lusts; and will not be
ruled by the line of Gods word, deny, and deride the doctrine of the
resurrection, Christ's second coming, heaven, and hell, as 2. Pet. 3. 3. 4. 2.
Tim. 2. 17. 18.

Secondly, Use. 2.
here are reproved, and convinced all Epicures, Libertines, looseliuers, and
all worldlings, and voluptuous persons, who albeit they in word deny not any
Article of faith, as the former did, and do; yet they deny the power of all
religion in their hearts, and so live as though there were neither God nor
devil, heaven or hell, loving riches more then religion, and pleasures more
then piety. 2. Timot. 3. 45.

Use. 3. Thirdly we shall by observing and noting the measure and quantity of
our hope, and desire of Christ's coming, etc. judge of, and discern the
quantity of our faith; for these being necessary effects of faith, if they be
great and lively so is our faith, and if they be weak or dead, so is our
faith; for the tree is known by the fruits, and the cause by the undoubted
and proper effects of it; And thus much of preparation, and the principal
parts of it.

Now we are to come to treat of the special opportunity, and time when, both
this general, and particular preparation is to be made, and that is only the
present time, and this present life, whiles the day, the light, and the truth
lasts, and while the means, and ministry of grace, reconciliation, and
salvation are offered, and continue, Titus 2. 10. Gal. 6. 10. Ioh. 9. 4. Ioh.
12. 35. 36. 2. Cor. 61. before our hearts be hardened with the long custom of
sin, and so they become incurable, Hebr. 3. 13. Acts. 28. 27. whilst Christ
knocks at the door of our hearts. 3. 20. before the night comes. John. 9.
4. and the door be shut, Luke. 13. 25. for in the grave, in death, and hell,
noe praising of GOD, and no time of repentance, and reconciliation, as Isay.
38. Luke. 16. 24. 25. the Bride must trim her self in this life. Apo. 19 7.

Now must the wedding garment be provided, Math. 22. 11. this life is the time
of grace, for the ministry of reconeiliation is only here. 2. Cor. 5. 18. 1.
Cor. 15. 24. and 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. for at the day of judgment it
shall wholly cease. Lastly, Christ forgiueth sins (only) in earth, Luke 5.
24. and the Apostles, and so the ministers of the word in all ages succeeding
them, bind and loose, retain, and remit sins in earth, Math. 16. 19. John.
20. 23. wherefore we must seek the Lord ^hiles he may be found, and in the
six days of this life, provide us of the heavenly Manna, that we may keep
with him an everlasting Sabbath in the highest heavens.

Here is ouer-throwne that vile and damn^ble doctrine of the Popish purgatory,
who imagine, and teach that the souls of many are temporallye tormented in
Purgatory flames, and that they may be eased and released of their torments,
by the prayers and intercessions and satisfactions of the living, and specially
by the pardons of the beast, I mean not Nebuchadnezar transformed for seven
years into a beast, but the Pope eternized for one; whereas first, this late
coined doctrine is injurious and derogatorie to Christ his all-sufficient
satisfaction, who dyed (only) once to put away sin, Heb. 9. 26. Hebr. 7. 25.
and in all places of scripture, merit, satisfaction, and redemption, is only
ascribed to his blood, to his stripes, to his sufferings, both in soul
immediately, and also in body jointly and apart, etc. Secondly, he that
believes is saved, Use. 1.
and he that believes not is co^ndemned already, viz. in the decree, and by
the word of God* John. 3. 8. Thirdly, who-so-euer repents not, and believes
not, dies in his sins, and so undoubtedly perishes, John. 8. 21. Ezechi.
18, 24. Luke 13. 3. 5.

Fourthly, the rich glutton making intercession to Abraham in behalf of his
five brethren found no favor, but received a just repulse and reproof, Luke.
16. 29. 31.

Fifthly, David whiles the child borne in adultery lived, prayed for his life,
but as soon as it was dead, then he ceased p^aying, and fasting for it, for
he knew it would not avail. 2. Sam. 12. verse. 22. 23.

Lastly, the penitent thee^e that suffered with Christ, and never had done
good, upon his serious repentance, and firm faith, albeit wrought miraculously
at the last hour, had a promise made him to be that same day with CHRIST in
Paradise, Luke 23. 43. which Saint Paul enterpreteth to be the third heaven. 2.
Cor. 12. 3. 4. being compared together. Now if any man had gone to purgatory
fire, and should there be further p^rged and prepared, no doubt he had been
one, sed haec hactenus de questuosissima papistarum fabula.

Use. 2. Secondly, seeing that there is no liberty, and peace of conscience
until men repent, Prou. 18 14. and no actual pardon, and that the time to
repent, and prepare our selves, is only this life, which is short, momentary,
and transitory, and wherein, the children dye as well as the ancient, yong-men
as well as the old, the strong and lusty, as soon, and as suddenly, as the
weak, it must learn, and school us in no wise to defer our repentance, and
time of preparing our selves, but to begin betimes, and to hold on to the last
breath.

For first we are bound, 1. Reason.
and commanded to serve God in spirit, and truth, and that all the days of
our life, Luke 1. 74. 75 ergo, we must not put and post of all to old age, not
knowing whether we shall ever live to it, or not.

Secondly our journey to heaven being long, 2. Reason.
the preparation great, and the time very short and uncertain, we must be
wise, and redeem it, and repent when we may.

Thirdly, we must with Solomon, Josias, Timothy, Joseph, and others, serve God
in the days of youth, and in the flower of our age, when our memory is most
apt and firm, our understanding most sharp, our senses most lively, and we
may best lay the foundation of an holy and comfortable old age, thus are we
commanded and exhorted, Eccles. 13, 1. Psalm. 119. 9. Psalm. 78. 6. 7. and it is
their great commendation. Tit. 1. 4. 2. Tim. 1. 5. 2. Epist. Ioh. 4. 1. Ioh.
2. 12. 13, 14. Whereas otherwise they that neglect, and omit to reconcile
themselves unto God in their best time, and in the days of their childhood,
and youth grow in time senceles, and brutish, and hard hearted, and are justly
forsaken of God in their old, and impotent age, that had no care, and
conscience to fear, obey, and serve him in their youth.

Thirdly it is seldom, and rarely seen, that men that have lived all their
life, and spent all their golden days (as they call them) in superstition,
sin, and vanity, should undoubtedly turn unto God in their old age. It is
more wondrous then usual, and there are only some examples of it in
Scriptures to keep the aged from despair, but they are very few and rare,
that we should not (as most do) presume to much of it.

Lastly of all ages, old age (if it be not before rooted, and grounded in
faith, in love, and in the practice of Godliness) is of all ages the most
unapt, and untoward, to perform these duties, to begin, and lay the foundation
of repentance, and to make it ready for Christ. We may in this case in some
sort say, Can a man be (new) borne when he is old, can he enter into his
Mothers womb again, and be borne, John 3. 4. not being ignorant, and
misunderstanding the doctrine of regeneration, as Nicodemus; but only in
another sense affirming that time to be the most unfit. And there is sufficient
reason for it; for in old age the memory decays, the strength fails, the
senses are infeebled and wast, then are the evil days of sorrow, and labor,
of pain, and aches, then the days, and years approach, when men shall say that
they have no pleasure in them. Ecclesi. 12, 1, 2. then satan is most egar, and
busy, knowing right well, that then he must loose all, or gain all, wherefore
let us with the wise Virgins prepare our selves whiles we have time, let us
walk in the light whiles the light shines, and seek the Lord whilst we may
find him. Isay* 55. 6. 7. Which GOD grant. A men.

The third Section.
Then, they that were ready etc.
IN these words the solemnization, and consumation of the marriage betwixt
Christ, and the wise Virgins, (or true Church) is contrayned, and it does
divide it self into four parts, viz. First what this solemnization is.
Secondly the place where; Thirdly, the priui^^dges and prerogatives of it.
Lastly, the use, and application of it.

The so^emnization, or consummation of the marriage is the glorious, and
perfect state of the elect after the resurrection, when they in the highest
Heaues shall with their eyes behold CHRIST, have fellowshippe and live with
him, and reign with him for evermore, being perfectly conformable unto him,
and to his will, both in body, and soul. Phil. 1. 23. Mat. 25. 34. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 17. Apo. 7. 15. 17. 21. 2. 3. 4. John. 17. 21. In this description two
points are to be explained and expounded, first the dignity, and comfort of
this communion, and conjunction with Christ in glory. Secondly the perfestion,
and glorification of the Bride, and Virgin both in soul, and body.

First touching the conjunction, and marriage, and the excellency of it, the
continual sight* and company of Christ, the Son of right cousnesse and
fountain, of all fellici^^e, shall minister perpetual, and unspeakable joy
and comfort to all Gods Saints, for they shall no more walk by faith, (as in
this life) but by sight: they shall no more darkely behold GOD in the glass,
and ministry of the worde^, or in the spectakle of the creatures, but see him
face, to face, they shall in the Imperial, and Maiestica^l Court, and Palace
of Heaven see God, as he is. 1. Ioh. 3, 2. 1. Cor. 13, 12 namely they shall so
far forth behold Gods Majesty, and the perfection of his glory, as a finite
creature, albeit glorified, is capable off; they shall see him as he is, but
not how infinite he is* 1. Timo. 6. 16. And as for Christ Jesus their
redeemer, husband, and head, they shall (as Job speaks,) see him with these
same, and no other eyes, Job. 19. 25. 26. They shall follow him wheresoever he
goes. Apoc. 14. 4* they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
for-head, Apoc. 22. 4. Finally the tabernacle of GOD shall be with them, and he
will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and GOD himself shall be their
GOD with them, Apoc. 22. 3. Now if the sight, salutation, and company of man,
and Wife, Father, and Children, Kinsfolk, and acquaintance, friends and
welwil^ers, that are far distant, and have been long absent one from
another, be so admirably grateful and so wonderfully delightsome, how much
more desirable, marvelous, and vneffable will the continual sight, and
fruition of GOD the Father, 2. Cor. 12
Christ the Son our redeemer, and the Holy Ghost our comforter be unto us in
the Parliament, and Throne of Heaven? And if Moses that only talked, and had
conference with GOD in the Mount but forty days, was so glorious in his face,
at his descent, and return, that the Children of Israel could not, or durst
not behold it, Exo. 3. 4. ver. 3. 5.
how much more unspeakably Maiesticall, and glorious shall they be that have
fellowish, (not as sinners with GOD on earth for a few days) but as perfectly
sanctified in the Palace of Heaven for evermore?

Hereunto in the second place, I may well adioyne the mutual, joyful, and
unutterable communion with all Angels, Archangels, Patriarks, Prophets,
Fathers, Apostles, Evangelists, Confessors, Martirs, and all the true Saints
of GOD, of all degrees for evermore, who, by how many degrees, and in how many
properties, especially in knowledge, in Holiness, and love, they exceed, and
excel all mortal creatures: so much more rare, and incredible comfort shall
they by their mutual fellowshippe, communicate one to another. They shall not
be ignorant one of another, nor strange, and suspected one to another, much
less, false, and hollow; as in this world, partly by reason of ignorance,
partly by reason of hypocrisy, and partly by reason of humane infirmities it
comes oftentimes to pass, but they shall be all one, in will, and consent,
living, and loving together in perfect harmony of concord, and charity.

Use. The consideration hereof must cause us to shun, decline, and abhor ill,
and contagious company, (what in us lies) and to have our hearts, and minds
inflamed, and possessed with a longing desire to be dissolved, in the time
appointed, and to enjoy the most blessed fellowshippe of GOD, of the Lamb, and
of all the Saints, and Angels in glory for evermore.

The second partickle to be made lightsome, and unfolded is, the perfection,
of the glorified soul, and the body.

Touching the souls just and perfect men, they now after their dissolution
from the body, are replenished with infinite joy, and triumph in the Heavenly
Jerusalem. Luke. 16. 25. Hebre. 12, 22, 23. Math. 25. 21. 23. but their joy
shall be much more increased, when the souls shall be reunited to their bodies,
Phil. 3. 20. and when the whole number of GODS elect Saints are accomplished,
and come in, Apoc. 6. 10. 11. Here they shall in Quires, and companies,
mutually, and eternally magnify, and praise the Lord (as afterward I will
more fully show (when I come to speak of the rest of their prerogatives.

Secondly in the mind, and understanding their shall be no error, ignorance,
dulnes, but clear judgment and perfect wisdom, 1. Cor. 13. 12. for we
shall be in perfect light, and the wisdom of GOD shall manifest it self unto
us: secondly in the will and affections, there shall be no ecstasy or
distemper, but perfect righteousness, integrity, perfect love of God, and his
saints, and Angels, and absolute conformity to Gods will. Lastly the body it
shall be a bright, glorious, beautiful, strong, nimble, perfect, and in^orrupt
instrument, habitation, and receptacle of the glorified soul. It shall be so
bright and glorious, that it shall shine forth as the sun, and shall send
forth beams of light, Math. 13. 43. It shall rise a glorious body, 1. Cor.
15. 43. It shall be like to Christ his body, ergo, no doubt most glorious,
Phil* 3. 20. Some glimpse, taste, and representation hereof, we have in the
transfiguration of Christ, whose garment was white and glist^red* Luke. 9. 29.
it was very white as snow, so white as no Fuller can make upon the earth,
Mark, 9. 3. In Moses and Elias that appeared to our Savior in glory, Luke 9.
31. and in the sundry and glorious apparitions of Angels in the old, and in the
beginning of the new Testament. It shall be a strong body, for it shall rise
again in power, and not in weakness, as 1. Cor. 15. 43. It shall be a nimble
body, as well able by the proper form of it, to ascend, as to descend, as may
be collected out of 1. These 4. 17. Math. 22. 30. Phil. 3. 20. compared
together; It shall be a beautiful and goodly body, because it is and shall be
a vessel of honor, as Rom 9 33. Lastly, it shall be perfect, and incorrupt,
because as there is no fault, defect and deformity in it, so it shall be a
spiritual body, 1. Cor. 15. 44. spiritual, not because the substance shall
be changed, for glorification takes nor away the truth, and demensions of a
natural body, but because it needs none of these outward and earthly
supplies, and helps of meat, drink, apparel, sleep, rest, marriage,
Physic, light, etc. for Christ shall be in steed of all these unto it, and
supply all. 1. Cor. 15.

Use. 1. The first use that arises from the consideration and meditation of
the body and soul jointly glorified is, a notable comfort for Gods children,
that for the time present, live obscurely, and in great contempt, in no regard
and reputation, traduced and troubled in every place, for they shall see the
Lord, and have immediate fellowship with him, and shall shine as the sun in a
clear sky.

Use. 2. In any bodily defect, weakness, sickness, ache, pain, ulcers,
deformity, lamenesse, and maimednesse, we are not to be discontent, and
offended, but endure them patiently; For first they are but fatherly
corrections, and trials, Heb. 12. 7. and 8. Secondly they are but temporary.
Thirdly, the dearest and holiest of Gods children, are as well subject to them,
and bear their portion in them as much as any, yea much more then other, Psalm.
73. verse. 5. and 15. Lastly, they shall be taken all away, and eternal glory,
and perfection shall succeed in their place.

And thus much of the explanation, and description of the marriage: what it is.

The fourth Section.
THe privileges and prerogatives of this marriage, remain to be considered,
and they are principally four: first a perpetual and solemn sabbath, which
the saints of God shall inuiolably observe in singing the new song of their
redemption, Apoc. 14. 3. they with one voice and heart shall singe, and
acknowledge that Christ has redeemed them to God by his blood out of every
kindered, and tongue, and people, and nation, Apoc. 5. 9. and has made them
unto their God, Kings, and Priests, and in the 7. chap. 10. 11. 12. they shall
found forth this (...), or thanksgiving: and they cried saying, salvation
comes of our God that sits upon the throne, and the lamb, and they shall
fall before the throne on their faces, and worship God saying, Amen, praise,
and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be unto
our God for evermore, Amen. Finally their voice shall be like the voice of great
^aters and as the vyoce of strong thunder, saying halleluia, our Lord GOD all
mighty has reigned, Apoc. 19. 6. more-heareof (...) may read, Isai. 66. 22.
Apo. 21. 3. Apoc. 11. 17. but this Sabbath shall be without peculier Priest, for
all shall be priests unto God, it shall be without Temple, or Ceremonies, for God,
and the Lamb are the Temple of it, and shall supply these occasious.

Wherefore seeing that there is an eternal rest in Heaven, and that our
Sabbath, which according to Christ his institution, the Apostles practice, and
the custom of the vinuersal Church, we keep the first day of the week in
memory, and honor of Christ's resurrection, is a tipe, and representation of
it, it must reach us to observe it, both incorruptly touching the out-ward
form, and spiritually touching the the inward disposition of our minds, and
hearts, or else we shall never keep it in heaven, for God will never honor us
in Heaven Luke. 9. 26. unless we honor him in earth, and never perfect us in
heaven, unless by the works of sanctification we begin it hear, Apoc. 20.
6. 7.

The second privilege, and prerogative is the actual, and eternal
inheritance, and possessing of the new heaven and the new earth, part of the
dowry, and ioynter of the Saints. 1. Pet. 1. 4. Apo. 5. 10. 2. Pet. 3. 13. Romans
8. 21. 22. Math. 5. Now whether they shall sometimes by local motion, and
bodily presence, (albeit some new, and learned writers out of the. Apoc. 5. 10.
and Apo. 21. 8. 2. Pet. 3. 13. before named, and from the nature of a glorified
body that can both, ascend, and descend at his pleasure, do collect, and would
conclud it) or which is more probable, and likely by vision, and heavenly
contemplation, and noe absurdite, for if Saint Steven being on earth and having
noe doubt his eyes, for the present clarified, looked up into Heaven, and saw
Christ sitting on the right hand of God. Act. 7. ver. 56. why may not a
glorified body by his glorified eyes, and the air, and sky, being also
purified look down from Heaven, and contemplate the Earth etc. But because
this point is difficult, and the knowledge of it, is rather coniecturall then
certain, we must be content to be ignorant of it, vntell the day, when all
secrets shall be made manifest; and let us in the mean time make some use of the
point as most may concern us; Here is matter of consolation for poor
Christians, that either never actually possessed any worldly goods, lands, or
livings, as Lazarus, and others, or have been with the religious Hebrews, by
the enemies of the truth dispoiled, and deprived of them, Heb. 10. 34. or else
by the men of the earth, whose portion is (as it is to be feared) in most, or
many of them (only) in this life, and that enclose, and hedge in, al to
themselves and their proper uses, unmercifully turning men out of home, house,
and living; well let them possess, their souls in patience, and in faith, and
hope, apprehend and wait for it, for they shall one day inherit the new
Heaven, and the new Earth, they shall have room enough, and larg demaines when
their enemies repining at it, shall remain forever excluded, and excomunicated
from them, and it.

The third preuiledge is that the Godly then completely, and perfectly, and
(...) shall be all kings, priests, Prophets, Apoc. 5. 10. and so partake of
Christ his dignity, and offices, As Kings they shall reign with Christ, and
triumph over Satan, and all the wicked, yea, and tread them under their feet
Rom 6. 20. Mal. 4. 3. As Priests they shall eternally praise God, and the Lamb
for the redemption of his people. etc. and perfectly obey his will Apoc. 22. 3.

And as Prophets they shall (as far forth as is possible for a finite, and
circumscriptible creature) know GOD, and see him, and exquisitely understand
all things that shall concern their felicity. 1. Ioh. 3. 3. 2. Cor. 12.

Use. Wherefore if ever we look, and hope to be Kings, Priests, and Prophets
in Heaven, let us as spiritually, so conscionably practice these offices in
earth: for the practice of them in this life, and in the life to come differ
not in essence, and substance, but only in place, and degrees, let us then as
Kings rule, and reign over ^ur affections, and desires, and govern our
familyes (like so many little Churches) in the fear of GOD. Let us as Priests
consecrate our selves, souls, and bodies to Christ, and his worship, and
service, and pray continually to GOD in behalf of our selves, and our
domestiques. Lastly, let us as Prophets, labor to be rich in the knowledge,
and understanding of Gods will, and so (to our utmost power, and skill) impart,
it (as occasion, and our calling shall require) unto others, especially to
those of our own family. Genesis 18, ver. 17. 18. The fourth privilege of the
Saints in glory is their glorious, and perpetual triumph, and perfect victory
over sin, death, hell, satan, and his angels, and all the reprobate
whatsoever. Sin, and death, and hell shall be a bolished, and cease forever. 1.
Cor. 15. 55. 56. 57. and in respect of the Godly be destroyed, as Apoc. 20.
14. Antichrist, and his members shall no more assault, and persecute us, for
the beast, and the false Prophet shall be cast alive into the lake of fire
burning with brimstone, Apoc. 19. 20. and all the members, and worshippers of
the beast shall drink of the pure wrath, and ^ee tormented in fire, and
brimstone before the Holy Angels, and before the Lamb. Apoc. 14. 10, 11. they
shall go forth, and look upon the Carcases of the men that have transgressed,
Isa. 66. 24. Finally the Saints shall tread down satan, and all their
enemies under their feet, Romans 16. 20. and shall stand before the Throne, and
before the Lamb clothed with long white robes, ( Uiz. of purity, and
inocency,) and having palms, (in signification of victory) in their hands.
Apoc. 7. 9.

Use. Wherefore the due consideration of this last prerogative, as also of the
former must kindle, and work in us, an earnest, and continual expectation,
and longing after our full, and final redemption, and perfect glorification.
The dutiful wife should not so long, and look for the return of her husband,
far, and long time absent, the husbandman so hope, and wait for the harvest;
the Mariner the haven, the wayfaring-man, his iorneyes end, the woman in
travel her deliverance, the Captive his liberty, as we should wish, and wait
for, pray for, and expect the time of the marriage, and our consumation.

Use. If we would be perfect conquerers, and reign, and triumph with Christ
in Heaven, we must in earth take his part against the mighty. Judge. 5. 23. We
must under the condu^t of our general Christ Jesus our Heavenly Michaell, as
his Angels, and soldiers, fight against the dragon, and his Angels, and we
shall overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of his testimony,
and by not loving our lives unto death. Apoc. 12. 7. 11. Finally we must put
on the whole armor of GOD; faith, hope, conscience, confession, and profession
of the truth, righteousness, and the sword of the Spirit which is the word
of GOD, Ephesi. 6. 13. And we must pray constantly with all manner of prayer,
and supplications in the Spirit for our selves, and for all Saints. etc. And by
the right use, and continual handling of these, we shall crucify the flesh
with the affectons, and lusts thereof. Gallathians. 5. 24, we shall be able to
resist in the evil day, and having finished all things to stand fast, and we
shall overcome satan* and all his batteries, and temptations; and then after
all our fight, contention and victory ended, we shall in the life to come,
eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of GOD, Apoc.
2. 17. we shall eat of the hidden Manna, Apoc. 2. 17. we shall have power
over nations, verse. 26. we shall be clothed with white array, and our name
never put out of the Book of life, Chap. 35. we shall be pillars in Gods
house, and go out no more, 16, 12. And to conclude, we shall sit with Christ
in his Throne, even as he sits with his Father in his throne, Apoc. 3. 21.
which God at length fulfill, and accomplish in us, for his most dearly beloved
sons sake, Jesus Christ our only, and all-sufficient redeemer, and mediator,
Amen.

NOw we are briefly to consider the place where this marriage shall be
solemnized, and all this glory, joy, and privileges eternally possessed, and
communicated unto us. The place therefore is the highest heavens, the throne of
GOD, and the Lamb, the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the living God,
Paradise, the seats, and habitations of the saints, and Angels, the wedding
chamber: and finally, the new heaven and the new earth. This blessed heaven is
a place in respect of substance subject to no change, and corruption, in
respect of quantity, and extent far exceeding other places, and of sufficient
capacity to receive all the elect of God; in respect of qualities, it is of
all places most bright, most glorious, most pleasant: finally it is such a
place wherein no evil can be feared, and no good can be wanting, and in which
GOD does offer himself to be seen of men and Angels face to face; and the
humanity of CHRIST more glorious then the Sun* shall be seen, and be
beheld with us, even with our bodily eyes. Apoc. 21. the whole Chapter, and
Chapter 22 from the first verse to the sixth verse, Hebrew. 11. John. 14.

Wherefore fat be it from us; that vainly looking for a visible Church here
without all spot, or wrinckle in order, and manner, and seeing, and finding it
not, proudly, unthankfully, rashly, and without cause to divide, and separate
our selves (as is the manner of Schismatickes) from the Church of God, which
notwithstanding al other defects, whether in doctrine that is not fundamental
or policy. yet firmly and purely retains the scu^d Preaching of Apostolical
doctrine, pure invocation of Gods name in Christ, and right use of the two
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords supper, for these notes are essential,
substantial, and of the life of the Church, other things are outward,
accidental, and circumstantial, and rather of the comeliness, well being,
and ornament, then, of the simple necessity, and essence of the Church, yet it
were to be much wished that the defects were supplied, abuses removed, and
corruptions taken away, but it must be done by the^ who have lawful
authority* and in order without tumult, and rashness, and repugnance, cause, and
sound ground, In the mean time, it is the duty of private persons to take the
benefit of the word, and sacraments with thanksgiving, least God for their
vntha^kefulnes in time take it away, and to pray for the amendment of that
which is amiss, and patiently expecting it, in the interim to walk in their
several callings with diligence, and conscience.

Use. 2. Seeing all bliss, felicity, and euer-during happiness is only in
heaven, and not in earth* we must not rest in these temporal and transitory
things of honor, wealth, preferment, beauty, buildings, credit pleasure,
delights, recreations, outward peace, and prosperity, neither must we think
that true felicity and happiness consists herein; for first all these are
uncertain, and transitory, as the grass, vapor, flower, shadow, they are
like Jonas his gourde of one days continuance, and are like Reeds, or rotten
posts failing, and causing them to fall that lean upon them.

Secondly they are rather (by reason of our corrupt nature) fnares, baits, and
traps to deceive, and hurt us (as infinite, examples euince) the^ simply
means, and instruments of our selicity, and faluation.

Thirdly they cannot save our souls, and make us blessed before GOD, as
Solomon acknowledged when he called them all vanity of vanities, but this
work is proper only to grace, and GODS special mercy in Christ.

Fourthly, they are no especial, and proper endowments of Gods, Church, and
Children, (though sometimes they in good sort enjoy them, and partake of them)
for the wicked commonly possess them in far greater measure then the Godly
who are rather rich in mind, and in grace, then in these external, and
perishable profits, honors, and pleasures. Wherefore we must eleuate our
hearts, and minds far above these earthly, and momentary things, and seek
the things above; we must get us up into the mountain of divine
contemplation, and by the eyes of true faith, behold* and view our Country the
Heavenly Canaan: we have no abiding City here, wherefore we must seek one to
come having a foundation, Heb. 11. verse.
whose builder, and maker is GOD. And as for these worldly, and outward things
we must only use them so far forth as they are lawful, and are helps unto
us for the furthering of of our Journey, and the advancement of Godliness, and
no otherwise; for else it is better that they should perish then we; and it is
far better that we should alienate* and withdraw our minds, and affections
from them, then that they should separate us from GOD (as they do the most)
and deprive us of the kingdom of Heaven; and in this case if they were as
dear, and necessary unto us, as our eyes, hands, feet, yea Fathers, and
Mothers, yet we must cut them off, and hate them.

And thus much touching the place.

The fourth and the last branche, is the manifold uses and applications of this
doctrine of the heavenly marriage; first by consideration hereof, we must be
stirred up, and do our utmost endeavor to mortify, and overcome all worldly
desires, and earthly pleasures; for otherwise we cannot addict and wedde our
selves to these, and withal truly prepare our selves for the coming of
Christ: for touching riches, and worldly cares, there is such an antipathy, an
opposition between them and grace, that the one cannot consist without the
other: for as the eye cannot at one instant, behold heaven and earth, even so
a man cannot serve GOD and the world together, they are so adverse and
contrary; And as those places where gold and silver grow, are in all other
respects most barraine, and fruitless, so where the love of money, riches, and
the world do bear swaye, and prevail, there true zeal, and sincere
godliness can never* be found; and as touching pleasures, they are the
matter, and fuel of evil desires, they are honey mixed with poison, and they
are as Haw-thornes, and briars, which albeit sometimes they bear goodly
leaves, and flowers; yet if a man gripe them hard, they will prick and wound
him; wherefore it stands us upon to be wary of them, and when we use them,
to use them charily and moderately.

Use. 2. Secondly, we must learn hence to be forward, and constant in
well-doing, and still to repair our ruins, and prepare our selves until the
last breath; for he only that continues (in godliness, and patience) to the
end, he shall be saved, he that is found watching and wakefull at his
masters coming, shall be blessed, Luke 12. 36. 37. and he that faints not
in weldoing shall in due time reap Math. 24. 13. Luke. 12. 38. Gal. 6. 9.
Otherwise we, if we fail never so prosperously, and sink at the Haven mouth;
if we travel directly to Heaven, and turn back almost at our iorneyes end;
if we do God good and faithful service in our youth, and afterward prove
faithles, and prefidious in our elder years; and finally if we begin in the
spirit, and end in the flesh all our former endeavors labors, and sufferings
are to noe purpose, all our righteousness shall be forgotten, and we shall die in
the sins and transgress^^ns that we have committed, Eze. 18. 24. Wherefore if
the hope of Ransomming work patience in the captive, assurance of liberty, and
freedom constant labor, and faithfulness in the prenrise* and servant; and
expectation of victory, and spoil, constant resolution, and valowrous courage
in the soldier: why should not much more the certain, and vndoub^ed hope, and
assurance of this happiness, and eternal conjunction with Christ make, and move
us to be constant, and immovable in all duty of piety, charity, and Justice,
knowing that our works are not in vain in the Lord 1. Cor. 15. 58.

Use 3. Thirdly the assured expectation of this Heavenly, and glorious union
must teach us with the patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martirs, Confessors and
with all the Saints of God both of former, and also of later time to endure and
under go all sicknesses, trials, afflictions, losses, contempts, and
persecutions joyfully, and patiently, Heb. 11. 25. 2. Cor. 4. 16. 17. 18. and
Heb. 11. 8. 9. For first they are but momentary, and never beyond the date, and
term of this life, secondly Christ's yoke is easy and his bu^ then light*
Mat. 11. 31. and he will lay upon his no greater burden, then he will make them
able to bear. 1. Cor. 10. 13. But will give (...) idest an issue, and evasion
with the temptation. Lastly GOD will recompense, and reward these temporary,
and transitory evils, and sufferings with an infinite weight of glory in all
his Saints. 2. Cor. 4. 17. 18.

Use. Fourthly the use of this doctrine serves notably to mollify, and
mitigate the sorrows of death, and all the pains, and pangs of it, for the
stinge of it, ( viz. eternal condemnation,) is taken away. 1. Cor. 15. ver.
55. 56. Secondly it is not a plague unto us, but only a temporary correction,
nay a narrow wicket, or gate to intromit, and send us forthwith into the
possession of eternal life. Apoc. 14. 13. for if we be loosed then we go
straightly to the Lord. Phil. 1. 23. if we remove hence we dwell with the Lord,
and are married unto him. 2. Cor. 5. 8. and (to end the point) we rest from
all the labors of this life; and our works (First the reward of them in
mercy, and favor) follow, and attend upon us as an honorable guard. Apoc. 14.
13. Wherefore let us not fear death and damnation, but let us arm our selves
with faith, and hope, and let us often, and seriously meditate upon the life to
come, and the glory of it, and we shall (when the time is come) be willing to
die, and die with much comfort, and assurance.

Lastly (amongst many other uses) we must not mourn vnmeasurably for our
friends, and kinsfolks, or any other that live, and die in the Lord, for they
are with God, and in perfect bliss. And as any man will rather rejoice, then
sorrow, if his son, daughter, friend, kinsman be happily, worshipfully,
honorably, preferred in marriage, albeit he is otherwise to want their
ordinary company, and presence, so should we rather rejoice that they now are
perfited, and most honorably, and gloriously wedded to Jesus Christ, their
King, and head, then mourn as they that have no hope.

It is indeed lawful, and fit to mourn, for nature, and religion warranteth
it, but it must be in measure, and for our sins that have deprived us of
them, and for that the Church feels and finds the loss of them, then for
any private and carnal respect, and herein notwithstanding we must submit our
wills to Gods will, and rather labor to im^sitate their excellent and manifold
virtues, then to lament immoderately, or ouer-long for their departure; but
alas the world knows not, nor acknowledges good, and godly men. The
righteous, and merciful men, (as we have had lamentable experience within
these few years) of all rancks and callings, dye, they are taken away from the
evil, and rest in peace, and no man considers it in heart, or understands
it. Isa. 57. 1. and therefore because the world makes no more account of them,
and is not worthy of them, GOD most justly depriueth them of their presence and
comfort.

And thus much of the solemnization, and the privileges and uses of it.

The fourth part of the division.
And the gate was shut.
NOw we are come to speak and treat of the last branche, and part of the
distribution, namely the contrary event* in respect of the foolish Virgins; for
they having only common graces, and a temporal faith, which fails in time of
necessity, and temptation, and seeking for supply when the time was past, were
by the Bridegroom Christ repelled, and put by from entering into the wedding
chamber, and kingdom of heaven. In the unfolding and explication whereof,
diverse particulers are to be discussed; As first, who shuts the gate*
Secondly, when it is shut; Thirdlye, who are shut out: Fourthly, the condition,
and miserable estate of them thus excluded. Lastly, the ^enerall application
and use of the doctrine.

The person that excludes them, that indeed first excluded him, because they
did not, nor would not receive him into their heart, is Christ, the
bridegroom, the Son of God, and the judge of the world: he is the porter by
whom, and through faith in whom all the believers enter in, and find pasture,
John. 10. 9. he is the Prince of shepherds, as (...) and the Bishop of our
souls, that properly, and by his own power, binds and loses, retains,
and remitteth. For that which his Ministers do subordinately, and
ministerially, that does he absolutely and as cause and principal. John 20.
22. 23. Math. 16. 19. he alone has the Keye of David which opens, and no
man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens, so that he has right power,
and authority, to receive in, or put out whom he will, Apoc. 3. 7. they that
kiss him, believe in and obey him, shall be saved and glorified, Psalm* 2.
12. Mark. 16. 16. Hebr. 5. 9. and they that sin against him, hurt their own
soul, they that hate him love death. Prou. 8. 35. they that will not have him
to reign over them, are his enemies, and shall be slain before his face, Luke.
19. verse. 27. and they that either by open persecution: or else by
infidelity, and by contempt, scorn, or impenitencie fall on this stone shall
be broken, and on whom soever of them it shall fall, it will grind him to
powder. Luke. 21. 44.

The use of this doctrine is twofold, First it condemns and ouer-throweth
the usurped, false, and forged authority of the Romish Antichrist, who will
needs be Christ's Vicar general on earth, and blasphemouslie assumeth unto
himself the Keys of Heaven and Hell, as though it were in his power to save,
pardon, or to retain, and condemn whom he would: whereas first he cannot
be Christ's vicar, for Christ in the spiritual regiment, and government of the
Church, is with it to the end of the world. Math. 18. ver. 19. 20. and is
present by his power, and deity in every place, Math. 28. 19. 20. and
therefore needs no substitute to supply his Room. Secondly, the holy Ghost
is Christ's deputy, and vice^erent, for he is in every place, and enlighteneth,
guides, sanctif^eth, and governs the Church, and so neither does, nor can
the man of Rome, save himself from death, diseases, much less, from the
bottomless pit, from whence he came, Act. 1. 25.
and whether he must needs go (withal our consents) as ^udas to his place.

Thirdly in respect of order, and public administration the Christian
Magistrate may with much better right, and equity be called the Vicar of
CHRIST in governing the people according to the word of GOD. And in this
sense, Eleutherius Bishop of Rome writing to Lucius King of the Britains
calls him Christ's Vicar: for by Christ Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice. Pro. 8. ver. 15. and 16.
And as for the Authority of binding, and loosing, the Ministers of the true
Church, (wherein the Pope has no more right, then the Pirate in the true
ownershippe) have only a Ministry of reconciliation and a ministry of
binding, and loosing, but the inward operation, and working of the Holy Ghost
in the heart, is Principal, and belongs to CHRIST JESUS alone. Luke. 24. 45.
Act. 16. 14. So in censuring, admonishing, suspending, excommunicating,
exhorting, threatening, and in all other Ecclesiastical Offices CHRIST has no
deputy, but only instruments that do witness, and testify his will
according to the rule of Scriptures, but the whole entire action is personal,
and proper to him alone, and utterly overthrows, the feigned, and
counterfaite supremacy of the Romish Pirate, and Prelate.

Use. If we would not have Christ at the day of judgment to disclaim, and
exclude us as he did the foolish Virgins, we must not by infidelity, and
impenitencie debar^e him out of our hearts, but by a lively faith let, and
receive him into them, and entertain, and feast him with love, reverence,
amendment of life, obedience, and the like graces of the Spirit; for CHRIST
dwells in our hearts, if we believe, Apoc. 316.
he knocks at our hearts often by his word, by his Spirit, by his mercies,
and by his judgments, and if we assent unto him, and by faith admit into the
Chamber of our hearts, he will dwell with us, yea dine, and suppe with us, and
supply all our wants. Apoc. 3. 20.

Wherefore let us not (as the Church in the Cantikles) suffer CHRIST our
beloved to remain without, having his head full of dew, and his locks with
the drops of the night, because forthwith we would not arise, and dress us,
nor defile our feet. Cantickels 5. 2. and 3. or put our selves to any pain,
or trouble, but let us let open unto him by yielding unto the truth, and by
being amended by his admonitions, so shall we be CHRIST JESUS his
possession, his peculier people, and a temple for him, and his Spirit to dwell
in; otherwise if we suffer any one sin, whether of Idolatry or of
infidelity, or of worldliness, or of filtie living, or of gross ignorance,
or any reigning, and dominering sin that is unfelt, and unresisted, to sway
us, and tyrannizc over us, we drive, and bannish JESUS CHRIST not so much out
of our coasts, as the Gergesites did. Matthew. 12. 45. as out of the Castle,
and palace of our hearts, and admit satan our deadly enemy in his Room,
and stead.

Thus much of the first part, name^y the person who shuts.

The second branch, is the time when the gate is shut, viz* when all means,
and occasions of coming unto salvation are taken away* and when the time of
grace, repentance, and reconciliation is past, which is, when this life is
ended, Luke. 16. 23. 24. 25. 26. 28. 29. (...) the ^iche glutton in hell,
desiring and seeking unto Abraham, that he would send Lazarus, whom he had
neglected and contemned, to yield him the least comfort, he could not obtain
it, and when he desired that Lazarus might be sent to his fathers horse, to
advise and warn his five brethren that they should not come into that place of
torment, he speedeth not in his preposterous and unlawful suite, but his
brethren are referred, and rem^tted unto the interpreters of Moses and the
Prophets. Again, the dead do not praise the Lord, neither does the dust give
thanks unto him, or declare his truth, Isay. 38. 18. Secondly, at the day of
the Lord (for as death leaves men, whether penitent, or impenitent, so the
last judgment finds, and judges them, and no otherwise) it is no time of
reconciliation, and of obtaining mercy, as the example of the five foolish.
Virgins, and of those that Luke, 13. 25. cried, Lord, open unto us, when the
door was shut, and could not be admitted, and intromitted, does plainly prove,
and demonstrate.

The reason hereof is, because the Lord in his mercy and grace, does in this
life, to those especially that be in, and of the visible church offer, and
tender the means of faith, repentance, grace, mercy, and forgiveness of all
their sins, by the holy ministry of the word, and Sacraments, as 2. Cor. 6.
2. Titus. 2, 10. 11. 12. John 12. 35. John 4. 9. Isay. 55. 67. Gala. 6. 10.
Prouer. 1. 24. 25. 26. and because the wicked are temporizers, either utterly
and totally despise, and contemn it, as Luke 14. 18. 19. 20. or else they come
only in show, and content themselves with a naked profession, and some outward
reformation, wanting the hand, and firm grapple of true faith, that firmeth,
apprehends, claspeth, and applies Christ to their eternal salvation, Hebr.
4. 2. and also destitute of inward reformation and holiness, coming (I say)
without the wedding garment of faith, and sanctification, they are found
detected by Christ, convinced of hypocrisy, bound hand and foot, and cast
into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Math. 22. 11.
12. 13.

Use. The use hereof is first to show the vileness, and vanity of the
doctrine of Popish purgatory (whereof I spoke at large before (and therefore a
word now shall suffice) it is a vile doctrine, because it detracteth from, yea
and makes frustrate the all-sufficient death, and purgation of Jesus Christ.
Hebrew. 7. 25. It is vain and false, for as there are but two sorts of
persons, elect, or reprobate, Sheep, or Goats, good or evil, and as men dye
either in the estate of grace (as all the elect do) or else in ^he estate of
damnation (as do all the reprobate and impenitent) so are there but two places
in the scriptures appointed for them, after this life, viz. heaven, and hell,
therefore no purgatory, or third place, John. 5. 29. Apoc. 14. 13. wherefore
seeing there is no such purgatory after this life, nor no means left to
relieve, or release them: therefore all prayer of the living for the dead, is
simplye unlawful, for first it is against the rule of faith, videliz. the
word of GOD, and therefore must of necessity be sin.

Secondly, it is against the rule of charity, that should always judge the
best of the dead, and not persuade themseues the dead, are in torments where-of
they have noe certain ground, or knowledge.

Use. The second, and last use is to teach us not to stay for companions in the
way to eternal life, John. 13. 24. for so we may perish together, nor to
defer, or put of our conversion from day to day Math. 24 48. 49. 50. 51.
least either by death, or the last judgment we be suddenly surprised, and
overtaken, and accordingly judged, and condemned, 1. The. 5. 2.

Thus much of the time.

The third branch, and member of the division, is the persons, and parties that
are shut out: viz. the foolish virgins, idest, those that did not provide for
the time to come, because they did carelessely please themselves in their
wants, and so passed by the time of mutual communication and they contemned
the helps that were offered unto them, and therefore they are deservedly
derided for their folly, and do suffer the Just punishment of their
negligence, and brutishnes.

Hence we learn that it suffices not to carry only the shining lamps of
external profession, to have asight, or taste of Gods mercies (without sound
feeling of them, and norishment by them) Hebr. 6. 4. Mat. 13. 20. or to have
only an external holiness amongst men, as these foolish Virgins (noe doubt)
had, for if a man have noe more then this, he cannot go beyond a reprobate in
Christianity, and all these temporal, and common graces will fail a man in
the time of temptation, in the day of death, and at the Last judgment as
Hebre. 6. 4. 1. John. 2. 19. But true faith whereby we are justified, and
sanctified before GOD never fails, Luke. 22. 32. and all the (saving) gifts
of GOD are without repentance. Romans 11. 29. and GOD will remember their sins,
and iniquities noe more, Heb. 10. 17. therefore he will never take his grace
wholly from them; wherefore let us not content our selves with a bare
knowledge, and historical faith, but turn this temporary faith into a true,
and saving faith; and let not the strangnes, or rarenes of divine misteryes
only, or principally move, and enduce us to the profession of religion, for so
may Simon Magus, and the Athenians be Christians, neither let gaining, or
retaining of worldly wealth, peace, prosperity, friendship, and dignity, or
credit be our inducements, or perswations to Christianity, for these things
are uncertain, and when these ends fail (as they do often) then their
profession, religion, and temporary faith and obedience determines, wherefore
let the ends of our faith, profession, and religion be only the love of GOD and
the zeal of his glory, the delight in the truth, the obedience of his will,
and a careful, and constant desire of salvation; and that we may know that
our faith is not temporary, and historical, but sound, and saving, let us try
and examine it by these rules following, first that we be humbled in our
hearts for our sins, Isai. 51. 17. and that we have a Godly sorrow for them
2. Cor. 7. 10. Secondly that we be persuaded that our sins be pardonable,
for otherwise we shall despair as Caine did Genesis 4. 13.

Thirdly we must sincerely desire the means of salvation, such as faith,
repentance, mortification, and reconciliation are: fourthly we must pray for
nothing in the earth so much, so earnestly, and so continually as for the
forgiveness of our known and unknown sins: fifthly we must labor, and
endeavor in all our actions to approve and commend our selves rather unto GOD,
then unto men: lastly whether by experience, and continual observation, of
Gods favor, goodness, and merciful providence toward us, we attain unto
the strength, ripeness, and full measure of faith. Romans 5. 4. 5, Psalm. 23. 6.
1. Sam. 17. 34. 35, 36. If we find these things in our selves, we have true
faith, and shall never perish, but if we want them either in part, or in whole
let us seek betimes to procure, and so to increase them. And thus much of the
persons.

The fourth branch, and part is the state, and condition of the foolish Virgins
at the coming of the Bride-grome, and that is contained in these words viz.
And the gate was shut, and here two principal points are to be marked, and
attended. First from what they are excluded, viz. from the favorable, and
comfortable presence of Christ, and from the glory of Heaven. Secondly into
what place and company they are remitted, and reserved, viz. to hell, where
they shall be tormented with the diuill, and his Angels in the lake that burns
with fire, and brimstone foreuermore.

Touching their exclusion from the glorious and blessed fellowshippe of Christ,
what a torment is this, and how does it grieve, and gall them to think, and
consider of it? Surely it cannot be imagined, much less lively expressed; It
is at this day a great part of the diuills torment to remember from how great
glory, and excellency he is irrecouerably fallen. Now that they, and all the
reprobate are eternally separate from the company of CHRIST it is apparent, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Math. 25. 41. Luke 13. 27. Apo^. 22. 11.

What a greuious, and unspeakable torment this is, we may by the helps, and
occurrences of outward things, and examples in the world consider. Of a wife
for her offenses excluded, and deuorced from her loving, and honorable husband,
and so from all maintenance, and comfort; of a servant imprisoned as Onesimus
for playing the thief against his good, and gracious master: of Absolon two
whole years banished from his Fathers sight, and presence: and of a subject in
great grace, favor, place, and familiarity with his ^^ghtie, and gracious
Sovereign, and afterward exiled, degraded, imprisoned, and disgraced forever.
How much more fearful, horrible, and uncomfortable is it to be
excommunicated and separated not for a small time, but for ever, and ever from
the presence, and favor of CHRIST who is the sum of all grace, and favor,
and the fountain of all happiness, and felicity.

Thus much of the first point* namely from what they are excluded.

Secondly touching the proper, and peculier place of unspeakable torment, which
from the foundation of the world is appointed for them, it is hell, or a place
of eternal, and unutterable pain far remote, and distant from the highest
Heaven; and as sundry both ancient, and latter Deuines probably think, and
collect out of the Scriptures as. Deutronomy 32. 22. Isay* 30. 33. Number 16.
30. 33. Proverbs 15. Psalm 86. 13. Psalm 30. 6. Philip 2. 10. Luke. 8. 31.
and (though this point is more curious then profitable, and more con^ecturall
then certainly known where it is) that it is in some place under the earth.

And to signify, and set forth the Nature, and terror of it, it is called hell,
the bottomless pit. Apoc. 9. 10, the lake that burns with fire, and
brimstone, a prison. 1. Pet. 3. 19. a place of darkness. 2. Pet. 2. 4.
everlasting destruction. 2. Thessalo. 1. 9. a place without, Apoc. 22. 15.
unquenchable fire. Mark. 9. 43, Matthew, 3. verse 12.

The use of the place is to convince all Atheistes that deny it, and all that
say there is no other hell, but a man's conscience, but they one day (if they
continue their errors and madness) shall find and feel that there is an
hell; and if their conscience sometime terrify them for their wickedness
here, let them assure themselves that this is to them but the flashings, and
beginnings of hell fire. Thirdly, if they will not believe the Scriptures and
word of God, yet in that they believe, and are convinced by many means, that
there are devils, let them beware that they be not lead blindfolded by Satan
into hell, and there feel the eternal torment of that which here they neither
feel, nor acknowledge, and be most deservedly deprived of that glory and joy,
whereof they never in this life would take notice.

Now touching the pains, and punishments, tortures, and torments of the
damned, we are to consider, and handle them first generally, and then more
specially, and severally.

First in general they are unspeakable and intolerable; secondly, endless,
and eternal.

That they are intolerable and insufferable, these Scriptures following do
abundantly testify and affirm; The great day of his wrath is come, and who
can withstand it, Apoc. 6. 17. there is said to be wailing and gnashing of
teeth, Math. 22. there torment is shadowed forth under the borrowed and
metaphorical terms (of such things as be most subject to our sense, and
fearful in our apprehension) of fire, brimstone, the worm of conscience that
never dies, utter darkness; And if the enemies of the truth in this life upon
the sense, and apprehension of the heavy weight of Gods judgment against them,
Apoc. 6. 9.
shall seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to dye, and death
shall flee from them; how much more shall this come to pass, when the full
vyoles of Gods* wrath shall be finally powered out upon them, and when they
shall drink the pure wine of his wrath Apoc. 9. 6. Apoc. 14. 10. Romans 2. 4
Psalm. 74. 10. Luke. 16* 24. 25.

Touching the eternity, and euer-lastingnesse of their pains, and tortures
both in soul, and body, both plain places of Scripture* and sound arguments
thence collected abundantly euince and testify.

First the pains and punnishments are called everlasting fire, Matthew 25. 41.
the worm that never dies. Isa 66. 24. the smoke of their torments does
ascend evermore, they have no rest day, nor night. Apoc. 14. 11. and they
shall be punnished with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power, as 2. Thessal. 1. 9. so that when as many
Millions of years be expired, as there be motes in the sun, drops of
water in the Ocean sea* sands upon the sea shore, creatures upon the earth:
and when so many years shall be accomplished, as all Arithmetitians can number
all their life long; yet their torments shall have no end, nor ease, but begin
again a fresh. Now the reasons why their torments shall be eternal are these:
First the joys of heaven are eternal, Math. 25. 46* and therefore the pains
of the damned are eternal also, for contrariorum contraria sunt consequenta:
Secondly GOD whom the reprobates have offended, and contemned is an everlasting
majesty, and the chief and eternal good* and therefore the punishment of the
sin committed against him is eternal, for sin committed against the
infinite majesty, is infinite. Thirdly, if the reprobates lived here for ever,
they would sin for ever, and being in hell they cannot praise God. Psalm. 30.
9. but hate, repine, and murmur against him. Object.
But God is merciful, and therefore he will at length end their torments* or
at least ease them. First they despised Gods mercy in this life when it was
offered them, Ans.
and thereby have made themselves altogether unworthy of it. Secondly they
shall be punished more gently then they have des^^ued. Matthew. 11. 22. for GOD
could much more have aggrauated, and increased the quantity of their torments.

And thus much in general of the pains of the damned.

Now let us come to some particulers. First in their faces, and countenances
there shall be shame, and confusion for evermore, Dan. 1. 8 9. 7, and for this
cause the reprobates are called the vessels of dishonor. 2. Tim. 1. 20. Romans
9. 21. for then all their secret sins shall be laid open, and discovered. 1.
Cor. 4. 5. and their conscience bringing them always fresh into their
rememberance shall always v^xe, and torment them. Isa. 66. 24. Mark. 9. 44.
and we gather this punnishment by the contrary estate of the Godly at Christ
his coming. 1. Ioh. 2. 28. for they shall be bold, and not ashamed.

Now if many men in this life for avoiding and preventing of open shame, and
punishment, do not only hide, but also make away themselves, in what horror,
and vexation think we they shall be in, when they shall suffer full and
everlasting shame, and punishment? Secondly, they upon the perfect sense of
their infinite sins, and upon the full apprehension of Gods infinite
indignation, shall everlastingly despair, and shall always desire to dye, and
shall not dye, Apoc. 9. 6.

Thirdly, in their minds and wills being unspeakably infected, and possessed
with envy, and malice, they on the one part seeing themselves deprived of so
infinite glory, and plunged into so endless miseries, by reason of their
sins and offenses, and on the other side, either by present sight and view,
as some divines collect out of Luke 13. 28. Luke. 16. 23. Apoc. 14. 10. or else
(which is an undoubted truth) by keeping in fresh and perpetual memory, the
absolute and glorious estate, and glorification of the godly at the last day,
observing and perceiving the godly whom they in their life time so scorned,
abused, wronged, persecuted to be so vnconceaueably blessed, shall be tormented
and vexed with an incredible envy, Isa. 66. 23. 24. Psalm. 85. 10. 11. Luke 16.
23. We have some instance hereof in proud Hamon that cursed Agagite that could
in no wise endure the exaltation of Mordocheus, but it was a sword to his
heart, and a vexation to his conscience. And if the envious in this life
repine, yea, and pine away at the felicity and favors of others, how much
more will they then envy, when they themselves shall be incomparably more
miserable, and the godly unspeakably more blessed.

Fourthly, the reprobate shall be as well tormented in their bodies, which have
bin the vessels and instruments of sin, and iniquity, as in their souls, for
as their bodies shall be dark, ^inglorious, and deformed, contrary unto the
glory of the elect: so shall they be tormented not with any material fire, for
the^ the worm of conscience, the carcases of the slain, and the metaphorical
speeches, especially in the Apoc. 22. 23 that describe and delineate unto us
the joy and glory of heaven should be literally understood, which is very
absurd to think, but with that which is equivalent, yea far more extreme,
namely the full, and final wrath of God ceazing and inuading the soul and
body, as appears, Apoc. 14. 10. They shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, yea of the p^re wine that is powered into the cup of his wrath, and shall be
tormented in fire and brimston before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb for
evermore, they shall drink up the dregs of Gods wrath, which is their portion
to drink, Psalm. 74. 10. and Psalm. 11. 6. Lastly because they must in soul and
body suffer the unsupportable indignation of the Lord, are called, and so
indeed are, vessels of wrath prepared to destruction. Romans 9. 22
Now if the anger of a Lion, of a Bear robbed of her whelps, much more of a
mighty Monarch be so pernicious^ and dangerous, how much more incomparable then
is the wrath and indignation of the Almighty and the most just Lord, who is to
his enemies a consuming fire, Hebr. 12. 29. and whose wrath burns unto the
bottom of hell. Deuteronomy. 32. 22. God give us grace by our godly fear, true
repentance, and sound obedience in this life, to prevent it, Amen.

Thus much of the general and particular punishment of those that are excluded.

The last point, and part to be handled, and wherewith we will conclude the
whole treatise, is the manifold, and wholesome uses that we are to make of this
doctrine: first therefore the serious consideration, and meditation of the
state, and pains of the damned, must be a forcible motive to diswade and
reclaim us from committing sin, and iniquity for fear, of falling into the
same condemnation. Chrysostom in his 13. Homily, or sermon upon the Romans,
says well to this purpose; Vtinam (inquit) vbique de Gehenna dissereretur, non
enim sinet in Gehennam incidere, Gehennae meminisse, etc. that is, would to God
every man would speak of hell; for to remember hell, will not suffer a man to
fall into hell; for if the due consideration of severe humane laws that shall
be duly executed, do keep the most unruly from offending, much more will the
serious consideration of the pains of hell (if men have grace to think on
them) reform and amend men, I^de. 23. Secondly the Preachers and Ministers of
the word of God, when they see and perceive the deadness, dullness, ^and
impenitencie of the hearers* must labor by laying open the multitude, and
torments of the damned, to draw men to fear God, and to repent their sins.
Math* 23. 33. Heb. 10. 27. Apoc. 14. 9. 10. 11.

The third use is to teach us not to be envious against the wicked, nor to
repine at their temporal dominion, and prosperity: for first, neither they,
nor their pomp nor prosperity shall continue long, but perish suddenly. Psalm.
73. 18. 19. 20. Psalm. 37. 12. Secondly, they have (for the most part) their
portion in this life, Psalm. 17. 14. Lastly, their damnation is just, and
sleeps not, 2. P^t. 2. 3. wherefore we must rather commisserate and pity
them, yea, and pray God to convert them, for in so doing we shall please God,
discharge our own duties, and perhaps in the end, be a means to win, and
reclaim them.

Fourthly and lastly, finding in our selves by due examination, that God has
delivered us from so great condemnation and made us heirs, in hope of eternal
life, we must continually, and from our hearts give all glory and praise unto
God, Apoc. 5. 9. 10. Col. 1. 12. 13. 14. and hereby be stirred up to be
steadfast, immovable, abundant always in the work of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15.
57. 58. Now the Lord God, the fountain of mercies, and the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, grant we may perform these duties, and continue constant like
pillars in his love, and service to the end, for his beloved sons sake Jesus
Christ our only redeemer, and mediator, Amen.

AN APPENDIX or necessary addition, touching the doctrine, nature and use of
the Sacraments, propounded in plain and profitable Questions, and Answers,
very requisite and comfortable for every Christian to know.

TO THE WOR shipfull, Learned and Religious Gentleman, master Thomas Gibbs of
Watergaull Esquier: Thomas Draxe wishes increase of grace and of all
prosperity, and for a monument of his love and duetifull affection,
consecrateth this small adioynder following.

The Doctrine, nature and use of the Sacraments.
Qu. WHat signi^ieth this word S^ments?

An. A ^ouldiers oath made to his Captain whereby he is sworn to be true to
and consecrated to the ^eruice of the general, and from that original
signification it is drawn by the common consent of the Church, to signify the
Holy S^ales of Gods mercy. For as the soldier by his oath administered and
taken, binds himself to the service of his general* so we by the use of
the Sacraments bind our selves to God and to his worship.

Qu* What is a Sacrament?

Ans. An outward ^igne or ^eale ordained of God, to confirm our faith in the
c^rtenty of our redemption, and to signify and seal unto us the graces and
benefits that ^lowe thence. Genesis 17. 11. Romans 4.

Qu. What are the ends of Sacraments in general?

An. First and princially to confirm our faith in the promises of grace, and
to be seals and pledges thereof unto us. 1 Cor. 10. 16. Romans 6. 3. Gal. 3. 2.
6.

Secondly to distinguish us from all Infidells and Atheists whatsoever.

Thirdly to preserve the remembrance and memory of Christ his benefits. Exodus
12. 14. Luke 22. ver. 19.

Lastly to bind and unite us more firmly to God, and his service, and to one
another.

Qu. Are the Sacraments necessary to salvation?

Ans. Yes, for first God in his wisdom and mercy has instituted them to that
end, and has also commanded them to be used. Secondly by the refusal and
contempt of them, we declare our selves to be none of Christ's desciples, of
whom these Sacraments are badges. Thirdly (during this mortality) we are weak
infaith and full of infirmities and therefore have need of the^.

Qu. But are the Sacraments so simply and absolutely needful to sal^ation that
he that wants them cannot be saved?

An. No, for first, not the want but the contempt of them damneth. Secondly the
Israelits in the Wilderness wanted them 40. years, but were not therefore
condemned, and the theife upon the Cross was saved, albeit never baptized
Luke. 23. Lastly damnation is denounced to the unbeliever and impenitent
person, and not to have that (without his own defaute) is deprived of the
Sacraments.

Qu. Then grace and remission of sins is not inherent, in, annexed and tied
so to the Sacraments, that whosoever uses them should by his very act of
receiving, be partaker of it?

An. No, for first, it is the proper work of God to confer grace, albeit
(ordinarily) by the means. Secondly the Sacraments are signs and seals of
grace, but not causes thereof. Thirdly their nature and substance is not
changed; therefore they cannot of themselves confer grace.

Lastly, Achit^phell, Simon Magus, Judas, were Partakers of the Sacraments, yet
because they wanted faith, they receued no good by them, for here, in regard of
us faith is all in all Heb. 4 ver. 2.

Qu. If there be no grace contained and inherent in the Sacraments, why are the
signs and the things signified called so often in Scripture by one and the
same name? Exo. 12. 11. 1. Cor. 5. 7. Math. 26. 28. 1. Cor. 11. 24.

Ans. They are often times thus named, only to show the strait union and
near conjunction, that is betwixt the signs and the things signified in the
believers, for at what time they in faith receive the signs, God by his spirit
conferreth the things signified.

Qu. What difference is there betwixt the word Preached and the Sacraments?

Ans. Frst the word preached is only audible and propounded to the ears, but
the sacraments are sensible, and offered and subject to the sense of seeing,
fasting, handling.

Secondly, grace is offered in the word more generally, but in the Sacrament
more particularly.

Thirdly the word is preached both to believers and unbelievers, but the
sacraments, (especialy that of the Lords supper) are communicated to those that
believe, or (at least) thus probably judged.

Forthly, the word is of force toward faith and salvation without, or before
that the Sacraments be received; as may appear in Abraham, Genesis The Enuch
Act. 8. Corn. Act. 10. ve. 2. 3. and 44. 45. but the sacrament without the word
is of no validity, I mean the words of Institution.

Qu. How are Sacraments divided?

A. Into Sacraments of the old Testament and Sacraments of the New.

Qu. What is a Sacrament of the old Testament?

A. That which was instituted and ordaned of God for the faithful before
Christ's in carnation.

Qu. Of How many sorts was it?

Ans. Of two sorts, ordinary and extraordinary.

Q what were their ordinary Sacraments.

An. Circumcision and the passover.

Qu. What is Circumcision?

An. An ordinary Sacrament of the old Testament whereby by reason of the
cutting off and circumcizing of the foreskin the premise of grace, that is, of
redemption and sanctification in the Messiah to come was signified and sealed.
Genesis 7. ver. 11. and 12. Romans 4. 11.

Qu* What is the Passover?

An. An ordinary Sacrament of the old Testament, whereby, by the eating of a
Lamb, the believers were put in mind of their deliverance out of Egypt and
especially were confirmed concerning their redemption from the power of Satan
sin and death, to be performed by Christ that was then to come.

Qu. What were the extraordinary Sacraments of the old Testament.

An. Those that were not so solemly repeated, of this sort was the arc,
wherein Noe and his family were preserved in the time of the deluge; and hereby
was signified and sealed our preservation from eternal damnation, by Christ,
1. Pe. 3. 3. and 20. Such like Sacraments were the baptism of the cloud and of
the sea 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. likewise the eating of Manna and the drinking of the
water flowing out of the rock, ibid verse. 3. and 4.

Q. what are the Sacraments of the new Testament?

A. Those which Christ the mediator of mankind being now exhibited did
institute and ordain for his that be^eeued Q* what and how many are these
sacraments?

Ans. Only two, Baptism and the Lords supper.

Q. What difference is there between the Sacraments of the old Testament and
of the new that succeed them.

Ans. They are both the same altogether in substance, or in respect of the
thing signified; for as the substance of the word was the same in the time of
the old Testament and of the New, so also the substance of the Sacraments, and
this is made plain by diverse places of Scripture. ^ebr. 13. 8. Collo. 2. ver.
11. 1. Cor. 5. 11.

Qu. How then do they differ?

Ans. Only in certain circumstances and accidents, as for example. First they
differ in the external sign or element. Secondly in number, for they were
more in number, but these few. Thirdly in manner of signification, for they
signified Christ to come, and therefore were more dark, but these Christ
presented and exhibited, and therefore more plain and easy. Lastly they
differ in time and person, for the Sacraments of the old Testament were proper
to the Jews, and lasted only unto the coming of the Messiah, but the
Sacraments of the new Testament are common both to Jews, Gentiles and do
continue unto the worlds end.

Qu. How many things are we to consider in a Sacrament?

Answ. Three, first the outward sign or matter. Secondly the thing signified.
Thirdly the form, order and analogy between the sign and the thing signified.

Qu. What is the sign?

An. The outward or sensible matter which is the substance, and the external
act^ons co^uersant about the sacrament, which is the accidental circumstance.

Q* What are the things signified by the^?

Ans. Christ with all his mercies and saving graces.

Q* What is the form of a Sacrament?

An. The relation, order or proportion that is betwixt the sign and the thing
signified? Q What is Baptism?

A. The sacrament of our new Birth, or of our first admittance, or entrance
into the Church, or Christianity* Romans 4. 11. Math. 28. 19.

Qu. To whom does Baptism belong?

A. To al believers, and to their children.

Qu. Are in^ants then to be Baptized, especially seeing that the scripture
makes no express mention thereof?

A. Yes undoubtedly, for first there is such an affinity between Circumcision
and Baptism that succeeds it; that by what reason the children of the Jews
were circumcized, by the same may the children of Christians be baptized.
Secondly the commission that Christ grave to his Apostles, commanding them to
baptisze all nations, was general and made no exception of Infants. Thirdly the
Apostles baptized whole families. Ac. 16, 15. 1 Cor. 1. 16, 1 and therefore in all likelihood Infants that are a part of the^. Lastly the grace, promise, and
the thing signified belong to Infa^ts, therefore the outward sign also.

Q. How often is a man to be Baptized?

An. Only once. For as it is sufficient to be once ingrafted into the Church
and once borne, so it suffices to be but once baptized. Secondly there is but
one baptism. Ephe 4. Lastly circumsition was but once administered and
therefore baptism in like manner.

Qu. What is the outward sign or element in Baptism?

Answ. Water only, and no signs or matter else.

Que. What is the thing signified by Baptism?

Answ. First the purging and washing away of our sins by the sprinkling of
the blood of Christ. Secondly our regeneration or sanctification to eternal
life. Titus 3, 5. Romans 3. verse 25.

Q. What is the form of Baptism?

An. The diuing, dipping or baptizing of the Infant and with water by the
Minister into the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. Mat. 28, 29.

Qu. What gather you hence?

Ans. A double and solemn covenant, First in regard of God the Father to
receive the party baptized into his favor, of God the Son to redeem him, and
of God the holy Ghost to regenerate him. Secondly of the party baptized who
here solemnly promises to acknowledge, invoke and worship God alone, and
withal to renounce the world, the flesh and the devil.

Q. What use are we to make of baptism?

An. First when we are tempted to commit any sin, we must for the preueting of
it, call to our^remembrance, our solemn vow made in baptism. Secondly we must
daily labor to feel and discern in our selves the proper effect and fruit of
Baptism, namely the power of Christ's death mortifying sin, and the power of
his resurrection quickening and renewing us.

And thus much of sacraments in general, and of Baptism, in particular.
Qu. What is the Lords supper?

An. A sacrament of our spiritual norrishment growth and preservation in
Christianity.

Qu. Who instituted it?

Ans. The Lord Jesus.

Qu. When?

Ans. At supper time.

Qu. Why at that time?

An. Because at that evening began the day of the passover, and Christ being
forthwith to be apprehended, could not defer it to the next morning.

Qu. Why did the Church change the time of the administration of it?

Ans. The time is but an external accident, which is in the Churches liberty
to retain or alter. Secondly the reason why they changed it unto the morning
was the prevention of drunkenness, gluttony or the like abuses that in
process of time crept in.

Qu. What are the outward signs or elements in the sacrament?

Ans. Bread and Wine.

Qu. Why are there two signs in the Lords supper?

Answ. For two ends. First more lively and fully to set forth Christ his
passion. Secondly to signify and seal unto us, our full and perfect
norrishment and salvation in Christ.

Que. What does the breaking of the bread signify?

An. The body of Christ bruized and crucified for us.

Qu. What does the pouring out of tht wine signify?

An. The blood of Christ shed for the remission of our sins.

Qu. Then we need no Popish images pictures, crucifixes and to represent unto
unto us Christ's passion?

An. No, For the death and passion of Christ's holy Scriptures, and also in this
Sacrament (especially) is described, set forth and depainted lively before our
eyes. And as for the Papists* lying vanities, they are flat idolatrous and we
abho^ and detest them.

Qu. What is the thing signfied b^ this Sacrament?

An. Christ Jesus and all his merits and blessings.

Q. what is the form of this Sacrament?

An. The order and relation between bread and the wine and the thing
signified, in the administration and use of this sacrament?

Qu. Explain and show unto me the order, analogy and proportion between the
signs and the thing signified?

An. Thus it appears, as the bread and wine have force and efficacy to norish
and strenthen the body: so the body and blood of Christ, together with all the
benifits that flow from his death and passion, do inwardly norish and
strengthen a believer unto eternal life.

Qu. Are the Bread and Wine in the use of the Sacrament things really existing,
or but only outward shows and appare^ts (as the Church of Rome imagines?)

An. They do really exist and retain their former substance and nature: for
first (according to the infallible rule in Philosophy) no accidents can subsist
without their subjects to whom they are tied.

Secondly the Apostle Paul in the whole discourse of the Sacrament, mentions
the express words of bread and wine* 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28.

Qu. How then and wherein differs the bread and wine in the sacrament from
common bread and wine?

A. Not in nature and substance, but only in end use and signification. For in
common use they serve only to the nourishment of the body, but in the
sacrame^tal use to the norishing of the soul, secondly before they were
without signification and relation, but in the Sacrament they signify Christ's
body* and blood.

Q. Then the elemenss of bread and wine are not transsubstantiated or turned
into the very body and blood of Christ?

A. No, for first it is a spiritual food and therefore spiritually to be eaten
and received by ^aith. Secondly the holding of this absurd opinion overthrows
the articles of Christ's Incarnation and ascension, for if he was borne of the
Virgin Mary, then not made of bread, and if he be ascended into Heaven and
there contained unto the end of the world, then he is not corporally present
and much less made of bread. Thirdly it destroys the very nature and form
of a Sacrament, which consists in the relation and respect that is betwixt
the sign and the thing signified. Fourthly the bread in time will mould, and
the wine turn into vinegar, ergo there is no such conversion. Lastly (to omit
many other arguments) if there were any such transubstantiation, the very
reprobates as Judas should truly feed on the body and blood of Christ and so
should be saved but this is flat against scripture.

Qu. If there be no such real conversion of the bread and wine into Christ his
body and blood, why the^ are the unworthy receivers guilty of the body and
blood of Christ?

Ans. First, because they wanting faith, which is the eye, mouth, an^ stomach
of the soul; discern not this mystical bread and wine from common bread and
wine, but come unto it as unto a profane banquet. Secondly, because they by
their infidelity and wicked hearts abuse and profane these holy seals and
pictures; and therefore are guilty of high treason before God, eue^ as he that
rendeth, abuses and trampleth upon the kings image or broad ^eale, is guilty
of treason before men.

Qu. How then is the bread and wine to be received?

Ans. Reverently and by faith.

Qu. How by faith?

Ans. By believing that, as verily as I receive the bread and wine, so
spiritually I receive and feed upon Christ his body and blood For faith makes
that present to the ^oule, that is in place far distant. And as the eye of a
man does by his sight touch the stars though many thousands of miles distant:
so does faith mount up into Heaven and so apprehend and feed on Christ. Act.
7, verse 55.

Q. What is faith?

Answ. A persuasion of Gods favor and mercy in Christ.

Que. Who are worthy Communicants or receivers?

An. They only that firmly believe in Christ* hunger and thirst after him,
truly repent them of their sins, and are thankful for the great work of
their redemption.

Qu. But the faithful themselves, (as we have the Apostles themselves for
instances) labor of many doubts, wants, infirmities, relesses, ergo no man is
worthy to comm^nicate?

Ans. First the Lords supper is a medicine to the weak and fainting soul, and
therefore we are as well to purify our hearts in it, as to bring pure hearts
to it. Secondly al (notwithstanding al their other ignorances and infirmities)
in whom sin reigns not, and that come to the Lords Supper without guile and
hypocrisy, are worthy in Gods acceptance.

Q. Who then are unworthy receivers?

Ans. All that are grosely ignorant, all Infidels, Atheists, Hypocrites,
Heretics, Schismatiques, and (in a word) all impenitent and profane persons.

Qu. What danger do these incur?

Ans. If they repent ^ot, besides temporal plagues, they incur eternal
condemnation.

Q. May not an elect and a true believer, sometime receive unworthy?

Ans. Yes.

Qu. How then does ^e escape eternal condemnation?

Ans. First, his person is accepted with God, and therefore being once in
Christ he ca^neuer perish. Romans 8. 1. Ioh. 10. 27* Secondly he is temporally
chastised for his unworthy receiving, as the Corinthians were, but all his
sins are pardoned and the gilt of them taken away.

Q May not a true Christian with a safe conscience communicate there where is
know^e to be present some open and vile offenders.

Ans. Yes, if he do not consent unto their sin or approve of it, for it is
not his fault, and another man's badnes must not make him to refuse the Manna of
his soul.

Secondly, the Prophets themselves and others, observed the sacrifices and
feasts with those that were most wicked; yea Christ himself kept the Pasouer
amongst the wicked ^ewes.

Qu. What benefit and comfort has a right receiver by the Lords Supper?

Ans. First, a confirmation of faith in the promise of grace, and in his
communion with Christ* Secondly a reviving of the death and passion of Christ
and the benefits that proceed thence, in his memory. Thirdly, a more firm and
near union with the members of Christ. Lastly, a most certain hope of the
life to come. 1. Cor. 11. 26.

Qu. What must a man do that h^ may be a worthy receiver?

Ans. He is to perform three several duties. First before he communice:
secondly in the time of communicating; and thirdly after that he has
communicated.

Qu. What must a man do before he communicate?

Ans. He must try and examine himself.

Qu. Is it not sufficient that his pastor or minister examine him and approve
of him?

Ans. No for albeit it be a good and necessary duty, yet it suffices not, for
first he may deceive the Minister, but he is better known to himself.

Secondly he must live by his own faith, and answer for his own sins,
wherefore it concerns him nearly to look to himself.

Qu. Wherein must a man examine himself?

Ans. In four things. First whether he know God, know the fall of man, and
the manner of his restitution by Christ. Secondly in his faith, namely whether
he desire, apprehend and receive Christ, as he is described in the scriptures,
and exhibited in the Sacraments.

Thirdly in repentance, viz. whether he repent of all his known sins, and
have a care and resolution to do those things that please God, Math 3. 17.

Lastly in charity, whether he love good men, and wis^ well even to his
enemies, and seek daily to reconcile himself unto his neighbor, whom he has
wronged or offended. Mat. 5. 25.

Q. What is the duty of a worthy receiver in the very art and time of the
receiving of the Sacrament?

Ans. He must reverently behave himself, ponder the great mercies of God
vouchsafed him, and by the eyes of faith so behold and contemplate all the
story of Christ his passion, as if with his eyes he saw him hanging on the
cross and crucified, and his blood dropping out of his veins.

Qu. How often must a man receive the Sacrament?

Ans. Very often, for so the Apostle wills, 1. Corinthians. 11. so the primitive
Church practiced, and ever need the often use of it.

Q. What duty must a man perform after the receiving of the Sacrament?

Ans. He must praise the Lord, and give him thanks for the wonderful work
of his redemption, and for all the means thereunto belonging.

Secondly, he must be occasioned hence, more constantlye to prosesse Christ,
and more entirely to love his children and servants.

FINIS. Deo Tri-vno laus and gloria. Si Christum been scis satis est si caetera
nescis.

