THE CHVRCHES Security, Together with the Antidote or preservative of ever
waking Faith. A treatise containing many fruitful instructions, moralities
and consolations fit for the time and age wherein we live. Hereunto is annexed
a sound and profitable treatise of the general signs and forerunners of the
last judgment. By THOMAS DRAX.

Happy are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find waking.
Luke 12. verse. 37. AT LONDON Imprinted by George Eld, and are to be sold by
John Wright at his shop at Christchurch Gate. 1608.

SALOMONS SONG. Chap. 5. verse. 2. I sleep, but mine heart waketh.
FOr as much as Christ Jesus the son of God, our blessed Savior, our holy
harmless undefiled hight ^riest, separate from sinners, and made higher then
the heavens, was subi^ct to the like infirmities, and temptations in all things
(as we are,) but without sin, and that which amongst other temptations, his
threefold combat and conflict with the devil, does demonstrate, we must not
think it strange, or take it offensiuely, that we that are but his members,
his servants, yea and most miserable and sinful creatures should be liable,
and subject to the temptations, and assaults of the world, flesh, and the
devil. For first we must be conformable unto Christ our head. Secondly Satan's
m^lice, and rage against us, especially in these last days wherein he
perceives his time to be so sh^rt, Apoc. 12. ver* 12.
is restl^sse and vnpea^^able. Lastly every Christian man, yea the most perfect
believer that lives upon the earth, by reason of his manifold ignorances,
slips, errors, drowsinesse, defects, imperfections, does (if God and grace
prevent not) minister and afford continual matter, and occasion for the
tempter to assault him, yea and to work upon him. Therefore, as Christ Jesus
was assaulted with three special temptations, Math. 4. ver. 3.
whereof the first was directed to remove him from his sonne-like confidence in
God. The second, to puff up his m^nde with rash presumption in the protection
of God. verse. ^.
And the third to blast, and infect his mind with the venomous vapor of
ambition, and covetousness, all which he resisted, and ouer-came by the
scripture, and word of God: even so here in the Cantickles the church was
encountered with three sorts of temptations, though in form and kind
differing from Christ his temptations. The first which is the best, and most
holy temptation, Canti 2. 4.
was her Loue-sicknesse, or falling into a swound, by reason of the sight of
the great provision, and spiritual dainties that Christ had prepared for the
Church. Answerably hereunto Peter in the trans^iguration of Christ was so
ravished, and surprised with the sweetness of that momentanie glory, that he
imagined Christ his kingdom and glory to be earthly, and did plaee the
blisfull happiness of the Saints in this trans^tory and troublesome world,
which alone is to be sought in heaven. And proportionably hereunto Paul
(whether in the body, 2 Co^. ^2. 4.
or out of it, he knew not, and therefore it is not in our knowledge to
determine) was rapt v^into the third heaven, or Paradise, and h^ard words which
cannot be spoken, and which it is impossible for man to utter.

The second temptation wherein (as also in the next following) the Church more
bewraieth her corruption, Cap. 3. verse. 1. 2. 3.
is the fear (which comes from infidelity) in the Church, least she had
lost Christ; yet so qualified, as thereby the spirit kindles in her more
pains, and study, both to seek to attain unto Christ more nearly, and to
apprehend him more firmly, and in a while after that all the means had been
used, she finds Christ, and renueth and reuiueth her faith in him.

The third, and last temptation, which is worldly drowsinesse, Cap. 5. 2. 3. 4.
and some kind of security, incident to the Church, and children of God; the
bitterness, and extremity whereof was, that she fell into a swound, that is,
she for the time, was almost in despair of her salvation, as one deprived of
feeling and comfort of grace: But at length by communication with her friends
concerning Christ his excellency, and the place where he was gone, her faith
begins to revive, and she assures her self that Christ is hers, and she is
his. And this is the third, Verse. 17. 18.
and last temptation, wherein we mean to insist. The original, brief and
substance of it is contained in these words; I sleep, that is, I am somewhat
secure, and careless, and keep not that watch against the pleasures of this
life, and the baits and hooks of the world as I should, and am bound to do.

Then follows a limitation, or exception in these words. But mine heart
waketh, that is, my ^aith apprehends, and holds Christ, and I do not
suffer my delight, and joy in him to cease, and determine.

In the temptation comprised in these words, I sleep, two things are to be
considered. First the Churches winking, or slumbering. Secondly the confession,
and acknowledgment of her fault, and offense.

In that the Church is here said to sleep, or slumber, yet so as that she
discerns off, 1. Obser.
notwithstanding that her heart, that is, her faith, and better part waked,
laid hold on, and found sweere repose, and contentment in Christ. We learn
hence this doctrine, and iustruction viz. that the true Church of God, and the
particular members of it, are not only subject to sin, and error in general,
for every man is borne, Psalm. 51. ^. 5.
and conceived in sin, every man is a liar, we have all sinned, Romans 3. 23.
and stand in need of the golrie of God, who knows the errors of this life:
all our righteousness is but as a menstrous cloth. Psalm. 19. v. 11.
and when we have done all that we can, we are but defective and unprofitable
servants; but also, and that more particularly, that many times the Church of
Christ, even in the best, and most flourishing outward Estate of it, is
overtaken with a kind of spiritual slumber, and security, and is less
careful, and watchful to beware of the snares of the worlds prosperity, and
the baits, and allurements of honors, and pleasures; so that here it must
needs follow that her faith must oftentimes be weakened, eclipsed, and darkened,
yea and she now and then fall into simptoms, and fits of desperation.

The truth hereof appears first in David, who when he was established in his
kingdom, and flourished in prosperity, was puffed up with carnal security,
and confidence in his own strength, Psalm. 30. v. 6. 7.
and full little thought of his own infirmity, dangers or iminent evils, as
though his present felicity should never change: verse. 8.
but presently God hid his face from him, that is withdrew the sense of his
favor, and good will, and cast him into trouble, and calamities, and so
awakened him from his slumber, and drowsines.

Secondly in Ezechias (otherwise a right good King) whose heart was lift up
with pride, by reason of his late and glorious victory, and abundance of
treasures, in so much. that he in oftentation showed unto the ambassadors of
the King of Babell all his treasures, 2 King. 20. 13. 15.
that be had in his house and realm, so that wrath came upon him, and upon
Judah and Jerusalem.

Thirdly in Ephraim, Iere 31. 18.
who in his prosperity was as an untamed Calfe.

Fourthly, Math. 25. 6.
in the very wise Virgins, who (though they had their Lamps furnished with
oil) yet they slumbered at Christ his second coming.

Fi^tly, in Christ his disciples, who because Christ whiles he lived upon the
earth, kept them from all dangers, dreamed of continual prosperity, and could
not conceive of nor endure to hear of Christ his death and resurrection;
in-so-much that at the time of his suffering they slept and slumbered, Make 14.
verse. 37. and 40.
when they should have watched, and prayed, and when Christ was once
apprehended, they all, for fear, forsook him, and fled away, yea and Peter
denied him three several times, Math. 26.
with cursing and swearing, Mark. 14. 71. This was the state of the Angel, and
people of Sardis, who had a name that they lived, Revel. 3. 1.
yet were dead. The lukewarm Church of Laodicaea was tact with security, and
slumber. She indeed said that she was rich, and increased in worldly goods,
Ibid. ver 17.
and had need of nothing, whereas the holy Ghost testifies of her that she was
wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked. And lastly the Church of
Ephesus, (albeit in all other things a most excellent Church) yet she is noted
for this, that she left her first love, that is, she had abated, and remitted
much of her former love, both to God, and her neighbor. Now he is happy that
can Rerum cognoscere causas, that is, know the causes of things, and by feeling
of the pulse, judge, and discern of the disease.

The causes then from whence the churches slumber proceeded, were (especially)
worldly prosperity, and cares, as likewise earthly delights, and pleasures;
which how greatly they hinder, yea and many times choke all zeal, and
sanctification, appears manifestly by the third sort of hearers, which are
resembled to seed sown amongst thorns, they indeed hear the word, and after
their departure to their domestical occasions, they are choakea with cares,
Luke 8. Ver. 14.
and with riches, and voluptuous living, and bring forth no fruit. The sense
hereof is, that even as thorns, and other hurtful incombrances do choke the
corn (that is otherwise prosperous) whiles it is growing to a stem or stalk:
so corrupt motions of the flesh do prevail in the hearts of men, and overcome
faith: so that it does suppress, and oppress the power and working of
heavenly doctrine before it be come to his full ripeness. And therefore it
stands every man upon, to pull these manifold thorns out of his heart,
unless he would have Gods word utterly choked in him. Prosperity, and
excessive pleasures and delights, corrupted, and effeminated most wise Solomon,
that at length he was drawn to commit idolatry himself (as some interpret) or
at least) to grant a toleration and permission of it to his outlandish wives,
1. Reg. 11.
and concubines, if not to others. And because the spiritual sleep, and
slumber, which has allusion to that which is natural, does and will, by way
of comparison with it, more fully and effectually appear, let us a little
consider the similitude, and proportion that is betwixt them both.

Natural sleep is the rest or binding of the senses, and the suspension, or
interruption of the spirits, caused by certain sumes and vapors, which by
reason of plenty of meat and drink, ascend from the stomach into the head and
brain, and thereby stopping the roots of the sinews, or nerves, are by the
animal spirits carried unto the seats of the outward senses: so a spiritual
sleep or slumber, is a ceasing, or stopping of the spiritual senses, so that
the spiritual eye, for the time, cannot see, nor the ear attend, nor the
palate taste, the mouth speak, nor the stomach desire, or digest, nor the hand
work, nor the feet go, (as in a deep sleep): or but very faintly, and
weakly (as in a winking, or nodding slumber) such as that of the church is in
this place, and it is caused from the fumes, and vapors of earthly
prosperity, cares, and pleasures, honors and glory, which ascend from the
distempered affections into the mind, and judgment, and so stay, and suspend
the spiritual senses, and cause sleeping, slumbring, nodding, winking, etc.

But because these temptations are not so frequent as fearful, nor so
delightsome as dangerous and deceitful, in so much that the most virtuous,
wise, learned, religious, and prudent men in the world have hereby been
entised, and entangled, I will for the better laying open of them insist, and
in order handle every particular branch.

First touching wordly ioylitie and prosperity, it pusfeth up the heart with
pride, and contempt of others; and it steals away the heart from God, 2 Samuel
15. 6.
as Absolon did the peoples from his father David; and here-vpon Paul advises
Timothy to charge his rich hearers that they be not high minded, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
and that they trust not in vncertaineriches but in the living God: And to this
effect, the Lord warns the Isralites that when they have eaten, and filled
themselves, when they have built goodly houses, and dwelt in them, when their
beasts and sheep are increased, Deuteronomy. 8. 14.
and their gold multiplied, that then their heart be not lifted up, no they
forget the Lord their God. In prosperity, David committed adultery, and
murder, and numbered the people in the pride of his heart. Luke. 15.
In his prosperity the prodigal child departed from his fathers house, and
wasted all his substance by riotous, and intemperate living. From hence also
sprang the sins of Sodom; unnatural lust, pr^de, fullness of bread,
abundance of idleness, and contempt of the poor. Ezechi. 16.


The Princes of Israel being at ease in Sion, ^ut far from them the evil
day, Amos. 6. 3. 4. 5
as though Gods plagues should never ceaze upon them: They lay upon their beds
of Iuory, fed, and fared deliciously; had all varitie of Music, wines, and
ointments; Put none of them was sorry forie for the affliction of Joseph, Verse
6.
that is of their brethren in captivity.

The rich man in the Gospel, whose ground brought forth plentiful fruits,
and whose thoughts were altogether set upon the enlarging of his barnes and
buildings, Luke. 12. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
applauded, and soothed up himself in his security, as though he had obtained
a long lease, or patent of it, but that night was his sou'e fetche^ (by the
Devil) from him.

The warmth of Ca^phas his fire, and the occasion of ill company there, Mark.
4. Ver. 54.
induced Peter to deny his Lord and master. The world bewitched Demas, and
made Judas a traitor. By reason of worldly prosperity, and eager and earnest
pursuit after it, it is, that many Anassims, Nimrods and Termagonts of the
earth, oppress and insult over the poor afflicted and innocent; and as the
great ^ishes devour the smaller, so do the rich the mean and poorer sort.
Hence it is, that many of them, join house to house, Isay 5. 8.
and lay field to field, until there be no place (and elbow room for the
poor), that they may be placed (alone) by themselves in the midst of the
earth. This avarice and unquenchable thirst of the Ahabs of this world, that
will never be content until they have by hook or crook got Naboth his
Vineyard, is the common sin of the land, not decreasing or going back ten
degrees, as the Sun in the time of Ezech as, but prevailing like Noah his
deluge, until all be drowned. The poor cry, and no man (almost) for the time
regards or righteth them, but the Lord in heaven beholds all, and his eye
liddes try the children of men. And as for these encrochers and enclosers, GOD
at length frustrateth them of their hope and expectation, Isai. 5. verse. 9.
pulls down their houses, leaves them void of inhabitants and tenants,
Verse. 10.
and curses their grounds and fields, that they answer not the labor and cost
bestowed upon them.

From the abuse of ease and prosperity, likewise, arises riot, pride,
excess, and phantasticknesse of apparel amongst all sorts and ranks of men,
and especially in women; who like to them, yea and exceeding them much in
Isaias his time, Isai. 3. verse 16. 17 etc.
beyond their degree, and all comely gravity; affect and follow after
bravery, sumptuousnes, garishnesse, strange, foreign, monstrous and ridiculus
fashions, much unbeseeming Christian profession and the daughters of GOD, who
should rather labor to be inwardly garnished then outwardly trimmed; and
whose attire should be holy, decent, comely, and rather within then above
their calling. But this malum (I fear) is i^ mebicabile and nolime tangere,
the fault of Court, City and Country. But for all this, God will and does
punish this pride, many times with shame and captivity, and many times with
poverty and beggerie, and he will call them to account for spending so much
time trifling and tricking themselves, and for improouing, racking and
inhauncing their rents, to the ruin of their poor tennants, and all to
maintain their pomp, and curious bravery.

From the worlds prosperity and the desire and lusting after it, proceed so
many ungodly, unequal and unprosperous marriages. Here it is, that sometimes
men of sort and place yea and those that do or, at least seem to prosesse
Religion very sincerely, will for lands and livings, match their sons and
daughters with Atheists and half Papists, as though religion should stoop to
riches, and as though Godliness would sooner be gotten then wordly goods. But is
this marrying in the Lord? will iron and clay cleave together? and can any good
come of so bad beginning? To conclude the great red dragon with h^s tail, that
is not so much with his ceremonies, inventions, and traditions, (albeit v^le,
and antechristian) as with his pomp, promises, preferments, dignities, drew
the third part of the stars from heaven, Genesis 15.
and cast them to the earth. By the stars according to the phrase of
scripture are meant principal and eminent persons both in church, Genesis 37.
and commonwealth, that were drawn by this bait from the heavenly truth,
Apoc. 1.
and divine studies, to intend wholly earthly, and transitory things, and to
become vassals, and slaves unto Antechrist.

Seeing that worldly prosperity, and welfare, Use. 1.
(though not properly in his own nature, but accidentally through man's
corruption) breeds, and brings the before named, and many other evils with
it, as we also of this blessed Island can for many years by wo^ull experiments
testify; for from hence has proceeded so much Atheism, so great neglect of
Gods worship, such contempt of the word, such profanation in many places of
Gods Sabbath, such abuse of the Sacraments, such blasphemy, such oppression,
and so infinite enclosures, such a night upon many Prophets, etc. We must
therefore beware of the inffection, and poison hereof, Apoc: 17. 4.
and decline it, as we would, in a another case, Apoc. 17.
the whore of Babilons golden cup in her handful of abominations, and
filthiness of her for^ication. Let our treasure be in heaven, not upon the
earth let us not build upon outward prosperity, for this is but a sandy
foundation; neither let us trust unto it, for it is as a reed, or rotten
post, and will soon fail us, let us not set our heart upon it, but upon
God, our hope, and our confidence for ever, who will never fail, nor forsake
us. Let it be our servant, and subject, and tributary to us as the Cananites
were to Solomon; but let it not be our master, and commander: for that were a
base, and preposterous course, then might we say (as Sollomon in another case
says) I have seen servants on h^rses, Eccles. 10. 7.
and Princes walking as servants on the ground. Vs^. 2.
Seeing that wordly prosperity is not the true contenting, and ^uerlasting
treasure, peculier and proper only to the Saints, and servants of God; but it
is earthly, vain, deceitful transitory, and common to the wicked with the
good, yea the wicked enjoy it (though as usurpers only before God,) commonly
in greater measure then the godly; we must not rest and settle our affections
upon it, but if we be risen with Christ, seek the things above. God who is
all sufficient, must be our portion, and if our riches any manner of way
alienate, or withdraw us from him, or his service, we must cast them away as
the Mariners in a tempest cast their wares into the Sea: Better to loose all
with the Apostles, and poor afflicted Hebrews, and to gain Christ our
heavenly treasure, who is the fountain of all happiness: Then to win the
world, and loose heaven, and make shipwreck of our own souls. This is not to
change (...), that is golden armor for brazen as Diomedes in Homer did with
Gla^cus: but it is to exchange ease for eternity, the world for heaven, and
the Devil for Jesus Christ.

For as much as riches, and prosperity in themselves, and especially to the
godly who know how to use them, Use. 3.
are not evil, but good blessings of God, and they are given and lent us of
GGD to dispose of them as good Steward^, to good ends, and upon right uses;
we must therefore at the commandment of GOD, and following the worthy
presidents of Abraham, Lot, I^b, the Noble Sunamite, ^^ad^ah, Nehem^as, Levy,
Zachaus, the Centurion, Cornelius, Dorcas, Gaius, and many more in Scripture,
and in all ages sithence, with our temporals, and outward riches, relieve the
distressed, feed the hungry, intertaine strangers, nourish and maintain the
Prophets, and ministers of GOD, feast the poor provide for the fatherless,
and widows, advance religion, further learning, and do good to the common
wealth, and place where God has seated us. Then shall our riches, and
prosperity be sanctified unto us, and be means to procure comfort to our
souls, and strength to our faith here: and afterward add to our glory in
the kingdom of heaven. For according to the measure of our faith, and
well-doing, shall God in favor, and mercy reward us with further glory, and
happiness in the world to come. To end this point, shall an Heathen writer, yet
Prince of Philosophers say. Arist. 1.
Thou shall love God, Metaphy.
if thou shall imitate him in this, that thou may do good to all, and hurt
to none: and shall not we having the light of grace, the warrant of Gods word,
the examples and practice of all his Saints, and worthies, and so singular,
and precious promises laid before our eyes, much more carefully, and
conscionably put it in execution? Otherwise undoubtedly, our riches, our gold,
our silver, our lands, livings, possessions, revenues will be but matter, and
fuel of our just, and greater condemnation at the last day. (...) 5. 4.


And thus much of prosperity, and the uses of it.
The second cause, 2 cause worldly cares
or occasion, of the Churches slumber, and security, is worldly thoughts,
cares, and desires, and this has some affinity with the former, and many
times does follow it. The effects hereof are, as diverse so dangerous, as
manifold, so most miserable. They distract the mind, and like wild horses
draw it and drive it this way, and that way, and therefore are called (...),
that is distracting cares.

They choke the word of God, and make it unprofitable. For a man that is full
of worldly cares, and thoughts, has his wits a wooll-gathering (as the
common proverb is) when he should attend to better matters, his mind is on his
halfe-penny, and all his zeal is for Diana the great Goddess of the
Ephesians, when it serves for the maintaining of his trade, and not upon GODS
word, which is the food of the soul that indureth to eternal life. When he
is gone from hearing the word, John. 6. ye. 27.
he either forgets all, or (at least) neglects all, and practices nothing,
for it is impossible for a man to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles, or to expect any good from such.

Secondly, worldly sorrow, that is for loss of commodities, and goods, or for
sense, and ferae of evil, breeds death, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
that is causes desperation, and by consequence death: It is the Heathens
sin to be distrustfully careful; and to say what shall we eat, or what shall
we drink, or wherewith shall no be clothed? But we must commit our ways
to GOD, Math. 6. (...). 2. ^
cast all our care upon him, who cares, and provides for us, and be content
with our estate; for GOD has made a promise, that he will never fail, nor
forsake us. Will the LORD feed the Ravens that cry unto him, and will he not
feed his children? will he nourish the wicked his enemies, Heb. 13. 5.
and will he not much more feed his friends, and beeloued? shall he so
gloriously cloth the Lillies of the field, and will he not much more apparel
those that serve him, and depend upon him continually?

Lastly they that desire to be rich (says Saint P^ule) fall into many
temptations, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
and snares, and fall into marynoisome, and foolish lusts, which drown men in
perdition, and destruction. And in the end of the next verse he adds they
err from the faith, and pierce themselves thorough with many sorrows. Now the
Apostles meaning in this place is not, that riches are (properly) the cause of
the evils here mentioned, but only the inordinate appetite, and desire of
man. The temptations into which hereby private men fall into are many:
strayning, and stretching their consciences (as some do their broad clothes,
and carsies) but especially in the ministers of whom the Apostle specially
speaks, they are so blinded many times with covetousness, that they refuse
to do, and defend nothing be it never so absurd, so soon as the hope of
money, and profit has bleered, and blinded their eyes. And as touching faith,
they that are over troubled with worldly cares soon fall, and revolt from it,
as we have Demas for an example. Lastly they are sundry times horribly
tormented in conscience, as it befalls unto desperate men: To these sorrows
may be added suites in law, losses, hostilities, dangerous bargains, and the
like.

But some men will (perphaps) object, and say I have a great family, Obie.
and many children to sustain, and the world is hard, and I do no man open
wrong, therefore it is lawful for me thus to carke, and care, to toil, and
moile, or else I know not how to live, but I must be enforced to borrowe, beg,
or steal.

First albeit it be lawful, Ans.
and necessary for a man carefully to keep the goods, which he has gotten,
and to employ them to necessary, and profitable uses: and albeit the thoughts,
and hand of the diligent bring abundance, Pro. 5. ver. 16. 17.
and poverty comes upon the idle person, as one that trauelleth by the way,
and necessity like an armed man; Prou. 21. 17.
and he that does not provide for his own, and namely for them of his
household denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel; and albeit every man
must follow his calling; yet notwithstanding, thoughttaking, distrustful care,
and toiling, and moyling continually with labor and grief is not hereby
warranted, but rather reproved, and in many other places of scripture totally
condemned. For first no man can hereby add one cubite to his stature, much
less to his life.

Secondly men hereby show themselves more like Paynims, Math. ^. 32.
and Gentiles who only seek after these earthly things, then like Christians,
who waiting for the glorious resurrection of the body, and eternal life,
should not take such carking care for this mortal, and miserable life.

Thirdly worldly cares, and the sincere serving of God, are so opposite, and
contrary that a man cannot intend both together, he cannot serve GOD, and
mammon; and therefore so much as a man adds to his thoughtfull care, so much
he detract^th from his hope, and confidence in God. Fourthly we are servants in
our heavenly Fathers house, and therefore he will kindly, Hebr. 13.
and lovingly provide that which shall be good for us. And as for borrowing, so
it be within our ability, P^^l. 37. ve 21
and with a mind, and conscience to repay it, is upon just occasion lawful.
And as for begging, if we serve God we shall never beg, or if it sometimes
should so fall out through ino^itable losses, Psalm. 37 ve. 25
and through the disorder of commonwealths, yet we shall never be for saken
of God. Lastly they that trust in God, and carefully, and thirstily walk in
their calling shall be so far from stealeing, that they shall either be more
enabled to give then to rece^ue, or (at least) being contented with that they
have, and making the Lord their portion, they shall be far from any such
unlawful practice.

Let us therefore beware that we do not with the Gentiles, Use. 1.
or with those that want faith in Gods providence with so egar appetites, and
thoughtfull cares seek after these outward, and earthly things, as though they
were the chief good; but before all things, and with all study, and endeavor
seek after heavenly, and spiritual things, as the most principal blessings,
and the true riches of man, and then, as for all other things God will cast the^
upon us as an advantage, or overplus, we not careing, or looking for the^.

Secondly let us not headily, Use. 2.
and over hastily vex, and torment our selves with the expectation, and
thinking upon things to come, like unto those that vainly imagine, and dream
of diverse afterclaps, Math. 6. 34.
calamities, and crosses to ensue. For present distresses, and difficulties
bring unto us troubles enough, and therefore we have no reason to multiply
care and misery by taking thought for that which is to come. And to finish,
and absolve this point, very Heathens condemn this carking care for future
events. Quids^ futurum, cras fugequerere, that is forbear to enquire what
shall be done to morrow. And (as Cicero says) meditationem fut^ri mali etc. the
thinking upon an evil to come, and that, perhaps will not come at all, is
foolish: that every evil is greeuious, and painful when it is once come.

Lastly we must commit, Use. 3.
or (according to the original) roll our way upon the Lord, that is, we must
in hope, and patience commit the issue, and event of all our actions, and
affairs to his divine providence, and disposition, and unload all our cares,
and labors into Gods bosom. We must also trust in him; Psalm. 37. 5.
that is persuade our selves that we are governed of God, and pray also to be
governed by him, and then he will bring it to p^sse, that is grant an happy,
and prosperous success; and not suffer our hope to be frustrate, as he
justly punishes the infidelity of the children of this world. For otherwise
our life, and calling cannot be ordered, and directed by man's diligence, Ier.
10.
and industry, for except the Lord build and oraer the house they labor in
vain that build it, therefore in so great weight of business, and dangers
we stand in continual need of the presence, Psalm. 137. 1.
and help of GOD.

And thus much touching worldly cares.
Now we are come to the third cause, 3. Part.
and occasion of the Churches slumber, and security, and that is, that she to
much addicted her self, Earthly pleasures.
and slacked the raines to earthly delights, and pleasures: which are of
marvelous force to rock, and lull men a sleep in the cradle of security. For
even as we see that natural sleeping, and slumbering is many times procured
by singing, music, rubbing, sweet broathes, and such delightsome things:
Even so the sleep, and slumber of the soul is often caused, not only by the
use of pleasures, and delights that are in themselves unlawful, which rather
work the death, then the slumber of the soul, but also (as here is intended)
by the unseasonable and immoderate use, and following of sportes, delights, and
recreations that are in themselves things merely indifferent, and therefore
lawful to be used, or foreborne. Examples, and proofs hereof we have many
in holy scripture. Amos. 6.
The Princes of Israel in Amos time gave themselves wholly to delicacie, wines,
feasting, music etc. and hereupon thought not upon their captivity at hand,
much less pitied the distressed Estate of their afficted brethren; but hereof
I have spoken before, Wise Solomon that felt, and found by woeful experience
the poysonfull infection of pleasures, pronounces laughter to be madness,
Ecle. 2. 2.
and all pleasure to be but vanity.

The Jews in Isaias his time, bathing, and soaking themselves in their
pleasures did not consi^er the w^rke of God, that is they did not heed, Isay.
5. ver. 12.
nor take notice of his judgments at hand. The baits of pleasure, and a
prodigal mind withdrew the lost child from his fathers house, and protection,
and at length brought him to shame, Luke. 15.
and extreme poverty.

It was one of the sins of the old world before the general deluge, and of
Sodom, and the Cities adjoining before their destruction from heaven, and it
is one of the maine sins that now does, and shall reign in the world, Christ
his coming to judgment, namely pleasures, ^nities, delights. The particulars,
whereof were, eating, drinking, marrying wi^es, Luke 17. 26. 27. 28.
and gi^ing in marriag^. Hereunto is added sur^etting, Luke 21. 34.
and drunkenesse, of which sins our S^uiour in Luke does so warn us. By the
former example our Saviors meaning is, that men shall be so taken up, and
possessed with the pleasures, and profits of this present life, as if not
change, and alteration were to be looked for. whereas otherwise eating,
drinking, marrying, etc. are not in themselves unlawful, (for they serve for
man's necessity, and comfort) unless men excessiuely, or altogether hereunto
addicted, should grow insensible of Gods judgments, or shutting their eyes
should run into all licentiousness, as though there were no God in Heaven
that would take vengeance on them: And as for those vile and damnable sins of
surfeiting, and drunkenness, what hurt they bring to the body, what lauishment
to the goods, what abuse of the creatures, what discredit to a man's good name,
what decay to the wit, and understanding, what ill example to the world, what
scandal to the godly, what offense to God, and what disstruction to the soul,
daily, and lamentable experience shows? Paul says that the widow living in
pleasure is dead being alive, 2 Timothy 6. 5.
is she is dead being idle, and serving for no use.

Lastly it is one of the sins of the whore of Babylon, and cause of her
ruin, yea a forerunner of it, to live in pleasure, to sit as a Quee^e,
Apoc. 18. Verse. 7.
to persuade her self that she is no widow, and that she shall see no
mourning. These pleasures if we do not beware of them, and wisely and soberly
use them, are as baits to intise us, snares to entangle us, a delectable
frenzy to beguile us, thorns to prick, and goare us, Ulysses his Syrenes to
turn us into swine, and beasts, the fuel of concupiscence; finally they
bring a spiritual lethargy, it is both forgetfullnes, and a slumber upon the
soul, and the infection of the wit like the biting of an Aspe which casts
the person that is bitten in a sweet sleep, Use. 1.
out of which he never recouereth. The use of this point serves to check, and
condemn the practice of those especially that having lands, livings, and
possession^ spend their time in pleasures and sports, but not in readi^^ the
scriptures, in perusing good books, in singing of psalms, nor in being
instruments of doing good. Hereupon they like wax are apt to receive any form
of religion saving the truth, and no marvel, for he that makes no conscience
of his pleasures, and of directing his life, will make no conscience of true
religion; for he loves his pleasures more then God. And answerably hereunto
Nimrod, 1 Timothy
and Esa^ are taxed and noted for their hunting, Nimrod a great hunter before
the Lord, but an oppressor, Esau an hunter, but a hairy, and a wild man, and a
persecutor of his brother.

Ob, But is not hunting lawful?

An. Yes if it be not upon the Sabbath days, and be in moderation. Secondly if
the same persons be as careful, and dilligent according to their calling, and
occasions to hunt the Romish Gray Fox, and all his cubs, Jesuits, Seminaries,
Priests, Papists, Recusants, that devour the vines, that is, corrupt and
destroy the Churches: Here is good game, sport, pastime, here is pleasure and
profit: Otherwise to hunt, and kill the silly Hare, and the Dear that do none
or little harm, and to let these stinking, subtle, and cruel Foxes alone,
is both dishonor to God, and shame to themselves, dangerous both to Church
and common wealth.

Ob. Is not beare-baiting, and cock-fighting lawful and allowable?

An. No, for it maintains, yea, and increases the enmity, and opposition
between the creatures, which man's sins brought first into the world: Isai.
11.
And therefore they should rather labor to reconcile, then to set the
creatures at jar, and rather lament then to sport themselves when they see
them one to rend and devour another: Yet notwithstanding if they will have some
proportionable sport wherein to recreate themselves, let them first like
prudent Paul who for the preserving of himself set the Scribes, Act. 19.
and Pharasies at difference; so let them for the defense of themselves, and
the weakening of the Papists, ours, and their adversaries, show their best wit,
skill, and endeavor to set these Midianites at enmity against themselves, by
showing the opposition of the late Papists with the ancient, the Jesuits with
the seculer Priests, and one Papist with an other, yea one, and the same
Papist many times with himself; as two excellent, and worthy Divines Master
Doctor Willet, and Master Doctor Morton the one in his terrastilon, and the
other in his prima et secunda Ap^logiae Catholicae part, have most notably
attempted and begun.

Secondly let them rather, and upon far better ground, and undoubted
recreation and comfort, labor and endeavor in their own selves, and souls,
to work, and breed enmity and war between the flesh and the spirit, and by
all holy means to continue, and further it, for as long as this battle, and
conflict lasts, there is grace in the heart: and when this cease, faith,
and grace determines. Let them strengthen, arm, and encourage the spirit, and
disarme and weaken the flesh, and sin, that the spirit may triumph, and the
flesh be subdued; Here is sport that will end in greater pleasure, here is
matter of exercise that will not undo, or hurt us, but enrich, and make us all
blessed. But it is much to be feared that most of those that are so carried away
with humane vanities, and these cruel sportes; little know, and discern what
this battle between the flesh, and the spirit means, much less are they
trained up, and beaten in it.

Use. 2. Secondly we must keep such a moderation, and temper in the use of
lawful pleasures, we that have wi^es must be as though we had none, 1. Cor.
6. 28.
so was it with good Vrias who for the time that his service in David's wars
lasted, made a conscience to go into his wife, least the pleasure of her might
perhaps make him more Remiss, 2. Sam. 11. ve. 11. and 13.
and unwilling to perform that warlike charge imposed upon him: we that
reioyee must be as though we reto^sed not, we must use them, as Jonathan
tasted of the hunny, only for his necessary refreshment, 1. Sam. 14. 27.
and as Canis e Nito bibit, a taste and away. Finally we must qualify, and
temper them with the fear of God, that we be not seduced by them, or (at
least) made more unwilling, unfit, and unapt for better exercises, and actions.

And thus much of pleasures, and their uses.
A fourth, and last reason of the Churches s^curitie, and slumbering in
general, and of the special members in particular, 4. cause: affectation of
hon^ur, titles, glory.
may be, and is oftentimes the desire, affectation of honors, titles, and of
the glory, and applause of the world; which many seeking, and withal
obtaining, judge of themselves rather by the opinion, and esteem of others,
then by the sound knowledge, and experimental Judgment. Apoc. 3. Verse 1. 2.
Hence it was that the Church of Sardis had a name that she lived, and yet was
dead. Of this sort are those that have a form of godliness, 2. Tim. 3. 4.
but deny the power of it.

The Devil (albeit twice before repulsed) at length tempted our Savior Christ
by showing him (in a vision perhaps) all the kingdoms of the world, Math. 4. 8.
and the glory of them, hoping thereby to blind his eyes, and to prevail
against him, as he does against many. Moreover Christ reproouing the Scribes,
and Pharasies for their vanity, and ambition, in that they hunted after
human glory, and neglected the glory that was due unto God, John. 5. 44.
says he how can ye believe that receive honor one of an other, and seek
not the honor that comes from God only? And this affecting, and desire to
gain, and retain human titles, and glory is one great cause that detaineth
many of the Papists from admitting of the purity of the Gospel, and it is
some occasion of hardening them in their Idolatry. It is said of many of the
chief rulers in the time of our Savior. Nevertheless even among the chief
Rulers many believed in him but because of the Phara^ies they did not confess
him, least they should be cast out of the Synagogue, John. 12. 42. ^3.
for they loved the praise of men more the the^ glory of God. Toss, harm.
It is to be thought ^ not withstanding these chief Rulers (amongst whom was
doubtless Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus were endued with true faith; but
it was for the time very weak and young, which God bears withal, and in
process of time cures and perfiteth. Ambitious vanity possessing Absolon,
moved him to seek to deprive his aged father David of his Crown and Kingdom.
The assenting unto the flattering and blasphemous acclamation, and applause of
the multitude caused Herod to be smitten of the Angel of the Lord imm^diately,
Acts 12, 23.
because he gave not the glory to God, so that he was eaten of worms and
gave up the Ghost, and it made the scribes, and Pharasies to delight, and
content themselves with an external, and only seeming righteousness; who in
their fasting* pra^ers, alms, titles, robes, salutations, aimed at, only the
praise, and commendation of men, and therefore are by our Sa^iour justly, Math.
6. 16.
and often taxed, and checked for it. They had the reward that they sought for,
viz. the praise of men, but they had no reward, or approbation from GOD. In so
much that Christ says. I say unto you except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the scribes, Math. 5. 20.
and Pharasies ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

The pomp, and applause of the world is nothing else but a vapor, or fume
soon consumed, it is like a fether tossed in the air from month to mouth, then
which nothing is more light, vain, and inconstant; and the bravery, and
flaunting glory of the world is nothing else the^ an Idol, and a vain thing,
Psalm. 73. 20.
yea like unto a dream wherewith for a time a man does delight himself,
whilst that he conceiueth great hopes of riches, honors, preferments, and
renown: but when he waketh all his hopes perish, and come to nothing.

Obi. But is it not lawful for a man to seek to seek to get a good name,
credit, report, and estimation amongst men, and when he has once gotten it to
maintain, and keep it.

Ans. Yes without question for whatsoever things be of good report if there
be any virtue, It is lawful to get and preserve a good name.
if there be any praise, we must think on these things. Secondly that which
GOD promises, and bestows upon his children as a special blessing that they
may moderately seek, Phil. 4.
and desire, but he promises to honor, yea, and honors them that honor
him. 1. Sam. 2. 30.


The principal reason that must induce, and draw us hereunto, is, and must
be not our own glory, but that by our means the Gospel, and the name of
Christ may be well spoken of; for the good name of Christians is an ornament and
credit to the Gospel. And upon this ground Paul exhorts servants to
subjection, Tit. 2 v.
faithfulness, and obedience that they may adorn the doctrine of GOD their
Savior in all things.

Lastly our Savior wills, and exhoreth us saying. Let your light so shine
before men that they may see your good works, Math. 5. 16.
and glorisie your father which is in heaven. Therefore it is lawful to have a
diligent consideration, love, and care for a good name, for so much the Greek
word (...). used before Phil. 4. ver. 8. imports. But here certain rules
are to be observed. Ce^ten cautions.
First we must beware that in no wise we detract, and derogate ought from the
honor, and glory of GOD (as the Papists do who attribute, and ascribe
merit, satisfaction, and justification to their own works and inventions,
and not to the grace of GOD only.) for then they that despise GOD shall be
despised, 1. Sam. 2. 30.
and he is so jealous, and zealous of his own honor that he cannot abide it
to be given to any other: therefore we must in all things earnestly seek for
the glory of GOD only, and not our own. Math. 6. 5.


Secondly we must refrain from all manner of sin, and wickedness, for
otherwise as one Fly does corrupt, Ecclesi 10. 1.
and cause to stink the ointment of the Apothecary: so does one sin, or vice
obscure, and eclipt his name that is in estimation, for wisdom and for glory.

Thirdly we must repent us of al our sins, P(...). 10. 7.
and we must practice justice, Mark* 14. 9.
and excel in good works. For then our memorall shall be blessed, and then that
which we have done, shall be spoken of, and remembered with honor.

Lastly we must not delight in the oblique, or disgrace of any, Math 7. 2.
but have a special regard to think, and speak well of others. For with
what, judgment we judge, we shall be judged.

And this much touching the resolution of this doubt.

Use. 1. Seeing that the inordinate desire, and affectation of human glory,
popular praise, and hunting after titles, and honor, do even in the best,
sometimes so dim and darken faith, and make them secure, and careless in
Gods matters, we must not please our selves in, much less dote upon these
outward, and vain things, least afterward being dispoyled of them we be
like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. 20.
who feed only upon these outward things, and foresee no further.

Use. 2. We must first, and principally approve our hearts, ways and
consciences unto GOD, and seek to be inwardly holy and not outwardly only
that our praise may not be of men but of God: Rom 2. 29.
for not he that praises himself, (no nor whom men always praise who may
be deceived) is not allowed, 2. Cor. 10. 18.
but he whom the Lord praises. And Secondly when we labor and endeavor to
approve our selves unto men, and especially to the true servants of GOD, if
they do praise, and testify well of us, we must not despise, and neglect
their commendation and approbation, but take it as a fruit and effect of our
well-doing; and albeit they give no such great report and commendation of us,
we must be content, and hold it sufficient, that GOD and our sanctified
conscience, 2. Cor, 1. 12.
testifies, and bears witness of our Godly pureness, and weldoing. 1. Cor.
1. 3.

And thus much of the four causes, and occasions of the Churches sleepiness
and security.
Thus we see by the example of this Church in the Canticles; The Church
subject to ^in and error.
as of diverse others, it is subject, as to other sins, defects and errors,
so to a kind of winking or slumbering even in the good and prosperous estate
of it. But in this place the Church was in no dead sleep, much less had her
faith extinct, for she discerned and took notice of her infirmity, which
she could not otherwise have done if she had either soundly slept, or had
wandered in darkness. Ioh. 12. 35.
Which being so, we are to make a twofold use of it.

Use. 1. First we must not for certain defects, infirmities, wants, and some
small spots and blemishes, either in doctrine or discipline, much less
forsake, and deny the Church that holds firmly and purely the foundation.
Neither must we for certain spots, balcknesse, defects and deformities,
doubt of much less despair of our own estate and salvation so long as our
heart is right with God and we are sound in the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ. For Christ has made a satisfaction to Gods justice for all our sins,
and there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ, in whom sin albeit
it always dwell, yet it never swaieth and reigns. And as for sins of
ignorance; weakness and infirmity the Lord pardons, Psalm. 103. v. 12 and 13.
and passes by them in his sons and servants.

And as a loving husband will not take away his love from his wife, A simil^ude.
nor cast her off for every fault and want, so long as she keeps her love
entirely, and sincerely to him. So GOD will not cast off his love, nor forsake
his Church or any particular member of it, for special wants and frailties in
particular commandementes, so long as they by faith cleave unto him, and
generally labor to please him.

Use. 2. Secondly seeing that sleepiness, drowsinesse, negligence and
securitic in the Church does not please God, but offend him and cause his
Majesty both by inward snibbes, yea and sense of his indignation: and also
oftentimes by sundry and fearful judgments and thunderclaps (especially when
it is grown to any deadness of heart and is hardly sensible of her decay and
decline) does labor to rowse and awaken them as he has of latter years this
Island by clamor and still triumpeting of his ministers; by dangerous, and
near effecting of the Papists gunshot; shogging and shaking of the earth under
us, noise of the winds, and roaring and inundation of the waters, eclipting of
zeal in many, and threatenings pronounced against us for our abuse, neglect
and contempt of his holy Gospel, that he will send and bring upon us not a
famine of bread, Am^s. 1^. 12.
but of Gods word: we all of us must take knowledge thereof, repent of our
sins betime, zep 2. V 1^2.^
fan our selves before the decree come forth, meet the LORD in the way,
yea and kiss the Son Christ Jesus, Psalm. 2. 12.
by true subjection, faith and obedience, Psalm. 2. 12.
least he be angry and so perish in the way, when his wrath shall suddenly
burn. Governors of the Church.
Let the Governors, Rulers and those that have the greatest eminency and
authority in the Church look dilligently to their charge for the remouall and
redress of ignorance, error, Atheism and Popish superstition, and for the
advancement and countenancing true Religion and virtuous living. Passor^s and
Preachers.
Let the Reverend Prelates and Pastors of the Church, Ministers, and Preachers
of the word beware they do not Perform Gods work negligently; let them wisely
and courageously speak and admonish the wicked of his way, lest God require
his blood at their hands. Ez^chi. 33. 8.
Let them keep back nothing but show unto their people all the council of
God, Acts. 20. 26. 27.
that they may be pure from the blood of all men. And let them preach the
word, be instant in season, and out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort with all
long suffering, and Doctrine. For the time will come when they will not suffer
wholesome Doctrine: but having their ears itching, shall after their own
lusts get them a heap of teachers: 2 Timothy 3. 2. 3. 4.
And shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fabl^s.

Thirdly let the civil Magistrates, Magistrates, and ciu^ll Rulers.
whether Superiors or Inferiors defend and assist the Pastors, and Ministers,
let them draw out the sword of Justice and cut down sin, let them
promote true religion, root out error, and Idolatry. Let them execute Justice
and judgment without respect of persons, let them spare, and defend the
innocent, let them provide for the wants of the poor, let them shine as lights
before the people by all godly and virtuous example, and finally let them, (as
far as their power and authority will extend) take order and do their
endeavor that the people under them may lead a quiet, and a peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
Finally let the people and subjects fear and serve God, Peoples duty.
repent of their sins, honor their King, obey and be subject to authority,
love and reverence their Ministers, submit themselves to the word of GOD, and
live in brotherly love, and unity, one with another, which GOD almighty
grant for jesus Christ's sake Amen.

And thus much of the Churches fault and infirmity.
2. SECTION.
NOw it follows to speak of her confession and acknowledgement of her
slumbring and carelesnes, contained and couched in these words I sleep. From
whose example and practice we are taught without all denying, Confession of
sin.
suppressing, or lessening our sins, to make a willing, and ingenuous
confession of them all unto allmighty God; to the intent that God may forgive,
and forget them, and remove or mittigate the ^uills and punishments that they
have brought upon us. For further confirmation and illustration hereof; we
have both commandment in S^ripture, and also public and private exercise of
it. The Lord by the Prophet Hosea Hosea, 13.
exhorting the Isralites to repentance prescribes them a set form of
repentance saying. Take unto you words and turn to the Lord and say: Verse. 3.
Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously etc. Verse. 4.
As^ur shall not save us etc. neither will we say any more to the works of
our hands (ye are) our Gods.

Secondly when we are exhorted to repent, and amend, we are withal exhorted
to confess our sins, for confession is as the First, so a most necessary
part of repentance. Heere-vppon Job Job. 33. 27.
says, if one say, I have sinned, and perverted righteousness and it did not
profit me. Then God will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his
life shall see the light. If we confess and for sake our sins, Pro. 28. 13.
we shall find favor. Again, if we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful
and ^ust, (Viz. in his promise) to forgive us our sins, public conteslion.
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Public examples we have in
Nehemias making a large and mournful confession of his and the peoples
sins. Nehe. 9. 5. 6. 7.


Secondly in Daniel, who in the name, and behalf of the people makes a
confession of his and the peoples, Dan. 9. 5. 6. 7.
and confesses that Justice belongs unto God, but shame and confusion to
them, etc. Thirdly of the Isralites in Isaias his time, who all acknowledge
themselves to have been as unclean things, Isai. 64. verse. 4
and their righteousness as a filthy rotten clout: and of the people in Samuel
the Prophets days; saying, I Sam. 12. 19
we have sinned in assuming us a King besides all other sins. Hereunto may
be annexed and referred the example of the Ninevites confessing their sins
unto God, Jonah. 3. verse. 8. and 9.
and of the people that came to John the Baptist to be baptized of him, Math.
3. v. 6.
confessing their sins Viz: voluntarily and in a general manner only.
Private consession.
Private practice, and presidents hereof we have in David confessing and
bewayling his folly in numbering the people, I Exodus 21. 8.
his adultery in polluting Vrias his wife, Psalm. 51. 3. 4. 5.
and his murder in causing her innocent husband, and his good subject, to be
slain in war. David before he had confessed his sins (as appears) could
find no ease day nor night, but his bones consumed, and he roared all the day:
but as soon as he in heart purposed to confess against himself his sins
unto the Lord, Psalm. 32. 3. 4. 5.
God forgave the punishment of his sin. Job. 9.
Likewise in Job who acknowledges himself to be vilde before God, and that he
cannot answer one word for a thousand. Thirdly in the Prodigal child, who
confessed that he had sinned against heaven and against God, Luke. 15.
and that he was no more worthy to be called his son. Verse. 21.
Fourthly of the contrite Publican, who would not lift up his eyes to heaven,
Luke. 1^. 13.
but smote his breast saying God be merciful unto me a sinner. Luke. 5. 8.
Fi^tly in Peter that accknowledgeth himself a sinful man, and of Paul that
in regard he had been a blasphemer, a persecutor, 1 Timothy 1. Verse. 15.
an oppressor, (albeit ignorantly) confesses himself to be the greatest
amongst sinners.

The person to whom confession is to be made is first properly and
principally GOD; Psalm. 51. 54.
for against him only have we sinned, and done evil in his sight, he alone
knows all our sins, and he alone pardons and forgiueth all our sins and
that for his own names sake, Psalm. 51. 4.
and for his Christ his ^ake, merits, suffering, and mediation. And therefore
it is folly, vanity, superstition, yea bondage and impossibility, to make
confession of al our mortal sins to a Priest (as the Papists make show of, and
require in their care confession) no commandment, no practice, no example,
hereof is extant in the sacred Scriptures, and it began not to be urged until
800. years after Christ. Secondly David and others repented, and received
remission of sins without confessing their sins in particular to any man
Psalm. 32. 2. Sam. 12. 12.

Ob. But is it lawful, and convenient some times, and in some case to confess
our sins to our Pastor, Minister, or Christian brother?

An. Yes, for James wills men to confess their sins one to another, I am 5.
and this private confession is to be made not of all known sins, but only
of that sin which troubles and vexes the conscience; or of that whereby our
neighbor is annoyed, and wronged. And that in two cases; first when ^ase and
comfort is sought for in trouble of conscience, Private confession to men when
lawful.
and here before confession be made, no help can be obtained: For as the
Physician must know the disease before he can apply the remedy, even so the
Minister, or brother cannot comfort, or council the distressed, before that he
has discovered his grief. And herein the persons to whom confession is to be
made are especially the faithful Ministers and Pastors, who for their
callings, Isai. 50. 4.
gifts, and experience, are of all men most apt and able to direct, inform,
and comfort the troubled conscience. And thus David confessed his sin to
Nathan, 2. Sam. 12. 13.
and the people to Samuel (as has been before touched.) 1 Samuel 12. 19.
Secondly we are to confess our sins to our neighbor whom we have
wronged, or offended by word or deed; that we may give some satisfaction to
him, and pacify his anger and displeasure, and so be reconciled to him. In
this case CHRIST prefers reconciliation to sacrifize, Math. 5. 23. 24.
and would have us first be reconciled to our brother, and then offer that we
left at (...) Altar.

Reasons further to move, induce, and persuade us (in the godly sorrow and
contrition of our hearts) to make confession of al our known sins unto God,
are specially these. First hereby we give glory unto God and ^ustifie him in
his word and corrections, 1. Reason. 10. 12. 27.
who the more we debase our selves before him (in respect of our sins) the
more we glorify God, John. 9. 24.
from whom nothing is hid, Psalm. 51. 4.
and the more vile, and base that we are in our own eyes the more precious and
glorious in Gods; and when we think and confess that we are lost in our
selves we are found of him. The second reason is, Psalm. 32. 5.
because unless we confess our sins before God, we can find no ease of
them, but they will more pain and torment us. The stomach that is ouercharged
with some vndisgested meats that does annoy it, A similitude.
or with Rheum or Phlegm is ^ased by a vomit: even so the soul that is
burdened with sin is eased and relieved by confession, and accusation of it
self.

Thirdly without confession, there is not, nor cannot be any true repentance,
for it is a part of it, yea the gate, door, and foundation of it, and if the
heart be holy, contrite, godly sorrowful, it cannot but manifest, and
discover it self by the confession of the mouth which speaks out of the
abundance of the heart.

The last reason is because without confession of all our known sins unto
GOD, there is no remission of sins. Prou 28. ve^.
For he that hides his sins shall never prosper, and the more we hide
them, the sooner, and more suddenly will they issue forth to our shame and
confusion, A similitude.
like as the waters the more they are dam'ed up, the more violently will they
break forth. David before he confessed his sins, 2 Samuel 12. 12.
he found not pardon. And upon his confession he was immediately pardoned.

Seeing that confession of sin, is so necessary, Use. 1.
and that it is not so easy a matter to find out all our sins, we must not
only try and examine our deeds, words, and thoughts by the strickt and
straight line and rule of Gods law, which is the discouerer, and reuealer of
sin; but because our knowledge is imperfect, and we blind, and partial in
our own cases, we must be content to have our sins ripped up and laid open by
public doctrine, 1 Cor. 14. 25.
and preaching; and endure it albeit, it never so much gall, wound, and shame
us: and also admit and allow of private, and brotherly admonition. For all
these are holy, and the ordinary means ordained and sanctified of God for our
humiliation, repentance and recovery, which whosoever neglects contemns, or
refuses, he can never truly come to the knowledge and conscience of sin,
much less repent of it, and so be saved.

Secondly we must not only confess those our sins unto God, that are more
enormous, and heinous and these Use. 2.
that are many times odious before men; but also our secret, and particular
corruptions, faults, blottes, weaknesses, infirmities, yea and also sins of
omission, and neglect especially of prayer, praise, thanksgiving unto God. And
we must have a true touch and godly sorrow for them: for the least sin in it
own nature being committed against the good and infinite majesty of God, Rom
6.
and his undefiled law deserves death. Psalm 25.
Thus David desires pardon of the sins of his youth, Psalm. 19. 11.
yea of his unknown sins. Job. 1. 5.
Thus Job offered burnt offerings for his children every day fearing least his
sons had sinned, and had blasphemed God in their hearts. Thus Paul was
afflicted and troubled in himself for his original sin, Romans 7. verse. 24.
crying out, and saying. O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death? David having only upon extraordinary advantage, 1 Samuel 24.
6.
and occasion cut of the lap of Saul's garment, Psalm. 119. 18.
was troubled in his heart. He also confesses his blindness and ignorance in
Gods matters. The Church of God in Isaias his time does acknowledge that
whereas they erred from Gods ways, Isai 63. 17.
and that their hearts were hardened from his fear, it came for their
vnthankefullnes, and that God in justice was the author of it. Lastly when they
omit good duties to God or men, or fail in the manner, and measure of them,
they make confession of it, we have failed and we have rebelled, etc. And in
another place: Lam. 3. 42.
all this plague is come upon us, as it is written in the law of Moses, Dan. 9.
13.
yet made we not our prayers before the Lord our God, etc. And of this we must
have a care to repent, because by leaving our duty unaccomplished we oftener
offend, then by sins committed: and if GOD should require it at our hands,
the smallest sin of omission it is enough to condemn us. Psol. 130. 3.
And therefore David says if thou O Lord straightly markest iniquity, who shall
stand? And again, Gal. 3. 10.
cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the law to do them. And here is a notable touchstone whereby the
children of God are discerned, and distinguished from all reprobates
whatsoever. The reprobates (and that but now and then) are touched with, and
make confession of some great, and notorious sin, as we have examples in
P^arao, in Caine, in Judas. But for their smaller sins, particular
infirmities and sins of omission, they have no touch, sense and feeling at
all. Rom 8. ver.
Contrariwise the elect, and regenerate of God, do even groan and sigh under
the burden of these lesser sins, they make confession of them, and desire to
be eased, and lightened of them, for they know that hereby they offend GOD, Romans
7. 19.
which they would in no wise do, and therefore Paul says, the goo^ thing
which I would I do not, but the evil thing which I would not do that do I:
so that here he is grieved for his particular sins both of commission and
omission, or leaving of good unperformed.

And thus much of confession and the uses thereof.
THE THIRD SECTION.
But mine heart waketh.
Having spoken of the Churches flumber and security, wherein her infirmity,
and weakness appeared: it follows that now I propound, and apply the
Antidote or remedy contained in these words. But mine heart waketh. The heart
here, which is naturally the seat, and fountain of life and motion,
principally and properly signifies, faith, whereby the Church in this her
drowsinesse, and slumbering security, waked, that is laid true hold of Christ,
and seffered not her delight in him to vanish. Some shadow and resemblance
hereof we may see, and observe in natural sleep, wherein the outward senses
rest, and cease working, but yet the phantasia or imagining part is commonly in
action and motion. Even so a true justifying faith: albeit it be for a time
obscured, and the external actions of it appear not, nor are felt and
discerned; yet the seed, root, and foundation of it always, remains and
abides. This being so, I from the authority of this place, gather this
doctrine, and conclusion viz: that, doctrine. That the faith, and other saving
graces that proceed from it and accompany it; neither fail, nor are wholly,
and finally lost in the children of GOD, no not in the greatest temptations,
falls and decaies that can possibly happen unto them, but it shall revive, and
be in time recovered, and confirmed.

The seed of eternal life may for a time be hidden in them, and not show
forth it self, yet it abides in them. 1. I^oh. 3. 9.
The fire of the spirit of GOD may be cooled yea and covered in them, but it
is never extinct. The shining Sun of righteousness by reason of the
interposition of the earth between them and it, may be eclipted, but yet it
never departs out of the firmament of their heart. They may seem for the
time to be dead trees without leaves or fruit, but they retain sap of
grace in their heart.

They outwardly may seem to themselves, and to others, to be but dross, yet
they are before GOD vessels of silver and gold. They may esteem themselves in
the time of distress, bare, yea bankerupt; and yet notwithstanding have, and
retain in their hearts, the precious marga^te, and pearl of the grace of GOD,
yea and Christ himself the treasure of eternal life. They like the two
disciples that went to Emaus, may talk together of the scriptures, Luke 24.
14l. 15, 16.
yea, and communicate, and confer with Christ himself, and yet their
spiritual eyes for a time may be so holden that they cannot know him. They
may conceive Christ in their hearts, and yet now, and then, not perceive the
motion of this heavenly Embrio. Lastly they may be cast into a swound, or
trance, in so much that no spiritual breath can be discerned in them, and yet
have life and heat at the heart.

That the truth, and soundnes of this conclusion, Viz. that Gods spirit, the
gift of faith, and saving grace in the true members of the Church, can never
perish or be utterly lost, but in time be revived, may more manifestly and
evidently appear, these Scriptures following must be he^ded and attended.

He that drinks of the water that I shall give him shall be never more a
thirst, Ioh. 4. ver. 14.
nay I shall be in him a well of water springing up to eternal life, therefore
it cannot be dried up, for it springs continually, and cease not, until it
has brought him to everlasting life. 1 John. 3. 9.
Whosoever is born of God sins not, id est does not commit that sin
against the holy Ghost, no nor other sin with delight, and continuance; for
his seed abides in him. Simon, Simon, Luke. 22 31. 3 2.
Satan has desired you to winnow you as wheat, Viz. that passes through the
riddle, the chafe remaining. But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail
not, Heb. 7. 2 5.
yea he lives always to make intercession to God for the Church. But Christ
his prayer is always heard.

Their love to God, to his word, Ioh. 11. 42.
to his Children is never lost, for much water cannot quench love, neither can
the floods drown it, Cant. 8. 7.
love does never fall away, and no marvel seeing it is a root and
foundation. 1 Cor. 13.
The calling and gifts of God are without repentance, Eph^s. 2. 17.
that is the inward calling of God, Romans 11. 29.
and his graces that concern salvation are constant, and never (wholly) taken
away; for as God is unchangeable, so are his gifts and decrees. Mal. 3. 6.
God has unto the Gentiles granted repentance unto life, Act. 11. 18.
if eternal life be the effect, and consequence of it, it can never be lost: I
says the Lord will forgive their iniquity, ^er. 3. 1. 34.
and will remember their sins no more. Therefore they can never dye out of
Gods favor, not be deprived of the grace of justification, whose sins shall
never be charged upon them. They are always green olives before God, Psalm.
1. 3.
their leaves, that is to say, their sanctification never ^adeth, 2. Tim. 1. 19.
the continue in the Apostles doctrine, and in the fellow ship of the Church;
their election is a sure foundation and certain, Col. 2. 5. 6.
they are rooted, and grounded in the faith: And lastly as their persons can
never perish, but shall be saved, so answereably cannot their gifts and graces
that are the means to bring Ephesians. 4. ver. 30.
them to eternal life. Touching their persons and so their faith, they are
sealed to the day of redemption, their names are written in the book of life,
the gates of hell cannot prevail against them, ^oh. 13. 3.
Christ loves them to the end and nothing can separate them from the love of
God, Romans 8. 38.
they are given of God to Christ to be saved, Ioh. 10. ve. 2^
and none can take them out of his hands, and 1. Pet. 1. 5.
(to conclude) they are kept by the power of GOD through faith unto salvation.

And if human testimonies, and those of most excelent and ancient divines be
to be respected, when the scriptures be so plain and plentiful, then amongst
many others the judgment of that most judicious father Saint Augustine is most
notable, who says horum ^ides quae per dilectionem operatur, profecto aut
omnino non deficit, aut siqui sunt quorum ^ides d^icit, reparatur antequam vita
ista ^initur. de correptione et gratia cap. 7. Their faith which works by
love either never fails at all, or if it do fail in any, it is repaired
again before the life be ended.

Obi. Saul, Simon Magus, Judas, Himeneus, and Alexander, fell away from faith,
made shipwreck of it, and a good conscience, and lost the spirit and grace of
GOD, therefore the elect may wholly loose their faith, and the spirit of
regeneration.

Answer. The argument or consequence follows not; these were never elected
nor ever t^uly just, or righteous before GOD. Saul was an hipocrite, persecuted
David, and died fearfully: Judas was the child of perdition, and in his best
estate he was but a these, and an hipocrite Simon Magus his heart was not
right in the sight of God howsoever he was other wise deemed, and esteemed
before men. Act. 8. 21^.
And as for P^ymeneus, and Philetus they never had true iustiying faith which
never fails but only an historical, or temporary faith which hipocrites may
have, and which in time of temptation fades, and falls away.

Ques. But how far forth may, and sometimes do the elect and regenerate loose
faith, grace, and the spirit of God?

An. First they, notwithstanding that their adoption and interest to eternal
life remains firm, and sure; yet by their sins do and may loose y^ inward
feeling of Gods favor, Hosea. 5. v. 15.
and be left to themsel^es for a time, in their troubles and afflictions,
Secondly until they repent of their sins they feel not, nor find in
themselves the outward act and effects of imputed grace. Thirdly touching
inward and inherent grace, albeit the seed, and habit of it cannot be lost
by reason of confirming and succeeding grace, yet the outward work and
apprehension of it may for a time cease and be suspended as we have examples
in David, Job, Anna, Ezechias, and others.

Ques. In the most grievous, and extreme assaults and temptations of the
children of God, what grace of God remains in them so, as that they, and
others of sincere orthodoxe judgment may be kept from despair, and conceive
good hope that they remain in Gods favor?

An. These following; the love of God, of his Son Christ, of his word, and of
all his children in general. For they never hate God, hate Christ, hate his
word, hate his children, but love and like them. Secondly they think, and
speak often of God, and his ways, desire to be reconciled unto him. Thirdly
they pray unto God, which though they cannot do always in feeling, yet they
do it in faith; and this faith without feeling is more precious, and more
highly esteemed with God then faith with feeling, for it wholly and simply
relieth upon God and his word. And herein as they be blessed that believe, and
see not, so (undoubtedly) they are most happy that trust in, and depend upon
God (...) (for the present) have no feeling. Lastly they rejoice, and find
marvelous contentment when they know or hear of the good estate and prosperity
of the church in general, or any member, or part of it in particular: and when
it goes ill either with the Church or any member thereof, they upon the notice
thereof mourn, greiue, lament; And this argues that they even in the night,
cloud, and tempest of their present affliction are lively, and feeling members
of the Church of God, because they have a sympathy, and such a mutual
compassion; and this point, that saying of Paul confirms, and strikes it (as
we use to phrase it) dead; if one member suffer all suffer with it, if one
member be had in honor all the members rejoice with it. 1. Cor. 12. 26.


Que. But God is an holy God, an hater, and a punisher of sin, one that
requires truth in the inward parts, and that we walk before him, and be
perfect, how then will he or can he, bear with such want of feeling, so many
complaints, so many defects, corruptions and wants in his children?

An. The Godly are better within then without and 1. Sam. 16. 7
GOD requires the heart more then the work, man looks on the outward
appearance, Mat. 12, v. 20
but the Lord beholds the heart. A broken heart is an acceptable sacrifice
unto him. If our faith be but as the grain of m^stard seed, yea as smoking
flax which for the present can neither yield light nor heat, yea and weak,
like a bruised reed, if it can but touch the hemne of Christ his garment, yet
if it be sound, having only God, Christ and the promises of the Gospel for
the object, and it do grow and increase, it is accepted with GOD for a
perfect faith and is sufficient for salvation.

Secondly God is a most indulgent, Heb. 12, v. 6, and 7.
and loving Father to his children looking only unto, and accepting the better
part in them which is his own work, and passing by and pardoning their
defects, Psalm. 32, 1, 2.
sins and imperfections as though they were not at all; Romans 8, 33, 34
and therefore they are blessed because their sins are not imputed and GOD
justifies them, who shall then condemn them?

And as we respect an heap of corn, Similitude.
(albeit the greater part be chaste) for the corn and not for the chafe, and
give it the denomination of corn, and as we esteem a mountain, or mine of
Gold, or Silver (though unwrought, and unrefined) for the gold, or silver and
not for the dross, and for the more precious part call it gold or silver: Even
so our heavenly Father accepts and regards his children for their better
parts; of faith, and sanctification, and takes no notice of their faults,
and defects (albeit they be far more in number then their virtues.)

Use. 1. First this doctrine of the perpetuity, and continuance of grace in
Gods children serves to check and condemn that false, and comfortless
doctrine of the Romish Synagogue, who holds and maintains and that by the
cannons of the ^ridentine council, non modo infidelitate per quam et ipsa ^ides
amittitur sed etiam quocun^q alio mortali peceato acceptam iustificationis
Tr^dent Council ses. 6. ca. 15
grasiam amitte et omnes qui laethalta committant peccata a Christ's gratia
seper^entur. That the grace of Justification received is lost not only by
unbelief by which faith it self is lost, but also by any other mortal sin,
and they that commit deadly sins are separated from the grace of Christ,
which vile doctrine (as before has been proved) is the breake-necke of faith
directly against the word of God.

Use. 2. Secondly it serves for the consolation and reviving of the afflicted
conscience of Gods children, for being in the estate of grace they can never
be deprived of it, but, God that has begun the good work will finish it,
Hose, 6, v. 1. 2.
he that has wounded the Church will heal it, though she fall she shall
rise, and when she shall si^ in dark nesse the Lord will be a light unto
them, Mic^ 7. v. 8.
and therefore let no man for his own, or any of Gods servants temptations,
falls, and frailties, despair either of his own, or any other man's
restitution, and salvation; Romans 11, v. 23
for God is able to restore them, yea and will restore and perfect them.

Use. 3. Seeing that in every greiuous temptation, we suffer much loss,
either by abating and remitting of our faith, our zeal, our hope, our love,
our strength, our joy, feeling; or else by falling into some gross and
greiuous actual sin, as did Noab, Lot, 'Dauid, Sol^mon, Ez^chias, Peter etc.
We must labor by all good, and holy means to repair our decaies, and
recover our losses. We must nourish the spirit of God, by prophecy, prayer
etc. cherish our lamps with the oil of faith. If our nets be broken we must
with James and John mend them, if our wedding garment be rent or torn we
must repair it. And as in Paul's navigations when through the fear of death,
and through an exceeding tempest, Acts 27
and for that the sun and stars in many days appeared not, the mariners,
and soldiers for fourteen days had no appetite to their meat, or did any
thing at all; yet at last, being comforted and revived by Paul, they did at
his exhortation, for the safeguard of their lives take food: even so, if
through the tempests of temptations, we have, longer then it was meet either
abstained from, nor had any appetite to spiritual food, it is time (before we
famish) to receive it and to recover our appetite.

If with the Church of Ephesus we have lost our first love, we must repent,
Apo. 2, 4, 5.
and consider from whence we are fallen, and do the first works; if with the
Church of Sardis we have a name that we Apo. 3, 2.
live and yet are dead we must awaken and strengthen the things that remain
that are ready to die. If with the Church of Laodicaea Apoc. 3, 16. 19.
we by reason of ease and prosperity grow lukewarm, and are neither cold
nor hot, we must be zealous and amend.

Lastly, if our sins have wounded us, and left us half dead as the thieves
and robbers did the man that fell into their hands between Jericho and
Jerusalem; Luk 10, 11, ^. 30, ad 37.
we must in the Inn of the Church entreat, and procure the good Samaritane
Christ Jesus to power wine and oil into our wounds, and to take charge of us
and heal us, so shall we be in staetu quo prius, yea and our latter end
will be more glorious and comfortable then our beginning.

And thus much of this point viz. that saving grace in the elect never fails.
THE FOVRTH SECTION.
But mine etc. Here the Church finds and feels grace in her heart, and by
faith lays hold on Christ, so that notwithstanding, that her temptation had
in part prevailed, yet she before the extremity, and bitterness of it came;
professes and assures herself and others that her faith was untainted, and
her heart sound with GOD. Her walls and outward buildings were somewhat crazed,
and battered, but the strong Castle of her faith in Christ untouched. From this
her confession we learn to our comfort that the elect, and Saints of GOD (of
whom alone his Catholic Church does consist) The elect assured of Gods favor
and their election.
are (except only in the green blade, and insancie of the Church or in the
night and tempest of some great temptation) persuaded and assured in their own
consciences by Gods spirit that they are in the state of grace, and salvation,
and shall never fall away from it.

Now that we may be assured that we have faith in our hearts, and so are in
favor with GOD, we have most plain, Romans 8, 15.
and pregnant places of holy scriptures to prove it. God has sent forth the
spirit of his Son into your hearts whereby we cry Abba father, we have
received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry abba father, the same spirit
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of GOD. But this
witness is not coniecturall but most certain; for the spirit can never be
deceived, therefore undoubtedly they knew that they were Sons. Ephesians. 3, 12.


Thirdly by the spirit we have boldness and entrance with confidence by faith
in him, for the spirit expels all fear, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
that is all doubtfulnesse and mistrust. Prove your selves whether that you
are in the faith, examine your selves, know ye not your own selves how that
JESUS CHRIST is in you except you be reprobates. Now CHRIST was in them by
grace and justifying faith, Gal. 2. 20.
and not by his power and miracles only, as Bellarmine would have it, 1 Ioh. 4.
17.
for by this faith men live in Christ, yea live for ever. 1. Ioh. 2. ve. 20


But you know the spirit for he dwells with you, and shall be in you:
therefore if we know the spirit to be in us, we must needs know our faith
and justification that proceeds thence. Dan. 7. 24.
Ye have an ointment from him that is holy and knows all things. Here the
Apostle alludeth unto the old figures of the law, and the ointments wherewith
the Priests were anointed and specially the high Priest a figure of Christ,
who is styled by the name of messiah, or anointed. Now the anointing of Priests
and Kings in the old testament was a representation of the gifts of the holy
Ghost, and this is the cause why the holy Ghost is here, 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
and else where named (...) or ointment, and the sense is that the true
believers having the holy Ghost, 1. Ioh. 4. 14.
know all things (necessary to salvation) and by his power preseuer in faith,
1. Ioh. 5. 18. 20.
ergo they also know that they are in Gods grace and favor. And again we know
that we are translated from death to life because we lou^e the brethren.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us because he has given us of
his spirit. He that believes in the son of God has the witness of God in
himself. Job. 19. 26. 27
Now this is not a doubting, or coniecturall knowledge but an holy persuasion
wrought in Paul's, Romans 8. 38. 39.
and so in all our hearts by the holy Ghost.

I know my redeemer lives (says Job,) and that I shall see God in my flesh,
and mine ies shall be hold him, and none other for me Lastly (to be breife) I
will conclude with that of Paul; I am persuaded that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor principaliites, nor powers, nor things present or things to
come, nor beegth, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. But least any man
should object that this persuasion was proper only to Saint; Paul and that
he had it by some special revelation for the answer hereof.

A^s. Romans ^. 5.
We must note that the ground of his (...)* viz: the love of God in Christ
Jesus is common to all the faithful, for it is shed in all their hearts. And
Paul, in another place, makes the assurance of salvation common to him with
all the faithful, saying, there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness,
2. Tim. 48
and not to me only, but unto all them also which love his appearing, albeit
some have it in greater measure then others.

And that this doctrine may be the more easily conceived of us; I will
explain and make it lightsome by some familier comparisons and similitudes.
Can a man carry fire in his hand, Similitudes and comparisons.
and not feel it, and can a man contain the holy flame of Gods grace in his
heart, and not discern it? Can a woman be wedded to an husband and not know
it? And can we be conjoined to Christ, yea and ingrafted into him, and not
perceive it? Can a man buy, and possess a precious pearl, and a rich
treasure, and yet be ignorant of it, and can the Church by faith buy, and
apprehend Christ, and not be aware of it? Can a man doubt of the garments where
with he is clothed, and can the Church clothed with the son of
righteousness never see nor observe it? 1. Ioh. 2. 20.
Can the elect (the friends of God) know all things needful for their
salvation by revelation from him, and shall they err and be ignorant in the
knowledge, and certainty of their own justification, and salvation? Can the
sense be deceived about his proper object? And can all spiritual senses
fail, and beguile us? Can he dwell in us, and we not see him? Can he dwell
in us, and we never feel him? Luke 24. v. 32.
Can he speak peace to our souls and cause our hearts to burn within us, and
we not hear him? Can he feed us with the honey, wine, spices, fatlings, and
delicates, and we have no taste, and relish of them? Can Christ perfume his
spouse with mirrbe, and incense and with all the powder of the merchant, Cant.
3. 6.
and she not smell it? Can Christ lodge and lie with us, Apoc. 3. 20.
and we with him, and never spiritually touch him? Finally shall the Church and
must she rejoice that her name is written in heaven, and yet have no
certainty of it? Wherefore this doctrine of the assurance of faith, and of the
grace of God is certain, infallible, and never fails. But before we (...)
attain unto this certainety of faith, and saving grace, Means to come to
assurance.
we must dilligently and reverently hear Gods word, know it, and our sins
by it, be truly humbled by it, despair of our own ability; ascent, and
subscribe unto the Gospel; hope and desire pardon, hunger and thirst after
grace, crave pardon of our sins, and particularly apply unto our selves the
promises of mercy, and salvation made unto us in the Gospel, and continue
herein, 1. Sam. 17* 36.
and then in process of time after long sense, observation, and long
experience of Go^'s favor an^ love Psalm. 23. 6. Yea after that we have been
long excercised in temptations, 2. Timi 4. 7. 8.
and been old beaten soldiers in Christ's battle we shall attain unto this
fullness, and firmness of faith.

By this doctrine is confuted and overthrown that erroneous and desperate
doctrine of the Romish Synagogue, Use. 1.
who albeit they teach that men may by their works merit salvation, and
satisfy Gods justice, yet they contradict themselves (which is proper to
Babel^ the mother of confusion) and considently hold and teach, that no man can
be certain of his salvation in this life by an ordinary and special faith,
but only by extraordinary revelation and hope, which hope ministers (as they
say) but a coniecturall certainty. If this their position were true, how could
ever Job in his extremities have comforted himself in the undoubted hope of
his resurrection to eternal glory. Would ever Moses have forsaken Pharaohs
court, and the glory, pleasure, and preferments of it, H^b. 11. 25.
if he had not had an eye unto, yea an assurance of the recompense of the
reward in the life to come? would Manahen that had been brought up with Herod
the Tetrarch so debased and subjected himself to so much envy, Acts. 13. 1. 2,
and so many pcrils, and dangers by entering into the holy ministry, had not
the expectation, and assurance of eternal happiness induced him hereunto? And
(to absolve this point) how could, or would so many thousands of Martyrs (since
the Apostles times especially) have suffered so much rebuke, so great losses,
Heb. 10. and 11. chapters.
so many tortures for Christ, and his Gospel, yea, and most cruel deaths and
persecutions, had they not been secured in their souls of the favor of God,
and been verily persuaded that they stood in the estate of grace, and should
in time be glorified?

Seeing that the knowledge of our e^tate before God, Use. 2.
and the certainty of Gods favor and love is so admirable and invaluable a
benefit communicated to none but Gods children, and to them that seek his face
in Christ, let us never rest, nor be quiet until we have sued out our qu^etus
est, and have procured this certainty. Let not marrying of wives, Luke 9. v.
^5.
buying of Farms, trying of Oxen, oues, and boues, and pecori campi, hinder,
and stay us from getting this assurance.

What shall we so toil and moile, and so sue and seek with so much pain and
cost, to ascertaine unto our selves and ours, lands, livings, leases, patents,
reuersions, (which notwithstanding by reason of our mortality, and the might,
malice, and cunning of men, we (oftentimes) can neither long, nor peaceably
enjoy) and shall we not much more seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness of Christ? shall not we labor to secure us of Gods unchangeable
favor; and to get the grant, yea, and beginning of eternal and unspeakable
happiness, which we may assuredly obtain, and the obtaining and purchase
whereof is worth ten thousand works: And therefore Curare externa neglectis
internis (imoaeternis, (as one says well) caec^tas est, that is, to have a
care of these outward things, and neglect and pass inward, and eternal things
is blindness, nay madness. For what will it profit a man to gain the whole
world, and loose his own soul, or what ransom or recompense shall he give
to r^de^me it? surely none. GOD therefore make us wise to salvation, and grant
that we may always look to the maine chance, and make choice of the better
part, Amen.

And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the churches, faith, confidence,
and feeling.
NOw because this doctrine is of so great moment, and importance, and of so
excellent, and necessary use; I for the edification, and comfort of all good
Christians will annexe and set down six special, and principal, or
characteristicall notes, marks and demonstrations, whereby a man may in
conscience be persuaded that he stands in the estate of grace, and is
reconciled unto God, whether for the present temptation he have feeling or
not. And by these notes and demonstrations it shall evidently appear who is in
the state of grace and s^luation; for as the life is known by the motion, the
fire by the light and heat, the tree by the fruit, and the sheep by the
marks and brands, so may the godly heareby judge and determine of their faith.

The notes are these six following, which I will (God assisting) handle briefly
and in order. Six special notes or marks of faith and grace.
The first is sound judgment in matters of faith and religion. The second
sincere affection toward, and constant delight in Christ, and his Gospel. The
third a constant course in all the excersises of godliness. The fourth an inward
and godly sorrow for our sins, and for the offense of GOD.

The fifth is thanfulnes in acknowledgement and high esteem of C H R I S T, and
all his graces and benefits. Lastly to suffer no sin to reign, and have
command and dominion in us, but to dislike, resist and break it off. He that
has these, and the like (...) congnisances, marks and properties we may say
justly of him, he that has or that does these t^inges, shall never fall, that
is, he is perpetually blessed, and can never by any violence, tyranny, or
injuries of Satan, and the world, be overthrown or removed from his state,
but is secure and safe against all evils.

Touching soundnes of faith and judgment, 1 note soundn^s of judgment.
it is when no heresy is maintained, or error held against the principles and
grounds of Orthodoxe religion; but in judgment and conscience is directed,
and rectified in all things by the holy Scriptures, this is a light to our
ways, and a Lanth^rne to our steps, the eye of our soul a lamp, and torch
to guide and lead us, in the darkness of this world, it is a gate and door
to let us unto Christ his chamber of presence, and to intromit us into heaven;
it is a key to unlock the treasures of the scriptures; it is the foundation of
our spiritual house, and the directer, and touchstone of al good works, and
obedience. That, this soundness of faith and judgment is of absolute
necessity, to prove unto us the truth of grace and Gods favor, it shall thus
by scripture most manifestly be declared.

The Church in the Acts of the Apostles is said to continue in the Apostles
doctrine, Ephesians. 2. 20.
the Church is builded upon the foundation, the doctrine, and scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles. Tit. 2. 2.
Elder men must be sound in the faith, nay the church must be rooted and
grounded in it. Col. 2. 6.
If they had been of us (says Saint John) 1. Ioh. 2, 19.
they had continued with us, viz* in soundness of doctrine, and in frequenting
the holy assemblies. No other foundation can any man lay then that which is
laid which is Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 3, 11.
That is the doctrine of the Gospel, touching Christ his person, and office, is
(as it were) the foundation of Christian Religion, therefore both pastors and
people must by all means endeavor to keep this doctrine pure, and
uncorrupted: And all doctrines and opinions, quirkes, and curriosities that are
not agreeable hereunto, are but wood, hay, stubble which the fire of heavenly
truth will in time to their reproach and shame reveal, and consume. The
ministry of the word is given, and ordained of GOD that we might grow up to
perfect on of faith, and that we should be no more c^ildren, Ephesians. 4. 13. 14.
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine. Jesus Christ
yesterday, Heb. 13. 8.
and to day and the same for ever. Be not carried about with diverse and
st^ange doctrine* for it is a good thing that the heart be established with
grace and not with meats etc. Faith is the eye of the body, if the eye be
single the whole ^ody shall be light.

The necessity, and most absolute use of this doctrine will appear by the
Caueates and warnings that are given us in scripture to beware of seducers, and
false teachers, and by the opposition and zeal that we are to show against al
Atheism, Idolatry, Libertinisme etc. Hence it is that in matters of
conscience, and in troubles of mind we are put over to the law and to ^he
testimonies, and they that speak not according to this word have no light in
them. Isa. 8. 20*
They that will not believe Moses and the Prophets will not believe though one
arose from the dead. Luke 1^.
Hence it is that David by reason of his understanding in, Psalm* 119. 104
and love to Gods word, hates all false ways. Hence it is that the Church is
exhorted to beware of false Prophets, to beware of the leuine that is, the
infections and false doctrine of the Scribes and Pharasies, to save themselves
from that forward generation, (...) Iud. 1. 3.
to play the Champions and to contend for the common faith, Apoc. 18. v. 4.
to come out of ^abylon least they be partakers of her si^nes, and so of her
plagues; not to go after false Christ's and false Prophets, Ioh. 10. v. 5.
for they must not so much as hear a stranger, that is, one that brings
strange, and false doctrine, much less bid him God speed, 2. Ioh. 10.
that is any way show any countenance, and allowance to his corrupt doctrine.
And no marvel for Heresy and false doctrine is the poison and pestilence to
the soul, Apo. 9 v 5.
it stingeth, and vexes the conscience like a scorpion. 2. Tim. 2. 17.
It does eat and consume the soul like a Gangraene, it makes men spiritually
mad, 2. Pet. 2. 2.
yea and brings with it (if men die in it) certain and just damnation.

Use. 1. Wherefore we learn hence, first not to measure the truth of Religion
by multitudes, universalities, antiquities (as the Papists and ignorants, of
the world do;) for h^rein we may soon be deceived, ^uk. 13. v. 24.
the broad way leads to destruction, Christ's flock is but a little one: and
the number of the elect is (in comparison of them that perish) exceeding few,
therefore we must try and examine all by the standard, and certain rule of
Gods holy word* and if it be consonant thereunto, we must admit it, otherwise
reject it.

Use. 2. It meets with and checketh the error, and sottishness of the
simple ignorant multitude, of whom for the most part we may truly say they
know not the law of God and accursed, Ioh. 7. v. 49.
who term and call an Atheist a Papist a Libertine, (if ^e be only outwarly
and ciuilly righteous,) just, liberal courteous, sociable, a right honest man;
as though there could possibly be any true honesty without fath and true
religion, the cause and foundation of it; For Paul does make Godliness a cause
of honesty that is, 1. Tim. 2. 2.
of Christian life, and behavior.

Use. 3. We must beware of and shun all doctrine that tends to Atheism and
Libertinisme, and all popish opinions, and especially such as have been by
some of late years vented, furbished and refined, and therefore the more
dangerous, Resined Errors.
and deceitful. And indeed no better then the whore of Babilons golden cup,
glorious without, but within full of abominations and deadly poison. Of this
kind of opinions, and errors (to omit others) are these following. First that
the now Romish church (albeit idolatrous, and apostatical) is a true visible
church.

2. Error. That the holy religion of Christ now professed, and by public
authority maintained in England, and the doctrine and worship of Papists differ
only in accidents and circumstances and not in substance, and that a
reconciliation betwixt both parties might well be admitted. Whereas first the
Romish religion is (for the most part) Idolatrous and heretical, but so is not
ours at all. Secondly the Papists will in no wise yield to any reconciliation
to us, though in truth, and why should we yield and be reconciled to them in
error, and Idolatry?

3. Error. That we must not enquire how Christ is present in the Eucharist
(viz: whether spiritually or bodily) intending hereby to keep men in
suspense, and to make away for that absurd and blasphemous doctrine of
Transubstantiation. Whereas otherwise it is most plain by scripture that
Christ's presence is altogether spiritual.

4. Error. That the sabbath is but a ceremony, and that it is in the churches
power and liberty to alter it, determine the time, and the continuance of it,
and to remit and abate of the strictness of it as it shall think good.
Whereas it is one of the ten commandments, and therefore must needs for
substance be moral and perpetual, and it is in the power of no person to
dispense withal, and the maintayning of this error opens a door to al
profaneness and licentiousness.

5. Error. The false opinion of universal grace, and the denying of the
doctrine of ^ternall reprobation in Gods secret decree. Math. 1^. 27.
Whereas saving grace is proper only to the elect, Romans v. ^.
and that God has eternally decreed, and does in time actually pass by many
and most, it is by scripture most apparent.

6. Error. That the sufferings of Christ were only bodily and not in soul
(properly and immediately) but by Sympathy only. Whereas his souls heaviness,
bloody sweat, prayer against it, and the consent of most worthy, and Orthodoxe
Divines, euince the contrary.

Lastly it is malum omen, and prognosticateth much decay of sincere zeal and
pure affection, when of late times amongst too too many students in Divinity,
the sound, judicious, pithy and fruitful writings, comments, disputes, and
Evangelical authors, such as are Calvin, Beza, Martyr, Bucer, Zanchius,
Pola^us. Iunins, Iuell, Whittakers, Fulke, and Perkins, etc. are neglected,
contemned, and out of request, and the false rubbish, and muddy books and
writings of Popish schoolmen, and interpreters are iniudiciously and rashly
received. Hereunto may be referred, (as a great rebater to faith, and a mighty
infection, and corruption to good life, and manners,) the publishing,
toleration, reading, and affecting of scurrile play books, unsavory, and
amorous ballads, foolish ieasts, and fained and unprofitable histories and
fables. These are to to much in request; these effiminate men's manners, and
make them apt to entertain any religion but the truth: and if perhaps they
retain the truth, it is to be feared that it is more in show then in
substance, for custom rather then* for conscience.

And thus much of the foundation of faith and judgment.
Now it follows that we speak of sincere affection, 2. Note, si^cere
affection.
and sound delight in Christ, and in his Gospel: Vbi am^r ibi oculus, where
our love is, there will be our eye, and where our treasure is, there will be
our heart. Our love to Christ must be hearty like Peter's, it must be great like
Mary Magdalins, John. 21. 7.
it must be settled and immovable that no water can quench it, Luke 7. 38*
no^ the stoods drown it, yea we must for no substance part with it. Cant. 8.
7
Christ is the tree of life, and under his shadow we must sit down^ and rest.
Cant, 2. v. 3.
We must count all things, whatsoever may otherwise be auantageable unto us,
but loss and dung to win him. Philip. 3. 8^
And as for the world, because it is the spring and fountain of all knowledge,
Psalm. 87. v. 7.
the immortal seed, and the instrument of faith and salvation; we must
receive it, and love it, if we would profit by it, yea, and prefer it above
spoils, treasures, gold, silver, and precious stones. If we leese it, we leese
all things, yea the very broad scale and patent of eternal life, and if we
have and retain it (in sound judgment, sincere delight, and hearty affection)
we shall live for ever. We must also cleave unto the Lord with full purpose
of heart, Acts 11. 23.
and entreat him to knit our* hearts unto him, least our hearts distracted
with diverse desires, Psalm. 86 11.
should remain in doubt, and take such courses as are not pleasing unto God;
but that they being consecrated unto him may obey him, Romans 8. 23.
only rest in him, and depend upon him. 2. Cor. 5. 2.
Lastly we must wait for our full redemption, and entertain an earnest
desire to enjoy e^ernall life.

This doctrine meets with the Stoikes, Use.
and those that are Stoikally minded who deny affections, and would have men
herein to be no better then stocks and stones; whereas in truth without these
affections set upon their right object, and that in due proportion, there can
be no true serving of God, no zeal for his glory, no fear of his name, no
hatred, and detestation of ^^nne, no spiritual joy and delight, no true love
of God, his saints, and word, and no true faith and hope in God, etc. These are
wings whereby we fly, and are carried unto God, chariots to bring us unto
Christ, and they are the very heart and life of all our spiritual actions.

The churches security. And thus much in brief touching the sincerity of our
affections.
THe third note and mark of faith and grace, is a settled and a continued
course in all the duties of godliness. The 3. note. Constant and universal
obedience.
And herein is Christian wisdom, fortitude, and resolution seen. For the
proof and demonstration of this point, the Scriptures are plain and
plentiful, David says; I have respect unto all thy commandments. I have
chosen the way of truth, Psalm. 119. v. 6.
and thy judgments have I laid before me; teach me O Lord the way of thy
statutes, and I will keep it unto the end: And seven times a day do I praise
thee, v. 30. and 33.
because of thy righteous judgments. Prou. 4. 18.
The way of the righteous shines as the light that shines more and more unto
the perfect day; that is the noone-tide, when the day is most clear and
bright. And the meaning is, that the godly do daily profit in wisdom, and the
fear of the Lord, and go from strength to strength, until they ascend to
that perfection which may be attained unto in this life. Luke. 1. v. 7. ^.
This is one maine end of our redemption, viz. to serve the Lord in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our life. Again we are perpetual subjects
and servants unto God (albeit otherwise his freemen and children) and we expect
an eternal reward, namely eternal life purchased for us, and promised us,
therefore our obedience must be perpetual also. But that we may the better
keep this continued and resolved course in goldlinesse; we must always
remember, and do our utmost endeavor, to repair, and renew our faith and
repentance: for as we sin daily, so we must repent daily, and as we slip
daily and loose something (especially in the evil day and the time of any
special temptation) so it is most requisite that we be carefulll to confirm
and strengthen our ^aith, and to renew our repentance. For recovery of bodily
health and strength decayed, we use Physic, good diet, exercise, and all
other good means, and shall not we be much more studious and provident by
all means, for the recovery and repair of our spiritual strength and health
that is any ways impaired, and diminished. This was the practice of Dau^d who
says I have considered m^ ways and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
Psalm. 119* 59.
Hence it is that our Savior teaches and commands us daily to confess our
sins, and crave pardon of them at Gods hands saying, forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. Hence it is that
before we receive the word we are to prepare our selves, Ecles. 4* 17.
and to take he^de to our feet, that is, to our affections, when we enter
into Gods house, and be more near to ^eare them to give the sacrifice of
Fools, that is we must vseall diligent endeavor that we hear the voice of
GOD, and frame our life thereafter, and not to offer such sacrifice as fools
do, who having sinned, imagine that they can satisfy the Lord with their
ceremonious Worship, when their life notwithstanding is not amended. Psalm 2*
66.
David s^ith that he will wash his hands in innocence and (so) compass Gods
alter. Likewise before the receiving of the Sacrament of the body, and blood
of CHRIST; a man must try, 1. Cor. 11. 28
and examine himself, and by consequence renew his faith, and repentance, and
so eat of the bread and drink of that cup. And (to knit up all in a word)
the Church of Corinth must expel that leaven the incestuous person: 1. Cor. 5.
7.
the Church of Ephesus must recover her first love: the Church of Pergamus must
repent of that sin for tollerating them amongst them that mainta^ned the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans. Apo. 2. 25
The Church of Sardis must awaken, and strengthen the thing that remain, that
are read^e to die. Apo. 3. 2.
The lukewarm Church of Laodicae^ which was neither hot nor cold (which is
now the common sin of our time and the malady of most Churches) must be
zealous, and amend. verse. 19.


Use. 1. The use of this doctrine, is to cond^mne them that either use no holy
and Religious exercise at all, and hereby discrie and bewray themselves to be
mere Atheists, and Nullifidians, or else if they do perform any duty of
piety, religion and love, they do it upon fits, brunts, passions; for a time,
and that in some things only like Iehu, and their goodness (like that of
Ephraim and luda^) is as a morning cloud, and as a morning dew it goes away,
Hosea. 6. 4.
they are soon hot and soon cold, and they are far from any steadfast
resolution, and continued practice, which only is proper to a true justifying
faith: whereas hipocrites, temporizers, and wordlings may (for a time and upon
sudden motions) formally perform all the forenamed duties.

Use. 2. The second use is for consolation. Do thou notwithstanding thou now
and then deuiate, and digress a little out of the way for a time with Noah,
Lot David, Peter, Ezechias etc, travail daily foreward to heaven? do thou
purposely, and ordinarily walk in the narrow way that leads to eternal
life? Do thou not long continue in thy by-pathes, nor please they self in
them; but upon notice of thy error, reduce thy self into the way again, and
then by more speed and have make amends for thy former straying and
slothfulness? comfort thine heart, thine infirmities shall never be laid to
thy charge, and thou shall at length attain to the end of thy journey and
hope, namely the port and haven of everlasting happiness, For GOD, chiefly
respects the heart, and resolution: And that which Paul says of alms, and
contribution; 1. Cor. 8, 12.
we may truly affirm of all other holy duties: if there be first a willing
mind, they are accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that a man has not, and (to conclude) for this constant practice, continuance,
and perseverance in holy duties and Godliness: ^osua, David, Iehoshaphat, Aza,
Ezcch: as, Josias, etc. are commended and eternized in scripture, for that they
served GOD with a perfect and upright heart, and did (in general) that which
was acceptable in Gods sight.

And thus much of a continued course in Godliness.
THe fourth sign or mark is a grief, 2. Cor. 7. 11 4* note a Godly sorro^.
and Godly sorrow for the offense of God joined with an earnest desire of
reconciliation and forgiveness. It is a Renting of the heart and not of the
garments. Examples of this sorrow, Joel. 2. 13
we have in Daniell confessing his, and the peoples sins, we have sinned, and
committed iniquity and done wickedly, Dan. 9. verse. 6.
O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, and to us open pen shame. In the
prodigal child, Father I have sinned against heaven, Luke 18. 13.
and against thee, and I am no more worthy to be called thy child. In the
Jews repenting of their unthankfulness against Christ, of whom its said that
they shall lament for Christ as one mourns for his only son, and be sorry
for him as one is one is sorry for his first borne. Zacha. 12, 10.
They are blessed that mourn, viz: Math 5.
for their own sins, and others, and a broken heart is a sacrifice to God.
Let every man then descend into himself, examine his conscience and bewail
his sins, whereby he has crucified the son of God. Let him then sigh and
groan and be afflicted for his offenses, which no Man, Angel, or creature else
could satisfy for, but only Christ Jesus the Kings son, who both suffered
manifold and exquisite pains in body, and most inward and unspeakable
torments in his soul for his sin and that being his utter enemy, and
therefore if he could shed buckets of tears for his sins, yea and tears of
blood all the days of his life he must not think it sufficient. Now the
grief and sorrow must not be only, or cheifely in respect of losses,
crosses, extremities, afflictions, punishments, or because he afraid of hell
torments and the terror of the last judgment; Psalm. 130, 4.
for reprobates, as Cain, Esau, Judas, Magus, may and have gone thus far: but
it must be chiefly because the good majesty of GOD has been offended, his
patience and long suffering abused, and his mercy and favor contemned, and
this sorrow would appear in just and Godly men, albeit there were no
conscience to accuse, no judge to condemn, no temporal plagues to terrify,
and no eternal torments to daunt and dampe him. And if that saying be good
oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore: so much more the Godly and regenerate are
loath and grieved to displease God for the love and reverence they bear to God
and their Savior Christ. And as for deprecation, De^^re of pardon.
and desire of pardon, it is of absolute necessity, and we have abundant
scriptures for the illustration and justification of it. In the Jews in Hosea
his time, Hos. 14, 4.
saying. Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: I say, Daniell.
and the Jews of his time saying. O Lord hear, O Lord, forgive, O Lord,
consider and do it, Psalm. 51.
defer not for thine own names sake O my GOD. In David, have mercy upon
me, O GOD according to thy loving kindness; according to the mul^itude of
thy compassions put away mine iniquities.

And here we may observe a notable and a manifest difference between Gods
children, and the hipocrites and wicked. Gods children desire nothing so much
as to be reconciled unto him, and therefore upon the sense, and perceiving of
his displeasure, they forthwith fall to prayer and humble suite, for the pardon
of their sins, and never give over vntell God from heaven send into their
hearts some comfortable assurance thereof. But the wicked in their extremities
(if they desire ought of God) either by themselves or others, it is only with
Pharao, and Simon Magus, for the remoouall, or prevention of Gods judgment,
but as for their particular sins, the cause of all their miseries they have
no true touch of, much less, then, desire pardon of them; as the examples of
the two forenamed persons, as likewise of Cain, Esau, Judas etc. do
sufficiently testify. And the reason hereof is for that the wicked, and
reprobate are never lively smitten with the sense of their particular offenses,
nor discern what an excellent and unutterable benefit it is for a man to be
eased of them, Psalm. 32, 1. 2
but the case is far otherwise with every Godly, and truly regenerate man.

And thus much of Godly sorrow and desire of pardon.
THe first sign and mark of saving grace is when no one sin, A fi^t note
freedom from all reigning sins.
nor any sin is suffered to sway, domineere, and reign in the body, or soul.
Now that is a reigning sin that is committed with a full and resolved consent
of will, Psalm 53.
and wherein a man continues without grief for it, ^ These: 5, 7
without fear of God, or his judgment, without resistance against it, and
without amendment of life. It is when men make a trade, and occupation of
sin, and like Ahab sell themselves to commit sin, and it is like to a wild
horseman, Math. 7, 23
and unruly Rider that spurreth his horse so egarly vntell they both be
overthrown, and be (as he said) carried man and horse and all to the devil.
Every sin of this kind is a deadly wound to the soul, an earnest penny to
satan, yea and his food and diet; an irresistable and violent tempest to the
conscience, Romans 6, 16.
a strange God, an Idol, and a certain herbinger, and forerunner of eternal
destruction; and it is in every man by nature until he be renewed and
regenerate. From this, and the like sins the regenerate are freede not by
nature, but grace, not by their own deserts, but by Gods mere mercy and
goodness; and it is apeculier prerogative of a sanctified and justified man to
have no sin reigning, and tirannizing in him.

The Godly have the seed of the spirit remaining in them, and therefore they
can commit no such sin. They keep themselves (as instruments of grace) that
the wicked one touches him not viz: 1. Ioh. 5, 18.
to commit any reigning sin. Sin shall not (no nor can) have dominion over
them, for they are not under the law but under grace. Against these there is no
law (to condemn them;) for in them the spirit always fights against the
flesh; Gal. 5, v. 24.
and they have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, and
therefore albeit they sin of ignorance, and infirmity only, yea and
sometimes of presumption, yet they shall never be condemned for them: for it
is not they that do it, but that dwells in them; Romans 7. v. 20.
and they are not slaves, and servants unto sin as the wicked, are, who li^e
and die in them, but servants of obedience unto righteousness whom the Son
has made free. Ioh. 8, 34. 36.


Let hereunto be added, that the regenerate with David pray unto God, Psalm. 19,
13.
that he would keep them from presumptuous sins that they reign not over
them, and they desire the Lord to direct their footesteps by his word, that so
no iniquity have dominion over them, and this their prayer being framed
according to Gods will, Ioh. 15, v. 16.
and only for spiritual and necessary graces God always hears.

Use. 1. Seeing that reigning sins are so dangerous and pestilent, yea and as
contrary to true regeneration, as fire to water, darkness to light, and death
to life: we must beware of it, and give no consent and allowance unto it,
least sin like the servants, and messenger of ^enadab King of Syria take
diligent heed if they can catch any thing of us, 1 King 20, 33.
and so work upon us to our perpetual ruin as they did upon Ahab.

Therefore it is wisdom, and good for us not to presume to come to near the
banks of sin, least we sink, and be drowned, if we would not have the
fire of sin to consume us: We must take heed of, and labor betimes to
quench the very sparks of it; we must dash our sins like the Babilonish
young children against the stones: Psalm. 137. v. 9.
kill the young Lions; and we must make a conscience even of small and lesser
sins, if we would be free from great and reigning sins. These many times
are more dangerous then greater and more gross sins; for great and gross
sins men will often leave, for fear of discredit, shame, and penalty, but
smaller sins are not acknowledged, and are counted no sins, and so at
length prevail, and get head that they that make no conscience of them will be
drawn in time to commit more horrible sins: even as he that makes no
conscience of filching, and purloyning, may easily (upon occasion, and
entisement) be drawn to rob by the high way-side, and to offer violence to
innocent men.

Let us therefore give no assent to sin, least assent bring delight, delight
custom, custom necessity, necessity, senslesnes, and senslesnes death and
damnation. Shall we so carefully shun, and decline al things y^ bring hurt,
sickness, infection, and danger to the body? and shall not we much more
heedfully beware, and take heed of the tyranny and dominion of sin that in
time brings both body and soul to eternal destruction. Lastly let us
betimes procure the Amulete or preservative of grace to keep the poison of it
far from the heart (our hold, or castle) or (to speak more plainly) let us
hide, Isal. 119. 11.
and lay up Gods word in our heart, that we sin not against God.

It serves also to condemn, and reprove those, Use. 2.
that (because they are in their own opinion only righteous, and in the
conceit, and estimation of men, whom they may easily by their sophistry and
hypocritical holiness deceive: but not so inwardly of conscience before God,)
think themselves free, though they with the Scribes and Pharasies be fast
bound with the chain of some peculiar and beloved sin. If they with Judas
preach, do miracles, have an office, and dissemble their impieties (albeit
covetousness reign in their heart) all is well with them: they think it
sufficient with Herod, to hear John Baptist for a time gladly, yea to
reverence him, and to reform many smaller sins, and yet few go so far,
albeit they live with him, and remain in perpetual adultery, or the like
sins: John. 5. v. 35.
they content themselves to delight in John his doctrine, and Ministry for a
time, but they soon fall away from it and him: And lastly they think
themselves happy, and perfect men, if with the Scribes and Pharasies they pray,
they fast, they do alms, they pay their tithes, they wear long robes, and
enlarge the fringes of their garments for vanity, vain glory, yea and merits
sake: and yet inwardly they be hypocrites, rotten bones, and full of extortion,
cruelty, persecution, covetousness, excess, deceit, and error. But of these
we may say justly (as Christ did of his time) except your righteousness exce^d
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharasies ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven: Math. 5. 20:
and as Christ said another time. O Serpents, Math. 23. 33.
O gene^ation of vipers, how should ye escape the damnation of hell? Wherefore
let us labor rather to be inwardly holy then outwardly, and to approone our
ways and consciences to God rather then to men, and by no one sin to suffer
satan to have entrance and access unto our hearts, for if he once get hold,
and possession, 2. Pet. 2. v. 20.
(and specially re-entry) after he has been by grace and the knowledge of
the Lord Jesus repelled: he will either very hardly, or else never be
removed, but takes, seven other spirits worse then himself, and they enter
in, and dwell there, Math. 12. ve. 45.
and the end of that man is worse then the begin^ing.

And thus much of reigning sin with the uses thereof.
THe sixth, The sixth mark praise and thanks giving unto God.
and last mark amongst many other and that most eminently, is praise and
thanksgiving unto God for all his benefits past, present, and to come,
whether outward, and temporary, or spiritual, and eternal. Of this sort, in
things outward, is our creation, preservation, health, life, liberty,
prosperity, private and public deliverances, yea and all the means of our
temporal life, and happiness; and specially in heavenly things our
predestination to eternal glory, our adoption to be Gods sons, our
redemption by Christ's sufferings and obedience, our justification by faith in
Christ his death and merits, our illumination, and sanctification by his word
and spirit: the blessed ministry of the word, the use and comfort of the
Sacraments, the reueiling, and weaking of Antichrist and his promised
destruction, the fitting of us for a better kingdom; and preparing the
kingdom of glory for us, his long patience, and forbearance of us, and all
fatherly, gentle, and merciful corrections, and warnings. For all these in
general, Col. 3. 17.
yea and for every one of them in particular we are bound, and must endeavor
(both generally and distinctly) Job. 1, 21.
to return unto the Lord praise and thanksgiving, and to serve him in
holiness, Luke 1, 75.
and righteousness all the days of our life. Here upon Paul upon the distinct
consideration of them brasteth forth into thanksgiving, and says: Ephe. 1. 4:
Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ which ^ath blessed us with
all spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ. And afterward he
descends into particulars. David also wondering at the greatness of Gods
goodness bra^teth out into an exclamation, Psalm. 116, 17.
and acknowledges Gods benefits to be greater then he is able to requite. What
shall I (says he) render unto the Lord for all his benefits? and in another
place he says, my soul prais^ thou the Lord, Psalm. 103, 1, 2
and all that is within me praise his holy name; my soul praise thou the
Lord and forget not all his benefits. Hereby he stirs up himself to
thanksgiving, and labors to shake of all drowsinesse: For forgetfulness,
and unthankfulness, as it is the common disease of the world, so it argues a
vain, and a wicked mind. For special, and particular deliverances from
captivity, from hunger, from imprisonment, from sickness, Psalm. 107.
from fear of drowning, and shipwreck etc. require particular thanks, and
there is good reason it should be so, for every particular benefit requires a
new song, and a peculier form of thanksgiving, and this is plain by sundry
psalms of David endited, and framed upon sundry benefits received, and
deliverances obtained. This thankfulness is the peculiar duty of the Just,
and it is a Sacrifice whereby we glorify GOD, and glorifying him, he will
glorify us. It is also a special note of the true, ye the triumphant Church
as may appear by the practice, and examples of the Angels, Elders, and beasts
in the Apocalips, Apo. 7, 12
Amen. Glory, honor, wisdom thanks and power, and might be unto our God
for evermore. It is peculier to them to singe the new song of their redemption
which none can learn but the redeemed alone: Apoc. 14, 4.
We must also with the Church in the Apocalips render and ascribe unto the
Lord, Apo. 19, 1.
praise, glory, wisdom, honor, thanks, power, might, salvation for his
righteous judgment (already in part) upon the Antichrist of Rome, for that he
has condemned the great whore which corrupted the earth with her fornication,
and has avenged the blood of hi^ servants shed by her hands.

Lastly the Church is exhorted, to rejoice, be glad and give glory to him for
the full redemption of his Church at hand, and because the marriage of the lamb
is come, and the bride has made her ready. But that we may the more soundly,
and sincerely practice and perform this duty: we must do three things.

First we must magnify, and high esteem of all Gods High estimation of Gods
blessings.
speak of them honorably: think, and meditate of them often, yea and to value
and price them above riches, Psalm. 119.
spoils, corn, wine, gold, silver, Jewels, precious stones, yea, and account
all things else (in comparison of them, and so far forth as they are any let
or hinderance to our salvation) as loss and dung. Philipians 3.


Secondly we must debase our selves before God, Debasing of our selves before
God.
and Genes. 32, 10*
and graces at his hands. Thus Jacob acknowledged himself not to be worthy of
the least of all Gods mercies, and of his promises p^rformed unto him. Thus
David (upon the consideration of Gods unspeakable mercies toward mankind,
and also of man's vileness and vanity,) brasteth forth into an exclamation,
saying. What is man that thou art so mindful of him, Psalm 144. 3. 4.
or the Son of man that thou think upon him? Man is like to vanity, his
days are like a shadow that vanishes.

Thirdly in Paul and that most singulerly) who confesses ingenuously that the
grace of the Lord was exceeding abundant toward him; 1 Timothy 1, v. 15
being (before his conversion) a blasphemer, a persecutor, and an oppressor;
and that JESUS CHRIST, came into the world to save sinners of whom says he I
am chief. Lastly in the lost child saying, Luke 15. 19.
Father I am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy
hired servants.

Thirdly if we would show our selves truly thankful, To live in obedience
to God, and his co^mandme^ts.
sin no more least a worse thing befall us, order our conversation aright,
keep our selves pure from idolatry; and consecrate and deuote our selves,
souls and bodies to God his service. For this is a most lively, effectual*
yea, Psalm. 50. v. ^3.
and real sacrifice, yea the best sacrifice that we can offer unto God. Romans
12. ver. 1. Reasons further to enforce this duty, and to persuade us hereunto,
are first so many commandments and exhortations in holy scriptures, and (by
name) in the psalms of David.

Secondly the often and excellent examples of so many rare and renowned men in
holy scripture, of Patriarchs, Kings* Prophets, and right Isralites in the old
Testament: and of Christ his Apostles, disciples, and all ranks of sound
confessors, and Christians in the new Testament. These are so many notable
lights, lamps, examples, and directors unto us; whose footesteps if w^e
insist not in, we declare our selves to be bastard slips and not true
branches, and to be (notwithstanding al labor, care, and husbanding) that
cursed ground that brings forth nothing, Heb. 6. 8.
but briars, and thorns, whose end is to be burned.

Thirdly of all other sacrifices, this is most sweet and sauory in Gods
nostrilles, Genesis 8. v. 21.
being not a constrained, and enforced worship (as prayer is sometimes,) ^ut a
free will offering, Psa. 50. 14, 15
it is the ca^ues and fru^te of the lips which confess his name, and it is a
special glorification of God.

Fourthly hereby we imitate and follow the practice of the Church triumphant
in heaven, whose continual usage and exercise it is, in quiers, and companies
by Himmes, Psalms, and thanksgiving, to sound and set forth the glory, and
mercies of God.

Fifthly because unthankfulness for, and forgetfulness of Gods blessings, and
benefits, is a thing most distasteful, and hateful to the divine majesty* and
a brand of profaine and dissembling hearted men. Therefore it is said of y^
Isralites that though they in their affliction remembered that God was the
strength and the most high God their redeemer, Psalm. 78. 35.
yet they did but flatter him with their mouth, and dissembled with him with
their tongue, for their heart was not upright with him, neither were they
faithful in his co^enant: over and besides the Jews were no sooner gloriously
delivered out of Egypt, and had passed through (the red sea making way for
them;) Psalm. 106. 2.
but they forgot God their Savior, who had done so great things for them.
Lastly nine of the ten leprous persons whom Christ cleansed and cured, are
noted for unthankfulness; Luke 17. 8. etc.
for it is said that only one of them returned to give God thanks, and that
was a Samaritane, and one that was most odious to the Jews and of all other
the most unlikely, but he served not Christ in vain, for he alone was
inwardly cured, and had his sins forgiven him. Finally (to end this reason) the
very Heathen and Pagans, who knew not God in Christ, and were altogether
ignorant of, and never had any holy Scripture to direct them; did and could by
the very dark light of nature see, and acknowledge thus much: (...), says
^indarus that sententious and wise Poet. That is, an old good turn is soon
forgotten, and men are unmindful of it, and that it i^ lost which a man does
to an unthankful person; yea and that which is most remarkable. Cum ingratum
dixeris omnia dixeris. That is when a man has named an unthankful man; he
has (therein) named all faults, or disgraceful imputations, and it makes a
man unworthy of al favor: and to this purpose, Gregory in his Morrals says
well, non est dignus dandis, and that is, he is not worthy to receive benefits
to be given, who is not thankful for good things already received. Math. 1^.
23.
Thus the unthankful servant in the Gospel whom his Lord and master after
(upon his submission, and supplication) had forgiven ten thousand talents,
was for his vnthankefullnes to his Lord, and his cruel and extreme handling
of his fellow servant, that only ought him but one hundred pence, delivered
unto the Iayler until he should pay all he debt,

Lastly because in the duty of praise, and thanksgiving, we are most defective,
negligent, and remiss; we need use all good means to stir up and revive us,
and to testify our zeal, and thankefulnes unto God. For as without means we
cannot attain unto the end: so without special, and spiritual helps we can
never be truly, and constantly thankful. Of this sort, are the often
meditating of our sollemne promise and vow made in Baptism, to renounce all
false Gods, false worship, and sin, and to believe in God, and to serve him
in holiness, and righteousness all the days of our lives. Of this sort are
moral and gospellike vows, Psalm 119.
and covenants of repentance, Psalm. 66. v. 13. and 14.
prayer, and thanksgiving, obedience, yea public and private oaths to cleave
unto God, and serve him only.

Hereunto may be added religious fasts, both public and private, so often
practiced of the saints of God both in the old and new Testament, yea and of
the reformed church since, and that with most happy success.

Lastly, The Lords supper a Sacrament of thanks giving.
seeing that the Lord knowing our aptness and pronesse unto this vice, has
ordained a sacrament of thanksgiving which the ancient fathers call the
E^charist to nourish and preserve true thankfulness in the church toward
Christ, and for all his merits, graces, and blessings, we must often, and
religiously, as, use all other helps, so specially this. And finally as all
rivers run into the sea from whence they came; so let all the benefits and
blessings of God bestowed on us, Similitude.
flow back and redownd unto God the author and fountain of them: which God
almighty grant for Christ Jesus his beloved Sons sake, to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost be given and rendered in the Church, all honor
praise and glory forever and ever. Amen.

THE GENERAL signs and forerunners of Christ's coming to judgment, soundly
and sincerely collected out of holy Scripture, and serving as well to awaken
the drowsy and slumbering Protestant* as to comfort and revive the Godly and
afflicted Christian.

Take heed watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. Mark. 13. verse.
33.

When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your
heads: for your redemption draws near. Luke 21. verse. 28.

To the Right worshipful learned, and Godly wise Gentleman Mr William Combs
of Warwick Esquire, high Sheriff of the shire and one of his Majesty's high
Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical, all increase of grace, comfort and
happiness.
EVEN as (right worshipful) it was the commendable and diligent practice of
the Prophets and holy men of God (for the increase of their comfort and
confirmation of their faith) to calculate, 1 Pet. 1. v. 10 and 11.
by the direction of the word of God, and to search and enquire out the very
time of Christ his incarnation, his death, his glorification. So in semb^able
sort, it as much concerns us, upon the ends of the world are come, and who
have both promises and signs of Christ his second appearance at hand for our
perfect redemption and full salvation, to take due notice of them, to search into
them and observe the accomplishment of them in their proper times. Our rule of
direction, must not be human collections, fained prophecies and revelations,
Astrologicall coni^ctures, Arithmetical computations, for these are vain,
uncertain, deceitful, as the event in all ages does demonstrate: but it must
be only the written word of God, which albeit it has not reueiled the day,
nor the year, nor the definite time of Christ his second coming, yet it has
left unto us many general yet undoubted signs and forerunners of it, which
are some of them, wholly expired, some of them in present motion and progress
and others yet wholly to come. These signs and predictions if we search them
out, weye and make use of them, (as they are described in holy scriptures) we
shall not only be contained and preserved from Atheism and unbelief, the
common sin of the world, and be kept from all ras^, foolish and ungrounded
^uri^sities, but also be effectually and continually stired up to prepare our
selves in Faith, Hope and Repentance against Christ his coming, and we shall in
all trialls and temptations whatsoever might comfort our hearts in that our
Redemption is so nigh at hand.

This doctrine, being of so notable use and profit, (especially for the Godly
and sober minded,) I thought good to publish it and upon good considerations to
recommend it to your worships patronage. First you for learning, judgment and
experienc^ are very sufficient to judge of it. Secondly your virtuous affection
and most religious disposition will (no doubt) find comfort and contentment in
it. Thirdly, your fauonr, grace and authority being tempered with so much
humanity and humility, (...) not (I hope) be wanting. Lastly (not to be
tedious) I can by no other means so well testify my thankful duty for your
late and extraordinary kindness both in word and deed, testified toward m^e.

Wherefore, most humbl^ entreating your acceptance, and requesting you to make
use of my short observations, I here, most humbly take my leave. The Lord,
bless, preserve and prosper your worship, as likewise the Noble, and virtuous
Lady, the Lady Puckering your wise: and infulness^ of days and Faith,
glorify you both in the Heavens.

Couentry: July 1608. Your worships in all duty to be commanded. THOMAS D^AXE*

The signs and fore runners of Christ's coming to judgment.
THe Lord Jesus in his mercy, because he would not have ^is children ensnared
and overtaken unawares at the sodainnes of his second coming, and because he
would warn, convince and leave the very wicked his enemies without excuse and
defense of themselves: has revealed and set forth in Scripture certain
general and undoubted signs of the approaching of the last judgment, whereof
some are already perfectly fulfilled, some in part accomplished, and others yet
remain to come to pass in their time. Of al these and the general uses that
^re to be made of them, I will speak breifely, and in order*

The first general sign (long sithence past) is the destruction and
desolation of Jerusalem, together with the Jews state and policy, and that
irrecouerably unto the end and consumation of the world, Math. 24. 12. Mark.
13. ver. 12. Daniel. 9. 26.

And this is a type and patter^e of the worlds destruction

The second sign is the divulging and preaching of the Gospel throughout the
whole* known and inhabited world. Therefore for this purpose the Apostles as
they had an extraordinary calling and extraordinary gifts, so they had a
general commission and commandment to go into all the world and to teach and
Baptize al nations, Math. 28. 19.
and to preach the Gospel to every creature, Act. 1. 8.
Mark. 16. 15. and to be his witnesses unto the ends of the world.

The reason there of is, first because God would hereby in lighten, convert and
draw unto himself all that are to be saved. Secondly, that it might be a witness
to all nations, and that al men might be convinced sufficiently through all
parts of the world that they could pretend and allege no excuse of their
ignorance to hide their impiety. Matthew 24. 14. Secondly the Apostles preached
the Gospel accordingly to all the world that was then habitable or known, or
(at least) in the most famous, populous and known countries, kingdoms and
cities of it, so that from hence either by the Apostles Disciples, or the
Evangelists, or by others, it might be brought from thence unto the most
obscure, unknown and barbarous nations (such as are America and the North
parts of the world) Col. 1. v 6. and 23. Romans 10. 18. Lastly the ancient and
holy Fathers of the primitive Church, Mr. Doctor Willet, synop. ^ol. page 1063.
1064. 1065.
as Origene, Jerome, Ambrose, etc. make express mention in their writings of
the universal calling and enlightening of all nations, and therefore no such
solemn and universal legacy is now the second time to be expected, seeing
that the Apostolical calling and gifts are ceased, and seeing that the
Gospel is passed from ^udaa, and from the East, to the South to the Greeks:
from the South it has made his progress to the West, that is to the Latins,
and from the West to the North, that is* to the Germans and other confining
countries, yet we deny not, but it may, though not universally yet be
revealed in other countries where it either originally has not been preached,
because perhaps in the Apostles times those countries were not inhabited, or
(at least) very slenderly and sparingly, or where the mystery of iniquity and
Antichristianisme had obscured and prevailed over all, Apoc. 14. v. 6. Apoc.
18. v. 1.

The third sign is the coming and revealing of Ant^christ, for the day of the
Lord (says the Apostle) shall not come except first that man of sin be
disclosed, 2. These. 2. 3.
whom Saint John calls Antichrist: 1. John. ^. 18.
concerning which Antichrist and his members and Locusts, Saint Paul says,
that they are men of corrupt minds, 2, Tim. 3. v. 8. and 9.
reprobate concerning the faith, and that they shall prevail no longer: for
their madness shall be evident to all men.

But Antichrist is come long ago, when the third Angel in the Apocalypse blew
the Trumpet, then this great star (the Pope and his successors as the heads
of the Apostacy) fell from heaven burning like a torche; Apoc. 8. v. 10. and*
11.
and it fell into the third part of the rivers, and fell into the fountains of
waters and made them bitter, he has been revealed sithence by the preaching of
the two (few yet sufficient) witnesses in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 1^. v. ^* 5. 6.
and by the first, second and third Angel in the 14. of the same Apocalypse 1.
by all the excellent teachers, Preachers, and writers sithence Martin Luther
his time, namely from the year of Christ about 1520. until this present time.
To conclude, the description of Antichrist, and whatsoever the Prophets and
Apostles have foretold of Antichrist they in all things agree to every Pope of
Rome, and him only, since the death of Gregory the great, and since the death
of the Emperor Maurice, as has been demonstrated by many heretofore both
English and foreign writers: and touching this argument yea and the whole
mystery of the Romish Antichrist a learned countri-man of our own has
purposely, learnedly, and succintly written in his Theological disputations,
de Antichristo and eius eccle^ia.

The fourth and last sign, Romans 8.
yet in motion, and not perfectly fulfilled, but to continue unto the worlds
end, is the vanity, corruption and abuse of the creatures, which has
continued from Adams fall, and does and shall increase by degrees unto the
consummation of all things. The Elements (as we may observe) of fire, air,
water and earth, are corrupted, distempered, and oftentimes very hurtful and
contagious to mankind and other creatures. In plants, trees, herbs, there is
not the same vigor, efficacy and virtue that was wont to be, the earth is
become more barren and unfruitful; the sea more distempered and tempestuous*
often breaking his bounds, and encroaching upon the firm continent, the Sun
and Moon, the worlds two eyes, more oftentimes and fearfully eclipted then
in former times, yea the sun, as also the stars (as the most excellent
Astronomers have noted) move much more unequally, and are removed greatly from
their former standings. And as for men, we full well know, and are taught, by
reading scripture, and experience that they are not so long lived, nor of that
goodly tall and strong constitution of body, as in former ages.

But some may object and say, this shortness of man's life and decay of his
strength is notably supplied by agilitie of mind and pregnancy of wit,
capacity, invention: I answer; This is most true and Gods name is to be
glorified for it, but yet men never more abused and perverted their wits and
capacities then in these days; for commonly the more witty men are, the more
wicked, the more politic, the more pestilent; and the more understanding that
they have, the more Heretical, Papisticall and Atheistical they prove. To
leave man and to come to buildings, houses, apparel, what vanity, what
surperfluiti^ and excel, what folly and pride does not herein appear? For
buildings, that in time past served only for defense and necessity, and
therefore were made very strong and durable; are now for the most part in many
places, builded (albeit with excessive cost as the poor tenants can testify)
yet slightly, and more for show then for substance and for pomp then profit.
And garments and apparel which naturally serves to hide man's nakedness, and
to defend him from cold, and (to make the best of it) to serve for comeliness
and distinction of degrees; is used now ordinarily, as an ensign of pride,
serves for bravery and ostentation, more then for profit, durablenesse or
common wealths advantage. And thus we see, that as the world does decay and
decline in the parts, so it does and shall in the whole.

The fourth sign is the shaking, weakening wounding and consuming of Antichrist
and his kingdom in many kingdoms countries and cities by the breath of Gods
mouth. 1. by the powerful and continual preaching of the Gospel, 2. These. 2. v.
8
as also by the material sword of Christian Kings, Princes and Magistrates in
their several dominions, though not all at one time yet successively Apoc. 16.
6, Apoc. 17. 16. Apoc. 18. 6 and so it shall be more and more ruinated and
decayed vntell the burning and desolation of Romish Babylon.

The fifth sign is grievous calamities and persecutions of Gods Prophets, The
fi^t sign.
Saints and Servants under Antichrist, especially these 100. years last past of
which (perhaps) Daniel chap. 2. 15. chap. 8. ve. 34. Apoc. 11. 35. Apoc. 13.
ve. 15. 16. 17. Lastly in Rome has bin found the blood of the Prophets, and of
the Saints and of all that were slain upon the earth, Apoc. 18, 24
of these it is verified y^ the Psalmist says for thy sake are we slain
continually, ^s^l 44. ve 22
and are counted as sheep for the ^laughter, and that which our Savior
fore-sheweth, saying, they shall excommunicate you: yea the time shall ^ome,
Ioh. 16, 1. 2
that wh^soeuer kills you will think that ^e does God good ser^ice: the
reason hereof in respect of Antichrist and his adherents is because they cannot
endure the ransacking and refuting of there idolatry, false doctrine, the Popes
supremacy and their idle superstitions and Antichristian rites, ceremonies and
traditions. But we hope that these trobles are for the most part past, and that
toward the end of the world shall be well abated, so that the church as of late
years shall have a further breathing time, and thus much Mark^ seems to
signify, Mark. 13. 7.

And thus much of the signs perfectly, and many of them long sithence
accomplished.
THe second sort of signs and forerunners are those yt are in continual act,
namely partly fulfilled and partly to be further performed in their times. Of
this sort are first an Apostasy and departure of many pastors and people from
faith and sound doctrine to Antichristianisme Turcisme yea and plain Atheism.
2. These. 2. 3. 1. Tim. 1. 4. 2. Pet. 2. ve. 1. 2. 3. Apoc. 13. ve. 16. et 17.
But under the tyranny of the Romish Antichrist and Mahomet this general
Apostasy and falling away from truth and wholesome doctrine has long a go
been verified, yet not so but that daily we see it by lamentable experience
continued and so it shall more and more be increased unto the end of the
world: for many that have renounced Antichrist, fall to flat Atheism and
Libertinisme, and some again reuert and revolt to their former superstition
out of which they were for the time and in sort recovered, of these speaks
the scripture in many places Hebre^es 6. verse. 4. 5. 6. 2. Tim. 4. ver. 3. 4.
2. Peter 2. verse. 20. 21. and it shall so abound and ouerflow at Christ his
second coming. That he shall hardly find faith on the earth, Luke 18, ^.
and no marvel for as there have done, yet do, and always shall arise false
Prophets, Seducers, Deceivers (successively) in many countries* kingdoms and
places, 2. Pet. 2. 2
so many shall follow their damnable ways and be blinded by them.

The second sign partly past and partly present and to come, is a general
impiety, corruption of manners and impudency in all manner of sin, still
(like Noah, his general deluge) preuayling in most places* the particular
effects where we as in a cataloge may read and observe in Paul his first
Epistle to Timo^^y, chapter the third v. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. And hereof in our own
kingdom we have had fearful experience, especially in these six and seven
last years, as though God had granted a general indulgence to all manner of
licentiousness, and as though hell were broake loose, and this profainesse and
corruption of manners in all places of the world, yet continues and shall be
much more universal and contagious near the time of Christ his second coming
Luke 17. 26. Math. 24. 38. and hereof there is and shall be more fear then of
corruption in doctrine; 1. Tim. 3, 5
for many shall retain a form and outward profession of Godliness but deny the
power and efficacy of it.

The third sign, is signs in the Sun and in the Moon, and in the Stars,
Luke. 21, 25
and upon the earth trouble upon nations, with perplexity. Acts 2, 20
The sun shall be turned into darkness and the Moon into blood before the
great and notable day of the Lord come. This sign by frequencie and multitude
of Eclipses has of later years and daily is fulfilled; likewise by terrible
winds, tempests, meteors and strange alterations in the air it is performed,
and this our late experience can justify: but it shall be perfectly accomplished
in the instant of Christ his second coming and glorious appearing; for then
he by the brightness of his glorious Majesty shall darken and suppress the
light of Sun Moon and Stars; and a little before this time the whole frame
of the world shall be shaken and moved and the very brute and senseless
creatures shall before hand perceive and feel the power of Christ his coming
Luke 2^, v. 26
when all the reprobate shall remain blockish and without feeling.

And thus much of mixed or continued signs.
Signs and forerunners that are yet to come to pass are specially these five
following.

First the burning and utter desolation of Rome the mother of fornication and
idolatry and the proper seat of Antichrist, this that it shall be so, is most
manifest and apparent by Scripture, reasons and authorities: First the
Scripture testifies that, Apoc. 16. 16*
the great (ittie shall be divided into three parts, and great Babylon shall
come in remembrance before God: and that the ten horned or Kings shall hate
the whore, Cap. 17. 16.
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire, Verse 8.
and most plainly in the 18. Chapter, her plagues shall come in one day,
death, and sorrow, and hunger, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for
strong is the Lord that judges her. Here-vpon the (Iodolatrous) Kings of the
earth, the Merchants, and every ship governor, Chap. 18* V. 9. 11. 17. 18.
and all they that occupy ships, and ship-men, and as many as work in the
Sea, shall bewail her, lament her, weep and cry at the sight and notice of
her burning, but this is not yet come to pass, like-wise all the Church of God
shall ^eioyce and praise God for his just judgments executed upon the Whore;
Apocalips. 11. Verse 20. and Chapter 19. Verse 1. and 2.

Further reasons are these, God has begun in part to punish and destroy Rome
and Antichrist, and therefore seeing that it is builded and stands upon a
sandy foundation, having begune to fall, it must needs shortly fall when the
rain of Gods severe judgment comes, and the floods flow, and the winds
blow and beat upon it, and great must be the fall of it.

Secondly, The-Easterne Babylon, a type of this Western Babylon (abeit she had
nothing so much conviction, nor never committed so heinous and manifold
abhom^nations as Rome has done) was utterly and many ages sithence destroyed,
much more shall Rome it self, the mouth of Hell and Satan's his chamber and
Metropolis. Thirdly all the Protestant and sound interpreters of the Apocalips
by one joint consent hold that Rome shall be ransacked and ruinated and wholely
consumed and never more inhabited unless it be wi^h devils.

Lastly (to omit the prophecy of Sibylla who says that Rome in the tenth
generation of men shall perish with fire hard at the end of the world) the
Papists themselves acknowledge thus much and render reasons of it. (...) and
(...).
Our Rhemists in their Annotations in Apoc. 17. say that Rome before the end of
the world shall be come the seat of antichrist, Ribera upon the 14. chap. says,
it shall be the shop of all Idolatry. Vega the Jesuit in his commentary upon
the 18. chapter, says that it shall be the habitation of devils and revolt from
the faith of Christ: and hereupon Vega and Ribera (both Jesuits) confess that
Rome in the end of the world shall be Babylon and burned, as they collect out of
the 18. chapter: and the Kings and Merchants shall lament for her torments,
which says Vega we must needs refer to the last times before the end of
the world; wherefore howsoever many, because of present improbabilities cast
needelesse doubts yet shall the threatenings and judgments of God not fall to the
ground but be executed in their times. Math. 24. 35


The second sign yet to be fulfilled is the general calling and conversion
of the nation of the Jews (in the places and countries where they shall be and
are residing,) when the fullness of us Gentiles is come into the church, and
this shall be the reviving and rejoicing of the world both in respect of Jews
and Gentiles, and this is most plain as by Lu. 21. ver. 24. 2. Cor. 3. 16. and
perhaps Zophonia 3. ver. 8. so especially Romans 11. ver. 12. 15. 2. 6. This
general conversion of them we daily expect to come to pass albeit we are
ignorant of the manner and circumstances of it, but hereof I have treated at
large in my exposition of the 11. chapter to the Romans.

The third sign next succeeding and following in order is the arising of false
Christ's, Math. 24. ver. 24.
and false Prophets, that shall show great signs and wonders: in so much that
(if it were possible) they should deceive the very elect. Hereupon Gods people
are admonished and instructed, that when they shall say, Ver. 26.
behold he is, in the secret places that they must not believe it. But it will
be objected that there were such that took upon them the name of the Messiah
and the King of Israel before the destruction of Jerusalem, and seduced and
drew many after them (as we have examples in Theudas Acts 5. and in the
Aegiption Acts 21.) I answer here in this place Christ speaks of false
Christ's that shall long after that time arise, and that shall seduce as well
the Gentiles as the Jews.

Secondly those Christ's did show no signs and wonders as these shall do, who
shall labor by false miracles and satanicall illusions and conclusions to
gain and procure credit and authority to their false doctrine, and also in
respect of efficacy of error in the last generation or age of the world, it
may very well stand that the Son of man shall scarcely find faith upon the
earth when he comes to judgment. Luke 18. 8.


The fourth sign, that is the last general sign is a certain brutish
security and an unspeakable deadness of heart and spirit, so that man shall be
without all fear of God, senseless of all evil, caring for no instructions
and admonitions; but living in pleasure and impenitency and not heeding nor
taking notice of the signs of Christ his coming. Math. 24. 35. Luke 17. 26.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. so that the last day shall come as a snare on al such; L^k 21.
35
sudden destruction shall come upon them and they shall in no wise escape, 1.
These. ^, ^. et. 4.
they shall not be able to endure the day of his wrath; much less be able to
stand and justify their cause in judgment.

This brutish security has been in former ages, and much increases in these
our days, but then it shall be much more vniue^fall and incurable.

The last sign is the darkning of the lights of heaven, and the roaring of the
seas Math. 24. v^. 24. Luke 21. v. 25, this is the nearest sign and therefore,
we are the more carefully to observe it when it comes.

Quest. Why will not God reveal unto any the time and day of the last
judgment?

An. Partly to bridle man's rash curiosity that does search and mine into
secrets that are both impossible and unlawful to be known. Secondly that we
should watch and wait for his coming and make us ready every hour. Mark. 13.
ver. 33.

Quest. Why does God def^rre and put of the last judgment so long?

An. First that the number of his elect might be all borne, called and
fulfilled, and so gathered into the Chruch triumphant in heaven. Secondly to
contain and keep his people from astonishment of fear and from abuse of his
long patience, and also to try and exercise their faith, hope, charity and
patience. Lastly to leave the wicked and those that contemn his grace offered
unto them, Rom 2 v 4. et 5. 2. (...). 3. ^.
and abuse his long suffering, without all excuse and defense of themselves in
the last day.

Use. 1. The general uses of all these signs past, present and are to come,
are principally four. First here are reproved and condemned all such who
being led by their own lusts and carnal reason and not by holy scripture
beeleue not the last judgment but contemn and deride it. 2. Pet. 3. ver. 3.

Whereas first this doctrine is plainly and abundantly set forth in the
scriptues. Psalm. 50. 1. Act. 10. 42. Math. 25. 31. Luke 18. 17. Romans 2. 16.
Hebrew. 9. 27. Job. 19. 25. Act. 3. 19. Act. 17. 31. 2. Cor. 5. 10. 1. Pet. 4.
Jude. ver. 14. et 15. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Apoc. 1. Apoc. 20. ver. 12. 13. 14. 15.

Secondly except there should be a general judgment there need no
resurrection. Lastly God could not show himself either perfectly just in
punishing and condemning the reprobates, nor perfectly merciful in absoluing
saving, and rewarding his servants.

Use. 2. Secondly, seeing that we know not the day nor the year of judgment
but only the general signs of it, it serves to refute and refell the pride
and rash cu^iositie of those, that either by fained revelation, human
Prophecies* Arithmeticall supputation, position of stars and hum^ine
conjectures and authorities, will calculate and cast yea and define the very
time and year of Christ coming (as some did in the ancient fathers times, and
many defined that the world shall end in 88.) but time and experience has
showed the folly and vanity of there conjectures.

Secondly it is a thing both utterly unlawful and simply impossible for any
man to know or define the certain and set time of Christ his appearance, Acts
^. ^.
for it is not revealed to the very elect Angels, and Christ when he was upon
the earth knew not the day. Math. 24. ver. 36. Math. 13. 32. much less can we
know it. Math 24, 42, et ^4


Use. 3. The third use is for instruction and admonition that the Godly
themselves because many times they are in a kind of slumber, and do not alike
cheerfully look for CHRIST his coming, might watch, pray, Luke 12. 43
repent, make themselves ready and wait for the day and appearance of Christ,
that when Christ comes to them either by death or at the last judgment, they
may be found waking and walking in their Christian calling, and so ready with
good conscience to render unto the Lord an account of their Stewardship.

Use. 4. The fourth use is for the consolation of the sound and sincere hearted
Christian whosoever, Acts 3, ver. 19
for he knows that the nearer the signs are to their accomplishment; the
sooner shall he be eased of the burden of his sins, delivered from all
miseries and be possessed with all joy and happiness. Luke 21, 28
Hereupon the Godly are upon notice taken of the accomplishment of these
signs, exhorted to lift up their heads, because their full redemption draws
nigh and they in the certain hope and expectatation of this blessed day, are
notably sheilded and defended against all temptations and afflictions. Job. 25.
19. 2. Cor. 4. Apoc. 1. 7.


Use. 5. The last use is for the terror and conuincement of all im^enitent,
unbelieving, profaine rebellious persons; who in this life would not submit and
subject themselves to ^ee taught, ruled and ordered by Christ, his Gospel, his
discipline, they by reason of their unbelief and con^empt shall find and
feel Christ to be as a just, so an angry and severe judge to condemn them to
eternal and unspeakable torments. Apoc. 6. verse. 15. 16. Luke 21. 26. Ma^h.
25. 41. Apoc. 6.

The Lord God for Christ his sake grant, that we may take due notice of these
signs, and be hereby effectually stirred up to prepare our selves against
Christ his coming that our souls may be saved. Amen.

(...).
