IDEA THE SHEPHERDS GARLAND, Fashioned in nine Eglogs.

ROWLANDS SACRIFICE to the nine Muses.

Effugiunt auidos Carmina sola roges.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the black Bear. 1593.

TO THE NOBLE, AND VALEROVS GENTLEMAN, MASTER ROBERT DUDLEY: ENRICHED WITH ALL
VERTVES OF THE MIND, AND WORTHY OF ALL HONORABLE DESERT.

Your most affectionate, and devoted: Michael Drayton.

THE FIRST EGLOG.
When as the joyful spring brings in the Summers sweet relief:
Poor Rowland malcontent be wayles the winter of his grief.
NOw Phoebus from the equinoctial Zone,
Had task'd his teame unto the higher sphere.
And from the brightness of his glorious throne,
Sends forth his Beams to light the lower air,
The cheerful welkin, comen this long looked hour,
Distills adowne full many a silver shower.
Fair Philomel night-musicke of the spring,
Sweetly records her tunefull harmony,
And with deep sobbes, and doleful sorrowing,
Before fair Cinthya acts her Tragedy:
The Throstle cock, by breaking of the day,
Chants to his sweet, full many a lovely lay.
The crawling snake, against the morning sun,
Now streaks him in his rayn-bow colored cote:
The darkesome shades, as loathsome he does shun,
Enchanted with the Birds sweet siluan note:
The Buck forsakes the launds where he has fed,
And scorns the hunt should view his velvet head.
Through all the parts, dispersed is the blood,
The lusty spring, in flower of all her pride,
Man, bird, and beast, and fish, in pleasant flood,
Rejoicing all in this most joyful tide:
Save Rowland leaning on a Ranpick tree,
O'r grown with age, forlorn with woe was he.
Oh blessed Pan, thou shepherds god says he,
O thou Creator of the starrie light,
Whose wondrous works show thy divinity,
Thou wise inuentor of the day and night,
Refreshing nature with the lovely spring,
Quite blemished erst, with stormy winters sting.
O thou strong builder of the firmament,
Who placedst Phoebus in his fiery Carre,
And by thy mighty Godhead did invent,
The planets mansions that they should not jar,
Ordeyning Phebe, mistress of the night,
From Tytans flame to steal her forked light.
Even from the cleerest crystal shining throne,
Under whose feet the heavens are low abased,
Commanding in thy majesty alone,
Whereas the fiery Cherubines are placed:
Receive my vows as incense unto thee,
My tribute due to thy eternity.
O shepherds sovereign, yea receive in gree,
The gushing tears, from neuer-resting eyes,
And let those prayers which I shall make to thee,
Be in thy sight perfumed sacrifice:
Let smokie sighs be pledges of contrition,
For follies past to make my souls submission.
Submission makes amends for all my miss,
Contrition a refined life begins,
Then sacred sighs, what thing more precious is?
And prayers be oblations for my sins,
Repentant tears, from heauen-beholding eyes,
Ascend the air, and penetrate the skies.
My sorrows wax, my joys are in the wayning,
My hope decays, and my despair is springing,
My love has loss, and my disgrace has gayning,
Wrong rules, desert with tears her hands sits wringing:
Sorrow, despair, disgrace, and wrong, do thwart
My Joy, my love, my hope, and my desert.
Devouring time shall swallow up my sorrows,
And strong belief shall torture black despair,
Death shall orewhelme disgrace, in deepest furrows,
And Justice lay my wrongs upon the Beer:
Thus Justice, death, belief, and time, ere long,
Shall end my woes, despair, disgrace, and wrong.
Yet time shall be expired and lose his date,
And full assurance cancel strongest trust,
Eternity shall trample on deaths pate,
And Justice shall surcease when all be just:
Thus time, belief, death, Justice, shall surcease,
By date, assurance, eternity, and peace.
Thus breathing from the Center of his soul,
The tragic accents of his ecstasy,
His sunset eyes began here and there to roll,
Like one surprisde with sudden lunacie:
And being rouzde out of melancholy,
Fly whirle-winde thoughts unto the heavens quoth he.
Now in the Ocean Tytan quenched his flame,
And summond Cinthya to set up her light,
The heavens with their glorious starry frame,
Preparde to crown the sable-vayled night:
When Rowland from this time consumed stock,
With stone-colde heart now stalketh toward his flock.
Quid queror? and toto facio conuicia coelo:
Di quoque habent oculos, di quoque pectus habent.
THE SECOND EGLOG.
Wynken of man's frail wayning age
declares the simple truth,
And does by Rowlands harms reprove
Mottos unbridled youth.
Motto.
MIght my youths mirth delight thy aged years,
My gentle shepherd father of us all,
Wherewith I why lome Joyed my lovely feeres,
Chanting sweet strains of heavenly pastoral.
Now would I tune my miskins on this Green,
And frame my muse those virtues to unfold,
Of that sole Phoenix Bird, my lives sole Queen:
Whose locks done stain, the three times burnisht gold.
But melancholy grafted in thy Brain,
My Rimes seem harsh, to thy vnrelisht taste,
Thy droughthy wits, not long refresht with reign,
Parched with heat, done wither now and waste.
Wynken.
Indeed my Boy, my wits been all forlorn,
My flowers decayed, with winter-withered frost,
My clowdy set eclipsed my cherefull morn,
That Jewel gone wherein I ioyed most.
My dreadful thoughts been drawn upon my face,
In blotted lines with ages iron pen,
The lothlie morpheu saffroned the place,
Where beuties damask daz'd the eyes of men.
A cumber-world, yet in the world am left,
A fruitles plot, with brambles ouergrowne,
Misliued man of my worlds joy bereft,
Hart-breaking cares the offspring of my moan.
Those dainty strains of my well tuned reed,
Which many a time have pleased my vvanton ears,
Nor svveet, nor pleasing thoughts in me done breed,
But tell the follies of my vvandring years.
Those poysned pills been biding at my heart,
Those loathsome drugs of my youths vanity,
Svveete seemed they once, full bitter now and tart,
Ay me consuming corosiues they be.
Motto.
Even so I vveene, for thy old ages fever,
Deemes sweetest potions bitter as the gall,
And thy cold Pallat having lost her savor,
Receives no comfort in a cordial.
VVynken.
As thou art now, was I a gamesome boy,
Though starved with vvintred eld as thou do see,
And well I know thy svvallovv-vvinged joy,
Shall Be forgotten as it is in me.
When on the Arche of thine eclipsed eyes,
Time has ingrau'd deep characters of death,
And sunburned age thy kindly moisture dries,
Thy vvearied lungs be niggards of thy breath,
Thy bravvne-falne arms, thy camock-bended back,
The time-plovv d furrovves in thy fairest field,
The Southsaiers of natures woeful vvrack,
When blooming age must stoop to starued eld,
When Lilly white is of a tavvnie die,
Thy fragrant crimson turned ash-colored pale,
Thy skin orecast with rough embroderie,
And cares rude pencell, quite disgraced thy sale,
When dovvne-beds heat must thavve thy frozen cold,
And luke-vvarme brothes recure Phlebotomie,
And when the bell is ready to be tol'd,
To call the worms to thine Anatomy:
Remember then my boy, what once I said to thee.
Now am I like the knurrie-bulked Oak,
Whom wasting eld has made a toombe of dust,
Whose windvfallen branches fold by tempest stroke,
His barcke consumes with canker wormed rust
And though thou seemst like to the bragging bryer,
As gay as is the mornings Marygolde,
Yet shortly shall thy sap be dry and seere,
Thy gaudy Blossoms blemished with cold.
Even such a wanton, an unruly swayne,
was little Rowland, when of yore as he,
Upon the Beechen tree on yonder plain,
Carved this rhyme of loves Idolatry.
The Gods delight, the heavens hie spectacle,
Earths greatest glory, worlds rarest miracle.
Fortunes fayr'st mistress, virtues surest guide,
Loves Gouernesse, and natures chiefest pride.
Delights own darling, honors chief defense,
Chastities choice, and wisdoms quintessence.
Conceits sole Riches thoughts only treasure,
Desires true hope, loyes sweetest pleasure.
Mercies due merit, valeurs just reward,
Times fairest fruit, fames strongest guarde.
Yea she alone, next that eternal he,
The express Image of eternity.
Motto.
Oh divine love, which so aloft can raise,
And lift the mind out of this earthly mire,
And do inspire the pen with so hie praise,
As with the heavens does equal man's desire.
Thou lightning flame of sacred Poesy,
Whose fury does incense the swelling brains,
As draws to thee by heauen-bred Sympathy,
The sweet delights of highest soaring veins:
Who does not help to deck thy holy Shrine,
With Myrtle, and triumphant Laurel tree?
Who will not say that thou art most divine?
Or who does not confess thy deity?
Wynken.
A foolish boy, full ill is he repayed,
For now the wanton pines in endless pain,
And sore repents what he before missaide,
So may they be which can so lewdly feign.
Now has this yonker torn his tressed locks,
And broke his pipe which sounded erst so sweet,
Forsaking his companions and their flocks,
And casts his gayest garland at his feet.
And being shrouded in a homely cote,
And full of sorrow as a man might be,
He tuned his Rebeck with a mournful note,
And thereto sang this doleful elegy.
Tell me fair flock (if so you can conceive)
The sudden cause of my night-sunnes eclipse,
If this be wrought me my light to bereave,
By Magic spells, from some enchanting lips
Or ugly Saturn from his combust sent,
This fat all presage of deaths dreryment.
Oh cleerest day star, honored of mine eyes,
Yet sdaynst mine eyes should gaze upon thy light,
Bright morning sun, who with thy sweet arise,
Expell'st the clouds of my hearts lowering might,
Gods rejecting sweetest sacrifice,
Of mine eyes tears ay offered to thine eyes.
May purest heavens scorn my souls pure desires?
Or holy shrines hate Pilgrims orizons?
May sacred temples gaynsay sacred prayers?
Or Saints refuse the poores devotions?
Then Orphane thoughts with sorrow be you waind,
When loves Religion shall be thus prophayn'd.
Yet needs the earth must droupe with visage sad;
When silver dewes been turned to bitter storms,
The Cheerful Welkin once in sables clad,
Her frowns foretell poor human creatures harms.
And yet for all to make amends for this,
The clouds sheed tears and weepen at my miss.
Motto.
Woe's me for him that pineth so in pain,
Alas poor Rowland, how it pities me,
So fair a bait should breed so foul a bayne,
Or humble shows should cover cruelty.
VVinken
Beware by him thou foolish wanton svvayne,
By others harms thus may thou learn to heed,
Beauty and wealth been fraught with hie disdain,
Believe it as a Maxim of thy Creed.
Motto.
If that there be such woes and pains in love,
Woe be to him that list the same to prove.
VVynken.
Yes thou shall find, if thou desir'st to prove,
There is no hell, unto the pains in love.
THE THIRD EGLOG.
Rowland and Perkin both Ifeere, in field upon a day,
With little Robin redbrests Round, do pass the time away.
Perkin.
ROwland for shame awake thy drowsy muse,
Time plays the hunts-vp to thy sleepie head,
Why li'st thou here as thou had long been dead, foul idle swayne?
Who ever heard thy pipe and pleasing vain,
And does but hear this scurrill minstralcy.
These noninos of filthy ribauldry, that does not muse.
Then slumber not with foul Endymion,
But tune thy reed to dapper virelayes,
And sing a while of blessed Betas praise, fair Beta she:
In thy sweet song so blessed may thou be,
For learned Collin lays his pipes to gage,
And is to fayrie gone a Pilgrimage: the more our moan.
Rowland.
What Beta? shepherd, she is Pans beloved,
Fair Betas praise beyond our strain does stretch,
Her notes too hie for my poor pipe to reach,
poor oten reed:
So far unfit to speak of worthies deed,
But set my stops unto a lovver kay,
Whereas a horne-pipe I may safely play,
yet vnreproou'd.
With flattery my muse could never fage,
Nor could affect such vain scurrility,
To please lewd Lorrels, in their foolery,
too base and vile:
Nor but a note yet will I raise my style,
My self above Will Piper to advance,
Which so bestirs him at the morris dance,
for penny wage.
Perkin.
Rowland, so toys often times esteemed are,
And fashions ever changing with the time,
Then frolic it a while in lusty rhyme,
with mirth and glee:
And let me hear that Roundelay of thee,
Which once thou sangst to me in Ianeueer.
When Robin-redbrest sitting on a breere,
the burden bare.
Rowland.
Well needs I must yet with a heavy heart:
But were not Beta sure I would not sing,
Whose praise the echoes never cease to ring,
unto the skies.
Pirken.
Be blithe good Rowland then, and clear thine eyes:
And now since Robin to his roost is gone,
Good Rowland then supply the place alone,
and show thy art.
O thou fair silver Thames: o cleerest crystal flood,
Beta alone the Phoenix is, of all thy watery brood,
The Queen of Uirgins only she:
And thou the Queen of floods shall be:
Let all thy Nymphs be joyful then to see this happy day,
Thy Beta now alone shall be the subject of my lay.
With dainty and delight some strains of sweetest virelayes:
Come lovely shepherds sit we down and chant our Betas praise:
And let us sing: so rare a verse,
Our Betas praises to reheaerse
That little Birds shall silent be, to hear poor shepherds sing,
And rivers backward bend their course, and flow unto the spring.
Range all thy swannes fair Thames together on a rank,
And place them duly one by one, upon thy stately banck,
Then set together all a good,
Recording to the silver stood,
And crave the tunefull Nightingale to help you with her lay,
The Osel and the Throstlecocke, chief music of our may.
O see what troops of Nimphs been sporting on the strands,
And they been blessed Nimphs of peace, with Olives in their
How meryly the Muses sing, (hands.
That all the flowery Medowesring,
And Beta sits upon the banck, in purple and in pall,
And she the Queen of Muses is, and wears the Corinall.
Trim up her Golden tresses with Apollos sacred tree,
o happy sight unto all those that love and honor thee,
The Blessed Angels have prepared,
A glorious Crown for thy reward,
Not such a golden Crown as haughty Caesar wears,
But such a glittering starry Crown as Ariadne bears.
Make her a goodly Chapilet of azur'd Colombine,
And wreath about her Coronet with sweetest Eglentine:
Bedeck our Beta all with Lillies,
And the dayntie Daffadillies,
With Roses damask, white, and red, and fairest flower delice,
With Cowslips of Jerusalem, and cloves of Paradise.
O thou fair torch of heaven, the days most dearest light,
And thou bright-shyning Cinthya, the glory of the night:
You stars the eyes of heaven,
And thou the glyding leven,
And thou o gorgeous Iris with all strange Colors dyed,
When she streams forth her rays, then dashed is all your pride.
See how the day stands still, admiring of her face,
And time lo stretches forth her arms, thy Beta to embrace,
The Sirens sing sweet lays,
The Trytons sound her praise,
Go pass on Thames and hie thee fast unto the Ocean sea,
And let thy billows there proclaim thy Betas holy day.
And water thou the blessed root of that green Olive tree,
With whose sweet shadow, al thy bancks with peace preserved
Laurel for Poets and Conquerours, (be,
And myrtle for Loves Paramours:
That fame may be thy fruit, the boughs preserved by peace,
And let the mournfist Cipres die, now storms and tempests cease.
We Will straw the shore with pearl where Beta walks alone,
And we will paue her princely Bower with richest Indian stone,
Perfume the air and make it sweet,
For such a Goddess it is meet,
For if her eyes for purity contend with Tytans light,
No marvel then although they so do dazell human sight.
Sound out your trumpets then, from Londons stately towers,
To beat the stormy winds a back and calm the raging showers,
Set too the Cornet and the flute,
The Orpharyon and the Lute,
And tune the Taber and the pipe, to the sweet violons,
And move the thunder in the air, with lowdest Clarions.
Beta long may thine Altars smoke, with yearly sacrifice,
And long thy sacred Temples may their Saboths solemnize,
Thy shepherds watch by day and night,
Thy Mayds attend the holy light,
And thy large empire stretch her arms from east unto the west,
And thou under thy feet may tread, that soul seuen-headed
beast.
Perken.
Thanks gentle Rowland for my Roundelay,
And blessed be Beta burden of thy song,
The shepherds Goddess may she flourish long, o happy she.
Her years and days thrice doubled may they be.
Triumphing Albion clap thy hands for joy,
And pray the heavens may shield her from anoy,
so will I pray.
Rowland.
So do, a^nd when my milk-white eawes have yeande,
Beta shall have the firstling of the foulde,
I le burnish all his horns with finest gould,
and paynt his fleece with purple grain.
Perkin.
Believe me as I am true shepherds swayne,
Then for thy love all other I forsake,
And unto thee my self I will betake,
with faith vnfayn'd.
Ipse ego thura dabo, fumosis candidus aris:
Ipse feram ante tuos munera vota pedes.
THE FOVRTH EGLOG.
Wynken be wayleth Elphinslosse,
the God of Poesy,
with Rowlands rhyme ecleepd the tears
of the green Hawthorne tree.
Gorbo.
WEll met good wynken, whither do thou wend?
How have thou fared sweet shepherd many a year?
May vvynken thus his days in darkness spend?
Who I have known for piping had no peer?
Where been those fair flocks thou were wont to guide?
What? been they dead? or hap'd on some mischance,
Or mischief has their master else betide,
Or Lordly Love has cast thee in a trance.
What man? lets still be merry whilst we may,
And take a truce with sorrow for a time,
And let us pass this weary winters day,
In reading Riddles, or in making rhyme.
VVynken.
Ah woe's me Gorbo, mirth is far away,
Mirth may not soiourne with black malcontent,
The lowering aspect of this dismal day,
The winter of my sorrow does augment.
My song is now a swanne-like dying song,
And my conceits, the deep conceits of death,
My heart becom'n a very hell of wrong,
My breast the irksome prison of my breath.
I loath my life, I loath the dearest light,
Com'n is my night, when once appeeres the day,
The blessed sun seems odious in my sight,
No song may like me but the shreech-owles lay.
Gorbo.
What may thou be, that old vvynkin de word,
Whose threadbare wits o'rworne with melancholy,
Once so delightsome at the shepherds board,
But now forlorn with thy selves self-wild folly.
I think thou dot'st in thy gray-bearded age,
Or brusd with sin, for thy youths sin art sorry,
And vow'st for thy? a solemn pilgrimage,
To holy Hayles or Patricks Purgatory.
Come sit we down under this Hawthorne tree.
The morrowes light shall lend us day enough,
And tell a tale of Gawen or Sir Guy,
Of Robin Hood, or of good Clema Clough.
Or else some Romant unto us areed,
Which good old Godfrey taught thee in thy youth,
Of noble Lords and Ladies gentle deed,
Or of thy love, or of thy lasses truth.
VVinken
Gorbo, my Comfort is accloyd with care,
A new mishap my wonted joys has crossed:
Then marvel not although my music jar,
When she the Author of her mirth has lost,
Elphin is dead, and in his grave is laid,
Our lives delight whilst lovely Elphin lived,
What cruel fate has so the time berraid,
The widow world of all her joys deprived.
O cursed death, Lives fearsull enemy,
Times poysned sickle: Tyrants revenging pride:
Thou blood-sucker, Thou child of infamy:
Devouring Tiger: slaughtering homicide:
Ill have thou done, and ill may thee betide.
Naught have thou got, the earth has won the most,
Nature is paid the interest of her due,
Pan has received, what him so dearly cost,
O heavens his virtues do belong to you.
A heavenly clowded in a human shape,
Rare substance, in so rough a barcke Iclad,
Of Pastoral, the lively springing sap,
Though mortal thou, thy fame immortal made.
Spel-charming Prophet, sooth-diuining seer,
o heavenly music of the highest sphere,
Sweet sounding trump, soule-rauishing desire,
Thou stealer of man's heart, inchanter of the ear.
God of Invention, Jove's dear Mercury,
Joy of our Laurel, pride of all our joy:
The essence of all Poets divinity,
Spirit of Orpheus: Pallas lovely boy.
But all my words shall be dissolved to tears,
And my tears fountains shall to rivers grow:
These Rivers to the floods of my dispaires,
And these shall make an Ocean of my woe.
His rare deserts, shall kindle my desire,
With burning zeal, the brands of mine unrest,
My sighs in adding sulphur to this fire,
Shall frame another AEtna in my breast.
Planets reserve your playnts till dismal day,
The ruthles rocks but newly have begone,
And when in drops they be dissolved away,
Let heavens begin to weep when earth has done.
Then tune thy pipe and I will sing alaye,
Upon his death by Rowland of the rock,
Sitting with me this other stormy day,
In you sayre field attending on our flock.
Gorbo.
This shall content me VVynken wondrous well,
And in this mistie wether keep us waking,
To hear ofhim, who whylome did excel,
In such a song of learned Rowlands making.
Melpomine put on thy mourning Gaberdine,
And set thy song unto the doleful Base,
And with thy sable veil shadow thy face,
with weeping verse,
attend his hearse,
Whose blessed soul the heavens do now enshrine.
Come Nymphs and with your Rebecks ring his knell,
VVarble forth your wamenting harmony,
And at his drery fat all obsequie,
with Cypres bows,
mask your fair Brows,
And beat your breasts to chyme his burying peale.
Thy birthday was to all our joy, the even,
And on thy death this doleful song we sing,
Sweet Child of Pan, and the Castalian spring,
unto our endless moan,
from us why art thou gone,
To fill up that sweet Angels quier in heaven.
O whylome thou thy lasses dearest love,
When with green Laurel she has crowned thee,
Immortal mirror of all Poesy:
the Muses treasure,
the Graces pleasure,
Reigning with Angels now in heaven above.
Our mirth is now deprived of all her glory,
Our Taburins in doleful dumps are drowned.
Our viols want their sweet and pleasing sound,
our melody is marred
and we of joys debard,
Oh wicked world so mutable and transitory.
O dismal day, bereauer of delight,
O stormy winter sourse of all our sorrow,
o most untimely and eclipsed morrow,
to rob us quite
of all delight,
Darkening that star which ever shone so bright:
Oh Elphin, Elphin, Though thou hence be gone,
In spite of death yet shall thou live for aye,
Thy Poesy is garlanded with Baye:
and still shall blaze
thy lasting praise:
Whose loss poor shepherds ever shall bemone.
Come Girls, and with Carnations deck his grave,
With damask Roses and the hyacynt:
Come with sweet Williams, Marioram and Mynt,
with precious Balmes,
with hymns and psalms,
His funeral deserves no less at all to have.
But see where Elphin sits in fair Elizia,
Feeding his flock on yonder heavenly plain,
Come and behold, yon lovely shepherds swayne,
piping his fill,
on yonder hill,
Tasting sweet Nectar, and Ambrosia.
Gorbo.
Oh how thy plaints (sweet friend) renew my pain,
In listening thus to thy lamenting cries:
That from the tempest of my troubled brain,
See how the floods been risen in mine eyes.
And being now a full tide of our tears,
It is full time to stop the stream of grief,
Lest drowning in the floods of our despaires,
We want our lives, wanting our souls relief.
But now the sun begins to decline,
And whilst our woes been in repeating here,
Yon little eluish moping Lamb of mine,
Is all betangled in yon crawling Brier.
Optima prima fere manibus rapiuntur auaris:
Implentur numer is deteriora suis.
THE FIFTH EGLOG.
This lusty swayne bis lowly quill,
to higher notes does raise,
And in Ideas person paynts,
his lovely lasses praise.
Motto.
COme frolic it a while my lusty swayne,
Let Us see if time have yet revived in thee,
Or if there be remaining but a grain,
Of the old stock of famous poesy,
Or but one slip yet left of this same sacred tree.
Or if reserved from elds devouring rage,
Records of virtue, Aye memorial,
Left to the world as learnings lasting gage,
Or if the praise of worthy pastoral,
May tempt thee now, or move thee once at all.
To Fortunes Orphans Nature has bequeathed,
That mighty Monarchs seldom have possessed,
From highest Heaven, this influence is breathed,
A most divine impression in the breast, (feast.
And those whom Fortune pines does Nature often
It Is not the troops of painted Imagerie,
Nor these worlds Idols, our worlds Idiots gazes,
Our forgers of supposed Gentillitie,
When he his great, great Grand-sires glory blases,
And paints out fictions in base coined Phrases.
For honor naught regards, nor follows fame,
These silken pictures showed in every street:
Of Idleness comes evil, of pride ensues shame,
And black oblivion is their winding sheet,
And all their glory trodden under feet.
Though Envy suit her seuen-times poysned darts,
Yet purest gold is seven times tried in fire,
True valeur lodges in the lowlest hearts,
Virtue is in the mind, not in th'attyre,
Nor stares at stars; nor stoups at filthy mire.
Rowland.
I may not sing of such as fall, nor clyme,
Nor chaunt of arms, nor of heroique deeds,
It fitteth not poor shepherds rural rhyme,
Nor is agreeing with my oaten reeds,
Nor from my quill, gross flattery proceeds.
Unsitting terms, nor false dissembling smiles,
Shall in my lines, nor in my style appear,
Worlds fawning fraud, nor like deceitful guiles,
No, no, my muse none such shall soiourne here,
Nor any bragges of hope nor signs of base despair,
No fatal dreades nor fruitles vain desires,
Nor caps, nor curtsies to a painted wall,
Nor heaping rotten sticks on needles fires,
Ambitious thoughts to clime nor fearcs to fall,
A mind void of mistrust, and free from servile thral.
Foul slander thou suspicions Bastard Child,
Selfe-eating Impe from vipers poysned womb,
Foul swelling to ade with lothly spots defiled,
Vile Aspis bred within the ruinde tomb,
Eternal death for ever be thy doombe.
Still be thou shrouded in black pitchie night,
Luld with the horror of night-rauens song,
Let foggie mistes, clowd and eclipse thy light,
Thy wooluish teeth chew out thy venomd tongue,
With Snakes and adders be thy body stong.
Motto.
Nor these, nor these, may like thy lowly quill,
As of too hie, or of too base a strain,
Unfitting thee, and sdeyned ofthy skill,
Nor yet according with a shepherds vain,
Nor no such subject may beseem a swayne.
Then tune thy reed unto Ideas praise:
And teach the woods to wonder at her name:
Thy lowly notes here may thou learn to raise,
And make the echoes blazen out her name,
The lasting trumpe of Phebes lasting fame.
Thy Temples then shall with green bays be dight,
Thy Egle-soring muse upon her wing,
With her fair silver wings shall take her flight,
To that hie welked tower where Angels sing,
From thence to fetch the tutch of her sweet string.
Rowland.
Oh hie inthronized Jove, in thy Olympicke reign,
Oh battel-waging Mart, oh sage-saw'd Mercury,
Oh Golden shrined Sol, Uenus loves sovereign,
Oh dreadful Saturn, flaming aye with fury,
Moyst-humord Cinthya, Author of Lunacie,
Conioyne help to erect our fair Ideas trophie.
Oh Tresses of fair Phoebus stremed die,
Oh blessed load-starre lending purest light,
Oh Paradise of heavenly tapistrie,
Angels sweet music, o my souls delight,
o fairest Phebe passing every other light.
Whose presence joys the earths decayed state,
Whose counsels are registered in the sphere,
Whose sweet reflecting clearenes does amate,
The starrie lights, and makes the Sun more fair,
Whose breathing sweet perfumeth all the air.
Thy snowish neck, fair Natures tresurie,
Thy swannish breast, the haven of lasting bliss,
Thy cheeks the bancks of Beauties usury,
Thy heart the mine, where goodness gotten is,
Thy lips those lips which Cupid joys to kiss.
And those fair hands within whose lovely palms,
Fortune diuineth happy Augurie,
Those straightest fingers dealing heavenly alms,
Pointed with pur'st of Natures Alcumie,
Where love sits looking in loves palmistrie.
And those fair Iuorie columns which vpreare,
That Temple built by heavens Geometry,
And holiest Flamynes sacrifizen theare,
Unto that heavenly Queen of Chastity,
Where virtues burning lamps can never quenched be.
Thence see the fairest light that ever shone,
That clear which does worlds cleerenes quite surpass,
Brave Phoebus chayred in his golden throane,
Beholding him, in this pure Crystal glass,
See here the fairest fair that ever was.
Delicious fountain, liquid christalline,
Mornings vermilion, verdant spring-times pride,
Purest of purest, most refined fine,
With crimson tincture curiously Idy'd,
Mother of Muses, great Apollos bride.
Earths heaven, worlds wonder, hiest house of fame,
Reuiuer of the dead, eye-killer of the live,
Beloved of Angels, Virtues greatest name,
Favors rar'st feature, beauties prospectiue,
Oh that my verse thy virtues could contriue.
That stately Theater on whose fair stage,
Each moral virtue acts a princely part,
Where every scene pronounced by a Sage,
Eternizeth diuinest Poets Art,
Joys the beholders eyes, and glads the hearers heart.
The worlds memorials, that sententious book,
Where every Comma, points a curious phrase,
Upon whose method, Angels joy to look:
At every Colon, Wisdoms self does pause,
And every Period has his hie applause.
Read in her eyes a Romant of delights,
Read in her words the proverbs of the wise,
Read in her life the holy vestall rites,
Which love and virtue sweetly moralize:
And she the Academ of virtues exercise.
But on thy volumes who is there may comment,
When as thy self has Arts self undermined:
Or undertake to coat thy learned margent,
When learnings lines are ever enterlined,
And purest words, are in thy mouth refined.
Knew thou thy virtues, oh thou fayr'st of fairest,
Thou earths sole Phoenix, of the world admired,
Virtue in thee repurify'd and rarest,
Whose endless fame by time is not expired,
Then of thy self would thy self be admired.
But art wants art to frame so pure a Myrror,
Where human eyes may view thy virtues beauty,
When fame is so surprised with the terror,
wanting to pay the tribute of her duty,
with colors who can paint out virtues beauty.
But since imperfect are the perfects colors,
And skill is so unskillful how to blaze thee:
Now will I make a myrror of my dolours,
and in my tears then look thy self and praise thee,
oh happy I, if such a glass might please thee.
Go gentle winds and whisper in her ear,
and tell Idea how much I adore her,
And thou my flock, report unto my fair,
How she excels all that went before her,
Tell her the very fowls in air adore her.
And thou clear Brook by whose fair silver stream,
Grow those tall Oaks where I have carved her name,
Convey her praise to Neptunes watery Realm,
refresh the roots of her still growing fame,
and teach the Dolphins to resound her name.
Motto.
Cease shepherd cease, reserve thy Muses store,
Till after time shall teach thy Oaten reed,
Aloft in air with Egles wings to sore,
and sing in honor of some worthies deed,
to serve Idea in some better steed.
She sees not shepherd, no she will not see,
her rarest virtues blazond by thy quill,
Nor knows the effect the same has wrought in thee,
The very tuch and anuile of thy skill,
and this is that which bodeth all thy ill.
Yet if her virtues glory shall decay,
Or if her beauties flower shall hap to fall,
Or any cloud eclipse her sunshine day,
Then look ( Idea) in thy pastoral,
And thou thy virtues unto mind shall call,
Rowland.
Shepherd farewell, the skies begin to lowre,
Yon pitchie clowd which hangs in the West,
I fear me does presage some sudden shower,
Come let us home, for so I think it best,
For all our flocks been laid them down to rest.
Motto.
And if thou list to come unto my Coat,
Although (God knows) my cheer be to too small,
And wealth with me was never yet afloate,
Yet take in gree what ever do befall,
And we will sit, and sing a merry madrigall.
Rowland.
Per superos iuro testes, pampamque Deorum,
Te Dominam nobis tempus in omne fore.
Motto.
Nos quoque per totum pariter cantabimur orbem,
Iunctaque semper erunt nomina nostratuis.
THE SIXTH EGLOG.
Good Gorbo calls to mind the fame,
of our old Ancestrie:
And Perkin sings Pandoras praise,
The Muse of Britanye.
Perkin.
ALL hail good Gorbo, yet returned at last,
What tell me man? how goes the world with thee?
What is it worse then it was wont to be?
Or been thy youthful days already past?
Have patience man, for wealth will come and go,
And to the end the world shall ebb and flow.
The valiant man, whose thoughts on hie been placed,
And sees sometime how fortune list to rage,
With wisdom still his actions so does gage,
As with her frowns he no whit is disgraced,
And when she fawnes, and turns her squinting eye,
Bethinks him then, of her inconstancy.
When as the Cullian, and the viler Clown,
Who with the swine, on draffe sets his desire,
And thinks no life to wallowing in the mire,
In stormy tempest, dying lays him down,
Yet tasting weal, the ass begins to bray,
And feeling woe, the beast consumes away.
Gorbo.
So said the Sage in his Philofophie,
The Lordly heart inspired with noblesse,
With courage does his crosses still suppress,
His patience does his passions mortify,
when other folk this pain cannot endure,
because they want this medicine for their cure.
Perkin.
And yet often times the world I do admire,
When as the wise and virtuous men I see,
Be hard beset with need and poverty,
And lewdest fools to highest things aspire,
what should I say? that fortune is to blame?
or unto whom should I impute this shame.
Gorbo.
Virtue and Fortune never could agree,
Foul Fortune ever was fair virtues foe,
Blind Fortune blindly does her gifts bestow,
But virtue wise, and vvisely does foresee,
they tall which trust to fortunes fickle wheel,
but stayed by virtue, men shall never reele.
Perkin.
If so, why should she not be more regarded,
Why should men cherish vice and villainy,
And maintain sin and basest rogerie,
And virtue thus so slightly be revvarded,
this shows that we full deep dissemblers be,
and all we do, but mere hypocrisy.
Gorbo.
Where been those Nobles, Perkin, where been they?
Where been those worthies, Perkin, which of yore,
This gentle Lady did so much adore?
And for her Impes did with such care puruey,
they been ysvvadled in their vvinding sheet,
and she (I think) is buried at their feet.
Oh worthy world, wherein those worthies lived,
Unworthy world, of such men so unworthy,
Unworthy age, of all the most unworthy,
Which art of these so worthy men deprived,
and inwardly in us is nothing less,
Than outwardly that, which we most profess.
Perkin.
Nay stay good Gorbo, Virtue is not dead,
Nor all her friends be gone which wonned here,
She lives with one who ever held her dear,
And to her lap for succor she is fled,
In her sweet bosom, she has built her nest,
And from the world, even there she lives at rest.
Unto this sacred Lady she was left,
(To be an heire-loome) by her ancestrie,
And so bequeathed by their legacy,
When on their deathbed, life was them berest:
And as on earth together they remain,
Together so in heaven they both shall reign.
Oh thou Pandora, through the world renoun'd,
The glorious light, and load star of our West,
With all the virtues of the heavens possessed,
With mighty groves of holy Lavvrell cround,
Erecting learnings long decayed fame,
Heryed and hallowed be thy sacred name.
The flood of Helicon, forspent and dry,
Her sourse decayed with foul oblivion,
The fountain flovves again in thee alone,
Where Muses now their thirst may satisfy,
And old Apollo, from Pernassus hill,
May in this spring refresh his droughty quill.
The Graces twisting garlands for thy head,
Thy Iuorie temples decked with rarest flowers,
Their roots refreshed with diuinest showers,
Thy brows with myrtle all inueloped,
shepherds erecting trophies to thy praise,
lauding thy name in songs and heavenly lays.
Sapphos sweet vain in thy rare quill is seen,
Minerua was a figure of thy worth,
Mnemosine, who brought the Muses forth,
Wonder of Britain, learnings famous Queen,
Apollo was thy Syer, Pallas her self thy mother,
Pandora thou, our Phoebus was thy brother.
Delicious Lark, sweet music of the morrow,
Clear bell of Rhetoric, ringing peales of love,
Joy of the Angels, sent us from above,
Enchanting Siren, charmer of all sorrow,
the lofty subject a heavenly tale,
Thames fairest Swanne, our summers Nightingale.
Arabian Phoenix, wonder of thy sex,
Lovely, chaste, holy, Miracle admired,
With spirit from the highest heaven inspired,
Oh thou alone, whom fame alone respects,
Natures chief glory, learnings richest prize,
hie Jove's Empresa, virtues Paradize.
Oh glory of thy nation, beauty of thy name,
Joy of thy country, blesser of thy birth,
Thou blazing Comet, Angel of the earth,
Oh Poets Goddess, sun-beame of their fame:
whom time through many worlds has sought to
thou peerles Paragon of woman kind. (find,
Thy glorious Image, gilded with the sun,
Thy locks adorned with an immortal crown,
Mounted aloft, upon a Crystal throne,
When by thy death, thy life shall be begun:
the blessed Angels tuning to the spheres,
with Gods sweet music, charm thy sacred ears.
From Fayrie I Will, divided from the main,
To utmost Thuly fame transports thy name,
To Garamant shall thence convey the same,
Where taking wing, and mounting up again,
from parched banckes on sunburned. Affricks shore,
shall fly as far as erst she came of yore.
And gentle Zephire from his pleasant bower,
Whistling sweet music to the shepherds rhyme,
The Ocean billows duly keeping time,
Playing upon Neptunus brazen tower:
lovers of learning shouting out their cries,
shaking the Center with th'applaudities.
Whilst that great engine, on her axeltree,
Does role about the vaultie circled Globe,
Whilst morning mantleth, in her purple Robe,
Or Tytan post his sea Queens bower to see,
whilst Phoebus crown, adornes the starrie sky,
Pandoras fame so long shall never die.
When all our silver swans shall cease to sing,
And when our groves shall want their Nightingales,
When hills shall hear no more our shepherds tales,
Nor echoes with our Roundelayes shall ring,
the little birds long listening to thy fame,
shall teach their offspring to record thy name.
Ages shall tell such wonders of thy name,
And thou in death thy due desert shall have,
That thou shall be immortal in thy grave,
Thy virtues adding force unto thy fame,
so that virtue with thy fames wings shall fly,
and by thy fame shall virtue never die.
Upon thy toombe shall spring a Laurel tree,
Whose sacred shade shall serve thee for an hearse,
Upon whose leaves (in gold) ingrau'd this verse,
Dying she lives, whose like shall never be,
a spring of Nectar flowing from this tree,
the fountain of eternali memory.
To adorn the trrumph of eternity,
Drawn with the steedes which dragge the golden sun,
Thy wagon through the milken way shall run,
Millions of Angels still attending thee,
Millions of Saints shall thy lives praises sing,
pend with the quill of an Archangels wing.
Gorbo.
Long may Pandora wear the Laurel crown,
The ancient glory of her noble Peers,
And as the Egle: Lord renew her years,
Long to uphold the proppe of our renown,
long may she be as she has ever been,
the lowly handmaide of the Fayrie Queen.
Non mihi mill placent: non sum desertor Amoris:
Tu mihi (si quafides) curaperennis eris.
THE SEVENTH EGLOG.
Borrill an aged shepherd swain,
with reasons does reprove,
Batte a foolish want on boy,
but lately fallen in love.
Batte.
BOrill, why sit'st thou musing in thy coat?
like dreaming Merlyn in his drowsy Cell,
What may it be with learning thou do doat,
or art enchanted with some Magic spell?
Or will thou an Hermites life profess?
And bid thy beads hear like an Ancoresse?
See how fair Flora decks our fields with flowers,
and clothes our groves in gaudie summers green,
And wanton Uer distills rose water showers,
to welcome Ceres, haruests hallowed Queen,
Who lays abroad her lovely sunshine hairs,
Crowned with great garlands of her golden ears.
Now shepherds layne their blankets all away,
and in their lackets minsen on the plains,
And at the rivers fishen day by day,
now none so frolic as the shepherds swains,
Why lie thou here then in thy loathsome cave,
As though a man were buried quick in grave.
Borrill.
Batte, my coat from tempest stands free,
when stately towers been often shakt with wind,
And will thou Batte, come and sit with me?
contented life here shall thou only find,
Here mai'st thou caroll Hymns, and sacred Psalms,
And hery Pan, with orizons and alms.
And scorn the crowde of such as cogge for pence,
and waste their wealth in sinful bravery,
Whose gain is loss, whose thrift is lewd expense,
and liuen still in golden slavery:
Wondering at toys, as foolish worldlings done,
Like to the dog which barked at the moon.
Here may thou range the goodly pleasant field,
and search out simples to procure thy heal,
What sundry virtues herbs and flovvres do yield,
against grief which may thy sheep or thee assail:
Here may thou hunt the little harmeles Hare,
Or else entrap false Raynard in a snare.
Or if thou vvilt in antique Romants reed,
of gentle Lords and ladies that of yore,
In foreign lands atchieu'd their noble deed,
and been renovvnd from East to Western shore:
Or learn the shepherds nice astrolobie,
To know the Planets moving in the sky.
Batte.
Shepherd these things been all too coy for me,
whose lusty days should still be spent in mirth,
These mister arts been better fitting thee, (earth:
whose drouping days are dravving toward the
What think thou? my jolly peacocks train,
Shall be acoyd and brook so foul a stayne?
These been for such as make them votarie,
and take them to the mantle and the ring,
And spenden day and night in dotarie,
hammering their heads, musing on heavenly thing,
And whisper still of sorrovv in their bed,
And done despise all love and lusty head:
Like to the curre, with anger well near wood,
who makes his kennel in the Oxes stall,
And snarleth when he sees him take his food,
and yet his chaps can chevv no hay at all.
Borrill, even so it fares now with thee,
And with these vvisards of thy mystery.
Borrill.
Sharp is the thorn, full soon I see by thee,
bitter the blossom, when the fruit is sour,
And early crook d, that will a Camock be,
rough is the vvinde before a sudden shovver:
Pity thy wit should be so vvrong mislead,
And thus be guyded by a giddie head.
Ah foolish else, I inly pity thee,
misgouerned by thy lewd brainsick will:
The hidden baytes, ah fond thou do not see,
nor find'st the cause which breeds all thy ill:
Thou think all gold, that has a golden show,
And art deceived, for it is nothing so.
Such one art thou as is the little fly,
who is so crowse and gamesome with the flame,
Till with her business and her nicetie,
her nimble vvings are scorched with the same,
Then falls she down with pitteous buzzing note,
And in the fire does sindge her mourning cote.
Batte.
Alas good man I see thou ginst to rave,
thy wits done err, and miss the cushen quite,
Because thy head is gray and words been grave,
Thou think thereby to dravv me from delight:
What I am young, a goodly Batcheler,
And must live like the lusty limmeter.
Thy legs been crook'd, thy knees done bend for age,
and I am swift and nimble as the Roe,
Thou art ycouped like a bird in cage,
and in the field I wander too and froe,
Thou must do penance for thy old misdeedes,
And make amends, with Auies and with creedes.
For all that thou can say, I will not let,
for why my fancy strayneth me so sore,
That day and night, my mind is wholly set
on iollie. Love, and iollie Paramore:
Only on love I set my whole delight,
The summers day, and all the winters night.
That pretty Cupid, little god of love,
whose imped wings with speckled plumes been dight,
Who strikes men below, and Gods above,
Rouing at randon with his feathered flight,
When lovely Uenus sits and gives the aim,
And smiles to see her little Bantlings game.
Upon my staff his statue will I carue,
his bow and quiver on his winged back,
His forked heads, for such as them deserve,
and not of his, an implement shall lack,
And Uenus in her Litter all of love,
Drawn with a Swanne, a Sparrow, and a Dove.
And under him Thesby of Babylon,
and Clcopatra sometime of renown:
Phillis that died for love of Demophoon,
Then lovely Dido Queen of Carthage town,
Which ever held god Cupids laws so dear,
And been canonized in Loves Calendere.
Borrill.
Ah wilful boy, thy folly now I find,
and hard it is a fools talk to endure,
Thou art as deaf even as thy god is blind,
sike as the Saint, sike is the seruiture:
But will thou hear a good old Minstrels song,
A medicine for such as been with love ystong.
Batte.
Borrill, sing on I pray thee let us hear,
that I may laugh to see thee shake thy beard,
But take heed Borrill that thy voice be clear,
or by my hood thou wilt make us all afeard,
Or else I doubt that thou will fright our flocks,
When they shall hear thee bark so like a fox.
Borrill.
Oh spite full way ward wretched love,
VVoe to Venus which did nurse thee,
Heavens and earth thy plagues do prove,
Gods and men have cause to curse thee.
Thoughts grief, hearts woe,
Hopes pain, bodies languish,
Enutes rage, sleeps foe,
Fancies fraud, souls anguish,
Desires dread, minds madness,
Secrets be wrayer, natures error,
Sights deceit, sullens sadness,
Speeches expense, Cupids terror,
Malcontents melancholy,
Lives slaughter, deaths nurse,
Cares slave, dotards folly,
Fortunes bayte, worlds curse,
Looks theft, eyes blindness,
Selfs will, tongues treason,
Pains pleasure, wrongs kindness,
Furies frenzy, follies reason:
With cursing thee as I began,
Cursing thee I make an end,
Neither God, neither man,
Neither Fayrie, neither Feend.
Batte.
Ah worthy Borrill, here is a goodly song,
now by my belt I never heard a worse:
Old doting fool, for shame hold thou thy tongue,
I would thy clap were shut up in my purse.
It is thy life, if thou may scolde and braule:
Yet in thy words there is no wit at all.
And for that wrong which thou to love have done,
I will aueng me at this present time,
And in such forte as now thou have begone,
I will repeat a carowlet in rhyme,
Where, Borrill, I unto thy teeth will prove,
That all my good consists in my love.
Borrill.
Come on good Batte, I pray thee let us hear?
Much will be said, and never a whit the near.
Batte.
Love is the heavens fair aspect, love is the glory of the earth,
Love only does our lives direct, love is our guyder from our birth,
Love taught my thoughts at first to fly, love taught mme eyes the way to love,
Love raised my conceit so hie, love framd my hand his art to prove.
Love taught my Muse her perfect skill, love gave me first to Poesies
Love is the Sovereign of my will, love bound me first to loyalty.
Love was the first that framed my speech, love was the first that gave me
grace:
Love is my life and fortunes leech, love made the virtuous give me place.
Love is the end of my desire, love is the loadstarre of my love,
Love makes my self, my self admire, love seated my delights above.
Love placed honor in my breast, love made me learnings fauoret,
Love made me liked of the best, love first my mind on virtue set.
Love is my life, life is my love, love is my whole felicity,
Love is my sweet, sweet is my love, I am in love, and love in me.
Borrill.
Is love in thee? alas poor silly lad, thou never could have lodged a
worser guest,
For where he rules no reason can be had, so is he still sworn enemy to rest:
It pitties me to think thy springing years,
Should still be spent with woes, with sighs, with tears.
Batte.
Gramercy Borrill for thy company, for all thy iestes and all thy merry Bourds,
I still shall long until I be with thee, because I find some wisdom in thy
words,
But I will watch the next time thou do ward, (heard.
And sing thee such a lay of love as never shepherd
THE EIGHTH EGLOG.
Good Gorbo of the golden world,
and Saturns reign does tell,
And afterward does make report,
of bonnie Dovvsabell.
Motto.
Shepherd why creep we in this lowly vain,
as though our muse no store at all affordes,
Whilst others vaunt it with the frolic swayne,
and strut the stage with reperfumed words.
See how these yonkers rave it out in rhyme,
who make a traffic of their rarest wits,
And in Bellonas buskin tread it fine,
like Bacchus priests raging in frantic fits.
Those myrtle Groves decayed, done grow again,
their roots refresht with Heliconas spring,
Whose pleasant shade inuites the homely swayne,
to sit him down and hear the Muses sing.
Then if thy Muse has spent her wonted zeal,
with Iuie twist thy temples shall be crowned,
Or if she dares hoyse up top-gallant sail,
Amongst the rest, then may she be renownd.
Gorbe.
My boy, these yonkers reachen after fame,
and so done press into the learned troop,
With filed quill to glorify their name,
which otherwise were pend in shameful coupe.
But this hie object has abiected me,
and I must pipe amongst the lowly sort,
Those little heard-groomes who admired to see,
when I by Moone-shine made the fayries sport.
Who dares describe the toils of Hercules,
and puts his hand to fames eternal pen,
Must invoke the soul of Hercules,
attended with the troops of conquered men.
Who writes of thrice renowned Theseus,
a monster-tamers rare description,
Trophies the jaws of ugly Cerberus,
and paynts out Styx, and fiery Acheron.
My Muse may not affect night-charming spells,
whose force effects the Olympicke vault to quake,
Nor call those grysly Goblins from their Cells,
the euer-damned frye of Limbo lake.
And who erects the brave Pyramides,
of Monarchs or renowned warriors,
Need bath his quill for such attempts as these,
in flowing streams of learned Maros showers.
For when the great worlds conqueror began,
to prove his helmet and his habergeon,
The sweat that from the Poets-God Orpheus ran,
foretold his Prophets had to play upon.
When Pens and Lances saw the Olympiad prize,
those chariot triumphs with the Laurel crown,
Then began the worthies glory first to rise,
and plumes were vayled to the purple gown.
The grauest Censor, sagest Senator,
with wings of Justice and Religion,
Mounted the top of Nimrods stately Tower,
soring unto that hie celestial throne:
Where blessed Angels in their heavenly queares,
chaunt Anthemes with shrill Siren harmony,
Tuned to the sound of those aye-crouding spears,
Which herien their makers eternity.
Those who foretell the times of unborn men,
and future things in foretime augured,
Have slumbred in that spell-gods darkest den,
which first inspired his prophesiyng head.
Sooth-saying Sibels sleepen long agone,
we have their reed, but few have cond their Art,
Welch-wisard Merlyn, cleueth to a stone,
no Oracle more wonders may impart.
The Infant age could deftly caroll love,
till greedy thirst of that ambitious honor,
Drew Poets pen, from his sweet lasses glove,
to chaunt of slaughtering broiles and bloody horror.
Then Jove's loue-theft was privily discri'd,
how he played false play in Amphitrios bed,
And how Apollo in the mount of I Would,
gave Oenon physic for her maydenhead.
The tender grass was then the softest bed,
the pleasant'st shades were deemed the statelyest hals,
No belly-god with Bacchus banqueted,
nor painted rags then covered rotten walls.
Then simple love with simple virtue way'd,
flowers the favors which true faith reuayled,
Kindness with kindness was again repaid,
with sweetest kisses covenants were sealed.
Then beauties self with her self beautified,
scornd payntings pergit, and the borrowed hair,
Nor monstrous forms deformities did hide,
nor foul was vernisht with compounded fair.
The purest fleece then covered purest skin,
for pride as then with Lucifer remaynd:
Deformed fashions now were to begin,
nor clothes were yet with poysned liquor staynd.
But when the bowels of the earth were sought,
and men her golden intrayles did epsy,
This mischief then into the world was brought,
this framed the mint which coynd our misery.
Then lofty Pines were by ambition hewne,
and men sea monsters swamme the brackish flood,
In waynscot tubs, to seek out worlds unknown,
for certain ill to leave assured good.
The starteling steed is managed from the field,
and serves a subject to the riders laws,
He whom the churlish bit did never weeld,
now feels the courb control his angry jaws.
The hammering Uulcane spent his wasting fire,
till he the use of tempred metals found,
His anuile wrought the steeled cotes attire,
and forged tools to carue the foe-mans wound.
The City builder then intrencht his towers,
and wald his wealth within the fenced town,
Which afterward in bloody stormy stours,
kindled that flame which burnt his Bulwarks down.
And thus began the Exordium of our woes,
the fatal dumb show of our misery:
Here sprang the tree on which our mischief grows,
the drery subject of worlds tragedy.
Motto.
Well, shepherd well, the golden age is gone,
wishes may not revoke that which is past:
It were no wit to make two griefs of one,
our proverb says, Nothing can always last.
Listen to me my lovely shepherds joy,
and thou shall hear with mirth and mickle glee,
A pretty Tale, which when I was a boy,
my toothles Grandame often has told to me.
Corbo.
Shepherd say on, so may we pass the time,
There is no doubt it is some worthy ryme.
Motto.
Far in the country of Arden,
There wond a knight hight Cassemen,
as bold as Isenbras:
Fell was he and eger bent,
In battle and in Tournament,
as was the good sir Topas.
He had as antique stories tell,
A daughter cleaped Dowsabell,
a may den fair and free:
And for she was her fathers heir,
Full well she was ycond the leyre,
of mickle courtesy.
The silk well couth she twist and twine,
And make the fine Marchpine,
and with the needle work,
And she couth help the priest to say
His Mattens on a holyday,
and sing a Psalm in Kirk.
She ware a frock of frolic green,
Might well be seem a maiden Queen,
which seemly was to see.
A hood to that so neat and fine,
In color like the colombine,
ywrought full featuously.
Her feature all as fresh above,
As is the grass that grows by Dove,
as lyth as less of Kent:
Her skin as soft as Lemster wool,
As white as snow on peakish hull,
or Swanne that swims in Trent.
This maiden in a morn betime,
Went forth when May was in her prime,
to get sweet Cerywall,
The hony-suckle, the Harlocke,
The Lilly and the Lady-smocke,
to deck her summer hall.
Thus as she wandered here and there,
Ypicking of the bloomed Breere,
she chanced to epsy
A shepherd sitting on a bancke,
Like Chanteclere he crowed crancke,
and pip'd with merry glee:
He leard his sheep as he him list,
When he would whistle in his fist,
to feed about him round:
Whilst he full many a caroll sung,
Until the fields and meadows rung,
and that the woods did sound:
In favor this same shepherds swayne,
was like the bedlam Tamburlayne,
which held proud Kings in awe:
But meek he was as Lamb might be,
Ylike that gentle Abel he,
whom his lewd brother slaw.
This shepherd ware a sheep gray cloak,
which was of the finest look,
that could be cut with sheere,
His mittens were of Bauzens skin,
His cockers were of Cordiwin,
his hood of Meniueere.
His aule and lingell in a thong,
His tar-boxe on his broad belt hong,
his breech of Coyntrie blew:
Full crispe and curled were his locks,
His brows as white as Albion rocks,
so like a lover true.
And pyping still he spent the day,
So merry as the Popingay:
which liked Dowsabell,
That would she ought or would she naught,
This lad would never from her thought:
she in loue-longing fell,
At length she tucked up her frocke,
White as the Lilly was her smock,
she drew the shepherd nie,
But then the shepherd pyp'd a good,
That all his sheep for sooke their food,
to hear his melody.
Thy sheep quoth she cannot be lean,
That have a jolly shepherds swayne,
the which can pipe so well.
Yea but (says he) their shepherd may,
If pyping thus he pine away,
in love of Dowsabell.
Of love fond boy take thou no keep,
Quoth she, look well unto thy sheep,
lest they should hap to stray.
Quoth he, so had I done full well,
Had I not seen fair Dowsabell,
come forth to gather May.
With that she began to veil her head,
Her cheeks were like the Roses red,
but not a word she said.
With that the shepherd began to frown,
He threw his pretty pypes adowne,
and on the ground him laid.
Says she, I may not stay till night,
And leave my summer hall vndight,
and all for long of thee.
My Coat says he, nor yet my foulde,
Shall neither sheep nor shepherd hold,
except thou favor me.
Says she yet lever I were dead,
Then I should lose my maydenhead,
and all for love of men:
Says he yet are you too unkind,
If in your heart you cannot find,
to love us now and then:
And I to thee will be as kind,
As Colin was to Rosalinde,
of courtesy the flower:
Then will I be as true quoth she,
As ever maiden yet might be,
unto her Paramour:
With that she bent her snow-white knee,
Down by the shepherd kneeled she,
and him she sweetly kissed.
With that the shepherd whoop'd for joy,
Quoth he, there is never shepherds boy,
that ever was so blist.
Gorbo.
Now by my sheep-hooke here is a tale alone,
Learn me the same and I will give thee hier,
This were as good as curds for our Ione,
When at a night we sitten by the fire.
Motto.
Why gentle hodge I will not stick for that,
when we two meeten here another day,
But see whilst we have set us down to chat,
yon tikes of mine begin to steal away.
And if thou will but come unto our green,
on Lammas day when as we have our feast,
Thou shall sit next unto our summer Queen,
and thou shall be the only welcome guest.
THE NINTH EGLOG.
When cole-blacke night with sable veil
eclipsd the gladsome light,
Rowland in darkesome shade alone,
bemoanes his woeful plight.
WHat time the wetherbeaten flocks,
forsook the fields to shroud them in the fold,
The groves dispoyl'd of their fair summer locks,
the leaueles branches nipt with frostie cold,
The drouping trees their gayness all agone,
In mossie mantles do express their moan.
When Phoebus from his Lemmans lovely bower,
throughout the sphere had ierckt his angry Iades,
His Carre now passed the heavens hie welked Tower,
began dragge adowne the occidentall slades,
In silent shade of desert all alone,
Thus to the night, Rowland bewrayes his moan.
Oh blessed stars which lend the darkness light,
the glorious paynting of that circled throane,
You eyes of heaven, you lanthornes of the night,
to you bright stars, to you I make my moan,
Or end my days, or ease me of my grief,
The earth is frail, and yields me no relief.
And thou fair Phebe, cleerer to my sight,
then Tytan is when brightest he has shone,
Why should thou now shut up thy blessed light,
and sdayne to look on thy Endymion?
Perhaps the heavens me thus despite have done,
Because I durst compare thee with their sun.
If drery sighs the tempests of my breast,
or streams of tears from floods of weeping eyes,
If downe-cast looks with darksome clouds oppressed,
or words which with sad accents fall and rise,
If these, nor her, nor you, to pity move,
There Is neither help in you, nor hope in love.
Oh fayr'st that lives, yet most vnkindest maid,
o whilome thou the joy of all my flock,
Why have thine eyes these eyes of mine betrayed,
Unto thy heart more hard then flintie rock,
And lastly thus deprived me of their sight,
From whom my love deriues both life and light.
Those dapper ditties pend unto her praise,
and those sweet straynes of tunefull pastoral,
She scorneth as the Lourdayns clownish lays,
and recketh as the rustic madrigall,
Her lips profane Ideas sacred name,
And sdayne to read the annals of her fame.
Those gorgeous garlands and those goodly flowers,
wherewith I crowned her tresses in the prime,
She most abhors, and shuns those pleasant bowers,
made to disport her in the summer time:
She hates the sports and pastimes I invent,
And as the toade, flies all my meriment.
With holy verses heryed I her glove,
and dew'd her cheeks with fountains of my tears,
And carold her full many a lay of love,
twisting sweet Roses in her golden hayres.
Her wandering sheep full safely have I kept,
And watched her flock full often when she has slept.
Oenon never upon Ids hill,
so often has called on Alexanders name,
As has poor Rowland with an Angels quill,
erected trophies of Ideas fame:
Yet that false shepherd Oenon fled from thee,
I follow her that ever flies from me.
There Is not a grove that wonders not my woe,
there is not a river weeps not at my tale:
I hear the echoes (wandering too and froe)
resound my grief in every hill and dale,
The beasts in field, with many a wosull groan,
The birds in air help to express my moan.
Where been those lines? the heralds of my heart,
my plaints, my tears, my vows, my sighs, my prayers?
o what avails faith, or what my Arts?
o love, o hope, quite turned into despayres:
She stops her ears as Adder to the charms,
And lets me lie and languish in my harms.
All is agone, such is my endless grief,
And my mishaps amended naught with moan,
I see the heavens will yield me no relief:
what helps care, when cure is past and gone,
And tears I see, do me avail no good,
But as great showers increase the rising flood.
With folded arms, thus hanging down his head,
he gave a groan as though his heart had broke,
Then looking pale and wan as he were dead,
he fetched a sigh, but never a word he spoke:
For now his heart waxed cold as any stone,
Was never man alive so woe begone.
With that fair Cinthya stoups her glittering veil,
and dives adowne into the Ocean flood,
The eastern brow which erst was wan and pale,
now in the dawning blusheth red as blood:
The whistling Lark ymounted on her wings,
To the gray morrow, her good morrow sings.
When this poor shepherd Rowland of the Rock,
whose faynting legs his body scarce vpheld,
Each shepherd now returning to his flock,
alone poor Rowland fled the pleasant field,
And in his Coat got to a vechie bed:
Was never man alive so hard bested.
Imprinted at London for Thomas woodcock, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the black Bear. 1593.


