FORTH FEASTING.

A PANEGYRICKE TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.

Flumina senserunt ipsa.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HEART, 1617.

FORTH FEASTING. A PANEGYRICKE To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
WHat blustering Noise now interrupts my Sleep?
What echoing Shouts thus cleave my crystal Deep?
And call me hence from out my watrie Court?
What Melody, what Sounds of Joy and Sport,
Be these here hurled from every neighbor Spring?
With what loud Rumors do the Mountains ring?
Which in unusual Pomp on tip-toes stand,
And (full of Wonder) ouer-looke the Land?
Whence come these glittring Throngs, these Meteors bright,
This golden People set unto my Sight?
Whence does this Praise, Applause, and Love arise?
What Load-starre eastward draws thus all Eyes?
And do I wake? or have some Dreams conspired
To mock my Sense with Shadows much desired?
Stare I that living Face, see I those Looks,
Which with Delight wont to amaze my Brooks?
Do I behold that Worth, that Man divine,
This Ages Glory, by these Banks of mine?
Then is it true what long I wished in vain?
That my much-louing Prince is come again?
So unto them whose Zenith is the Pole
When six black Months are past the Sun does roll:
So after Tempest to Sea-tossed Wights,
Fair Helens Brothers show their Chearing Lights:
So comes Arabias Marvel from her Woods,
And far far off is seen by Memphis Floods,
The feathered Syluans clowd-like by her fly,
And with applauding Clangors beat the Sky,
Nyle wonders, Seraps Priests entranced rave,
And in Mygdonian Stone her Shape ingraue*
In golden Leaves write down the joyful time
In which Apollos Bird came to their clime.
Let Mother Earth now decked with Flowrs be seen,
And sweet-breathed Zephyres curle the Meadows green:
Let Heavens weep Rubies in a crimsin Shower,
Such as on Indies Shores they use to power:
Or with that golden Storm the Fields adorn,
Which Love rained, when his Blew-eyed Maid was borne.
May never Hours the Web of Day out-weaue,
May never Night rise from her sable Cave.
Swell proud my Billows, faint not to declare
Your Joys, as ample as their Causes are:
For Murmures hoarse sound like Arions Harp,
Now delicatelie flat, now sweetly sharp.
And you my Nymphs, rise from your moist Repair,
Strew all your Springs and Grotts with Lillies fair:
Some swiftest-footed get her hence and pray
Our Floods and Lakes, come keep this Holie-day;
What e're beneath Albanias Hills do run,
Which see the rising or the setting Sun,
Which drink, Stern Grampius Mists, or Ochelles Snows:
Stone-rowling Taye, Tine Tortoyse-like that flows,
The Pearlie Done, the Deas, the fertile Spay,
Wild Neuerne which does see our longest Day,
Nesse smoaking-Sulphure, Leave with Mountains crowned,
Strange Loumond for his floting Isles renowned:
The Irish Rian, Ken, the Silver Air,
The Snakie Dun, the Ore with Rushie Hair,
The Chrystall-streaming Nid, lowd-bellowing Clyd,
Tweed which no more our Kingdoms shall divide:
Rancke-swelling Annan, Lid with curled Streams,
The Eskes, the Solway where they loose their Names.
To every one proclaim our Joys, and Feasts,
Our Triumphs, bid all come, and be our Guests:
And as they meet in Neptunes azure Hall,
Bid them bid Sea-Gods keep this Festival.
This Day shall by our Currents be renowned,
Our Hills about shall still this Day resound:
Nay, that our love more to this Day appear,
Let us with it henceforth begin our Year.
To Virgins Flowrs, to Sunburned Earth the Rain,
To Mariners fair Winds amidst the Maine:
Cool Shades to Pilgrims, which hot Glances burn,
Please not so much, to us as thy return.
That Day (dear Prince) which rest us of thy Sight,
[Day, no, but Darkness* and a clowdie Night]
Did freight, our Breasts with Sights, our Eyes with Tears,
Turned Minutes in sad Months, sad Months in Years:
Trees left to flowrish, Meadows to bear Flowrs,
Brooks hid their Heads within their Sedgie Bowrs,
Fair Ceres cursed our Fields with barren Frost,
As if again she had her Daughter lost:
The Muses left our Groves, and for sweet Songs
Sat sadly silent, or did weep their Wrongs;
Ye know it Meads, ye murmuring Woods it know,
Hills, Dales, and Caves, Copartners of their Woe;
And ye it know my Streams, which from their Eine
Often on your Glass recieu'd their pearled Brine;
O Naids dear (said they) Napaeas fair,
O Nymphs of Trees, Nymphs which on Hills repair,
Gone are those maiden Glories, Gone that State,
Which made all Eyes admire our Hap of late.
As looks the Heaven when never Star appears,
But slow and weary shroude them in their Spheres,
While Tithons wife embosom'd by him lies,
And World does languish in a drearie Guise:
As looks a Garden of its Beauty spoiled.
As Wood in Winter by rough Boreas foiled:
As Pourtraicts razed of Colors use to be:
So looked these abject Bounds deprived of Thee.
While as my Rills enjoyed thy royal Gleames,
They did not envy Tybers haughty Streams,
Nor wealthy Tagus with his golden Ore,
Nor clear Hydaspes, which on Pearls does roar,
Empampred Gange, that sees the Sun newborn,
Nor Achelous with his flowrie Horn,
Nor Floods which near Elysian Fields do fall:
For why? thy Sight did serve to them for all.
No Place there is so desert, so alone,
Even from the frozen to the torrid Zone,
From flaming Hecla to great Quincys Lake,
Which thine abode could not most happy make.
All those Perfections which by bounteous Heaven
To diverse Worlds in diverse Times were given,
The starrie Senate powered at once on Thee,
That Thou Examplare might to others be.
Thy Life was kept till the three sisters spunne
Their Threedes of Gold, and then it was begun.
With curled Clouds when Skies do look most fair,
And no disordred Blasts disturb the Air:
When Lillies do them deck in azure Gowns,
And newborn Roses blushe with golden Crowns;
To bode how calm we under Thee should live,
What Halcyonean Days Thy Reign should give,
And to two flowrie Diadems Thy right,
The Heavens Thee made a Partner of the Light.
Scarce wast Thou borne, when joined in friendly Bands
Two mortal Foes with other clasped Hands,
With Virtue Fortune strove, which most should grace
Thy Place for Thee, Thee for so high a Place,
One vowed thy sacred Breast not to forsake,
The Other on Thee not to turn her Back,
And that Thou more her loves Effects might feel
For Thee she rent her Sail, and broke her Wheel.
When Years Thee vigor gave, O then how clear
Did smothered Sparkles in bright Flames appear!
Amongst the Woods to force a flying Heart,
To pearce the mountain Wolf with feathred Dart,
See Faulcons climb the Clouds, the Fox ensnare,
Out-runne the winde-out-running daedale Hare,
To loose a trampling Steed along a Plain,
And in meandring Gyres him bring again,
The Preasse Thee making place, were vulgar Things,
In Admirations Air on Glories Wings
O! Thou far from the common Pitch did rise,
With Thy designs to dazell Enuies Eyes:
Thou soughtst to know, this Alls eternal Source,
Of euer-turning Heavens the restless Course,
Their fixed Eyes, their Lights which wandering run,
Whence Moon her Silver has, his Gold the Sun*
If Destine be or no, if Planets can
By fierce Aspects force the Free Will of Man:
The light and spyring Fire, the liquid Air,
The flaming Dragons, Comets with red Hair,
Heavens tilting Lances, Attillerie, and Bow,
Lowd-sounding Trumpets, Darts of Hail and Snow,
The roaring Element with People dombe,
The Earth with what conceived is in her Womb,
What on her moves, were set unto thy Sight,
Till thou did find their Causes, Essence, Might:
But unto naught Thou so Thy Mind did strain
As to be read in Man and learn to reign;
To know the Weight and Atlas of a Crown,
To spare the Humble Prowdlings pester down.
When from those pearcing Cares which Thrones inuest,
As Thorns the Rose, Thou weari'd would Thee rest,
With Lute in Hand, full of Celestial Fire,
To the Pierian Groves Thou did retire:
There, garlanded with all Vranias Flowrs,
In sweeter Lays than builded Thaebes Towrs,
Or them which charmed the Dolphines in the Maine,
Or which did call Euridice again,
Thou sungst away the Hours, till from their Sphere
Stars seemed to shoot, Thy Melody to hear.
The God with golden Hair, the Sister Maids,
Left, nymphall Helicon, their Tempes Shades,
To see Thine Isle, here lost their native Tongue,
And in Thy world-diuided Language sung.
Who of thine After-age can count the Deeds,
With all that Fame in Times hudge Annals Reeds,
How by Example more than any Law,
This People fierce Thou did to Goodness draw,
How while the Neighbor Worlds (tows'd by the Fates)
So many Phaetons had in their States,
Which turned in heedlesse Flames their Burnished Thrones,
Thou (as ensphear'd) keep'dst temperate Thy Zones;
In Afric Shores the Sands that ebb and flow,
The speckled Flowrs in unshorn Meads that grow,
He sure may count, with all the Waves that meet
To wash the Mauritanian Atlas feet.
Though Thou were not a crowned King by Birth,
Thy Worth deserves the richest Crown on Earth.
Search this Half. Sphere and the opposite Ground,
Where is such Wit and Bounty to be found?
As into silent Night, when near the Bear
The Virgin Huntresse shines at full most clear,
And strives to match her Brothers golden Light,
The Host of Stars does vanish in her sight,
Arcturus dies, cooled is the Lions ire,
Po burns no more with Phaetontall Fire,
Orion faints to see his Arms grow black,
And that his blazing Sword he now does lack:
So Europes Lights, all bright in their Degree,
Loose all their Luster paragond with Thee.
By just descent Thou from more Kings do shine,
Than maine can name Men in all their Line:
What most they toil to find, and finding hold,
Thou scornest, orient Gemmes, and flattring Gold:
Esteeming Treasure surer in Men's Breasts,
Than when immured with Marble, closed in Chests;
No Stormy Passions do disturb Thy Mind,
No Mists of Greatness ever could Thee blind:
Who yet has been so meek? Thou Life did give
To them who did repine to see Thee live.
What Prince by Goodness has such Kingdoms gained?
Who has so long his Peoples Peace maintained?
Their Swords are turned in Sythes, in Culters Spears,
Some giant Post their anticke Armor bears:
Now, where the wounded Knight his Life did bleed,
The wanton Swain sits piping on a Reed,
And where the Canon did Jove's Thunder scorn,
The gawdie Hunts-man winds his shrill-tun'd Horn:
Her green Locks Ceres without fear does die,
The Pilgrim safely in the Shade does lie,
Both Pan and Pales (careless) keep their Flocks,
Seas have no Dangers save the Winds and Rocks:
Thou art this Isles Palladium, neither can
[While Thou art kept] it be o're-throwne by Man.
Let Others boast of Blood and Spoils of Foes,
Fierce Rapines, Murders, Iliads of Woes,
Of hated Pomp, and Trophaees reared fair,
Gore-spangled Ensigns streaming in the Air,
Count how they make the Scythian them adore,
The Gaditan the Soldier of Aurore,
Unhappie Vauntrie! to enlarge their Bounds,
Which charge themselves with Cares, their Friends with wounds;
Which have no Law to their ambitious Will,
But (Man-plagues) borne are humane Blood to spill:
Thou a true Victor art, sent from above
What Others strain by Force to gain by Love,
World-wandring Fame this Praise to Thee imparts,
To be the only Monarch of all Hearts.
They many fear who are of many feared,
And Kingdoms got by Wrongs by Wrongs are tear'd,
Such Thrones as Blood does raise Blood throws down,
No Guard so sure as Love unto a Crown.
Eye of our western World, Mars. daunting King,
With whose Renown the Earths seven Climats ring,
Thy Deeds not only claim these Diademes,
To which Them, Liffy, Taye, subject their Streams:
But to thy Virtues rare, and Gifts, is due,
All that the Planet of the Year does view;
Sure if the World above did want a Prince,
The World above to it would take Thee hence.
That Murder, Rapine, Lust, are fled to Hell,
And in their Rooms with us the Graces dwell,
That Honor more than Riches Men respect,
That Worthiness than Gold does more effect,
That Piety unmasked shows her Face,
That Innocence keeps with Power her Place,
That long-exil'd Astrea leaves the Heaven,
And uses right her Sword, her Weights holds even,
That the Saturnian World is come again,
Are wished Effects of Thy most happy Reign.
That daily Peace, Love, Truth, Delights increase,
And Discord, Hate, Fraud, with Incombers cease,
That Men use Strength not to shed others Blood,
But use their Strength now to do other Good,
That Fury is enchain'd, disarmed Wrath,
That (save by Natures Hand) there is no Death,
That late grimme Foes, like Brothers other love,
That Vultures prey not on the harmless Dove,
That Wolves with Lambs do Friendship entertain,
Are wished Effects of thy most happy Reign.
That Towns increase, that ruined Temples rise,
And their wind-mouing Vanes plant in the Skies,
That Ignorance and Sloth hence run away,
That buried Arts now rowse them to the Day,
That Hyperion far beyond his Bed
Does see our Lions rampe, our Roses spread,
That Iber courts us, Tyber not us charms,
That Rhein with hence-brought Beams his Bosom warmes,
That Evil us fear, and Good us do maintain,
Are wished Effects of Thy most happy Reign.
O Virtues Pattern, Glory of our Times,
Sent of past Days to expiate the Crimes,
Great King, but better far than thou art great,
Whom State not honors, but who honors State,
By Wonder borne, by Wonder first enstall'd,
By Wonder after to new Kingdoms called,
Young, kept by Wonder, near homebred Alarmes,
Old, saved by Wonder, from pale Traitors Harms,
To be for this Thy Reign which Wonders brings,
A King of Wonder, Wonder unto Kings.
If Pict, Dane, Norman, Thy smooth Yoke had seen,
Pict, Dane, and Norman, had Thy Subjects been:
If Brutus knew the Bliss Thy Rule does give,
Even Brutus joye would under Thee to live:
For Thou Thy People do so dearly love,
That they a Father, more than Prince, Thee prove.
O Days to be desired! Age happy thrice!
If ye your Heauen-sent-Good could duly prize,
But ye (halfe-palsey-sicke) think never right
Of what ye hold, till it be from your Sight,
Prize only Summers sweet and musked Breath,
When armed Winters threaten you with Death,
In pallid Sickness do esteem of Health,
And by sad Poverty discern of Wealth:
I see an Age when after many Years,
And Reuolutions of the slow-paced Spheres,
These Days shall be to other far esteemed,
And like Augustus palmie Reign be deemed.
The Names* of Arthure Fabulous Palladines,
Grau'n in Times surly Brows in wrinckled Lines,
Of Henry's, Edwards, Famous for their Fights,
Their Neighbor Conquests, Orders new of Knights,
Shall by this Princes Name be past as far
As Meteors are by the Idalian Star.
If Gray-hair'd Proteus Songs the Truth not miss,
And Gray-hair'd Proteus often a Prophet is,
There is a Land hence-distant many Miles,
Out-reaching Fiction and Atlanticke Isles,
Which (Homelings) from this little World we name,
That shall imblazon with strange Rites his Fame,
Shall, raise him Statues all of purest Gold,
Such as men gave unto the Gods of old.
Name by him Fanes, proud Palaces, and Towns,
With some great Flood, which most their Fields renownes,
This is that King who should make right each wrong,
Of whom the Bards and mysticke Sybilles song,
The Man long promised, by whose glorious Reign,
This Isle should yet her ancient Name regaine,
And more of Fortunate deserve the Style,
Than those where Heavens with double Summers smile.
Run on (Great Prince) Thy Course in Glories Way,
The End the Life the Evening crowns the Day*
Heap Worth on Worth, and strongly soar above
Those Heights which made the World the first to love,
Surmount Thy Self, and make thine Actions past
Be but as Gleames or Lightnings of Thy last,
Let them exceed them of Thy younger Time,
As far as Autumn does the flowrie Prime.
Through this Thy Empire range, like Worlds bright Eye,
That once each Year suruayes all Earth and Sky,
Now glaunces on the slow and restic Bears,
Then turns to dry the weeping Austers Tears,
Just unto both the Poles, and moves even
In the infigur'd Circle of the Heaven.
O long long haunt these Bounds, which by Thy Sight
Have now regained their former Heat and Light.
Here grow green Woods, here silver Brooks do glide,
Here Meadows stretch them out with painted Pride
Embrodring all the Banks, here Hills aspire
To crown their Heads with the aetheriall Fire:
Hills, Bullwarkes of our Freedom, giant Walls,
Which never Fremdlings Slight nor Sword made Thralls;
Each circling Flood to Thetis Tribute pays,
Men here (in Health) out-liue old Nestors Days:
Grimme Saturn yet amongst our Rocks remains,
Bound in our Caves, with many Mettald Chains:
Bulls haunt our Shades like Ledas Lover white,
Which yet might breed Pasiphae Delight,
Our Flocks fair Fleeces bear, with which for Sport
Eudemion of Old the Moon did court,
High-palmed Hearts amidst our Forests run,
And, not impall'd, the deepe-mouth'd Hounds do shun;
The rough-foote Hare him in our Bushes shrowds,
And long-wing'd Haulks do perch amidst our Clouds.
The wanton wood-Nymphes of the verdant Spring,
Blew, Golden, Purple, Flowers shall to Thee bring,
Pomonas Fruits the Paniskes, Thetis Gyrles
Thy Thulys Amber, with the Ocean Pearls;
The Tritons, Heards-men of the glassie Field,
Shall give Thee what farre-distant Shores can yield,
The Serean Fleeces, Erythrean Gemmes,
Vaste Platas Silver, Gold of Peru Streams,
Antarticke Parrots, Ethiopian Plumes,
Sabaean Odours, Myrrh, and sweet Perfumes.
And I my self, wrapped in a watchet Gown,
Of Reeds and Lillies on my Head a Crown,
Shall Incense to Thee burn, green Altars raise,
And yearlie sing due Paeans to thy Praise.
Ah why should Isis only see Thee shine?
Is not Thy FORTH, as well as Isis Thine?
Though Isis vaunt she has more Wealth in store,
Let it suffice Thy FORTH does love Thee more:
Though She for Beauty may compare with Seine,
For Swannes and Sea- Nymphs with Imperial Rhene,
Yet in the Title may be claimed in Thee,
Nor She, nor all the World, can match with me.
Now when (by Honor drwne) Thou shall away
To her already jelous of Thy stay,
When in her amourous Arms She does thee fold,
And dries thy Dewie Hairs with Hers of Gold,
Much questioning of Thy Fare, much of Thy Sport,
Much of Thine Absence, Long, how e're so short,
And chides (perhaps) Thy Coming to the North,
Loathe not to think on Thy much-louing FORTH.
O love these Bounds, whereof Thy royal Stem
More than an hundredth were a Diadem.
So ever Gold and Bays Thy Brows adorn,
So never Time may see Thy Race out-worne,
So of Thine Own still may Thou be desired,
Of Strangers feared, redoubted, and admired.
So MEMORY the Praise, so precious Hours
May character Thy Name in starrie Flowers;
So may Thy high Exployts at last make even,
With Earth thy Empire, Glory with the Heaven.
FINIS.

