Peirs Gaueston EARL OF CORNWALL.

His life, death, and fortune.

Effugiunt auidos carmina sola rogos.



AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for N. L. and John Busby, and are to be sold at
the West door of Paul's.

To the worthy and honorable Gentleman, Master Henry Caundish, Esquire.
TIme-enobled Gentleman, and euer-honoured Ma. Caundish, highly esteeming you
(in mine own opinion,) amongst the number of those, who for their rare deserts
and excellency of their minds, (in this world-declining age,) have their names
registered in the Catilogue of the most worthiest of this time, as a kind
Maecenas to Scholars, and a favorer of learning and Arts: which shall engraue
your name with the Diamond of Fame in the Crystal mirror of Heaven. I present
to your judicial view, the tragical discourse, of the life, death, and
fortune of PEIRS GAVESTON, whose name has been obscured so many years, and
ouer-past by the Tragaedians of these latter times: assuring my self your
honorable patronage shall protect him, against the Art-hating humorists of
this malicious time, whose envious thoughts (like Quails) feed only on poison,
snarling (like dogs) at every thing which never so little disagreeeth from
their own Stoicall dispositions.

Thus confirming my self in your favorable and gracious acceptance of my
Muse, which in my love I ever consecrate to your honorable House, I wish you
that happiness, which is due to your own worth and good desert.

Your ever affectionate, Michaell Drayton.

Peirs Gaueston.
FRom gloomy shaddowe of eternal night,
Where cole-black darkness keeps his loathsome cel,
And from those Ghostes, whose eyes abhor the light,
From thence I come a woeful tale to tell:
Prepare the Stage, I mean to act my part,
Sighing the scenes from my tormented heart.
From Stygian lake, to graceless souls assigned,
And from the flood of burning Acheron,
Where sinful spirits are by the fire refinde,
The fearful Ghost of woeful Gaueston:
With black-fac'd furies from the graves attended,
Until the tenor of my tale be ended.
Wing-footed Fame now sommons me from death,
In Fortunes triumph to advance my glory,
The blessed Heavens again do lend me breath,
Whilst I report this doleful Tragic story:
That soul and body, which death once did sunder,
Now meet together to report a wonder.
O purple-buskind Pallas most divine
Let thy bright fauchion lend me Cypress bows,
Be thou assistinge to this Poet of mine,
And with thy tragic garland girte his brows,
Pitying my case, when none would hear me weep
To tell my cares has laid his own to sleep.
You mournful maidens of the sacred nine,
You destinies which haunt the shades beneath,
To you fair muses I my playnts resign,
To you black spirits I my woes bequeath,
With sable pens of direful ebonie
To pen the process of my tragedy.
Draw on the lines which shall report my life
With weeping words distilling from thy pen,
Where woes abound and joys are passing rife,
A very meteor in the eyes of men,
Wherein the world a wonder-world may see
Of heauen-bred joy and hell-nurst misery.
Declare my ebs, my often swelling tide,
Now tell my calmes, and then report my showers,
My winters storms, and then my summers pride,
False fortunes smiles, then her dissembling lowres,
The height whereto my glory did ascend:
Then point the period where my joys did end.
When famous Edward wore the english crown
Victorious Long shankes flower of chivalry,
First of his name that raignd in Albion,
Through worlds renownd to all posterity:
My youth began, and then began my blis,
Even in his days, those blessed days of his.
O days, no days, but little worlds of mirth:
O years, no years, time sliding with a trice:
O world, no world, a very heaven on earth:
O earth, no earth, a very paradise:
A King, a man, nay more then this was he,
If earthly man, more then a man might be.
Such a one he was, as Englands Beta is,
Such as she is, even such a one was he,
Betwixt her rarest excellence and his
Was never yet so near a Sympathy,
To tell your worth, and to give him his due,
I say my sovereign, he was like to you.
His court a school, where arts were daily red,
And yet a camp where arms were exercised,
Virtue and learning here were nourished,
And stratagems by soldiers still devised:
Here skillful schoolmen were his counsaylors,
Scholars his captains, captains Senators.
Here sprang the root of true gentilitie,
Virtue was clad in gold and crowned with honor,
Honor entitled to Nobility,
Admired so of all that looked on her:
Wisdom, not wealth, possessed wisemens rooms,
Unfitting base insinuating grooms.
Then Machiuels were loathed as filthy toades,
And good men as rare pearls were richly prized,
The learned were accounted little Gods,
The vilest Atheist as the plague despised:
Desert then gaynd, that virtues merit craves,
And artles Pesants scorned as basest slaves.
Pride was not then, which all things ouerwhelms:
Promotion was not purchased with gold,
Men hewed their honor out of steeled helms:
In those days fame with blood was bought and sold,
No petri-fogger pol'd the poor for pence,
These dolts, these dogs, as traitors banished hence.
Then was the Soldier prodigal of blood,
His deeds eternizd by the Poets pen:
Who would not dye to do his country good,
When after death his fame yet lived to men?
Then learning lived with liberality,
And men were crowned with immortality.
Grant pardon then unto my wandering ghost,
Although I seem lascivious in my praise,
And of perfection though I seem to boast,
Whilst here on earth I troad this weary maze,
Whilst yet my soul in body did abide,
And whilst my flesh was pampred here in pride.
My valiant father was in Gascoygne borne,
A man at arms, and matchles with his lance,
A Soldier vowed, and to King Edward sworn,
With whom he served in all his wars in France,
His goods and lands he pawnd and laid to gage
To follow him, the wonder of that age.
And thus himself he from his home exiled,
Who with his sword sought to advance his fame,
With me his joy, but then a little child,
Unto the Court of famous England came,
Whereas the King, for service he had done,
Made me a page unto the Prince his son.
My tender youth yet scarce crept from the shell,
Unto the world brought such a wonderment,
That all perfection seemed in me to dwell,
And that the heavens me all their graces lent:
Some swear I was the quintessence of nature,
And some an Angel, and no earthly creature.
The heavens had lim'd my face with such a die
As made the curiost eye on earth amazed,
Tempring my looks with love and majesty,
A miracle to all that ever gazed,
So that it seemed some power had in my birth,
Ordained me his Image here on earth.
O bewtious vernish of the heavens above,
Pure grain-dy'd color of a perfect birth,
O fairest tincture adamant of love,
Angell-hewd blush the prospectiue of mirth,
O sparkling luster ioying human sight,
Lives joy, hearts fire, Loves nurse, the souls delight.
As purple-tressed Titan with his beams,
The sable clouds of night in sunder cleaves
Enameling the earth with golden streams,
When he his crimson Canopie vpheaueth,
Such was my beauties pure translucent rays,
Which cheerd the Sun, and cleerd the drouping days.
My looks persuading orators of Love,
My speech divine infusing harmony,
And every word so well could passion move,
So were my gestures graced with modesty,
As where my thoughts intended to surprise,
I easly made a conquest with mine eyes.
A gracious mind a passing lovely eye,
A hand that gave, a mouth that never vaunted,
A chaste desire, a tongue that would not lie,
A lions heart, a courage never daunted,
A sweet conceit in such a carriage placed
As with my gesture all my words were graced.
Such was the work which nature had begone,
As promised a gem of wondrous price,
This little star foretold a glorious sun,
This curious plot an earthly paradise,
This globe of beauty wherein all might see
An after world of wonders here in me.
As in the Autumnall season of the year,
Some death-presaging comet does arise,
Or some prodigious mete or does appear,
Or fearful Chasma unto human eyes:
Even such a wonder was I to behold
Where heaven seemed all her secrets to unfold.
If cunning'st pensill-man that ever wrought
By skillful art of secret sumetry,
Or the divine Idea of the thought
With rare descriptions of high poesy,
Should all compose a body and a mind,
Such a one seemed I, the wonder of my kind.
With this fair bayte I fisht for Edwards love,
My dainty youth so pleased his princely eye:
Here sprang the league which time could not remove,
So deeply grafted in our Infancy,
That friend, nor foe, nor life, nor death could sunder,
So seldom seen, and to the world a wonder.
O heavenly concord, music of the mind,
Touching the heart strings with such harmony,
The ground of nature, and the law of kind,
Which in conjunction do so well agree,
Whose revolution by effect does prove,
That mortal men are made divine by love.
O strong combining chain of secrecy,
Sweet joy of heaven, the Angels oratorie,
The bond of faith, the seal of sanctity,
The souls true bliss, youths solace, ages glory,
An endless league, a bond that's never broken,
A thing divine, a word with wonder spoken.
With this fair Bud of that same blessed Rose,
Edward surnamed Carnaruan by his birth,
Who in his youth it seemed that Nature chose
To make the like, whose like was not on earth,
Had not his lust and my lascivious will
Made him and me the instruments of ill.
With this sweet Prince, the mirror of my bliss,
My souls delight, my joy, my fortunes pride,
My youth enjoyed such perfect happiness,
Whilst tutors care, his wandering years did guide,
As his affections on my thoughts attended,
And with my life, his joys began and ended.
Whether it were my beauties excellence,
Or rare perfections that so pleased his eye,
Or some divine and heavenly influence,
Or natural attracting Sympathy:
My pleasing youth became his senses object,
Where all his passions wrought upon this subject.
Thou Arc of Heaven, where wonders are inroled,
O depth of nature, who can look unto thee?
O who is he that has thy doom controuled?
Or has the key of reason to undo thee:
Thy works divine which powers alone do know,
Our shallow wits too short for things below.
The soul divine by her integritye,
And by the functious agents of the mind,
Cleer-sighted, so perceives through the eye,
That which is pure and pleasing to her kind,
And by her powrfull motions apprehends,
That which beyond our human sense extends.
This Edward in the April of his age,
Whilst yet the Crown sat on his fathers head,
My Jove with me, his Ganimed, his page,
Frolic as May, a lusty life we led:
He might command, he was my Soueraigns son,
And what I said, by him was ever done.
My words as laws, Autentique he alloude,
Mine yea, by him was never crossed with no,
All my conceit as current he auowde,
And as my shadow still he served so,
My hand the racket, he the tennis ball,
My voices echo, answering every call.
My youth the glass where he his youth beheld,
Roses his lips, my breath sweet Nectar showers,
For sn my face was natures fairest field,
Richly adornd with Beauties rarest flowers.
My breast his pillow, where he laid his head,
Mine eyes his book, my bosom was his bed.
My smiles were life, and Heaven unto his sight,
All his delight concluding my desire,
From my sweet sun, he borrowed all his light,
And as a fly played with my beauties fire,
His loue-sick lips at every kifsing qualme,
Cling to my lips, to cure their grief with balm.
Like as the wanton Yuie with his twyne,
Whenas the Oak his rootlesse body warmes,
The straightest saplings strictly does combyne,
Clipping the woods with his laciuious arms:
Such our embraces when our sport begins,
Lapt in our arms, like Ledas lovely Twins.
Or as Loue-nursing Venus when she sportes,
With cherry-lipt Adonis in the shade,
Figuring her passions in a thousand sorts,
With sighs, and tears, or what else might persuade,
Her dear, her sweet, her joy, her life, her love,
Kissing his browe, his cheek, his hand, his glove.
My beauty was the Load-starre of his thought,
My looks the Pilot to his wandering eye,
By me his senses all a sleep were brought,
When with sweet love I sang his lullaby.
Nature had taught my tongue her perfect time,
Which in his ear stroke duly as a chyme.
With sweetest speech, thus could I syranize,
Which as strong Philters youths desire could move,
And with such method could I rhetorize,
My music played the measures to his love:
In his fair breast, such was my souls impression,
As to his eyes, my thoughts made intercession.
Thus like an Eagle seated in the sun,
But yet a Phoenix in my soueraigns eye,
We act with shame, our revels are begun,
The wise could judge of our Catastrophe:
But we proceed to play our wanton prize,
Our mournful Chorus was a world of eyes.
The table now of all delight is laid,
Served with what banquets beauty could devise,
The Strens singe, and false Calypso played,
Our feast is graced with youths sweet comoedies,
Our looks with smiles, are soothed of every eye,
Carrousing love in boules of Iuorie.
Fraught with delight, and safely under sail,
Like flight-wing'd Faucons now we take our scope,
Our youth and fortune blow a merry gale,
We loose the anchor of our virtues hope:
Blinded with pleasure in this lustful game,
By oversight discard our King with shame.
My youthful pranks, are spurs to his desire,
I held the raynes, that ruled the golden sun,
My blandishments were fuel to his fire,
I had the garland whosoever won:
I waxt his wings and taught him art to fly,
Who on his back might bear me through the sky.
Here first that sun-bright temple was defild,
Which to fair virtue first was consecrated,
This was the fruit, wherewith I was beguild,
Here first the deed of all my fame was dated:
O me! even here from paradise I fell,
From Angels state, from heaven, cast down to hell.
Lo here the very Image of perfection,
With the black pensill of defame is blotted,
And with the ulcers of my youths infection,
My innocence is besmer'd, and spotted:
Now comes my night, o now my day is done,
These sable clouds eclipse my rising sun.
Our innocence, our child-bred purity
Is now defilde and as our dreams forgot,
Drawn in the coach of our security:
What act so vile, that we attempted not?
Our sun-bright virtues fountaine-cleer beginning,
Is now polluted by the filth of sinning.
O wit too wilful, first by heaven ordayn'd,
An Antidote by virtue made to cherish,
By filthy vice, as with a mole art stayn'd,
A poison now by which the senses perish:
That made of force, all vices to control,
Defames the life, and does confound the soul.
The Heavens to see my fall does knit her brows,
The vaulty ground under my burden groneth,
Unto mine eyes, the air my light allows,
The very wind my wickedness bemoneth:
The barren earth repineth at my food,
And Nature seems to curse her beastly brood.
And thus like slaves we sell our souls to sin,
Virtue forgot by worlds deceitful trust,
Alone by pleasure are we entered in,
Now wandering in the labyrinth of lust,
For when the soul is drowned once in vice,
The sweet of sin, makes hell a paradise.
O Pleasure thou, the very lure of sin,
The root of woe, our youths deceitful guide,
A shop where all confected poisons been,
The bayte of lust, the instrument of pride,
Enchanting Circes, smoothing couer-guile,
A luring Siren, flattering Crockodile.
Our Jove which saw his Phoebus youth betrayde,
And Phaeton guide the sunne-carre in the skies,
Knew well the course with danger hardly staide,
For what is not perceu'd by wise-mens eyes?
He knew these pleasures posts of our desire,
Might by misguiding set his throne on fire.
This was a corsiue to King Edwards days,
These iarring discords quite vntund his mirth,
This was the pain that never gave him ease,
If ever hell, this was his hell on earth:
This was the burden which he groned under,
This pincht his soul, and rent his heart in sunder.
This venom sucked the marrowe from his bones,
This was the canker which consumed his years,
This fearful vision, filled his sleep with groans,
This winter snowd down frost vpou his hayres:
This was the moth, this was the fretting rust,
Which so consumed his glory unto dust,
The humor found, which fed this foul disease
Must needs be stayed, ere help could be devised,
The vain must breath the burning to appease,
Hardly a cure, the wound not cauteris'd:
That member now wherein the botch was risen
Infecteth all not cured by incision.
The cause coniectur'd by this prodigy,
From whence this foul contagious sickness grue,
Wisdom alone must give a remedy,
For to prevent the danger to ensue:
The cause must end, ere the effect could cease,
Else might the danger daily more increase.
Now those whose eyes to death enuide my glory,
Whose saftie still upon my downfall stood,
These, these, could comment on my youthful story,
These were the wolves which thirsted for my blood:
These all unlade their mischiefs at this baye,
And make the breach to enter my decay.
These curres that lived by carrion of the court,
These wide-mouthed hel-hounds long time kept at bay,
Finding the King to credit their report,
Like greedy ravens follow for their pray:
Dispightfull Langton fauorit to the King,
Was he which first, me in disgrace could bring.
Such as beheld this lightning from above,
My Princely Jove from out the air to thunder:
This earthquake which did my foundation move,
This boystrous storm, this unexpected wounder,
They thought my sun had bin eclipsed quite,
And all my day now turned to winters night.
My youth embowel'd by their curious eyes,
Whose true reports my life anatomis'd,
Who still pursued me like deceitful spies,
To cross that which I wantonly devised:
Perceive the train me to the trap had led,
And down they come like haylestones on my head.
My Son eclipsed, each Star becomes a Sun,
When Phoebus fayles, then Cynthia shines bright,
These furnish up the Stage, my act is done
Which were but Gloe-wormes to my glorious light,
Those erst condemned by my perfections doom,
In Phoebus chariot, now possess my room.
The Commons swore, I led the Prince to vice,
The Nobles said that I abused the King,
Grave Matrons such as lust could not entice,
Like women whispred of another thing:
Such as could not aspire unto my place,
These were suborned to offer me disgrace.
The staff thus broke, whereon my youth did stay,
And with the shaddowe all my pleasures gone:
Now with the winds my joys fleet hence away,
The silent night makes musik to my moan,
The tatling echoes whispering with the air,
Unto my words sound nothing but despair.
The frowning Heavens are all in sables clad,
The Planet of my lives misfortune raineth:
No music serves a dying soul to glad,
My wrong to Tirants for redress complains:
To ease my pain there is no remedy,
So far despair exceeds extremity.
Why do I quake my downfall to report?
Tell on my ghost, the story of my woe,
The King commands, I must depart the court,
I ask no question, he will have it so:
The Lions roaring, lesser beasts do fear,
The greatest fly, when he approaches near.
My Prince is now appointed to his guarde,
As srom a traitor he is kept from me,
My banishment already is preparde,
Away I must, there is no remedy:
On pain of death I may no longer stay,
Such is revenge which brooketh no delay.
The skies with clouds are all inuelloped,
The pitchie fogs eclipse my cheerful Sun,
The geatie night has all her curtains spread
And all the air with vapors ouerrun:
Wanting those rays whose cleernes lent me light,
My sunshine day is turned to black-fac'd night.
Like to the bird of Ledaes lemmans die,
Beating his breast against the silver stream,
The fatal prophet of his destiny,
With mourning chants, his death approaching theme:
So now I sing the dirges of my fall
The Anthemes of my fatal funeral.
Or as the faithful Turtle for her make
Whose youth enjoyed her dear virginity,
Sits shrouded in some melancholy brake
Chirping forth accents of her misery,
Thus half distracted sitting all alone,
With speaking sighs, to utter forth my moan.
My beauty s'dayning to behold the light
Now weather-beaten with a thousaud storms,
My dainty lims must travail day and night,
Which often were lulde in princely Edwards arms,
Those eyes where beauty sat in all her pride,
With fearful objects filled on every side.
The Prince so much astonished with the blow,
So that it seemed as yet he felt no pain,
Until at length awakned by his woe,
He saw the wound by which his joys were slain,
His cares fresh bleeding fainting more and more,
No Cataplasma now to cure the sore.
Now weep mine eyes, and lend me tears at will,
You sad-musde sisters help me to indite,
And in your fair Castalia bathe my quill,
In bloody lines whilst I his woes recite,
Inspire my muse O Heavens now from above,
To painte the passions of a princely love.
His eyes about their rouling Globes do cast,
To find that Sun, from whom they had their light,
His thoughts do labor for that sweet repast,
Which past the day, and pleased him all the night:
He countes the hours, so sloly how they run,
Reproues the day, and blames the loytring sun.
As gorgious Phoebus in his first vprise
Discovering now his Scarlet-colored head,
By troublous motions of the lowering Skies
His glorious beams with fogges are ouerspred,
So are his cheereful brows eclipsed with sorrow,
Which cloud the shine of his youths-smiling morrow.
Now showring down a flud of brackish tears,
The Epithemaes to his hart-swolne grief,
Then sighing out a vollue of dispayres,
Which only is the afflicted man's relief:
Now wanting sighs, and all his tears were spent,
His tongue brake out into this sad lament.
O break my heart quoth he, O break and dye,
Whose infant thoughts were nursed with sweet delight;
But now the Inn of care and misery,
Whose pleasing hope is murdered with despite:
O end my days, for now my joys are done,
Wanting my Peirs, my sweetest Gaueston.
Farewell my Love, companion of my youth,
My souls delight, the subject of my mirth,
My second self if I report the truth,
The rare and only Phoenix of the earth,
Farewell sweet friend, with thee my joys are gone,
Farewell my Peirs, my lovely Gaueston.
What are the rest but painted Imagrie,
Dombe Idols made to fill up idle rooms,
But gaudie anticks, sportes of foolerie,
But fleshly coffins, goodly gilded tombs,
But puppets which with others words reply,
Like prattling echoes soothing every lie?
O damned world, I scorn thee and thy worth,
The very source of all iniquity:
An ougly damme that brings such monsters forth,
The maze of death, nurse of impiety,
A filthy sink, where lothsomnes does dwell,
A labyrinth, a iayle, a very hell.
Deceitful Siren traitor to my youth,
Bane to my bliss, false thief that stealst my joys:
Mother of lies, sworn enemy to truth,
The ship of fools fraught all with gaudes and toys,
A vessel stuffed with foul hypocrisy,
The very temple of Idolatry.
O earth-pale Saturn most maleuolent
Combustious Planet, tyrant in thy reign,
The sword of wrath, the root of discontent,
In whose ascendant all my joys are slain:
Thou executioner of foul bloody rage,
To act the will of lame decrepit age.
My life is but a very map of woes,
My joys the fruit of an untimely birth,
My youth in labor with unkindly throws,
My pleasures are like plagues that reign on earth,
All my delights like streams that swiftly run,
Or like the dew exhaled by the Sun.
O Heavens why are you deaf unto my moan?
S'dayne you my prayers? or scorn to hear my miss?
Cease you to move, or is your pity gone?
Or is it you that rob me of my bliss?
What are you blind, or wink and will not see?
Or do you sport at my calamity?
O happy climat whatso ere thou be
Cheerd with those suns the fayr'st that ever shone,
Which have those Stars which guide my destiny,
The brightest lamps in all the Horizon,
O happy eyes that see which most I lack,
The pride and beauty of the Zodiac.
O blessed fountain source of all delight,
O sacred spark that kindlest Virtues fire!
The perfect object of the purest sight,
The superficies of true loves desire,
The very touchstone of all sweet conceit,
On whom all graces evermore awaite.
Thus whilst his youth in all these storms was tossed,
And whilst his joys lay speechles in a trance,
His sweet content with such unkindness crossed,
And lowering Fortune seemed to look askance:
Too weak to swim against the streamfull time,
Foretold their fall which now sought most to clime.
Camelion-like, the world thus turns her hue,
And like Proteus puts on sundry shapes,
One hastes to clime, another does ensue,
One falls, another for promotion gapes:
Flockmell they swarm like flies about the brim,
Some drown whilst others with great danger swim.
And some on whom the Sun shon passing fair,
Yet of their summer nothing seem to vaunte,
They saw their fall presaged by the air,
If once this planet were predominant:
Thus in their gate they flew with wings of fear,
And still with care do purchase honor dear.
Thus restles Time that never turns again,
Whose winged feet are sliding with the Sun,
Brings Fortune in to act another scene
By whom the plot already is begun,
The argument of this same tragedy,
Is Virtues fall to raise up infamy.
The brute is blown, the King does now pretend,
A long-look'd voyage to the Holy Land,
For which his subjects mighty sums do lend,
And whilst the thing is hotly thus in hand,
Blind Fortune turns about her fickle wheel,
And breaks the prop which makes the building reele.
I fear to speak, yet speak I must perforce,
My words be turned to tears even as I write,
Mine eyes do yet behold his dying corse,
And on his hearse me thinks I still indyte:
My paper is hard sable Ebon wood,
My pen of Iron, and my ink is blood.
Lo here, the time drue on of Edwards death,
Lo here, the doleful period of his years,
O now he yields up that sacred breath,
For whom the Heavens do shower down fluds of tears
For whom the Sun, even mourning hides his face,
For whom the earth was all to vile and base.
May I report his doleful obsequie,
When as my Ghost does tremble at his name?
Feign would I write, but as I write I die,
My joints apald with fear, my hand is lame,
I leave it to some sacred muse to tell,
Upon whose life a Poets pen might dwell.
No sooner was his body wrapped in lead
And that his mournful funerals were done,
But that the Crown was set on Edwards head,
Sing I-o now my ghost, the storm is gone:
The wind blows right, lo yonder breaks my day,
Caroll my muse, and now sing care away.
Carnaruan now calls home within a while
Whom worthy Long-shankes hated to the death,
Whom Edward swore should dye in his exile,
He was as dear to Edward as his breath,
This Edward loved that Edward loved not,
Kings wills performd: and dead men's words forgot.
Now waft me wind unto the blessed I Will,
Rock me my joys, love sing me with delight,
Now sleep my thoughts, cease sorrow for a while,
Now end my care, come day, farewell my night:
Sweet senses now act every one his part,
Lo here the balm that has recur'd my heart.
Lo now my Jove in his ascendant is
In the aestiuall solstice of his glory,
Now all the Stars prognosticate my blis,
And in the Heaven all eyes may read my story,
My comet now worlds wonder thus appeers
Foretelling troubles of ensuing years.
Now am I mounted with fames golden wings,
And in the Tropic of my fortunes height,
My flood maintained with a thousand springs,
Now on my back supporting Atlas weight:
All tongues and pens attending on my praise,
Sur-named now, the wonder of our days.
Who ever saw the kindest roman dame
With extreme joy yield up her latest breath,
When from the wars her son triumphing came,
When stately Rome had mourned for his death:
Her passion here might have expressed aright,
When once I came into the Princes sight.
Who ever had his Lady in his arms,
That has of love but felt the misery,
Touching the fire that all his senses warmes,
Now clips with joy her blushing Iuorie.
Feeling his soul in such delights to melt,
There Is none but he can tell the joy, we felt.
Like as when Phoebus darteth forth his rays,
Gliding along the swelling Ocean streams,
Now whilst one billowe with another plays,
Reflecteth back his bright translucent beams:
Such was the conflict then betwixt our eyes
Sending forth looks as tears do fall and rise.
It seemed the air deuisde to please my sight,
The whistling wind makes music to my tale,
All things on earth now feast me with delight,
The world to me sets all her wealth to sale:
Who now rules all in court but I alone,
Who highly graced but only Gaueston?
Now like to Mydas all I touch is gould,
The clouds do shower down gould into my lap,
If I but wink the mightiest are controulde,
Placed on the turret of my highest hap:
My cofers now, even like to Oceans are,
To whom all floods by course do still repair.
With bounty now he franckly seals his love,
And to my hands yields up the I Will of Man,
By such a gift his kingly mind to prove,
This was the earnest wherewith he began:
Then VValingford Queen Elnors stately dower,
With many a town, and many a goodly tower.
And all those sums his father had preparde
By way of taxes for the holy land,
He gave me frankly as my due reward:
In bounty thus, it seemd he pleased his hand,
Which made the world to wonder every hour,
To see me drowned in this golden shower.
Determined now to hoyst my sail amain,
The Earl of Cornwall he created me,
Of England then the Lord high Chamberlain,
Chief Secretary to his Majesty:
What I deuisd, his treasure ever wrought,
His bounty still so answered to my thought.
Yet more to spice my joys with sweet delight,
Bound by his love aprentice to my pleasure,
Whose eyes still leuel'd how to please my sight,
Whose kindness ever so exceeded measure,
Devised to quench my thirst with such a drink
As from my quill drops Nectar to my ink.
O sacred Bounty mother of content,
Prop of renown, the nourisher of arts,
The Crown of hope, the root of good event,
The trumpe of Fame, the joy of noble hearts,
Grace of the Heavens, divinity in nature,
Whose excellence does so adorn the creature.
He gives his Niece in marriage unto me
Of Royal blood, for beauty past compare,
Borne of his sister was this Bellamie,
Daughter to Gilbert thrice renowned Clare,
Chief of his house the Earl of Gloucester,
For Princely worth that never had his peer.
Like Heauen-di'd Andromeda the fair,
In her embrodered mantle richly dight,
With Starrie train inthronis'd in the air,
Adorns the VVelken with her glittering light,
Such one she was, which in my bosom rested,
With whose dear love, my youthful years were feasted.
As when fair Ver dight in her flowrie rail,
In her new-coloured liueries decks the earth,
And glorious Tytan spreads his sunshine veil,
To bring to pass her tender infants birth:
Such was her beauty which I then possessed,
With whose imbracings all my youth was blessed.
Whose purest thoughts and spotles chaste desire,
To my affections still so pleasing were,
Never yet touched with spark of Venus fire,
As but her breast I thought no Heaven but there:
To none more like then fair Idea she,
The very image of all chastity.
O chastity, that guifte of blessed soul's,
Comfort in death, a crown unto the life,
Which all the passions of the mind controul's
Adornes the maid, and bewtifies the wife:
That grace, the which nor death, nor time attaints,
Of earthly creatures making heavenly Saints.
O Virtue which no muse can poetize
Fair Queen of England which with thee does rest,
Which thy pure thoughts do only exercize,
And is impressed in thy royal breast,
Which in thy life disciphered is alone,
Whose name shall want a fit Epitheton.
The Heavens now seem to frolic at my feast,
The Stars as handmayds, serving my desiers,
Now love full fed with beauty takes his rest,
To whom content, for saftie thus retiers:
The ground was good, my footing passing sure,
My days delightsome, and my life secure.
Lo thus ambition creepes into my breast,
Pleasing my thoughts with this emperious humor,
And with this devil being once possessed,
Mine ears are filled with such a buzzing rumor,
As only pride my glory does awaite,
My senses soothed with every selfe-conceite.
Self-love, prides thirst, unsatisfied desire,
A flood that never yet had any bounds,
Times pestilence, thou state-consuming fire,
A mischief which all commonweals confoundes,
O Plague of plagues, how many kingdoms rue thee,
O happy Empiers that yet never knew thee!
And now revenge which had been smoothered long,
Like piercing lightning flasheth from mine eyes,
This word could sound so sweetly on my tongue,
And with my thoughts such Stratagems devise,
Tickling mine ears with many a pleasing story,
Which promised wonders and a world of glory.
For now began the bloodie-rayning broils
Between the barons of the land and me,
Laboring the state with Ixion-endles toils
Twixt my ambition and their tyranny,
Such was the storm this diluge first begun,
With which this I Will was after ouerrun.
O cruel discord food of deadly hate,
O mortal corsiue to a common weal,
Death-lingring consumption to a state,
A poisoned sore that never salve could heal:
O foul contagion deadly killing fever,
Infecting often, but to be cured never.
By courage now imboldned in my sin,
Finding my King so surely linkt to me,
By circumstance I finely bring him in
To be an actor in this tragedy,
Persuading him the Barons sought his blood,
And on what terms these earth-bred giants stood.
And so advancing to my Princes Grace
The baser sort of factious quality,
As being raised unto such a place
Might counterpoyse the proud Nobility,
And as my agents on my part might stand,
Still to support what ere I took in hand.
Suborning gesters still to make me mirth,
Vile Sycophants at every word to sooth me,
Time-fawning Spaniels, Mermaydes on the earth,
Trencher-fed fools with flattering words to smooth me
Base Parasites, these elbowe-rubbing mates,
A plague to all lascivious wanton states.
O filthy monkies vile and beastly kind,
Foul prattling Parats berds of Harpie brood,
A corasiue to every noble mind,
Vipers that suck your mothers dearest blood,
Misshapen monster, worst of any creature,
A foe to art, an enemy to nature.
His presence graced what ere I went about,
His chief content was that which liked me,
What ere I did, his power still bare me out,
And where I was, there euer-more was he:
By birth my Sovereign, but by love my thrall,
King Edwards Idol all men did me call.
Often would he set his crown upon my head,
And in his chair sit down upon my knee,
And when his eyes with love were fully fed,
A thousand times he sweetly kissed me:
When did I laugh? and he not seen to smile?
If I but frownd, he silent all the while.
But Fortune now unto my ouer-throwe,
Intic't me on with her alluring call,
And still devising how to work my woe,
One bayte tan'e up, she let another fall.
Thus Syren-like, she brings me to the bay
Where long before she plotted my decay.
For now the King to France does him prepare,
For marriage with the Princess Isabel,
Daughter to Phillip then surnamed the fair,
Who like to him in beauty did excel;
Of Tilts and tryumphs every man reports,
And the uniting of these famous Courts.
And now the King to raise me higher yet,
Makes me the Lord-protector of the Land,
And in the Chair of his estate I sit,
He yields his Scepter up into mine hand.
Devising still how he to pass might bring,
That if he died, I might succeed as King.
His treasure now stood absolute to me,
I dranck my pleasures in a golden cup,
I spent a world, I had abundantly,
As though the earth had cast her bowels up.
My reckonings cast, my sums were soon enroled,
I was by no man once to be controled.
Now being got as high as I could clyme,
And Fortune made my foote-cloth as I gest,
I paynt me brave with Tagus golden slyme,
Because I would enjoy what I possessed.
Aluding still, that he is mad and worse,
Which plays the nyggard with a Princes purse.
And now the King returning with his train,
I summond all the chief Nobility,
And in my pomp, went forth to entertayne
The Peers of France in all this ioylitie.
Where, in my carridge were such honors placed,
As with my presence, all the shows were graced.
Guarded with troops of Gallants as I went,
The people crouching still with cap and knee,
My port and personage so magnificent,
That (as a God) the Commons honored me.
And in my pride, lo thus I could devise,
To seem a wonder unto all men's eyes.
In ritchest Purple rode I all alone,
With Diamonds imbroidered and bedight,
Which like the stars in Gallixia shone,
Whose lucter still reflecting with the light,
Presented heaven to all that ever gazed:
Of force to make a world of eyes amazed.
Upon a stately Iennet forth I rode,
Caparisond with Pearle-enchased plumes,
Trotting as though the Measures he had trod,
Breathing Arabian Ciuit-sweet perfumes;
Whose rarenes seemd to cast men in a trance,
Wondered of England, and admired of France.
Like trident-maced Neptune in his pride,
Mounted upon a Dolphin in a storm,
Upon the tossing billows forth does ride,
About whose train a thousand Trytons swarm,
When Phoebus seems to set the waves on fire,
To show his glory and the gods desire.
Or like unto the fiery-faced Sun
Upon his wagon prauncing in the West,
Whose blushing cheeks with flames seem overrun
Whilst sweating thus he gallops to his rest.
Such was the glory wherein now I stood,
Which makes the Barrons sweat their dearest bloo d.
Thus when these gallant companies were met,
The King here present with his lovely Queen,
And all the Nobles in due order set,
To hear and see what could be hard or seen:
Lo here that kindness easily is discride,
That faithful love which he nor I could hide.
Even like as Castor when a calm begins,
Beholding then his starry-tressed brother,
With mirth and glee these Swan-begotten twins
Presaging joy, the one embrace the other:
Thus one the other in our arms we fold,
Our breasts for joy, our hearts could scarcely hold.
Or like the Nimphe beholding in a Well,
Her dearest love, and wanting words to woo him,
About his neck with clipped arms she fell,
Where by her faith the gods conioynd her to him.
Such was the love which now by signs we break,
When joy had tied our tongues, we could not speak.
Thus arm in arm toward London on we rid,
And like two Lambs we sport in every place,
Where neither joy nor love could well be hid
That might be sealed with any sweet embrace:
So that his Queen, might by our kindness prove,
Though she his Wife, yet I alone his love.
The Barrons now ambitious at my reign,
As one that stood betwixt them and the Sun.
They underhand pursue me with disdain,
And play the game which I before had won:
And malice now so hard the bellows blew,
That through mine ears the sparks of fire flew.
Where in revenge, the tryumphes they deuisd
To entertain the King with wondrous cost,
Were by my malice suddenly surprisd,
The charge, their summons, and their honors lost;
Which in their thoughts revenge so deeply raised,
As with my blood they vowed should be appeased.
As when within the soft and spungie soil,
The vvind does pierce the intrals of the earth,
Where hurly burly with a restless coile
Shakes all the center, wanting issue forth,
Till with the tumor Towns and Mountains tremble,
Even such a meteor does their rage resemble.
Or when the shapeles huge Leuiathan,
Has thrust himself upon the sandy shore,
Where (Monster like) affrighting every man,
He belloweth out a fearful hydeous rore:
Even such a clamor through the air does thunder,
The doleful presage of some fearful wonder.
Thus as a plague unto the government,
A very scourge to the Nobility,
The cause of all the Commons discontent,
The Image of all sentialitie,
I was reproched openly of many,
Hated of all, not pitied now of any.
And as a vile misleader of the King,
A wastfull spender of his coin and treasure,
A secret thief of many a sacred thing,
A Cormorant, in whom was never measure;
I seemed hateful now in all men's eyes,
Buzzing about me like a swarm of flies.
Like as a cloud, foul, dark, and ugly black,
Threatening the earth with tempest every hour,
Now broken with a fearful thunder-crack,
Straight pours down his deep earth-drenching shower,
Thus for their wrongs now rise they up in arms,
Or to revenge, or to amend their harms.
The King perceiving how the matter stood,
Himself, his Crown, in this extremity,
And how the Barrons thirsted for my blood,
And seeing now there was no remedy,
That I some vile untimely death must die,
Or thus, must be exiled presently:
A thousand thoughts he hammereth in his head,
Thinking on this, and now again on that;
As one devise is come, another fled,
Some thing he would, and now he knows not what.
To help me now, a thousand means he forgeth,
Whilst still with sighs his sorrows he disgorgeth.
And for I was his very souls delight,
He thought on this, the only way at last,
In Ireland to hide me out of sight,
Until these storms were ouer-blowne and past.
And in mean time to appease the Barrons hate,
And so reduce me to my former state.
And to give place unto the Barrons rage,
Which flamed like a burning-quenchles brand,
Which naught but my exile could now assuage,
He sendes me post away to Ireland:
And to eschew all danger by the way,
Me safely guarded thither does convey.
As one whose house in danger to be burned,
Which he has builded with exceeding cost,
And all his wealth to earth-pale ashes turned,
Taking one Jewel which he loves most,
To some safe place does with the same retire.
Leaving the rest to 'he mercy of the fire.
Or as a Nurse within besieged walls,
Dreading each hour the Soldiers slaughtering knife,
Within some place as fittest there befalls,
Hides her sweet babe in hope to save his life,
Lo thus the King provides now for me
The joy and pride of his felicity.
He vvanted words to express what he sustained,
Nor could I speak to utter half my wrong,
To show his grief, or where I most was payn'd,
The time too short, the tale was all too long:
I took my leave with sighs when forth I went,
He streams of tears unto my farewell sent.
But sending looks ambassadors of love,
Which as our posts could go and soon retire,
By whose quick motion we alone might prove,
Our equal love did equal like desire:
And that the fire in which we both did burn,
Was easily quenched in hope of safe return.
Like to a vessel with a narrow vent,
Which is filled up with liquor to the top,
Although the mouth be ever eminent,
Yet is it seen not to distyll a drop:
Even so our breasts, brim-full with pensive care,
Stopping our tongues, with grief we silent are.
But when my want gave breath unto his moan,
And that his tears had now untied his tongue,
With drery sighs all now clean ouer-blowne,
Which erst (like Fountains) in abundance sprunge,
Unto himself, he thus complains his grief,
Since now the world could yield him no relief.
O cursed stars (quoth he) that guide my birth,
Infernal Torches, Comets of misfortune,
Or Genuus here that haunts me on the earth,
Or hellish fiend that do my woes importune:
Fate-guiding Heavens, in whose unlucky moving,
Stands the effect of my mishaps approouing.
Tide-ceasles sorrow, which do ouer-flow,
Youth-withering cares, past compass of conceit,
Hart-kylling grief, which more and more do grow,
And on the Anuile of my heart do beat,
Death-thirsting rage, still deadly, mortal, endless,
O poorest Prince ^ left desolate and freendles.
Sky-couering clouds, which thus do ouer-cast,
And at my noone-tide darken all my sun,
Blood-drying sickness, which my life do wast.
When yet my glass is but a quarter run:
My joy but a phantasme and elusion,
And my delights intending my confusion.
What Planet raignd in that unlucky hour,
When first I was invested in the Crown?
Or has in my nativity such power,
Or what vile Fury does attend my Throne?
Or else, what hellish hags be these that haunt me?
Yet if a King, why should misfortune daunt me?
Am I a Prince? yet to my people subject,
That should be loved? yet thus am left forlorn,
Ordaynd to rule? respected as an object,
Live I to see mine honor had in scorn?
Base dunghill mind, that do such slavery bring,
To live a pesant, and be borne a King.
The purest steel does never turn at lead,
Nor Oak does bow at every wind that blows,
Nor Lion from a Lamb does turn his head,
Nor Eagle frighted with a flock of Crows:
And yet a King want courage in his breast,
Trembling for fear to see his woes redrest.
It rather fits a villain then a state,
To have his love on others lykings placed,
Or set his pleasures at so base a rate,
To see the fame by every slave disgraced;
A King should ever privilege his pleasure,
And make his Peers esteem it as their treasure.
Then raise thy thoughts, and with thy thoughts thy love,
Kings want no means t'accomplish what they would,
If one do fail, yet other may thou prove,
It shames a King, to say, If that I could.
Let not thy love such crosses then sustain,
But raise him up, and call him home again.
Sweet Gaueston, whose praise the Angels sing,
May thou assure thee of my love the while?
Or what may thou imagine of thy King,
To let thee live in yonder brutish I Will?
My deer, a space this weary world prolong,
He lives, that can and shall revenge thy wrong.
Thus like a man grown lunatic with pain,
Now in his torments casts him on his bed,
Then out he runns into the fields again,
And on the ground does rest his troubled head.
With such sharp passions is the King possessed,
Which day nor night does let him take his rest.
As Lyon-skind Alcides, when he lost
His lovely Hylas, on his way from Thrace,
Follows the quest through many an unknown coast,
With playnts and outcries, wearying every place,
Thus lovely Edward fills each place with moan,
Wanting the sight of his sweet Gaueston.
Thus like a Barge that wants both steer and sails,
Forced with the wind against the streamefull tide,
From place to place with every billow hayles,
And (as it haps) from shore to shore does ride:
Thus does my case, thus does my fortune stand,
Betwixt the King, and Barrons of the Land.
On this Dilemma stood my tickle state,
Thus pro et contra all men do dispute,
Precisely ballanc't twixt my love and hate,
Some do affirm, some other do confute:
Until my King, (sweet Edward) now at last,
Thus strikes the stroke which makes them all aghast.
Now calling such of the Nobility,
As he supposed on his part would stand,
By their consent he makes me Deputy.
And being seated thus in Ireland,
Of gold and silver sending me such store,
As made the world to vvonder more and more.
Like great gold-coyning Crassus in his health,
Amidst his legion long-mayntaining store,
The glory of the Roman Commonwealth,
Feasting the rich, and gyuing to the poor.
Such was th'aboundance which I then possessed,
Blessed with gold, (if gold could make me blessed.)
Where, (like Lucullus,) I maintaind a port,
As great god Bacchus had been late come down,
And in all pomp at Dublin kept my Court,
As I had had th'reuenewes of a Crown.
In train, in state, and every other thing,
Attended still as I had been a King.
Of this my vvondrous hospitality,
The Irish yet, until this day can boast,
Such was the bounty of a King to me,
His Chequer then could scarce defray the cost.
His gyfts were such, I ioyd in what he sent,
He freely gave, and I as freely spent.
Few days there past but some the Channel crossed,
With kindest Letters enterlynd with love,
VVheras I still received by every post,
His Ring, his Bracelet, Garter, or his Glove:
Which I in hostage of his kindness kept,
Of his pure love, which lived and never slept.
With many a rich and stately ornament,
Worn by great Kings, of hie and wondrous price,
Or Jewel that my fancy might content,
With many a robe of strange and rare device.
That all which saw and knew this wondrous wast,
Perceived his treasure long time could not last.
And thus whilst Fortune friendly cast my Dice,
And took my hazard, and threw at the maine,
I saw it was but folly to be nice,
That chances once, that seldom haps again.
I knew such bounty had been seldom seen,
And since his time, I think has never been.
And now the Barrons which repynd before,
Because I was too lavish of the treasure,
And saw my wast consuming ten times more,
Which does so far exceed all bonds of measure,
This (as a knife) their very hart-strings cuts,
And gnawes them like the Colic in the guts.
Thus (all in vain,) they seek to stop the source,
For presently it ouer-flowes the bounds,
Yet well perceive, if thus it held his course,
No question then, the Common wealth it drowns:
And thus like men that tread an endless Maze,
Whilst Fortune sports, the world stands at a gaze.
Like Soldiers in a Town surpised by night,
Over their heads the houses set on fire,
Sure to be slain in issuing out to fight,
Or else be burned if they do retire:
Some curse the time, some other blame their fortune,
Whilst black Despair their deaths does thus importune.
This gracious King, (which seemd to sleep the while,)
Finding the iron thus fully had his heat,
With sweet persuasions fitly frames his style:
Which in their wits does such a temper beat,
With kindest looks, and sweetest vows of love,
As were of force a Rock of flint to move.
His clowdy frowns be turned to sunshine smyles,
And those on whom he lowerd, he friendly graces,
Their moody cheer, with sporting he beguiles,
His Lions looks, be turned to sweet embraces,
That with his will, their thoughts seem to accord,
Such is the love of subjects to their Lord.
And having found his kindness took effect,
He follows on the quest with hot pursuit,
Nor day, nor night, he does the same neglect,
Until the graff was grown to bring forth fruit:
And that the Barrons all with might and maine,
Now condescend to call me home again.
O frail and slyding state of earthly things,
Blind Fortune, chance, worlds mutability,
Aduauncing pesants, and debasing Kings,
Od hap, good luck, or star-bred destiny:
Which still do fawn, and flatter me so often,
Now casts me down, then sett'st me up aloft.
In all post-hast, the King to Ireland sent
His Princely Letters, for my safe return,
To England now I must in continent,
It seems that time all malice has out-worne.
The Coast is clear, occasion calls away,
The gale stands right, and drives me from the Bay.
My whistling sails make music with the wind,
The boystrous waves do homage to mine eyes,
The brutish sort of Eols Imps seem kind,
And all the clouds abandoning the skies
Now lovely Laedas egg-borne twins appear:
Toward Albyons cliues fair Fortune guides my steer.
The King is come to Chester, where he lies,
The Court prepared to receive me there
In all the pomp that wit could well devise:
As since that time was seldom seen elsewhere.
Where setting once my dainty foot on land,
He thought him blessed that might but kiss my hand.
In pleasures there we spend the nights and days,
And with our revels entertain the time,
With costly Banquets, Masks, and stately Plays,
Painting our loves in many a pleasing rhyme.
With rarest Music, and sweet-tuned voices,
(In which the soul of man so much reioyces.)
Like as the famous brave Egiptian Queen,
Feasted the Roman great Mark Anthony,
With Pearl-disolu'd carouses, seldom seen,
Served all in vessel of rich Iuory:
Such was the sumptuous banquets he prepared,
In which no cost or curious thing was spard.
Or like the Troyan Pryam, when as he
Beheld his long-lost son return to Troy,
Tryumphing now in all his iolitie,
Proud Ilion smokes with th'orges of his joy,
Such are our feasts and stately tryumphs here,
Which with applauses, sound in every ear.
Departing thence from Chesters pleasant side,
Toward London now we travel with delight,
VVher every City likewise does provide
To entertain us, with some pleasing sight:
Till all our train at length to London comes,
Where naught is hard, but Trumpets, bells and drums.
As when Paulus Aemilius entered Room,
And like great Jove, in starlike triumph came,
Honored in Purple by the Senats doom,
Laden with gold, and crowned with his fame.
Such seems our glory now in all men's eyes,
Our friendship honored with applaudities.
Or when old Phillips time still-wondred son,
In his worlds conquest surfeiting with spoils,
The scourge of Kings, returns to Babylon,
To sport and banquet after all his toiles,
Such is our glory in our London Court,
Whereto all Nations daily make resort.
And thus blind Fortune lulls me in her lap,
And rocks me still, with many a Sirens song,
Thus placed me on the Atlas of my hap.
From which she means to cast me down ere long.
Black ugly fiend, O foul misshapen evil,
In show an Angel, but in deed a devil.
Even as a Lion got into his paws
The silly Lamb, seems yet a while to play,
Till seeking to escape out of his jaws,
This beastly King now tears it for his pray.
Thus having got me in her arms so fast,
Determins now to feed on me at last.
Or as the slaughter-man does fat the beast,
Which afterward he means shall be slain,
Before provided to some solemn feast,
The more thereby he may increase his gain,
Lo, thus proud Fortune feeds me for the knife,
For which (it seems) she had prepared my life.
For thus ere long, between the King and me,
As erst before, our revels now begin,
And now the Barrons taste their misery,
Opening their eyes, which makes them see their sin,
The plague once past, they never felt the sores,
Till thus again it haps within their doors.
Like as a man made drunk with foul excess,
Drowning his soul in this vile lothly vice,
Once being sober, sees his beastliness,
Buying repentance with so deer a price;
Thus they perceive the bondage they possessed,
In condiscending to the King request.
The damned Furies here vnbong the source,
From whence the Lethe of my virtues burst,
The black-borne Fates here labor in that course,
By which my life and fortune came accursed.
My death in that star-guiders doom concealed,
Now in the brows of heaven may be revealed.
My youth spurrs on my frail untamed desire,
Yielding the raynes to my lascivious will,
Upon the Ise I take my full careire,
The place too slippery, and my manidge ill,
Thus like a Colt, in danger to be cast,
Yet still runn on, the devil drives so fast.
Now wandering in a Laborinth of error,
Lost in my pride, no hope of my return,
Of sin and shame my life a perfect mirror,
No spark of virtue once is seen to burn.
Nothing there was could be discernd in me,
But beastly lust, and censualitie.
Black He cate chaunts on her night-spell charms,
Which cast me first into this deadly sleep,
Whilst fier-eyd Ate clips me in his arms,
And hayles me down to dark Herebus deep.
Foul sleep-god Morpheus, curtains up the light,
And shuts my fame in everlasting night.
The fixed stars in their repugnacie,
Had full concluded of these endless iarrs,
And nature by some strange Antipathy,
Had in our humors bred continual wars.
Or the star-ceeled heavens by fatal doom,
Ordaind my troubles in my Mothers womb.
Some hellish hagg in this inchaunted cup,
Out of the Tun of pride this poison drew,
And those hot cinders which were raked up,
Into the nostrils of the Nobles blew.
Who now caroused to my funeral,
And (with a vengeance) I must pledge them all.
And now brake out that execrable rage,
Which long before had boiled in their blood,
Which neither time nor reason could assuage:
But like to men grown lunatic and wood,
My name and fame, they seek to scandelize,
And root the same from all posterities.
They all affirm, my Mother was a Witch,
A filthy hagg, and burnt for sorcery:
And I her son, and fitting with her pitch,
She had bequeathed her damned Art to me.
This rumor in the peoples ears they ring,
That (for my purpose) I bewitched the King.
They say, that I conuayd beyond the Sea,
The Table and the tressels all of gold,
King Arthurs relics, kept full many a day,
The which to Windsor did belong of old.
In whose fair margent (as they did surmize,)
Merlin ingraued many prophecies.
Some slanderous tongues, in spightful manner said,
That here I lived in filthy sodomy,
And that I was King Edwards Ganemed,
And to this sin he was enticed by me.
And more, (to wreck their spightfull deadly teene,)
Report the same to Isabel the Queen.
A Catilogue of tytles they begun,
With which I had the Noble men abused,
Which they auouch't I never durst have done,
If by the King I had not been excused.
And swore, that he maintaind against the state,
A monster, which both God and man did hate.
They swore, the King subbornd my villainy,
And that I was his instrument of vice,
The means whereby he wrought his tyranny,
That to his chance I ever cast the dice;
And with most bitter execrations ban,
The time in which, our friendship first began.
Lo, here draws on my drery dismal hour,
The doleful peryod of my desteny,
Here does approach the black and ugly shower,
Hence flows the Deluge of my misery.
Here comes the cloud that shuts up all my light,
My lowering Winter, and eternal night.
The angry Barrons now assembled were,
And no man left that on my part durst stand,
Before the Popes pernicious Legate there,
They forced me for to abjure the Land.
Forcing the King to further their intent,
By solemn oath upon the Sacrament.
Upon the holy Sacrament he swears,
Although (God knows) full much against his will,
So overcome with silence, sighs, and tears,
To make a sword the which himself should kill.
And being done, (in doing then not long,)
He seems to curse his hand, his heart, his tongue.
Like to a man that walking in the grass,
Upon a Serpent suddenly does tread,
Plucks back his foot, and turnns away his face,
His couller fading, pale as he were dead:
Thus he the place, thus he the act does shun,
Lothing to see, what he before had done.
Or as a man mistaking a receite,
Some death-strong poison happily does taste,
And every hour the vigor does awaite,
Apald with fear, now stands all aghast.
Thus stands he trembling in an ecstasy,
Too sick to live, and yet too strong to die.
He takes his Crown, and spurnns it at his feet,
His princely robes he does in pieces tear,
He straight commands the Queen out of his sight,
He tuggs and rents his golden-tressed hair.
He beats his breast, and sighs out pittious groans,
Spending the day in tears, the night in moans.
Like as the furious Paladine of France,
Forsaken of Angelica the fair,
So like a Bedlam in the fields does dance,
With shouts and clamors, filling all the air,
Tearing in pieces what so ere he caught,
With such a fury is the King distraught.
Or when the woeful Thrace-borne Hecuba,
Saw Troy on fire, and Pryams fatal doom,
Her sonns all slain, her deer Polixina,
There sacrifized on Achilles Tomb,
Even like a Bore, her angry tusks does whet,
Scratching and biting all that ere she met.
With fearful visions frighted in his bed,
Which seems to him a very thorny brake,
With ugly shapes which way he turnns his head:
And when from sleep he ever does awake,
He then again with weeping mournful cries,
In grief of soul, complains his miseries.
He wants disgesture, and refrains his rest,
His eyes ore-watched like eclipsed sunns,
With bitter passions is his soul oppressed,
And through his eyes, his brain disolued runns.
And after silence, when with pain he speaks,
A sudden sigh his speech in sunder breaks.
He starteth up, and Gaueston does call,
Then stands he still, and looks upon the ground,
Then like one in an Epileps does fall,
As in a Spasmo, or a deadly sound;
Thus languishing in pain, and lingering ever,
In the Symptoma of his pyning fever.
Like to a flower that droupeth in a frost,
Or as a man in a Consumption pyning,
Staynd like a Cloth that has his culler lost,
Or Poets-worne Laurel when she is declyning:
Or like a Pecock washed in the rain,
Trayling adowne his starry-eyed train.
To Belgia I cross the narrow seas,
And in my breast a very sea of grief,
Whose tide-full surges never give me ease,
For heaven and earth has shut up all relief,
The air does threaten vengeance for my crime,
Clotho draws out the thread of all my time.
Like as that wicked Brother-killing Caine,
Flying the presence of his mighty God,
Accursed to die, forbidden to be slain,
A vagabond, and wandering still abroad.
In Flaunders thus I travel all alone,
Still seeking rest, yet ever finding none.
Or as the Monarch of great Babylon,
Whose monstrous pride the Lord did so detest,
As he outcast him from his princely throne,
And in the field he wandered like a beast.
Companion with the Ox and lothly Ass,
Starved with the cold, and feeding on the grass.
Thus do I change my habit and my name,
From place to place, I pass unknown of any;
But swift report so far had spread my fame,
I hear my life and youth controld of many;
The bouzing Flemings in their boistrous tongue,
Still talking on me as I pass along.
O wretched, vile, and miserable man,
Besotted so with worldly vanity,
When as thy life is but a very span,
Yet every hour full of calamity.
Begot in sin, and following still the game,
Living in lust, and dying often with shame.
Now working means to have intelligence,
By secret Letters from my Lord the King,
How matters stood since I departed thence,
And of the terms and state of every thing,
I cast about which way I might devise,
(In spite of all) once more to play my prize.
And still relying on King Edwards love,
To whom before my life had been so dear,
Whose constancy my fortune made me prove;
And to my Brother, Earl of Gloucester,
And to my wife, who labored tooth and nail,
My abiuration how she might appeal.
I now embarck me in a Flemish Hoy,
Disguised in the habit of a Muffe,
Attended thus with neither man nor boy,
But on my back a little bagg of stuff:
Like to a Soldier that in Camp of late,
Had been imployd in service with the state.
And safely landed on this blessed shore,
Toward Windsor thus disguised I took my way,
Whereas I had intelligence before,
My wife remaind, and there my Edward lay.
My dearest wife, to whom I sent my ring,
Who made my coming known unto the King.
As when old-youthful Eson in his glass,
Saw from his eyes the cheerful lightning sprung,
When as Art-spell Medea brought to pass,
By herbs and charms, again to make him young,
Thus stood King Edward, ravished in the place,
Fixing his eyes upon my lovely face.
Or as Muse-meruaile Hero, when she clips,
Her deer Leanders byllow-beaten limms,
And with sweet kisses seazeth on his lips,
When for her sake deep Hellespont he swimms,
Might by our tender-deer imbracings prove,
Fair Heroes kindness, and Leanders love.
Or like the twifold-twynned Geminy,
In their star-gilded gyrdle strongly tied,
Chayn'd by their saffrond tresses in the sky,
Standing to guard the sun-coche in his pride.
Like as the Vine, his love the Elm embracing,
With nimble arms, our bodies interlacing.
The Barrons hearing how I was arrived,
And that my late abiurement naught prevailed,
By my return, of all their hope deprived,
Their bedlam rage no longer now concealed:
But as hot coals once puffed with the wind,
Into a flame outbreaking by their kind.
Like to a man whose foot does hap to light,
Into the nest where stinging Hornets ly,
Vexed with the spleen, and rising with despite,
About his head these winged spirits fly.
Thus rise they up with mortal discontent,
By death to end my life and banishment.
Or like to soldiers in a Town of war,
When Sentinel the enemy discries,
Affrighted with this unexpected iar,
All with the fearful Larum-bell arise,
Thus muster they; (as Bees do in a hyue,
The idle Drone out of their combs to drive.)
It seemd the earth with heaven grew malecontent,
Nothing is hard but wars and Armors ringing,
New stratagems each one does now invent,
The Trumpets shril their warlike points be singing,
Each soldier now, his crested plume aduances,
They manidge horses, and they charge their lances.
As when under a vast and vaulty roof,
Some great assembly happily appears,
A man (from thence) that stands out a loofe,
A murmuring confused rumor hears.
Such is the noise, from earth to heaven rebounding,
With shrikes and clamors every where resounding.
Like as the Ocean chafing with his bounds,
With raging billows flies against the Rocks,
And to the shore sends forth his hydeous sounds,
Making the earth to tremble with his shocks;
Even thus the murmr flies from shore to shore,
Like to the Canons battering fearful rore.
By day and night attended still with spies,
The Court become the cause of al our woes,
The Country now a Camp of enemies,
The Cities, all be-peopled with our foes.
Our very beds are snares made to enwrap us,
Our surest guard (as Traitors) do entrap us.
Like to a cry of roring-mouthed hounds,
Rouzing the long-liu'd stagg out of his layre,
Pursue the chase through vastie forest grounds,
So like a thunder rattling in the air,
Thus do they hunt us, still from coast to coast,
Most hated now, of those we loved most.
This gracious Prince lo thus becomes my guide,
And with a Conuoy of some chosen friends,
Brings me to York, where being fortified,
To Balioll the King of Scots he sends,
And to the Welchmen, craving both their aid,
That by their help the Barrons might be stayed.
But they which in their business never slept,
And (as it seemd) had well foreseen this thing,
Cause all the Ports and Marches to be kept,
That none should enter once to aid the King:
And by disswasiue Letters still devise,
To stay their neighbors from this enterprise.
Lo, in this sort the King and I betrayed,
And to their wills thus left as woeful thralls,
And finding now no further hope of aid,
We shut us up within Yorkes aged walls,
Until we knew the Barrons full intent,
And what all this rude hurly burly meant.
This gracious King, for want of wonted rest,
Fallen in these passions to an ecstasy,
With grievous sickness is so sore oppressed,
And grown in time to such extremity,
As he is forced to depart away,
To take the air awhile upon the Sea.
From Bedford now (the synod of their shame,
The counsel house of all their villainy,)
These bloody Barrons with an Army came,
Down unto York, where they besieged me:
That now not able to resist their might,
Am forced perforce, to fly away by night.
To Scarborough with speed away I post,
With that small force the City then could lend me,
The strongest Castle there in all the coast,
And (as I thought) the surest to defend me,
Where as I might withstand them by my power,
Hoping the Kings returning every hour.
But now, like to a sousing sudden rain,
Forced by a strong and sturdy eastern blast,
Or (like a hayle-storme) down they come amain,
And in the Castle gert me now so fast,
No way to escape, nor hope for me to fly,
My choice was hard, or yield my self, or die.
Away thus (like a prisoner) am I led,
My costly robes in pieces rent and torn,
Bound hand and foot, my hair disheuiled,
Naked and bare as ever I was borne,
Save but for shame, to stop the peoples cries,
With grief am clothed of mine enemies.
Along the Land, toward Oxford they convey me,
Like bauling currs, they all about me houle:
With words of foul reproach they now repay me,
Wondering my shame, as byrds do at an Owl.
Cursing my life, my manners, and my birth,
A scourge of God, ordaind to plague the earth.
The King, now hearing how I was arested,
And knew my quarrel cause of all this strife,
He writes, he sends, he sues, he now requested,
Using all means he could to save my life:
With vows and oaths, that all should be amended,
If that my death alone might be suspended.
And being brought to Dedington at last,
By Aymer Valence, Earl of Pembrook then,
Who toward King Edward rode in all the have,
And left me guarded safely by his men.
This gentle Earl with mere compassion moved,
For Edwards sake, whom he so deerly loved.
But now Guy Beuchampe, whom I feared still,
The Earl of Warwick, whom I called curr,
Having fit time to execute his will,
The Fox thus caught, he vows to tear my furr.
And he for whom so often he set the trap,
By good ill luck, is fallen into his lap.
This bloody Beuchampe, (I may term him so,)
For this was he that only sought my blood,
Now at the vp-cast of mine ouer-throw,
And on the chance whereon my fortune stood,
To Dedington he came, where as I lay,
And by his force, he took me thence away.
To Warwick thus along he does me bring,
And keeps me guarded in the Castle there,
And doubting now my succor from the King,
He rayseth up the power of VVarwick-shiere.
Thus from the Town, to Blacklow I was led,
And on a Scaffold there, I lost my head.
Lo, here the point and sentence of my time,
My lives full stop, my last Catastrophe,
The stipend of my death-deserued crime,
The Scene that ends my woeful tragedy.
My latest Vale, knitting my conclusion,
Mine utter ruin, and my fames confusion.
Like as Adonis wounded with the Bore,
From whose fresh hurt the life-warme blood does spin,
Now lies wallowing in his purple gore,
Stayning his fair and Alablaster skin:
My headles body in the blood is left,
Now lying breathles, and of life bereft.
(...) my Muse, put on thy Eagles wings,
(...) some comfort to my tired ghost,
(...) with Apollos dolefull-tuned strings,
(...) help at need, for now I need thee most.
Sorrow posses my heart, mine eyes, mine ears,
My breath consume to sighs, my brain to tears.
My soul now in the heavens eternal glass,
Beholds the scarrs and botches of her sin,
How filthy, ugly, and deformd she was,
The loathsome dunghill that she wallowed in.
Her pure Creator sitting in his glory,
With eyes of justice to peruse her story.
Like as a stagg at bay amongst the hounds,
The bloody Mott still sounding in his ears,
Feeling his breath diminish by his wounds,
Poures down his gummy life-preseruing tears;
Even thus my soul, now bayted by my sin,
Consuming shows the sorrow she is in.
Thus comfortles, forsaken and alone,
All worldly things unstable, and unsure,
By true contrition flies to him alone,
In whose compare, the heavens are most impure.
By whose just doom, to blessed souls revealed,
She gets her pasport to Elisia sealed.
And by repentance, finds a place of rest,
Where passing to the fair Elisian plain,
She is aloud her room amongst the blessed,
In those Ambrosian shadows to remain.
Till summond thus by Fame, she is procured,
To tell my life that has been thus obscured.
This monster now, this many-headed beast,
The people, more unconstant then the wind,
Who in my life, my life did so detest,
Now in my death, are of another mind:
And with the fountains from their teareful eyes,
Do honor to my latest obsequies.
Star-holding heaven has shut up all her light,
Nature become a stepdam to her own,
The mantled trouch-man of the Rauen-hued night,
In mournful Sables clad the Horizon.
The sky-borne Planets seeming to conspire,
Against the air, the water, earth, and fire.
Pearle-paued Auon, in her streamfull course,
With heavy murmr floting on the stones,
Moved with lament to pity and remorse,
Attempering sad music to my moans,
Tuning her billows to Zephyrus breath,
In watery language does bewail my death.
Oke-shadowed Arden, filled with bellowing cries,
Resounding through her holts and hollow grounds,
To which the Echo euer-more replies,
And to the fields sends forth her hideous sounds,
And in her Siluan rude untuned songs,
Makes byrds, and beasts, for to express my wrongs.
The heauen-dyed flowers in this happy clyme,
Mantling the Meadows in their Summers pride,
As in the woeful frostie winter time,
Drouping with faintnes, hold their heads aside.
The boystrous storms, dispoile the greenest greues,
Stripping the Trees stark naked of their leaves.
Death clad in liueries of my lovely cheeks,
Laid in those beds of Lillyes and of Roses,
Amazed with marvel, here for wonders seeks,
Where he alone a Paradise supposes,
Grew malcontent, and with himself at strife,
Not knowing now if he were death or life.
And shutting up the casements of those lyghts,
Which like two sunns, so sweetly went to rest,
In those fair globes he saw those heavenly sights,
In which alone he thought him only blessed.
Cursing himself, who had deprived breath,
From that which thus could give a life in death.
With palenes touching that fair rubied lip,
Now waxing purple, like Adonis flower,
Where Iuory walls those rocks of Curral keep,
From whence did flow that Nectar-streaming shower,
There earth-pale Death refresht his tired limms,
Where Cupid bathed him in those Crystal brimms.
And entering now into that house of glory,
That Temple with sweet Odors long perfumed,
Where nature had ingraued many a story,
In Letters, which by death were not consumed.
Accursed now, his cruelty he cursed,
That Fame should live, when he had done his worst.
Now when the King had notice of my death,
And that he saw his purpose thus prevented,
In grievous sighs he now consumes his breath,
And into tears his very eyes relented:
Cursing that vile and mercy-wanting age,
And breaks into this passion in his rage.
O heavens (quoth he) lock up the living day,
Cease sunn to lend the world thy glorious light,
Stars, fly your course, and wander all astray,
Moon, lend no more thy silver shine by night.
Heavens, stars, Sunn, Moon, conioyne you all in one,
Revenge the death of my sweet Gaueston.
Earth, be thou helples in thy creaturs berth,
Sea, break thou forth from thy immured bound,
Air, with thy vapors poison thou the earth,
Wind, break thy Cave, and all the world confound.
Earth, sea, air, wind, conioyne you all in one,
Bewail the death of my sweet Gaueston.
You savage beasts, that haunt the way-less woods,
You Birds delighted in your Siluan sound,
You scaly Fish, that swim in pleasant floods,
You hartless Worms that creep upon the ground,
Beasts, birds, fish, worms, each in your kind alone,
Revenge the death of my sweet Gaueston.
Fair Meadows, be you withered in the prime,
Sunburned and bare, be all the goodly Mountains,
Groves, be you leaueless in the Summer time,
Pitchy and black be all the Crystal Fountains:
All things on earth, each in your kind alone,
Revenge the death of my sweet Gaueston.
You damned Furies, break your Stigian Cell,
You wandering spirits, in water, earth, and air,
Lead-boyling ghosts, that live in lowest hell,
Gods, devils, men, unto mine aid repair,
Come all at once, conioyne you all in one,
Revenge the death of my sweet Gaueston.
Eyes, never sleep, until you see revenge,
Head, never rest, until thou plot revenge,
Heart, never think, but tending to revenge,
Hands, never act, but acting deep revenge.
Iust-dooming heavens, revenge me from above,
That men unborn may wonder at my love.
You peerles Poets of ensuing times,
Chanting Heroique Angel-tuned notes,
Or humble Pastors Nectar-filled lines,
Driving your flocks with music to their coats,
Let your hie-flying Muses still bemoane,
The woeful end of my sweet Gaueston.
My earth-pale body now enbalmd with tears,
To famous Oxford solemnly conuaid,
There buried by the ceremonious Friars,
Where for my soul was many a Trentall said.
With all those rites my obsequies behooved,
Whose blind devotion, time and truth reproved.
But ere two years were out and fully dated,
This gracious King who still my fame respected,
My wasted bones to Langley thence translated,
And over me a stately Tomb erected.
Which world-deuouring Time, has now out-worne,
As but for Letters, were my name forlorn.
My ghost now hence to Ankor shall repair,
Where once the same appeared unto thee:
And unto chaste Idea tell my care,
A sacrifice both for thy self and me.
In whose sweet bosom all the Muses rest,
In whose aspect our Clyme is only blessed.
Thus having told my drery doleful tale,
My time expired, I now return again,
Where Carons Barge hoyst with a merry gale,
Shall land me on the fair Elisian plain:
Where, on the Trees of never dying fame,
There will I carue Ideas sacred name.
And thou sweet Dorus, whose sole Phoenix Muse,
With Pegase wings does mount unto the sky,
Whose lines the gods are fittest to peruse.
My lovely Dorus, lend thine humble eye,
To my harsh style, (deer friend) at my request,
In whose conceit my verse is only blessed.
My deer Maecenas, lend thine eyes awhile,
From Meredian's sun-bred stately strain:
And from thy rare and lofty flying style,
Look down into my low and humble vain:
On this same babe my Muse has now brought forth,
Till she present thee with some lines of worth.
FINIS.
Diverse have been the opinions, of the birth and first rising of Gaueston,
(amongst the VVriters of these latter times:) some omitting things worthy of
memory, some inferring things without probability, disagreeing in many
particulars, and cauelling in the circumstances of his sundry banishments;
which has bred some doubt amongst those who have but slightly run over the
History of his fortune, seeing every man roue by his own aim in this
confusion of opinions: Although most of the^ concluding in general, of his
exceeding credit with the King, of the manner of his death, and of the pomp
wherein he lived. Except some of those VVriters who lived in the time of Edward
the second, wherein he only florisht, or immediately after, in the golden reign
of Edward the third, when as yet his memory was fresh in every man's mouth:
whose authorities (in mine opinion) can hardly be reproved of any, the same
being within the compass of possibility, and the Authors names extant,
auouching what they have written. On whom I only relied in the plot of my
History; having recourse to some especial collections, gathered by the
industrious labors of John Stow, a diligent Chronigrapher of our time. A man
very honest, exceeding painful, and rich in the antiquities of this I Will: yet
omitting some small things of no moment, feating to make his Tragedy more
troublesome, amongst so many currants as have fallen out in the same: framing
my self to fashion a body of a history, without maime or deformity. Which
if the same be accepted thankfully, as I offer it willingly, in contenting you,
I only satisfy my self.

M. D.


