THE HISTORY OF THE GREAT EMPEROVR TAMERLAN.

Wherein are expressed, encounters, skirmishes, battles, sieges, assaults,
skalings, taking of cities and strong places, defended, and assaulted, with
diverse Stratagems of war, the which this great and Renowned warrior has
conducted and accomplished, during his reign of forty or fifty years: with
other instructions for the war, which should not be unknown of them that
would attain unto the knowledge of arms.

Drawn from the ancient Monuments of the Arabians, by Messire Iean du Bec,
Abbot of Mortimer.

Newly translated out of French into English, for their benefit which are
ignorant in that language.

by H. M.

ANCHORA SPEI
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed for William Ponsonby. 1597.

TO THE FRIENDLY READER.
BEcause this History (friendly Reader) was translated at the first, and now
at this present imprinted and set forth for thy only benefit: I thought best
to recommend it rather to the Readers correction, then unto any man's particular
protection. For as I cannot otherwise think, but diverse and sundry errors
are in the translating by me committed, necessary by thee to be corrected: so
do I assure my self the History is so excellent, as it needs not to be
protected. For whether is to be considered the man in his honorable virtues, or
the matter with her rare and diverse properties, you shall find both the one
and the other able to protect themselves, and every way satisfy thine
expectation. For both the which I will say no more then I find written by the
French author, that the History is most true, and not devised, according to
the vanities of former ages, but being as it were buried in a strange and
unknown language is revived from that obscurity by his travails, and
presented unto the Reader in his own tongue through my pains. Whereof seeing
thou art to reap the fruit, I doubt not but ye will accept and yield me
thanks for the same. I will not trouble thee with a vain commendation of the
famous Tamerlan, who being amongst the worthy conquerors, as the sun with
the other stars, shall in the reading of this History shine unto thee his
own virtues. Farewell. From my house the xv. day of October. 1597.

THE HISTORY OF TAMERLAN.
Having read sundry Histories, the which do attribute as a great want unto
the happy fortune of Tamerlan, not to have a writer in his days, which might
have left in writing his History unto posterity: who surely had reason so to
say, if this had bin true. But without any cause did they moan him, insomuch as
his History is very famous amongst the Turks and Arabians, The History of
Tamerlan famous amongst the Turks and Arabians.
his conquests very largely discoursed, and many of his worthy and notable
sayings collected, with an infinite number of noble deeds left unto the
memorial of posterity, having been no less accompanied with such good hap,
than was Achilles. Very true it is, that he had not an Homer, but a great and
worthy person, learned as well in natural Philosophy, as in Astrology, who was
in the time of this Prince, a companion and familiar of his conquests, named
Alhacen, an Arabian Alhacen.
by birth, making profession of Mahomets religion, not according to the fond
and vain follies of the Turks; but for want of Christian instruction, he
worshipped one only God, the author of nature, and maker both of Mahomet.
Heaven and Earth (the which Mahomet taught as he had learned in the School of
the Christians) meaning to be contrary unto the Heathen, who did allow of
sundry Gods. This Author then being fallen into my hands, in my voyage into
the East Country, I caused the same to be interpreted unto me by an Arabian,
who The Frank tongue amongst the Turks.
did speak Frank (as they term it) that is to say, Italian, and some time I
spent, in associating my self so with this man, who commended greatly unto me
the eloquence and gravity of this author, wo^dering at his digressions, and
entering again into his matter so well to the purpose. It grieved me much that
I had not the perfection of this language, to be a help unto the riches of
this History, for to deliver it unto my Nation with some grace: but I took
thereof as much as I could in his language, which was corrupted, as is the Frank
tongue (so they term it) which is a kind of Italian, mingled with Slauon,
Greek, and Spanish, tongs very common at Constantinople, with the Arabian and
Turkish tongs: so as I could not gather but only the truth thereof, and not the
drifts and gravity of the declaration, wherein the author had collected it for
posterity, (and as he said) by the commandment of the Prince, Tamerlan his
learning.
who was a lover of learning, and excellent in the knowledge of Astrology and
divinity, as the custom of those Nations is to join the^ ordinarily together,
studying upon the virtue of names, and of the turning of letters, eue^ The
Tartarians strange kind of Astrology.
in their placing, writing the^ underneath stars, whereof they make sentences,
by means whereof they wrought miraculously in the things of nature. This is
that Zoroastrien and Bactrien science, that of Balaa^, and some others in my
opinion, which has succeeded unto so many Arabian Astrologians. Now then this
Prince was endued with such knowledge, as made him admired of the people where
he comanded, who are for the most part great wo^derers, insomuch as this
cau^sed him to be accounted a Prince accompanied with the divine virtue,
considering Italian fables written of Tamerlan.
the justice he used in all his actions. This has proceeded eue^ so far that
some Italians have written foolish things thereof, as of certain kinds of Tents
which he caused to be pitched, when he besieged any city; one white, signifiing
peace, it yelding unto his mercy; another red, signifying cruelty to follow;
and the third black, signifying mourning to ensue. But I find not this in our
Author, and I believe the^ to be fables, as that of Romans, for the affairs of
the war are not handled in this manner, and we find that he was very courteous:
only he desired to abbase Tamerlan very friendly unto the good, and furious to
the bad.
the pride of that Turkish Emperor, called Bajazet, the thunder of heaven, and
would tread upon his head, imitating therein the Divinity, which pulls down
the proud and raises up the humble. Therefore in a word, I say, that which our
Historiographers report of him, is very little after this Author. This is the
occasion therefore that I desiring to write, in this solitarines which I have
chosen, seeing the co^tinua^ce of the miseries wherinto I have often thrust my
self with the hazard of my life, as I am bound for my king and country; where
having received many wounds, by the favor of my king, I have sought again the
private life, which I had left* that I might not be seen in idleness at such
time as men of worth were busied in sacrificing their lives for preservation of
their country. Now the^ that I may keep my self from writing any thing of
these times, for to say true, it engenders hatred in many minds, and
especially the desire to be flattered, and they which cannot do it, are they
not comanded to keep silence? I must forbear to collect that which some men
of worth having both seen and endured, do leave, as a monument of our follies
unto posterity, which should rather in my opinion be buried, then brought to
light, for they be instructions to kindle men's minds for The discemodities
arising from the Histories of civil wars.
the trouble of their countries, finding therein colors for destruction of the
same. Do you not think that the History of the Roman civil wars, has
been the occasion of the overthrow of many commonwealths? and do not you
believe, that of the Grecians being read by Caesar, did harm, by lifting up his
courage, and making him hope for high matters (as those of Marius and Silla) to
set Rome on fire, and their own Country in blood, saying most truly, (and
they of this age shall pardon me) that man is without love, unworthy of fire
and water, who causes and loves civil wars. We must needs blame them in
recyting those, and take from them the hope of obtaining thereby glory of the
posterity, but much rather blame and dishonor. What was the cause that
parricide was not forbidden by a law written? because this were to instruct
that it might be done. Our country is another mother, shall we recite unto
posterity the praise of the parricide, which they commit against her the true
mother? For this occasion therefore I hold my peace, and bury in my self as much
as I may, the co^spiracies which they had made against their king, City,
fellow-citizen, the hallowed altars, and against all both divine and humane
right. I will now declare unto you with my Arabian, who this great Prince
Tamerlan The offspring and stock of Tamerlan.
was. He was then of the blood of the Tartarian Emperors, and his father Og had
for his portion the country of Sachetay, whereof he was Lord. This country
lying between the North and the East, is the ancient country of Parthia, upon
the coast of the Zogdians, and the chiefest city of his estate was Samercand
situated upon the river of Issarle. Some of our Historiographers would needs
have him to be the son of a shepherd; but this have they said, not knowing
at all the custom of their country, where the principal revenue of the kings
and The customs and revenues of the Tartarian kings.
nobles consists in cattle, despising gold and silver, but making great
reckoning of such riches, wherein they abou^d in all sorts: this is the occasion
wherefore some call the^ shepherds, and say also that this Prince descended
from the^. So his father Og was Prince of Sachetay, abou^ding in such kind of
wealth. And being come unto the age of fifteen years, his father being already
old, delivered up unto him the government of his kingdom, with the
commandment The solitary life of Og, for to serve God.
over al his men of war. His father Og being given unto peace, withdrue himself
unto a solitary life, for to serve God, and end the rest of his days in
quiet. Tamerlans name.
He gave unto his son Tamerlan (which signifies heavenly grace in their
tongue) two sufficient personages for to guide and assist him in the government
of his estate: the one was called Odmar, and the other Aly, persons Odmar and
Aly appointed to assist Tamerla^ in the government of his kingdom by his father
Og. Note.
in great dignity and credit with his father, whom this Prince did greatly
honor as long as they lived, and even after their death he did often make
mention of them before his servants, commending their services performed; a
matter of no small force for the mighty to make them well served, not to forget
their servants eue^ after their death. This acknowledging does greatly allure
men, as the forgetfulness thereof does grieve the^ for the present time, and
cools the desire they have to serve. This Prince was wont to wear on his
hand the rings of his two servants, and was wont to say, that when he beheld
these, he did call to his remembrance two precepts, which he had received of
them; and this did he the better to retain them in memory against he should
minister justice. Now this Prince was well instructed in the Arabian learning,
and exercised himself Tamerlan his studies and learning. The delicacies of
Tartaria. Tamerlans contemplation.
much therein, and at such time as they thought him to be either in the Bathes,
wherein they are very curious in that country, being their chiefest
delicacies, he was in the contemplacion and study of heavenly things, without
omitting any thing notwithstanding that belonged to the government of his
estate, wherein he said his professed Demon did oftentimes especially direct
him, accounting only his estate prosperous when he had the heavens favorable.
This Prince had within his eyes Majesty in his eyes.
such divine beauty, being full of such majesty, that one could hardly endure
the sight of them without closing of their eyes, and they which talked with
him, and did often behold him, became dumb, insomuch as he abstained with a
certain modesty and comeliness to look upon him that discoursed unto him. All
the rest of his visage was courteous and well proportioned: he had but little
hair on his chin: he did wear his hair long and curled, The custom of the
Tartaria^s.
contrary to the custom of his country, who are shaued on their heads, having
the same always covered, but he contrariwise was always in a manner
bare-headed, and greatly esteemed of his hair: therefore one of his familiars
demanding of him wherefore he did not shave his hair like other men, he said
unto him, My friend, I never Tamerlan ^^re long ^air and why.
told it unto any body, but (said he) the affection I know thou bear unto my
service, cannot deny it thee. My mother came of the race of Sa^son, for a mark
whereof she advised me to honor long hair. This was the cause that made him
respected of his men of arms, and the most part of the^ did believe there was
some virtue in those hairs, or rather some fatal destiny, the which many did
believe to be so; and verily they were of a duskie color drawing toward a
violet, the most beautiful that any eye could behold. His stature was of the
middle sort, The description of Tamerlan.
somewhat narrow in his shoulders, he had a fair leg and strong, the strength
of his body was such as no body did surpass, and often on the festiual days
he made trial of his strength with the most strong* and this he did with such
grace and humanity, that he who^ he overcame held himself therein most happy,
although it be a disgrace amongst the Tartaria^s to be thrown to the ground in
wrestling. Now as he was martial and desirous of glory: the first war that he
attempted was against the Moscouit, who came and Tamerlan his first war
aagainst the Moscouite.
spoiled a city which had put it self into his protection, and had entered also
into his country, and being retired, proclaimed open war against him, gave him
battle near to the river Mascha, although the Moscouit had a great army,
which he had gathered together long before. On the other side, the Prince
determining to resist him, assembled all his forces, and those of his allies
Tamerlans; and first, he made appear unto his soldiers the stoutnesse of his
courage; for this day he performed the office both of a soldier and Emperor
jointly together. Now the place of fight being disco^modious for us by reason
of a little hill which the Moscouits had taken, whereon they had placed some 6000.
me^ on foot, who with an infinite number of arrows hoped to overcome the^ that
went to the battle, who were constrained to pass by that place. Now he being
advertised that the Moscouit would not come to the battle, but only meant to
show himself, and after that to retire 20* leagues, as they are accustomed to
do: he being desirous to end this war by a battle, did adiudge,* beyond the advice of his Counsel, that the eenemy would not fight, unless by assaulting
this mountain, he were urged thereunto against his will, or else lose those 6000.
men which were there placed. Then he comanded A Stratagem.
20000. men of his army, led by Aly (Colonel of the footmen) to set upon them.
Now by this advise he brought to pass two effects: the one whereof was, that
he kept his horsemen from being injured by the arrows of the Moscouites; the
other was to compel them unto the fight, in case they would not otherwise come
thereunto, the which took place. For as the Moscouite thought to retire and
succor them, Tamerlan at that very time caused his army to pass over the
river Rosna, which gave the occasion of battle. The Moscouite could not
retire but in disorder, our Army having passed over: now the Muscouite had
very great forces, and men well trained up in the wars, having had always
wars with his neighbors, the king of Polonia, with whom he had then
friendship, and the aid of ten thousand very good horse. There were also
with him many Hungarian Gentlemen, led by Vdecelaus a Hungarian The army of
the Moscouite.
Gentleman, who had brought with him more then eight thousand horse; the
opinion was that he had in his army fourscore thousand horse, and a hundred
thousand footmen. Our Prince Tamerlan had in his army The army of Tamerlan.
about six-score thousand horse, and a hundred and fifty thousand men on foot,
but not so skilful in points of war as those of the Moscouite: for our estate
had long enjoyed peace, and our soldiers were indeed trained up in the
discipline of wars, but not in the practice thereof. For Prince Og loved peace
and rest from his childhood, and kept himself with great mildness with all
his neighbors, having nothing at all increased his borders, commended only for
preserving of them wisely. So these two Armies were the one before the other,
and in the mean time the mountain was forced by the Parthians, and defended
by the Moscouites, every one assisting theirs. To conclude, the fight
continued two hours, the armies nothing at al meddling therein, but yet every
one did encourage their soldiers, and The order of Tamerlanes battle.
exhort them unto the battle. The order of Tamerlanes was this; that is, he
caused all his army to be divided into squadrons, each consisting of six
thousand horse, except his own, which was of ten thousand, so as he made
eighteen squadrons, his own being reckened which made nineteen. The
Auantguard was conducted by Odmar who led nine squadrons, flanked with 40.
thousand men on foot, divided both on the right and left sides, who should
shoot an infinite number of arrows. The battle was conducted by Tamerlan,
who led ten squadrons, his own being therein closed, and 50. thousand footmen,
the best and choicest soldiers of his whole army. Prince Thanais, a kinsman
unto the Prince, led the Arere-ward, with forty thousand footmen, and six
squadrons: he had some three thousand horse adventurers, whom they call
Oliagues in their tongue, the same which we term the forlorn hope.

The Moscouite did not observe that order, but did fight by double ranks with
Lances, and there was a space to help themselves therein, and to break them,
notwithstanding those nations do not break them at all, and they seemed to be
a greater number then we, making a great noise. The Auantguard of the
Moscouites The order of the Moscouits battle.
was fully twenty five thousand horse. The Polonians and Hungarians were in
the Auauntguard, the which was led by the Moscouits son, whom they call the
Prince of Russia: the battle consisted of 40. thousand horse, wherein was the
king of Moscouie with many of his Lords, and all the forces of his Allies, the
Arere-ward was a great squadron squared with ten thousand horse; the footmen of
the Moscouit were between the Battle and the Arere-ward. Then our Prince
seeing Tamerlan his speech unto his soldiers, being ranged in battle array.
our army passed over, turned himself toward his soldiers, and began in this
sort to speak unto them: It is not for riches (my companio^s) nor for the
enlarging of the limits of my empire, that I do fight this day with your
assistance, but it is for a thing more excellent, seeing the same is to
purchase glory and honor unto the Parthia^ nation. The same whih was in old
time the bounds of the glory of the Roman name, who could never conquer it, nor
plant their Trophies therein. Let us not then give place unto the glory of our
auncesters, and make manifest this day unto me, the faithfulness that is in
you, and let the same be accompanied with your courage, for your king is not
accustomed to retire without victory, I have caused you to pass over this
river, for the trust I have in the force of your arms: let us rather die the^
repas it without carrying a laurel garla^d on our head. Whilst this passed
thus, the Parthia^ soldiers led by Aly had won the mou^tain, which was not
without great fight: but the victory fell on our side, which gave great hope
unto our army of more happy success. This made the Moscouits to acknowledge
the fault they had made, the which was well taken hold of by us: so the Prince
gave the sign of battle, marching forward all along the mountain which his
soldiers had won, enflamed with their victory to begin the fight. And he
placed 6000. fresh soldiers upon this mountain to favor his army. At this
instant the Moscouite gave the sign of battle, and advanced Battle between
the Moscouite and Tamerlan.
forward. Then the Prince Tamerlan willed his men likewise to come forward: and
sent his commandment thereof unto Odmar, who returned answer, that seeing the
Moscouit did with such heat seek to come unto the fight, he would suffer him to
come unto him, and would attend his coming resolutely in the place of battle.
Now Odmar alone could by his authority bridle the boldness of this young Prince,
who desired to go forward, and maintain in the mean time, like an old soldier,
his advantage, which was of no small weight for the victory, the place being of
greater advantage for the enemies, for in assaulting the^ we lost the force of
the fight, and we had also the wind and Sun in our eyes, which raised a great
dust made by our horses, which kept the Moscouits from beholding the efect of
their soldiers in the fight that either as they won or lost they might be
succored* So the fight was begun by the Moscouites, who strongly with all the
fury that was possible charged Odmar, who stiffly resisted all this forcible
violence, but not without the loss of many of his men, and himself thrown to
the ground, al his horse also broken, was fain to retire himself unto the left
wing of his footmen, where he was again mounted on horseback, whereupon
reuniting his men together, whilst the Moscouite did fight with the maine
battle, conducted by the Emperor Tamerlan, he ren^ed with those whom he had
so united together a new charge, setting upon the flank of the Moscouits, which
did greatly impair their strength. The fight endured 4. or 5. hours; insomuch
as the heaps of men and horse were so many defenses against the blows of the
arrows shot by the Parthia^ footmen and by those of the Moscouites. Now the
Moscouite horsemen had pierced the maine battle, the Hungaria^s fighting so
resolutely as the Prince remained severed with 3000. horse only, and after the
Parthian manner began to fight in retiring* whereupon the Moscouite thought he
had won the battle; then, when he being reunited unto his Arier-ward, led by
the Prince of Tanais, who had gathered together 14000. horse, and almost all
the footmen, it behooved the Moscouite to retire back, notwithstanding before
that he made a strong resista^ce; but at the length multitude and skill ouercam
the force and valor of the Moscouites, the victory bending to the Parthians
side, the which they did pursue hotly. Tamerlan was hurt on the forehead upon
the side of the left eye* and had two horses slain under him in the fight; the
Moscouite falling ^.
into the hands of a private soldier, as a prisoner, being not known, sa^ed
himself (his army being wholly overthrown* and diverse Muscouite Lords taken
prisoners) and retired himself with nine or ten thousand horse in order: many
of their footmen saved themselves by the benefit of the night. The place of
their retiring was about ten leagues from our army, and he passed over a
river, where he reunited together his men during the night. The least loss he
had was of his footme^, who took not the course of his horsemen, but rather as
soon as they perceived the victory incline to the enemy, they retired
themselves all along the mou^tains for their better advantage: a thing which
greatly favored the Moscouits. Tamerlan employed himself in giving God The
tha^kefulnesse of Tamerlan unto God for his victory
thanks for this victory, after he had pursued the enemy three leagues; the
next day he reuiewed his army, and found that he had lost of his side for his
part between seven an eight thousand horsemen, and between three and four
thousand footmen. The Moscouite lost some seven and twenty thousand footmen,
and between fifteen and sixteen thousand horsemen. This same day was Odmar the
safeguard of his Prince; for it is not to be doubted, had not the hindrance been
he gave, when the Moscouits assaulted Tamerlan, setting upon him with all their
forces together, but that they had been able to overthrow the Prince of
Thanais, and the Emperor who was reunited unto him. By the event of this
Battle we may learn how much advantage he has, A good aduertisment for
Generals.
who attends the coming of his enemy with a resolute mind, in the field
which he has chosen for the battle, having first caused the same to be well
viewed by his men, and especially by his Captains. Secondly, the hurt that
comes in not observing the dust which the wind raises. Thirdly, that the
Arier-ward well led, is the occasion of the victory, and oftentimes the
preservation of the Prince. Fourthly, how necessary it is to have the chiefest
strength of the battle in going to assault the enemy. Now our Tamerlan after
he had given thanks unto God, caused a view to be made of his Army, buried the
dead, both his own, and of his enemy, acknowledged the deserts of his
soldiers, yielding unto them such houour as they had deserved. In this
battle he lost Hally, who was slain by the blow of an arrow, after he had
forced the mountain, in going to the battle, being general of all his
footme^. This Prince was greatly grieuedtherwith, causing his body always to
be laid in his tent until his return unto Samarcand, where he caused him to
be buried Great honor done to Hally after his death for good service performed
by him in his life.
very honorably: he was the beginning of the greatness to Samercand, and of
the fame of his name, by making of a stately tomb for Hally. The Prince did
slack no time after so great a victory: for having given such order as was
necessary to a great army. (I will not forget to declare, that when as this
Prince did behold so many thousands of men lie dead on the ground where the
battle was fought, he turned himself unto one of his familiars, lamenting
the condition of them who command over Armies, and commending the profession of
the Emperor his father, he counted him happy, for that he had sought rest,
acknowledging A notable saying of Tamerlan for making of wars.
human misery, the which in destroying his own kind, procured his glory.
That for his part such tokens of victory were sorrowful eue^ unto his heart.) He
set forward, and came into the borders of the Moscouite, all the country being
astonished, and every one flying before his army, the Moscouite had retired
himself upon the loss of the battle, and had likewise caused al his footme^
to retire, making a show as though he had not lost his courage, and because he
had reunited 30000. of his horsemen together, he bragged to try very shortly
his fortune again. But for all this seeing his victorious enemy come and enter
into his country, he thought he should have to do with a mighty enemy: and
having called together his principal Captains, he passed over the river called
Nifort, and taking their counsel, he did resolve for the preservation of his
subjects to send unto the Conqueror, and once to make trial of his mercy, as
he had already of his forces, being informed by the prisoners of the noble mind
and mildness the which this Prince vouchsafed unto them, he determined to send
Ambassadors Ambassadors from the Moscouit to treat of peace with Tamerlan
to treat with him, and to assay for to amend that which had been ill done. The
Ambassadors being arrived, he received courteously, bewailing in a manner the
fortune of their master, rather then vaunting and exalting himself for the
victory: and as it were more modest then the conquered, he asked them how the
Moscouit did, and for what cause they came unto him. They gave him to
understand, that they had in charge from their Prince to treat with him,
desiring the abstinence of arms, and that they were ready to perform unto him
all things reasonable: they beseeched him moreover to use victory as a thing
which was the gift of Fortune, and might at another time change, calling unto
mind the estate of humane things, which are unstable. Prince Tamerlan made them
answer, that he had taken arms for the preservation of his confederates and
subjects, from the injury done vno them by the Moscouite; and this was the
cause of the victory, for that he had justly enterprised the same. That he
referred the victory unto the God of Battles, and not unto his own strength,
or forces of his soldiers, and for these reasons he was not thereby more
insolent: for it was the custom of the Parthians, retaining the same from the
A notable saying of Tamerlan.
glory of their ancesters, that in adversity their courages do nothing at
all fail them, and that prosperity likewise does in no sort blind the^ so
far, that they should not be mindful of justice as well in good as bad fortune.
That it was just they should satisfy the victor, and should Articles of
agreement concluded upon, between the Moscouite and Tamerlan.
promise not to enterprise any more the troubling of his allies, then should
they have peace with his arms. He also required that they should become
tributaries of a hundred thousand Ducats, and should pay all the charges of
the war, amounting unto the sum of three hundred thousand Ducats, he then
would send back again all the prisoners, and withdraw his army; that for
security hereof they should give him pledges, which should be changed every
year; unto all which they agreed. So was this war ended to his contentment,
returning with glory unto the Prince his father, in whose countenance no body
could perceive any joy for his sons prosperity, as he whom the care of
heaven had so ravished, that he no longer set his mind on earthly things. Now
Tamerlan was received into all his countries with much honor and triumph, the
great Cham of Tartaria, brother unto his father, sent presents to gratify
him, making offer unto him of his daughter in marriage, and that in marrying of
her, he would cause him to be acknowledged as Emperor throughout all his
kingdoms, as his next heir, himself being now old, and out of all hope to
have any more children. Hereupon he presently took his journey toward him,
being in the city of Quauicay, where he was received with all kind of triumph
and magnifice^ce; there did he show himself brave in all manner of gallant
shows and combats, as well in jest as in earnest. And as these nations are
full of vanity, and desirous to make show of their strength and agility,
Tamerlan carried away the prize therein, whether it were in shooting near The
Tartarians exercises.
with his bow, or in changing horses in the midst of the courses, or in
breaking an iron in running at the Quintaine; he made every one wonder at his
dexterity, and was crowned the sixth day after his coming thither with the
joyful consent of all the subjects of the Tamerlan his marriage with the great
Cha^s daughter.
Emperor his uncle, and of all the Court. After that he married the Emperors
daughter, desiring first to be crowned before the marriage, to the intent that
none should think that the Crown came unto him by means of her, but by
succession, the daughters not at all succeeding into Empires. It was also to
assure his estate, and having remained in that place by the space of two
months, he returned from thence with his wife to Samercand, in which city he
delighted greatly to remain, because the situation thereof was very fair;
and for The situation of the city of Samercand.
that the city is accompanied with a fair river, which causes great
trafique, and makes it richer then any city within that country. As he abode
there the Moscouite Presents from the Moscouit unto Tamerla^
sent to visit him with many presents of fair horses, and many excellent
furs, the which did greatly content him, for he had received news that the
Moscouite did arm himself, the which was true, but it was against the
Polonians, and other of his neighbors. Who made their repair unto him for his
assistance, earnestly desiring his aid; which he would not do; making answer
unto them, that he had given unto the Moscouite the Tamerlan his worthy
answer unto the Polonians, who desired aid of him against the Moscouite. A
Maxim.
dearest thing he had in the world, which was his faith. Many notwithstanding
of the Court corrupted by the Ambassadors of the king of Polonia, used
persuasions to move him to favor the Polonians, declaring unto him, that it
was a Maxim, that it behooued him not to suffer his neighbor to wax too
strong, especially of so mighty a kingdom as was Polonia; and that this was
the means to make the Tartarians and Parthians terrible unto the Moscouites.
That it was necessary at the beginning to oppose himself against such
greatness, the which being suffered to increase, would in the end prove
hurtful unto us, and then would it be very hard to overthrow the same. The
Prince answered, that at what time soever the Moscouit would not perform that
which he had promised unto him, he had sufficient means to punish him, seeing
he had already overcome him with the Parthians, which was but a small province
within Tartaria, and that at this day being increased to so great an estate as
the whole Empire of the Tartarians, he had occasion to fear him the less; he
hoped that his offspring would also add more Empires if it did maintain
equity; that in the mean time the Moscouite should break his forces in one
enterprise, he would likewise bring to pass his, wherein he should justly
get honor, and augment the limits of his reputacion. That the peace between
him and the Moscouite was notoriously known unto all his neighbors, the
breach whereof should not proceed of his part, and that it was beneficial both
for him and his subjects: Tamerlan a lover of justice
that God does punish those who unjustly enterprise war against their
neighbors; that this has been the occasion of the greatness of our house, that
his ancesters have always had this justice before their eyes, in as much as
they have never enterprised war but in their own defense, notwithstanding it
is 300. years since they knew what it was to have fortune contrary unto the^,
and that he believed certainly that proceeded from that A notable saying of
Tamerlan.
Justice which the God of hosts observed toward his; that if he were desirous
of war, and thereby to get honor and reputation, he had many things to
demand of his neighbors, who during the reign of his father, which sought
only heaven and neglected the earth, desirous of peace, has permitted: the
which he might justly redemaund, and upon refusal, by arms make way unto the
liberty of his subjects, tyrannised under unlawful Lords. Odmar seemed greatly
to allow of the Princes reasons, although he had been one of the first which
entered into this consideration to fear the greatness of the Moscouite; and he
wondered at the manner he used in counterpeysing so uprightly in equal balances
justice with his magnanimity; the which notwithstanding was not transported
beyond the course of equity, what reasons soever diverse wise men of his
Council declared, concerning the ancient enmity between the Moscouits and
Parthians, especially for the controversy in religion: but all this was
disanulled, Odmar allowing the purpose of the Prince, the which he alone knew,
and the others speaking only as old Cou^sellers, relying upon the ancient
maxims by the which are maintained and assured the greatness of Monarchies.
For Odmar alone was called by him at such time as the great Cham his uncle did
impart unto him his affairs: and amongst other matters, he propounded unto him
the enterprise of China, promising him assistance and aid, and giving him to
understand how necessary it was to undertake this war for the better assuring
of his estate, seeing the king of China had much gone beyond his ancient
bounds. So as our Prince had this journey in his mind, and prepared himself
thereunto, he had not otherwise refused their counsel, and the wise opinions
they propounded unto him, being always obedient unto reason and not to any
other passion, and then especially when the question was of war, and for the
good of his affairs; a thing for which he was as much to be co^me^ded, as for
any other virtue whatsoever; for by others The commendation of Tamerlan obeying
reason.
he was esteemed strong, courageous and stout, but by this here mentioned, he
was accounted wise and virtuous, which makes kings to be honored and admired:
whereof he that is the owner, is Lord of one of the greatest Empires that men
can obtain; for the wise man only has the dominion thereof. And what
avails it (I pray you) to conquer abroad, when as home-matters are miserably
subjected under the f^ry of our foolish passions: is it not very hard to
command another, when thou command not thy self, thou being the slave of
thy follies, which do break thee with all their force against the moderate rock
of wisdom, which houereth about thee, mocking at all that thou do without
her? Solomon also the king of Israel prayed for it, so did our Prince often:
this was the prayer he most commonly made unto God, and for Tamerlan prayed for
wisdom unto God.
this reason he honored greatly the counsel of the wise, and respected not
their poverty, and some wondered that he having knowledge of a wise man, would
send for him unto his Court, and conferring familiarly with A worthy custom of
Tamerlan.
him, would say unto him: My friend, I pray thee let me bestow part of my goods
upon thee, and do thou impart some of thy wisdom with me. He was A notable
saying of Tamerlan.
wont to say, they presented him with gold and silver, with precious stones,
with fair and rich moueables, where he abounded: but that he found few which
did beautify his mind with good precepts and instructions, wherewith to govern
so many sundry people whom God had subjected under the obedience of his
scepter. He had in his Court a Christian whom he loved much, and every one
greatly respected, named Axalla, a Geneuois by birth, brought up from his
youth about his person. This man principally did stir him up unto great
enterprises, and notwithstanding his religion, he trusted him. Now he had all
religion in reverence, so as The Author says that this may be praised in a
Pagan and infidel, but not in a Christian Prince.
it did worship one only God, creator of all things. He often said, that the
greatness of Divinity co^sisted in the sundry kinds of people which are under
the coape of heaven, who served the same diversely, nourishing it self with
diversity, as the nature was diverse where it had printed his image, God
remaining notwithstanding one in his essence, not receiving therein any
diversity. This was the reason that moved him to permit and grant the use of
all religions within the Countries of his obedience, always provided (as I
said before) that they worshipped one only God, detesting the idolatrous and
strange gods, in so much as he regarded not the diversity in religion, if
they were able to serve him; so as this Christian attained unto great honors
and dignities near unto him, as hereafter you shall hear.

Now to return from my digression: Our Prince was desirous of wars, knowing
that he could very hardly maintain his own estate and so many servants,
whose fingers would tickle if they were not employed in making of wars. So he
determined to make war with the king of China (who is called the Lord of the
world, and child of the sun) which was no small enterprise. But before he would
begin the same, he sent unto the Ambassadors unto the king of China from
Tamerlan.
said king of China, for to demand right for some countries (which they call
Hordas) abiding places, and towns, or rather countries fit for the feeding of
cattle, the which this Prince of China had usurped long before, and even the
passages of a river called Tachij, which is beyond his limits, which are walls
(the which are between A wall builded by the king of China to defend his
country from the roades of the Tartarians.
the kingdoms of the great Cham and of our Tamerlan) builded of purpose by
this king of China to defend him from the roades of the Tartarians and forces
of our Prince, so as this was begun with the advice of the great Cham, and
for his benefit as well as for the Princes. Therefore to accomplish his
enterprise, in the mean time that he attended for the return of his
Ambassadors, he caused his forces to come forwards from all parts, appointing
unto them for the place of meeting his own at the Horda of Baschir, where all
his army assembled: and other ayding troops of the great Cham in the deserts
of Ergimul at a certain day, in which place he should join with all his
army. The army of the great Cham consisted of two hundred thousand fighting
men, wherein were all the brave men of his Court, who were accustomed unto the
wars, the Emperor which then reigned, and was old, having greatly increased
his limits, and conquered a great country, so as these men were well trained
up in the wars, and accustomed unto travail and pains. Now then the
Ambassadors which were sent, return and inform the Prince of the will of this
proud king of the world, this A proud answer of the king of China returned
unto Tamerlan by his Ambassadors.
king of China (who was named so) who puffed up with vain glory, was
astonished how any durst denounce war against him, making this proud answer,
that Tamerlan should content himself that he had left him that which he might
have taken from him, and that his arms and forces were of another sort then
those of whom he published the victory, to bring thereby terror upon his
neighbors. This answer being heard, our Prince marched directly unto the
army, and gave order for the conueyance of victuals from all parts, sent to
hasten forward his consederates, emparted the answer unto the Emperor by
Ambassadors dispatched from him, caused the boldness of the king of China to
be published, to make manifest unto all the world the justness of his cause.
Before his departure he went to take leave of his father, who endued with a
singular A kind parting between the father and the son.
and fatherly affection, said he should never see him again, and that he
hastened unto his last rest, and having made solemn prayers over the Prince
his son for his prosperity, kissing him a thousand times, drew off his
Imperial ring, and gave it unto him, not asking whither his journey tended:
and calling Odmar, he bad him farewell, reco^me^ding his faithfulness unto his
son. This was done with a gravity, whereof the grace was more divine then
human: then he departed and drew toward Samarcand, The custom of the
Parthian kings to carry t^eir ^ ^^^s with them unto the war.
where the Empress his wife remained; whom he carried with him as is the
custom of that Nation, and after he had (being religious) visited the Tomb of
his servant H^lly, he caused his soul three days to be prayed for, according
to the rites of his law: whereupon Samay made governor of Sachetay in
Tamerlans absence.
he presently departed, having taken order for the well governing of his
kingdom in his absence, committing the charge thereof unto Samay, a man well
practiced in affairs, and he who had the charge of our Prince The courteous
nature of Tamerlan toward his bringers up.
in his youth: for I must needs say this by the way, that our Prince had
always a natural inclination toward those which had brought him up in
virtue, showing unto them in a manner the same honor, as if he were yet under
their government: and this he did thorough a gentleness of nature which was in
him, that made him beloved more then I am able to express unto you. So
Tamerlan his Army marching against the king of China.
then he marched forward in the midst of his army, which consisted but of
fifty thousand horse, and one hundred thousand men on foot, relying
principally on the forces of the great Cham his uncle; who above all desired
this war: he did not forget to give in charge that the rest of his forces
should be ready upon the first commandment as soon as he should be joined
with the forces of the great Cham, and marching forwards he had stayed by the
way, by reason of some distemperature which had surprised him thorough changing
of the air as the Physicians affirmed. But yet notwithstanding the forces
which Catiles Captain of the army of the great Cham conducted, went daily
forwards. Now the news was spredde into an infinite number of places of his
distemperature, yet did he not neglect to send unto the great Cham, and often
advertise him of the estate of his health, to the end the same should not cause
any alteration, the which he did foresee by reason of his preferment unto this
Empire by the great Cham his uncle: and he was in doubt of a certain Lord
named Cal^x, who was discontented therewith, and had not as yet neither
gratified nor acknowledged him as all the other subjects had done, and they
reported thereof diuersely unto him; but this Prince unto whom gentleness
being natural, was always of opinion, that it would not be convenient for
him to disturb the quiet of the kingdom which was given him, during the life
of his uncle, who desired it as old age does naturally: notwithstanding some
report that upon policy he suffered this war to be moved, whereas he might
have remedied the same, making it as a means to win the hearts of his new
subjects, who liked well of him already, and also to make himself to be
feared of those that heaped up conspiracies against his promoting unto the new
Empire. For kingdoms are for the most part obtained, and likewise preserved by
the good will gotten Tamerlan his policy to cut off the branches of sedition.
in well commanding men of war: it produced also another effect, which was,
that they who were sedicious, wasted of themselves, or else became his
affectioned servants by the ordinary service in the wars, and by this means
drew them out of their country. Now concerning his delay it was by sundry
diversely interpreted; some said that he had been advertised of some vproare to
be attempted, when he should be far severed from thence, and had passed over
the mountains of Pasanfu, and that Calix stayed upon nothing else, in so much
as the companies of the great Cham were gone forwards, even beyond the
mountains, having passed the river of Meau, and were encamped at Bouprou, the
which Calix understanding, thought he should have the means to work his
enterprise. Thereupon having assembled The conspiracy of Calix against Tamerlan
in his absence.
great store of his most faithful followers, he took counsel with them, that
this was the means to overthrow the purposes of Zachetay, who would reign
over, and bring them under his Empire: and that seeing their Prince had been so
badly minded as to do the same of his own mind without calling of them which
had interest in that election, that now was the time to assure their liberty,
which was in doubt to be lost, and caused also a rumor to be spread of the
sickness of this Prince, that the great Cham was old, the greatest part of his
forces far separated from him, that they should soon attain unto that they
desired: that his enterprise herein was so assured; that so soon as his army
was assembled, he would show himself before Catay, he was certain that
presently there would be a change in his favor; that his father had commanded
there; that it is long since he knew the affection of this people, which
inclined unto him; that they had not as yet seen their new Prince; that they
would easily believe whatsoever he declared unto them; that the Zachetay was
far severed from them; that they had to do with a great enemy, to whom also
he had sent Ambassadors to advertise him of his practice; that he was assured
his enterprise would have happy success; that they would forthwith dispatch
a messenger unto the great Cham their Prince, to An old pretense of all rebels.
assure him that they bent not their forces against him, but were his faithful
and obedient subjects: but they armed themselves, because they would not be
governed by the Parthians their ancient enemies (for these Nations hate one
another how near neighbors so ever they be, as does the Spaniard and the
Portugal, the English men and the Scot) that they knew this Prince, in respect
of his great age, having no posterity was desirous of quiet rest, and desired
nothing more then to end his days in peace, they would permit him so to do
without altering any thing in the same; that they hope the Parthians are so
badly entertained by the king of China, that in stead of setting upon them they
shall think themselves happy if they may be suffered to enjoy peace; that
they will march forward toward them at the straites of Tenduict, to hinder
their return. The propositions of Calix were great and well practiced: for it
was a year since he had won the peoples good will, and he heaped together
whatsoever was necessary for his insurrection: but this was done secretly,
notwithstanding diverse had given advertisement thereof unto the Prince
Tamerlan: but he despised that practice, or at the least made a show so to
do. Yet notwithstanding do I know, that he was not so sick at Cachobache
where he remained very near a month, that he had not in his understanding
(the which he wisely dissembled) the revolt which Calix practiced in his new
estate; that he delayed but only to understand the certainty of the events.
And I have often heard him say, that if it had not been for fear of offending
the great Cham his uncle, he had helped the same at the very beginning, without
suffering the same to be set on foot: this was the cause that this Prince made
so long abode. The Tartarians which were brought unto him by Calibes, were
vexed for having received news of the preparations made by the king of China;
they complained that opportunity and season passed away, so desirous were they
to manifest unto their new Prince their courages, and this was their daily
talk: but some matter of importance happened, and a great alteration was found
in the Princes disposition, who was forward and diligent for executing of that
speedily which he had with ripe deliberation resolved of. The which makes me
believe that he had very good advertisement, and that he waited the
opportunity. Now he gave order for matters behind him, to the end that no news
might be spread of his army: but rather that they should think that he had
passed the mountain, and had upon his neck the army of the king of China,
which was between the mountains and him: thus Calix thought greatly to
trouble him, when he rose in arms against him, and did think that he had
already assaulted the wall which the king of China had made against the
Tartarians. But Calix was thrust forward rather with a desire of ruling, then
beginning the same with any wisdom, making too great have: and as his
enterprise was craftily co^ducted, so was it cunningly discovered, and all fit
remedies prepared therefore whenever the same should happen. As soon then as
the Prince was advertised of the pretenses of Calix thus discovered, he marched
one days journey forward, to the end he might approach unto Calibes, and impart
the same unto him, and assembling all his followers and counsel together, he
discoursed unto them in this manner: Tamerlan his Oration unto his soldiers
upon the conspiracy of Calix.
I nothing doubt but that all of you will advise me to desist from this
enterprise, considering the armies which be raised up within the heart of that
country, where you all desire I should reign, and where with the full consent
of all the chiefest servants of the Emperor my Lord and uncle I have been
received: and ought not I then help him to punish the rashness of Calix, who
alone has disdained to obey me, and allow of my promotion unto the Empire of
the Tartarians? But it behooves us also to make provision against this enemy
which we have before us, who seems to be rather a defender then an assaulter,
according to the aduertisements we have received of his preparations. We must
also think that Calix has not attempted this without hope of being supported
by the king of China, against whom he did see that we did arm our selves, for
to require justly that which belongs unto us. There is good cause therefore we
foresee how to hinder him from entering into our kingdom, whilst I shall be
busied in reducing this bold fellow unto his duty. We must therefore
strengthen our borders, and leave all my munition and provision of victual in
this place, the army which we shall leave here will spend them, we will
carry back with us all our artilleries and engines unto a safe place, we will
leave upon the borders five and twenty thousand Parthian horse, forty
thousand of those sent by the Emperor my Lord and Uncle, and a hundred
thousand footmen under the charge of Calibes, of whose faithfulness I am most
assured. I will likewise advertise Samay to set forwards toward me with fifty
thousand horse as soon as he can, and my self with all diligence, will march
forwards with the rest of my army toward this bold fellow, and when I shall
be advanced, I will attend the counsel and commaundemen of the Emperor. His
discourse was allowed of, although Calibes was desirous to accompany him,
notwithstanding he thought obedience was better the^ sacrifice. They which had
not understood of the doings of Calix, thinking this a matter of great
importance, there was in the Counsel contrary opinions; the one saying it was
necessary to assure matters at home, the other party, that it was a great
enterprise to seek to make head with an army against the king of China, and
in the mean while to have so dangerous a Cancer within his realm, as was the
reuolting of the people: but these men entered not into the most secret counsel
of the Prince, who had long since foreseen the practices of Calix, having a
great army most ready to join with him upon the first commandment sent
unto the same: neither did they any thing at all perceive, that the Prince
Tamerlan, how much disquieted soever he made show to be, was very glad to have
occasion ministered to enter with arms into the state by him newly obtained, so
as the same might seem just in the eyes of the Emperor his uncle. For by this
means he should take possession of his gift, obtain the good will of his
soldiers, and be well assured to punish this fellow so thoroughly, The wise
foresight of Tamerlan.
as others which might peradventure be tickled with the same humor would take
thereby example, and therefore wisely had he separated the forces of the
Tartarians. For what face soever Calibes set on the matter, he harkened what
would become of Calix, that he might likewise make some co^motion: there was
left with him to command over the Parthians the Prince of Thanais, without whom
he could not do any thing, for that he led the auantgard. Thus was the army
divided in two parts; the king of China remaining long before he was advertised
of all this, and thought he had all the forces both of the Tartarians and
Parthians upon his arms, so as this was of no small importance to favor our
affairs: Good directions from Tamerlan.
for Tamerlan had especially given commandment, that the passages which are
easily gotten, might as diligently be kept, to the end that the king of China
should not be advertised of the tumult. Then Tamerlan set forward his
auauntgard under the leading of Odmar: he promised unto himself shortly a
happy success in his affairs, and advertised the Emperor of all: but it
came unto him when he was sick. And surely it was high time for Tamerlan to
march forward, or else all had been revolted, so leaving his footmen he made
great iourneyes. Now during the time that he had been advertised, and made his
abode to consult, which was the space of two months: Calix having presented
himself with a hundred thousand fighting men before Cambalu, a very great
city, and chief of the Province of Catayo, the inhabitants thereof came out
to meet him, and did also receive him with all the joy that might be. They had
sent likewise to Euinsay, where Cambalu r^uol^eth unto Calix.
the Emperor was at that time, to intertaine and assure him of their
obedience, and that they did rise up only because they would not be subjected
unto the Parthians. They had with one consent also sworn not to acknowledge
Tamerlan for their Emperor: but they did beseech the Emperor that they might
rather receive Calix, to the end (said they) the greatness of the Tartarians
should not be buried within the strait bounds of the Parthians. But as soon
as they heard that Tamerlan approached, it did bring much hinderance unto the
affairs of Calix: for these confederates so lincked together, made full
reckoning that his absence would be for the space of eight or ten months at
the least, what prosperity soever he were like to have in his enterprise: but
he had plotted out the business for them in another sort. Even as it is often
seen, that when a Schoolmasters enters on a sudden into the school, with a
rod in his hand, when as the scholars are in disorder, busied in beating one
another, or neglecting the charge given them by the Schoolmaster: in such and
the same manner did Tamerlan come unto the Tartarians whom Calix raised up,
being the^ at Cambalu whither all the Provinces came to gratify him. This was
bad news for him, to hear that Tamerlan approached, one of the greatest
Captains of the world, and who was the best followed, being most worthy that
not only they and the Tartarians should acknowledge him, but also all the
Nations of the world, being worthy to command them, because he was so
virtuous. He did as much as he could to co^ceale these news, but report cannot
be kept secret, it runs upon the house tops, and slideth even into the
houses, and look how the Moon diminishes and increases, being never An apt
comparison of report unto the moon^
steadfast in one estate: so many people which had unadvisedly followed him,
began to assemble themselves together for to make new matches, lightly changing
their opinions. You might then have seen the people Confused fear^ within the
city of Cambalu.
gather together in troops within this great City, here a thousand, and there
two thousand, not knowing whereupon to resolve, every one of them being afeard
of the just indignation of Tamerlan, unto whom so lately they had sworn their
obedience, and had acknowledged him for their Prince and Emperor, according to
the commandment of his ^^cle. They knew him to be of the blood of so many
Emperors, and that he had ruled over them with such great justice, they had
therefore their consciences which did accuse them as guilty, and did see the
hand already lifted up to punish their offenses. This caused every one of the
people thoroughly to bethink them of the follies by them committed in opening
their gates unto this rebel, that conspired against his Prince. Now whilst
our army marched toward Caindu, and from thence unto Calatia, whither our army
went easily, looking for the forces of his native country of Zachetay to come
and join with him: he did not yet forget to send forward daily of our
soldiers toward Cambalu, so as they supposed all our forces to be on the
neck of them already, which gave great terror unto the people: for the nature
of them is The nature of the common people.
such, that often times they ground their affairs upon prosperity, which
they hold most assured, not so much as dreaming that the events of matters of
the world be often contrary unto that they have in themselves imagined. Calix
perceiving that the people did repent, he thought best to withdraw himself
out of Cambalu, determining to oppose himself against Tamerlan, and sent for
his power from all places, putting all upon the event and hazard of a battle.
He had also received advertisement of the small contentment the Emperor
conceived of his proceedings, and how he had sent for all his forces to march
thither, that from thence they might go and join with his Nephew Tamerlan,
and how he falling again into the The great Cha^ sent his imperial ring unto
Tamerlan.
extremity of his sickness, had sent his imperial ring unto Tamerlan, had
given commandment that he should be obeyed even as his own person, both
during his life, and after his death; and therefore knew well, that he must of
necessity adventure all, seeing Tamerlan came toward him. So he drew out
of Cambalu full fifty thousand men, as well Burgesses, as soldiers which were
there in Garrison, having won all the Captains which the old Emperor had
placed there in Garrison, amounting to the number of thirty thousand men, and
him that commanded over them, who had consented unto the revolt of this great
City. To make it short, having assembled all his forces, he had fourscore
thousand horse, and a hundred thousand footmen, the which he had gathered
together from all parts. I know that the sedition of Calix was such, and in
such manner plotted, that he did even provoke the Moscouites, that at the very
same time they might invade Zachetay. Whereunto the Moscouite as a faithful
Prince, would not in any case hearken, a thing which I have often heard Odmar
report, commending the Moscouite, and maintaining him in peace with his master,
by often remembering him many times of this good turn performed: for it is very
credible, that if the Moscouite had at the very same time entered Zachetay, he
had hindered the forces of this Province, in such sort as it should not have
been able at all to give aid unto the affairs A good advertisement for men
in authority.
of Cambalu. Behold how they which guide the stern of the
common-wealthes-barke should in time give remedy unto the discontentments of
the mighty. For when they have attained unto authority, they do readily
trouble all things, having therein always very seditious minds, so as they are
very willing to shuffle the cards with them: and therefore such vproares are
not to be neglected, but remedied speedily. Our army then marched with all
diligence, in such sort as certain scouts which were two thousand horse, had
news of the army of Calix, the which came forwards directly toward us,
whereof they caused the Emperor to be certified speedily, who sent thither two
thousand horses more, to the end they should keep the passage of a river
called Brore, by the which our victuals were conveyed unto the army, and also
for to win always time, the Prince knowing right well that the motions of
civil wars be furious at the beginning, and that it is the best to resist them
slowly, drawing them always out at length if it be possible. For the people in
the end acknowledging their faults, their means and money failing them, and
oftentimes victuals also: on the contrary side in a royal army none of all
this does happen, where all things are favorable, and the soldiers well
disciplined, obedience and order being wisely observed. Then had the Emperor
the guiding of his own purposes, for he had received commandment from the
Emperor his uncle, to hazard therein all for all, delivering up into his hands
the safeguard of his life and estate, that he might thereby end his days in
peace, willing him likewise, to punish this arrogant fellow and his partakers.
By this means came forces from all parts unto Tamerlan; but on the contrary
part, the enemies army was then in his chiefest force, and began to feel
the want of victuals, by reason of a desert and certain mountains which it had
passed, where there was a Lord subject unto the great Cham, who after he had
promised him help for the conducting of victuals from Cambalu unto his army,
as soon as he perceived him to be far off, changed his mind, and began to
withdraw himself from his side, and to make war upon him: setting upon his
men, having gathered soldiers together, which was a great discommoditie unto
him for his army, in The proceedings of the two armies.
such sort as he must of necessity come unto a day of battle. But Tamerlan
having advertisement of all his disco^modities, found the means to pass over
four thousand horse to join with Cangi (for so was this Lord named) to give
order thereby for cutting off the commodities which came from Cambalu: and (as
I have said) the Emperor having caused the foords of Brior to be carefully
searched, and occupying all the passages with his army, he possessed twelve or
fourteen leagues of rich ground and good, having behind him the salt lake, and
before him the river of Ostan. And there did he watch advantage, staying the
coming of his enemies, with whom they thought to fight, at the very instant
they should arrive; but they were therein deceived, for they were kept occupied
with roades and skirmishes, and the maine battle came not to the fight: so as
it was two moons (or rather two months) before we advanced toward them, in
so much as necessity constrained them to retire toward Cambalu. The Prince
thereof advertised, passed over the river with his army, which was found to be
a hundred and fifty thousand horse, and two hundred thousand footmen, resolved
to join battle, fearing least Calix would return and winter at Cambalu, and
should be driven to fight within the same, where not doubting of the victory,
he feared yet least so great and rich a city as that, being sacked, would
bring unto him two great discommodities. The first would be, the loss of the
city; the other, he feared that taking such a city by force, his army
should be consumed in the spoil thereof, and utterly destroyed: or that his
old soldiers made too rich, would no longer follow him. After he had called
his principal Captains together, who were much vexed because they fought not,
in the end resolved thereupon, very sorry that there was no remedy but that the
possession of his Empire must be bloody. Now he had warned Calix to forbear,
and lay down his arms, and he would pardon him, but this rash fellow (whose
courage was not yet to be despised) made no account of all that: for purposing
to command, he could not resolve to obey, which did inuit him unto a short
life with happiness, rather then unto a long life honorlesse, even as they
which undertake such follies must needs resolve. For it is very hard that the
Prince his Lord should assure himself therein, as long as he does live, so
ticklish is this desire of reigning without a companion. So our army went unto
Chincy, and made seven leagues; the enemy having knowledge of our passage,
turned his face, and they say that The speech of Calix unto his companions.
Calix turned himself unto three or four of his companions, lifting his hands
unto heaven and said unto them that never in his life had he received more
acceptable news. The Parthians (said he) have at this very instant passed over
the river, and come toward us, and if Tamerlan, who bargained so much, will
fight at this present, I cannot receive a greater good turn. For (said he)
whatsoever shall become of me, it cannot but bring unto me an immortal glory;
for if I conquer him, who is he in Asia that may be compared unto me? the
Empires of the Tartarians and of Sachetay shall be mine: for I fight against the
forces of these two great estates, the which I have separated thorough my
practices: my power consists of these two peoples: if I be overcome, my
glory shall be very great, in that I durst, and unto this present time we have
gotten this glory, that the valor and courage of Sachetay was two months
shut up between the rivers of Brior and Ostan for the terror of our arms:
therefore the victory which he shall gain of us, shall be unto us always
glorious. Thus discoursing I have heard (said he) did show a great stoutnesse
of courage. He advanced his army forward, so as the auantcourers of the two
armies encountered each other, and our men were driven even into our Camp, a
thing which greatly displeased Odmar, who was in the auauntguard, for the
Emperor was very sorry that he had not made them stronger when they came near
unto the enemy, but the excuse was, that they did not imagine the rashness of
Calix to be so great as to set forwards three leagues. The next day was spent
in discoursing of battles, every one for his part, and to exhort the
Captains and soldiers, to divide the gouernementes unto Captains, with the
ranks and ordinances. Calix was of the age of forty, he was a Captain renowned
with the great Cham, he was one of the chiefest in dignity and place, and they
had always respected him within Tartarie as a person most worthy of the
Empire, if the glory of Tamerlan and his reputation had not so far excelled.
The Armies began to be viewed the one of the other about eight of the clock in
the morning, where there were very many skirmishes before they came unto the
main battle (according to the fights of these nations) it was a great plain
wherein they met at that time, with like advantage on either part; Odmar led
the Auauntguard The order of Tamerlans army ranged against Calix.
(as I have already said) wherein there was forty thousand horse, and
threescore thousand footmen; he made three squadrons, whereof he set forward
one before him that began the battle. Tamerlan marched in the same order, but
his squadrons were much stronger, the footmen both of the Auauntgard and of the
Battle were on the right and left wings. Tamerlan had drawn out six
thousand Parthian horse and two thousand Tartarian for the Arier-ward, and had
committed the charge thereof unto a faithful servant of his called Axalla (a
Geneuois borne) who had great credit with him, because he had been brought up
with him in his youth, and had good trial of his faithfulness, valor, and
industry; having given him in charge not to fight at all but upon the
extremity; and also to gather together all that should be scattered from the
Army. Axalla was a man of great judgment, his understanding being good and
quick, and a Captain in great estimation amongst the soldiers, although he
worshipped God in another manner then we did, and was also a Christian. And he
had many of them with him, whom he caused to come from the Georgians and from
Pont Euxin, who fought with great agilitie; this day did he show his great
fidelity and courage unto his Prince. Calix on the other side, who was a well
spoken man, was encouraging his soldiers to favor his fortune, and the
liberty of his nation: The order of Calix battle against T^m^rlan.
he had divided his troops into three maine battles only, his footmen upon
the right hand, his own person was in the midst of the maine battle, with
many footmen which compassed him round about (according as we use to fight.)
Now Odmar that was a politic warrier, stayed their coming without removing:
his first squadron rushed furiously upon this great multitude, that on the
right side, wherein was his own person, and the other on the left side gave a
great push, broke all the order of Calix army, in such sort, as it was
constrained to join all together, which was a great multitude: at this very
time the Prince charged, which overthrew all. You might have seen in an instant
amongst these great companies thus opened, some follow, some fly, some kill,
taking of horses, and men tumbling The battle between Tamerlan and Calix
within the country of Cataio.
over and over; they held the victory sure on our side, when as, behold, a
maine force did come upon us, conducted by Calix, who had gathered them
together, and they were between fifteen and sixteen thousand horse, which
came and set upon the Princes maine battle on the flank, and pierced the
same, and overthrew them in a manner all. Now you must understand, that those on
Calix part retired at the very first charge eue^ unto their carriages, and our
men had followed the victory too hotly, making great slaughter, in so much as
they charging again, and finding our forces broken, he did easily shake our
Army, and gave us a great check, so thoroughly, that we were upon the point
to lose the battle. The Prince Tamerlan was thrown to the ground; in the
mean while his maine Battle Tamerlan thrown to the ground.
retired, continually fighting according to our manner. The Prince was not long
in mounting again on horsbacke, looking continually on his Arier-guard, which
had not the means to join with him; and earnestly viewing the countenance of
the same. Now our footmen at such time as he went to give the charge, was
open, and after shut again, and had not been as yet set upon by any, they had
been only breathed upon at the charges which had been given; Axalla joining
with it his troops reserved for the Arier-ward. During this space Calix did
hotly pursue the troop of Calix enjoyed the victory one hour.
Tamerlan, who retired, skirmishing continually with his soldiers, being
almost all Parthians. The enemies maine battle did greatly diminish, for his
soldiers went a spoiling here and there within the camp of the Battle, and
they could not discern by reason of the great dust, the Arier-ward which
followed in good order after, killing and overthrowing all that were opposed
against them. When as (behold) at the same instant there came a cry even unto
Calix, with Turn, turn: there being a thousand or twelve hundred horse which
Axalla had severed from the rest, who having already advanced themselves
bravely, were come to handigripes with Calix, having received commandment to
mingle amongst them, for to redeem the Princes maine Battle, which was
pursued by them. Then did Calix in returning perceive, that both his Empire and
glory, together with the good fortune which he one hour had fully inioyed,
were for ever utterly lost, and then began he to repent himself of his folly:
and after he had commanded a charge to be given for the repelling of the
auant-currers, he staid, uniting his men, for he had as yet 11000. horse: but
he could not descrie whether those which were with Axalla should be footmen or
horse: for they all appeared unto him horsemen, a thing which did greatly amaze
him. On the other side he did perceive that at the same instant he left
pursuing the Emperors maine battle, in that very time it had gotten a loofe
off, joining together such of the men as had been scattred from the same;
attending the success of this charge, that he might begin his fight again,
notwithstanding he being bold and brave had his recourse unto extremity by his
arms, and having nothing in his face but boldness, he exhorted his men to
fight valiantly with him, and pursue the good Calix exhortation unto his men.
fortune which the great God had put into his hands this day: that these were
scattered men which sought to join with their fellows, and it was necessary
to hinder them from that. In this mean time his Army did strongly join
itself together, the which Axalla well considering, thought that the good
fortune of two great Emperors was this day in his power, and under his
conduct, and that his life or death could not but prove most glorious, being
for the safety of his good master, who had put in him so great confidence; he
encouraged his soldiers valiantly, commanding the first charge to be given,
and bravely assisting his men, he charged so strongly, that he passed clean
through the squadron of Calix, who was hurt in his mouth with the blow of a
Lance, after had performed the duty both of a soldier and Captain. In the
end, valiantly fighting, Calix t^^en prisoner by Axalla.
he fell into Axallas own hands, the which with one voice he proclaimed
through all his camp, the which overthrew the courage of all his soldiers.
Prince Tamerlan Tamerlan his great victory against Calix.
also set upon the flank of one of those troops broken already by Axalla; and
so was the victory entire. There were slain of the one side and of the other,
more then fifty thousand men. It cost our Emperor Fifty thousand men slain
in the battle bebetweene Tamerlan and Calix.
dear, who said that he never fought with greater danger of being overcome. He
honored greatly Axalla for his good endeavor and wise conduct, who brought
unto him Calix sore hurt in the mouth with the blow of a Lance, and another
blow of an arrow in the body. He spoke unto him, but the other being fierce and
bold, answered him nothing at all, making a sign that his mouth did hinder
him; he was kept until the next day, Calix beheaded.
and was judged by all the Counsel worthy of punishmen: whereupon he caused
his head to be smitten off, the which he sent to be presented unto the
inhabitants of Cambalu: he caused the like to be done unto all the chief
leaders, not for cruelty, but for necessity, knowing very well, that the means
to cut off the foot of civil wars, is to punish the heads of the same, for
they be Hydras which grow up but too fast. After this the Army A description
of Cataio.
marched into the kingdom of Cataio, a country rich in grass, and in all
kinds of pastures, abounding with great quantity of beasts, and people which
knew not what war meant. The Prince gave commandment that these people
should not be accounted as enemies, but his good subjects, that he would use
all the cities well, as Cangi, Sochgi, Gonzae, Tagni, Togara, Congu, which had
revolted, and were come to sue for pardon at his hands, in humbling themselves
before him; the which he granted unto them, enioyning them only to provide
sufficient victuals for his army: and never to be so ill advised as to harken
unto those, who for their particular ambition would withdraw them from the
obedience due unto their true and natural Prince and Emperor. Now this
mercifulness was presently spread abroad, which was of no small importance
for the appeasing of others who had put all their hope in extremity, which is
in losing their own lives to make others do the like: and especially the
inahbitants of Cambalu had taken this resolution: but being informed of the
Emperors clemency, changed their opinions; notwithstanding some of them which
were the most sedicious, who thought they should run the same fortune with
their leaders, were in despair, doing as much as in them lay, to draw with
them the destruction of their city, the which this mildness had appeased, and
changed into hope of the Princes clemency. In the mean while our army daily
aproched, and at such time as we came nearest, the more did the fear of all
the city increase, in so much as the Prince was advertised daily from those
which favored his side, of all things within the city, and he was assured
that every one determined to obey the Conqueror, and to do whatsoever he
commanded. The which being known unto the Prince, he left all his army at
Gonsa, and himself went directly unto the city of Cambalu, where all things
The ordinary garrison at Cambalu of 30000. soldiers.
were made quiet, by the means of thirty thousand soldiers, being the
ordinary garrison, whom he caused to enter therinto before him, and two hours
after entered into the same himself, being received with great magnificence, not
yielding as yet to pronounce the word of pardon, referring all unto the
Emperor, and to the ordinary course of justice. Willingly saying that he
pardoned the common people; showing himself sundry times openly gentle and
courteous, honoring them greatly amongst others of the city, which had taken
his part. Now he stayed for the return of one of his favorites, whom he had
sent unto the Emperor, to carry him news of the victory, and of the death
of Calix, and that the chief of this faction remained prisoners with him; also
to know what justice the Emperor would appoint to be inflicted on those
Citizens which were the first beginners of the revolt of this city: for the
Prince being desirous to be esteemed merciful, and to win love within this
great city, would not execute justice of himself, nor in his own name, but
by the Emperor his uncle, whom he did gratify herein, leaving the authority
wholly unto himself, and by this means he was not not esteemed cruel. Thus
the Prince after he had remained here eight days, departed. He was not many
days journey from the city before he received tidings how the great Cham his
uncle willed that justice should be executed on them which were the first
moouers of this revolt; the which was executed accordingly in the name of the
Emperor, and by his special ministers; in such sort, that as the people
accused the cruelty of the Emperor, they commended the mercy of Tamerlan. Now
the Emperor was better in health then he had been, and greatly desired to see
the Prince, who referred the resolution of this, whether he should go unto
him, until he came unto his Army, desirous to hear news thereof, remaining
upon the frontiers of China. In this sort went he away, separating himself as
much as he could from the execution which was in doing at Cambalu, where some
two hundred Burgesses A terrible execution.
were put to death, for an example unto the rest, their heads being set up in
the midst of the market place, in sign of a terror unto the^ which should
hereafter rebel against their Prince. Thus was this war brought unto an
end, to the great honor and reputation of Tamerlan. And it is also reported
for most certain, that if he had not stopped the way of this mischief, he had
utterly lost this estate, the conspiracy being in a manner general: but the
diligence he used in opposing himself against it, caused many to lose their
courages. Therefore in such reuoltes it is a special point, for a Prince to
show himself, to enter into the field, and pass through his Provinces, to
encourage his own, and give terror unto others. For the sedicious do often
declare lies unto the people, the which the presence of the Prince does
dispearse, even as the A go^d aduertisment for Princes.
clear Sun does a dark cloud, and above all to show that they fear not
those which conspire, making but small reckening of the same. For it is said,
that he which first beats the fields, has best company with him; he must not
think that without weapons in his hand, and not being on horseback, the
matter may be remedied with words and admonitions. A thing plotted by a
sedicious person, is continually attempted, or but deferred, but in the end it
breaks out; and therefore a wise A good aduertisment unto P^inces.
and advised Prince should disperse it speedily by the means of justice: for
such spirits are never pacified, but by the terror of death, and of those
which are guilty, the which must be prosecuted as soon as it is discovered,
and looked unto at the first rumor thereof, having good espials in every place,
and providing so well on every side, that as soon as the same shall happen,
he may be on the neck of the sedicious. You see how wisely our Prince made
use hereof, for it is not to be doubted, but he had discovered the conspiracy
long before the execution of the same. This was the occasion that he kept his
forces in readiness within the country of Sachetay, and marched himself
forward to minister occasion unto others, to discover unto him their evil
affections, by this means to make the goodness of his cause appear
manifestly unto all the world. A matter of no small importanc^ to preserve
himself, and the peoples affections, when they are once seasoned therewith: so
as it is the best to make them assailers, if it be possible, and bring to pass
that their assailing may be their utter undoing. Therefore is it necessary, if
possible to be (though half) on horseback, as soon as any shall be
discovered to have a stirring humor and to trouble good order. This must be
done, for words do nothing at all satisfy them: you must of necessity come
unto blows, for they be ordinarily rash fellows, whose eyes ambition
blinds, or else if they be wise (who see great likelihood at such time as
they enterprise it) their attempts have often good success, when they have to
do with negligent and careless Princes, or effeminate, or of small courage,
who give themselves too much unto delicacies, and spend their time in pleasure,
whereas they ought to have a watchful eye to look to the preservation of all
within their kingdom, and their hand ready to repulse injuries coming from
without. You see how well our Prince uses his mildness, care, and
watchfulness: before this he was but half Emperor of the Tartarians, but
hereby assured himself thereof with good dexterity, and die the Emperor never
so soon, there is no show that there can happen any moment of trouble: for he
is there reverenced Tamerlan his mildness won the love and reverence of all
for his great mildness and clemency, for rewarding of the good, and bearing
sometimes with a fault (if there be any) and for having moreover a stiff hand
to punish the wicked and sedicious. Now to come again unto our discourse: as
soon as our Prince was returned unto his Army where he found Odmar, who there
attended his coming, the which caused all the Army to march forward and meet
him, where he was received of his soldiers, and with a loud voice called by
all his Captains and soldiers; Most great Tamerlan welcomed unto his army,
with new and strange acclamations.
Emperor and most victorious, as they are accustostomed to do amongst the
Tartarians. The Prince after he had long discoursed with his Captains both of
the beauty and greatness of the city of Cambalu, he arrived at his tent,
where after he had declared unto Odmar in what sort all things had passed at
Cambalu: he asked his advise whether he should go and visit the Emperor his
uncle. Odmar who well perceived that the Prince desired it, and called unto his
remembrance the honor which he had received when he was at Quinzai, and that he
would have been very willing to spend the winter with the Empress, staying for
the spring for to return unto the enterprise of China. But Odmar which was no
flatterer, and who was a great Counselor of estate, and faithful unto our
Emperor Tamerlan, spoke unto him in this manner: Invincible Odmar his wise
speech as answer unto Tamerlan his question touching the visiting of his vn^le.
Emperor, so do I beseech you, as may be found in you both valor to conquer,
and wisdom to use the victory: you have left your Army, the which for the
space of six months has been busied in opposing it self against the forces
of your enemies; he whom you have left is a Tartarian, one of the chiefest of
this nation; do you not know that the Tartarian and also the Parthian, do in a
manner acknowledge none for Prince worthy to command them, but those that go
with them unto the wars? On the other side, do you nothing consider, that
you have enterprised this war to augment the glory of him who has chosen
and called you? Know you not, that the king of China holds a great country
which he has given you? It behooves that you manifest unto him the affection
of your service. Consider also that your glory and greatness will be more
acceptable unto him far off then near at hand. For being far off, it
shines unto him for the favoring of his affairs, but near, it makes his
own obscure. Do you not consider the suspicions he may conceive of your
greatness? the repentings which often come to them which have made men great,
whom they desire afterward to overthrow: for Princes be variable? What glory
can you obtain by this iourneying? Necessity constrains you not thereunto,
but your reputation will be wholly diminished thereby, and the way of your
glory is altogether contrary unto the same. It is better for you to winter
gloriously under your tents in the midst of your men of arms then within
the stately palaces of Quinzai, in the midst of the sweetness of an
effeminate Court. They which would find fault with you will demand the cause
wherefore you left your Army; they will say that you threaten the king of
China a far off: it is to be feared also least he should oppress your men,
from whence will you return to resist the same, while you bring together
again your men of Arms? The Parthians would as your self return unto
Sachetay, and the Tartarians unto their Horda, but if you march forward, you
shall prepare unto your self an assured victory of the king of China, and if
you do defer it, it shall prove dangerous unto you, whereas it is now most
assured, in as much as he thinks your Army busied within your own country,
your forces empaired, the faith of your peopled changed, and all your Empire
revolted. He sees your Army led by Calibes to temporize, and being but as it
were to defend it self, and not to assault any other, he supposes that all
your determinatio^s are ouerthrown. Some may thus say unto him (as some have
suspected, and it is not without reason, but I will not affirm it, being
unwilling to enter any further into your wise enterprises, the which God only
knows, who guides you) that you have rather left Calibes there the chief of
the Tartarians, to deliver your self from the suspicion you had of him, then
for any further desire you had to accomplish your enterprise. Lose not this
occasion, the great God delivers her into your hands, you hold her by the
hairs, suffer her not to slip from you. If I have offended your Majesty with
my bold speech, do with me what it shall please you, I am your slave, lo here my
head. The Prince Tamerlan was very sad, and changed his countenance
continually, when as Odmar The great humility of the Tartarians unto their
Emperor.
spoke once again unto him, kissing the hem of his garment in all humility,
as we are accustomed unto our Emperors in sign of subjection and bondage.
Then the Emperor answered him, that he had ever The notable answer of the
Emperor unto Odmar.
known his fidelity and love, and that the cause of his sadness was, for
that he did not find in himself ability to recompense the same: and that he
aknowledged now in earnest the wisdom of the Emperor his father, in making
choice of so worthy a Counselor to assist him, and that he certainly learned
to know, that the greatest servitude which Princes have with God, was that
there was no end of their glory, seeing their continual doing was their rest,
as in the Divinity; and that when he thought to give himself some ease, then
was the time he must in steed of the delicacies and pleasures of Quinzay, make
the deserts of Cipribit the resting place from the travails of his new
victory: that it was ended, and his purposes determined: I have also heard the
Prince say, that Odmar did not speak unto him like an earthly but divine man,
and that he verily believed that God by his means did call him back from
some mishap which would have light upon him, to make his glory increase the
more. Now the rumor was already spread over all, that the Princes
determination was to go and visit the Emperor his uncle, the which tickled
every man with desire to return into his country, hoping to enjoy the
sweetness of his native soil. When as commandment was given for a general
reuiew of the whole army: where the Emperor spoke unto his soldiers in this
manner: We have begun (my faithful soldiers) an enterprise Tamerlan his
oration unto his soldiers upon his going forward against the king of China.
to go and assault the king of China, who has of late repulsed even beyond the
mountains the Tartarian name; but we were hindered to our great grief by the
foolish rashness of Calix, and were driven to turn the bridle for to punish
him, wherein you have all assisted me. It grieueth me that I cannot as well
brag of the fresh spoils of a stranger, as I may vaunt (by the means of your
weapons) of those our unfaithful Citizens; and in times past with your own
selves making trial of my first Arms against the boldness of the fierce
Moscouite, although for this last civil victory I am further indebted unto
you, for your greater endeavor, and the hazarding of your persons being much
greater, so were they our own people, who would not acknowledge us, whereof I
cannot speak without shedding of tears, desiring rather to bury such a
victory, what glory and honor soever we have gotton thereby. Neither do I
recount these things unto you, but for to manifest that I forget not your
faithfulness, and the great travail you have endured with me. We must not
therefore be weary, but must turn our weapons against those which think that
we ate greatly troubled, whereas we are victorious. We have left our
companions, who have temporized to hear the event and success of our
affairs, all our munitions be there; we must in that place (my soldiers and
friendly followers) pass over the rest of winter; our companions look for us.
The enemy is secure and looks not for us at this season of the year: for he
perceives that our Army which is there is not sufficient for offense, but
only for defense. You shall receive double pay, the better to furnish you
against the injury of cold: and as we shall be clothed with double garments,
I hope we shall be also apparelled with double glory. Let us march on merrily,
I my self will go with you, and be companion of your glory. After he had thus
spoken unto his soldiers, they all cried; One God in heaven, and one Emperor
on the The cry of the soldiers upon the Emperors oration.
earth: and bowing down al their heads in token of humility, they showed how
agreeable they were to obey that which he commanded. Thus every one returned
into his tent, where they abode yet eight days more. The Prince sent back
again Zamai unto Sachetay with some five and twenty thousand horse and fifty
thousand footmen, for the saftie of his estate in those parts. Thus after
prayers were said, all the Army being assembled together in the presence of
the Prince (according to the custom of our Emperors) our Army began to march
forward. He forgot not likewise to dispatch one unto the Emperor his uncle, to
give him understanding of all this resolution, the which he very well liked
of. The Prince by the same messenger did beseech him to send unto him in the
spring of the year some fifty thousand men to repair his Army, and certain
money also for the payment of his men of war: which he granted him. Moreover
the conducting of good store of warlike munition, and plenty of victuals for
to renew ours: for this war was principally enterprised for the profit and
greatness of the Tartarians, and for the importance which the loss of the
Lordships of Paguin and Quifu was unto them, whereby the king of China had
greatly stre^gthened and assured his estate, in so much as he might at his
pleasure enter upon the Tartarians, and the Tartarians could not enterprise
against him without great forces, for that he had caused a wall to be made
between the spaces of the A wall builded by the king of China forty leagues
long.
mountains, which was forty leagues long, so as they were defended hereby from
the ordinary incursions, the which continually did greatly enrich the^, because
they brought much cattle through the same, wherein the cu^try of China does
greatly abound, by reason it is situated in a temperate air, being neither too
hot nor cold. The temperature of China.
This was the cause that made the Emperor his uncle to desire this war; whom
our Prince according to his duty would to the uttermost of his power gratify,
as also his new subjects. So we began to march, and in eight and thirty days
we arrived at Cipribit, the Army having found great disco^modities: there had
we news of Clibes, who was very glad to understand how the affayrs had passed:
he came to visit the Prince, who showed unto him a very good countenance, and
gave him particular understanding of his determination, and understood at large
of Calibes, all that had passed within the kingdom of China. The next day the
Prince mounted on horseback, and came unto Pazanfou, where the forces
commanded by Calibes were at that present, the which had often fought with and
tried the forces of the Chinois: but found the^ much inferior unto their own.
The Emperor caused a general reuiewe to be made of all the forces which were
under Calibes, and after he beheld the countenances of these soldiers
throughout all their ranks, he caused the^ to muster, and to receive money,
every one crying, God save the victorious and invincible Emperor, according to
their custom. I had forgotten to declare unto you how the Prince of Thanais,
who was left to command over the Parthian nation by the Prince, at such time as
Calibes went to meet him, was left in the army to command it, where being
desirous to show his courage, had made war, and meeting with four thousand
horse of China, led by the king of China his brother, he so allured the^ to
him, that having entrapped the^, he fought with and ouerthew them, bringing a
great number of The Prince of Thanais overthrew a troop of horsemen, led by the
king of Chinas brother
horse and spoils away and there remained dead upon the ground five or six
hundred, the enemies being retired in disorder, if the night had not been he
had obtained a most notable victory. He had for this good fortune much honor
at the arrival of his Prince, and he had also daily greatly wearied the
Chinois with ordinary incursions: he was son unto one of the Princes
sisters, and they greatly honored him, as well for his virtues, as the place
from whence he was descended. He was as yet but young, his father being dead
old, who had worthily served the Prince (as you have heard) against the
Moscouites, commanding over the arereward, who was notwithstanding a most
sufficient and politic Captain. Now he was desirous of glory during the
abode which he had made, being the foremost on the enemies fide, and with great
diligence had marked the wall and the places by the which he might enter by
force, and sent many spies into the country of China, by certain little ways
that were within the mountains, who advertised him of all. He had also gained
through his courtesy a Lord of the same mountains (called the The Prince of
Thanais gains a Lord of the m^untains to do the Emperor service. Vauchefu.
Lord of Vauchefu) who ruled a great Country, with whom he had so well
profited, that he made him desirous of a new master, and to submit himself
unto the Emperor, receiving daily great discommodity by the wars which the
Tartarians and Chinois made: so as he coming to visit the Prince of Thanais*
he assured him of his desire to do the Prince service, and to help him in the
war against the Chinois, the which the Prince of Thanais had wisely co^cealed
from Calibes. But as soon as the Prince was arrived, he imparted the same
unto him, the which made Tamerlan desirous to have some speech with him, so
that as soon as the Prince had received commandment from the Emperor, he
sent unto Vauchefu to advertise him of the Princes arrival, and of the
commandment which he had received: whereof the other was very glad, and
having appointed a day, the Prince took his journey (without stirring of the
army) into the camp of the Prince of Thanais, which was near unto the river
of Languenne, whither he had caused this foresaid Lord to come, who met him
there. The Prince having spoken Conference between the Emperor and the Lord of
V^ch^fu.
with him by his interpreters, he assured him of much friendship, and the said
Lord him of great fidelity and service, and after many promises made by the
Prince unto him for his greatness and quiet, he discovered unto him a passage,
by the which he assured him of entrance into the kingdom of China, and with
facility to set upon the forces of the king of China, which were appointed for
safeguard of the wall, the which as I have said, contained forty leagues; a
matter which gave cause of good aduisement unto the Prince: for Calibes who was
an old Captain, found it a matter of great difficulty to go through this
passage by force, according to the view he had taken thereof, and had caused
the same to be reuiewed by others. For it was carefully kept by the kings
forces, who was not weary to be mounted on horseback, assuring himself that
fifty thousand men the which he had placed for the guarde of the wall, were
sufficient to stop all that would enterprise to force the same. So this Lord
(much made of and gained thorough the good countenance of the Prince) was a
great furtherance unto the good success of this enterprise. Then the Prince
after he had heaped upon him gifts of fair horses, rich furs, and other rare
things, he willed him to utter that which he had to say unto him. This Lord
spoke then in this manner: Know my Lord, that it is but loss of time to think
The speech of the mountain Lord unto Tamerlan.
that with your arms you should be able to force the wall which the Chinois
have built against the incursions of your subjects, the defendants have too
much advantage therein. I doubt not of your soldiers stoutnesse and of their
courage, I know you have conquered many Nations with them, and that whatsoever
you command the^, they will die or do the same. I know you have great and wise
Captains with you, that your person is only of all the world worthy to
command them: but all this will be but in vain against the wall of the
Chinois, where I assure you there are fifty thousand men to keep it, and you
cannot stay there so short a time, but there will come thither fifty thousand
more, led by the Xianxi who has such a commandment. The king of China will
himself march forward also, who will give you battle with two hundred
thousand horse and as many footmen. After you have fought, I believe that the
fortune and valor of your men may obtain the victory, the which will cost
you dear: but for to show unto you how much the reputation and mildness of
your men has bound me unto them, I will show you a means by the which you may
cause fifty thousand men to enter into the kingdom of China, whom I my self
will conduct; and they shall be on them which keep the wall, in a manner as
soon as they shall perceive it. In the mean time you shall cause your men to
go unto a place that I will tell you, which will be very discommodious unto the
Chinois, by reason of a mountain over against them, which you must cause them
to win: for I assure my self, that when they shall perceive your soldiers to
be passed, they will loose their courage, and you may easily win the passage
for to favor those men of yours which shall be passed over with me. And for to
show unto you the affection and fidelity of that I speak, I will deliver into
your hands Hostages offered by the mountain Lord unto the Emperor.
an only son I have, and two little daughters with my wife: I have also one
brother, who I am assured will follow me to do you service. The Prince having
heard this Lord speak, received great joy thereof, hoping that his affairs
should happily succeed, and this he kept very secret, for even the Prince of
Thanais knew not the means that this Lord had; seeing there was only present
the Prince and an interpreter, and the Prince after he had thus spoken unto
him, gratifying him with all he could possibly, this Lord retired himself,
accompanied with the Prince of Thanais, who conducted him back again with all
the honor that might be. So the Emperor returned from thence into his
quarter, and the next day after he had imparted the whole unto Odmar, and heard
Calibes concerning that which he had learned of the departing of the king of
China, and of his preparation, which was great. This enterprise seeming hard
unto him, after due reverence yielded unto the Prince, he spoke unto him in
this manner: Know my Calibes oration unto Prince Tamerlan.
Lord, that I am your slave for to obey you: but seeing you require me to give
you an account of all that I know of the estate of the kingdom of China, for
that I have remained these six months upon the borders by your commandment,
to hinder them from passing the same, whereby they might hurt your enterprises,
I can affirm unto you that the king of China, who reigns at this present is
of great reputation, and has increased the limits of his kingdom more then
any of his predecessors, he is proud and bold, he causes himself to be named
of his people, Lord of the world. All his strength consists in this wall
opposed against us, the which he has caused to be made by reason of the
ordinary roades of our Nation. I am of opinion that there be between fifty
and threescore thousand men at the guard of that wall, men for the most part
trained up in the garrisons of the king of China, and his best soldiers, and I
know no good means to force this wall without great hazard and much loss of
your men. I have understood that toward the lake Hogeen you may find more
easy entrance into the kingdom: but this will be 7. or eight days journey
for your army, and there are many strait places, where your army (which is
great) will be long time a passing: on the other side, this will be a space of
time wherein the king of China may give order for his affairs, who supposes
that he has not to deal but with me, whom you have left with commandment
only of defense. Yet I think this to be most for your advantage, for that
victuals will be more easily conducted unto your army: you know that this is
the principal sinew to bring forth a strong and furious combat. Therefore under
correction of your grave and more wise advise, this is as much as I know
hereof, leaving unto your self for to discourse of the inner parts of the
country, when we shall have set foot thereinto, we will talk with you of the
same. The Prince hard him very attentively, but he knew not at all that which
the Prince had further learned, insomuch as the Prince, who would that his
reputation and glory should be attributed unto his valor, and unto those of
his army, what practice soever he had in hand, and after every one had
declared his opinion, he said; that he hoped the great God the unity of whom
he would maintain against such idolaters, and his just right should answer
the reasons which do co^tradict his purpose, and the valiant arm of his
soldiers shall quite overthrow whatsoever opposes it self against the same.
Behold how Princes make themselves wondered at for their forces, whereas
oftentimes they use more the Foxes craft, then the Lions strength. Our Prince
would wisely attribute unto himself the reputation of ouercomming by open
war, and concealed from his soldiers that which he held as assured to
execute it, to the end the honor of a happy conducting might be ascribed unto
him only. Now our Prince having satisfied every one of the Kings and Lords
that did accompany him, he appointed the meeting place for his army to be at
a certain place, where he meant to choose fifty thousand fighting men, and
deliver them unto the commandment of the Prince of Thanais, unto whom he
joined the Lord Axalla a Geneuois (for that he knew him to be discreet) for to
accompany him, commanding him to give credit unto him, for his experience
and fidelity. The day appointed being come, the Lord with his brother came to
the Emperor, having viewed the place again, and found it to be forceable and
fit to pass, assuring the Prince once again of the happy success of their
enterprise, and the Prince being assembled with them to confer together,
resolved in the end, that his person with all the army should approach unto the
walls directly over against Quaguifou, in Fifty thousand men sent into China
by a secret passage, under the leading of the Prince of Thnais and Axalla.
which mean space the 50000. men should march forwards unto the place
appointed, and where they were assured to pass, conducted by the Chinois Lord,
under the charge of the Prince of Thanais and Axalla Geneuois. The Emperor
having not failed to deliver unto the^ the best soldiers of his army, and
having set down the order by them to be observed, he willed that the Lord
Axalla should lead twenty thousand of them, and should march the first, the
rest led by the Prince of Thanais, and that every one should have one of those
Lords to guide them, that by their means the enterprise might be more safely
directed. So having marched x. leagues, they arrived at the passage, the which
was won not finding any man there to resist them: and having taken a A secret
way found into China, by the conduct of the mountain Lord.
light repast, they began to march forward other ten leagues which yet
remained, where the Chinois were, who suspected no such thing, having only an
eye unto them which marched for to force their walls, assuring themselves to
have the maistry, considering their advantage. But it fell out much otherwise,
for even at the very same time the Chinois did perceive the Princes army to
approach unto their wall, as soon did they dis^ry Axalla with twenty thousand
men, who advanced forward being followed by the Prince of Thanais with thirty
thousand soldiers chosen out of the whole army, who without any co^municacion
set upon the Chinois, who came presently unto the^, having left a certain
number of their camp for the guard of the wall: but they were presently won by
the footmen led this day by Odmar, who passed over so as the Chinois were cut
off between Axalla overthrew the Chinois that kept the wall of partition.
our armies. When Axalla began the battle he overthrew them in a manner all,
the Prince of Thanais not hazarding himself therein: there was great riches
gotten this day, the king of China his cousin (whom he called king) was taken
prisoner: there was a great quantity of gold amongst the^, as well on their
arms as on their horse and furniture: they showed no great stoutnesse. The
news hereof being come unto the king of China, who at that present time was at
Quantiou, brought unto him great astonishment, for that he judged it a thing
that could not possibly come to pass, you might have seen every one filled
with fright, tears and cries, bewailing the loss of their friends. The king
although he had not been used but to see Fortune always friendly with a mild
countenance, and now to see her turned backward with her hair brisseling, he
made thereof notwithstanding no great show, but gathering together soldiers
from all parts (as the custom is of these people) The custom of the Chinois.
he caused all the Priests and such as had the charge of holy things to come
unto him, and after exhortations used, he (as their head) commanded them to
offer sacrifice unto their Gods, of whom the Sun is the principal
commanding in heaven, whom they hold opinion to be the chiefest cause of their
being, accounting it immortal and impassible, moving it self only for the
benefit of living creatures, this did he command to be observed thorough out
all his Cities; and the second thing was, that every one able to bear arms
should mount on horseback, and come unto the king at Paguinfou, whither he
doubted that we would go, because it was one of the nearest towns upon the
borders. I have forgotten to declare that this Lord who had the charge to
conduct fifty thousand men unto the fro^tiers at such time as they which were
there had need thereof, was soon in a readiness, and came to oppose himself
against the Princes army which entered, and being skillful in the ways of the
country, troubled The Emperor won the walls of China.
much the army: for a great number of his men were on horseback. The Prince
determined to beat down all the walls the better to assure his return, as
also all the fortresses which were there upon all the passages, all of them
having yielded themselves after his victory, showing himself very courteous
unto the people of these mountains, he gave unto this Lord a small portion of
The mountain Lord rewarded with great government.
land, wherein there be seven or eight good towns, Archij, Ymulij, Faliquien,
Fulij, Cohensen, Quialij, Pulij, Quianlu, who came and delivered up their keys
unto him, being neighbors unto this Lord, and gave him the government of the
frontier province of Xianxij, showing himself to be a Prince of his word, and
acknowledging the notable services the which this Lord had done him. He
referred the honoring of his brother until he had means to do the same: all
which mildness was of no small importance to favor the conquest of this
country: for the people thereof are great wonderers, especially when as they
see the courtesy of the men of war, a thing which is altogether against their
custom: for they are very cruel unto their The Chinois cruel unto their
enemies.
enemies over whom they have the victory, holding that of the Indians, who
have often intercourse with them. Now in our Prince there was not any thing
noted but courtesy unto the conquered, insomuch as this made him admired and
honored. Now the question being after all the fortes of the borders were
beaten down, to know what course the army should take, the Prince had
received news, how that the king of China assembled his forces and marched
forwards, and that he was there in his own person, and that he strengthened
also his Cities which are sufficiently fortified, and more then in any country
adjoining unto him, so as this caused the Prince to determine not to assault
any strong city, and to leave any of them behind him, this were a great
discommoditie unto him for the victualing of his army: for to leave the enemy
behind him, being assured to have him on his front, this seemed to him nigh.
Therefore upon these doubts he thought good to have the advice of his Captains,
and having assembled the^ together, he propounded all these difficulties unto
them: in the end after sundry opinions, his resolution was, to leave nothing
behind him, and to assault some famous city, and take it, by means whereof he
may nourish his army, and secondarily call the enemy unto battle. The which
the conqueror should always seek, A good advertisement for Generals.
and the defender the latest he can hazard the same. For that it is a very
doubtful thing to commit themselves unto a battle, his duty being rather to
delay, undermining the conqueror by length, and by weariness, and light
skirmishes, then to sight in open field. For when a General has wisely set
his men in order, and has exhorted them to perform their duties, what can he
do more then commit all unto Fortune, and to the will of the Lord of Hosts? And
it seems unto me, that in no feats of arms does fortune show her tricks
more often, then in the success of battles, favoring often the weakest, and
deceiving them sooner which trust in their skill of ouercomming. The examples
thereof are very common in the history of the affairs of the world, where
small armies have overcome innumerable numbers. I speak here by way of a
preamble of things which you shall hereafter hear: and of the evil council
which the king of China received. Now for to return again unto my history,
it was concluded, Wars in China made by Tamerlan with his wise proceedings
therein.
and the advice of every one was, to conquer the country by little and little,
so as their enterprise was to draw directly unto Paguinfou, which as it was a
great City and one of the chiefest, so is it also strongly fortified and well
replenished with people: but the Prince made account that the king of China
would hazard a battle. Now the Prince before he would cause the same to be
summoned, had informed himself well of the situation thereof, and causing all
the country which is champion to be represented unto his view, which are for
the most part plains, this increased the more his hope of bringing to good end
his enterprise: the riches on the other side gave courage unto the soldiers,
and principally unto the Tartarians desirous of spoil, who carried with them
carts to convey away their spoils, Paguinfou being accounted an exceeding
rich and wealthy City. Then he dispatched Odmar with fourteen thousand
horse, to advance forward and summon the same, as for to hinder victuals from
being conveyed thereinto out of the champion country: to the end that the
cattle remaining in the fields, should be a means to maintain and nourish
his army. I had forgotten to tell you, that for the acknowledging of the Lord
Axalla his services, the Prince had made him Captain general of all his
footmen, which Axalla made Captain general of all the footmen.
was one of the principal honors of the army. He caused the said Lord Axalla
to march after Odmar, with all the footmen, which was very near a hundred and
fifty thousand men, well trained up in the wars, and good expert fighters.
He marched himself immediately after with all his horsemen, artilleries,
engines, and other munitions belonging unto war, directly unto Paguinfou.
Odmar did ride twenty leagues this day, so as he arrived there contrary to
their expectation, looking rather for the king then for the enemy, and having
taken much cattle, wherewith the country greatly abounds, he pitched his
tents, leaving the city between him and us, and stayed for his footmen, who
marched forwards in the mean space, sending continually unto the war, for to
weary the enemy. This endured three or four days, until our footmen led
by this brave Christian Geneuois, showed themselves in the plain of Paguinfou.
Then the City was summoned to yield obedience unto the Emperor, or else they
should receive the law of the conqueror. They made answer, that they were
determined to live and die in the service of their Prince. Now you must
understand that it was forty years or thereabouts, since the Father of the
king which reigns at this present over the Chinois, had conquered it from the
Empire of the Tartarians, and having driven out all the inhabitants, they had
planted therein new Colonies, so thoroughly, that there were but few of the
first remembrance, but only they of the flat country and small walled towns,
who came from all parts and brought their keys, most willingly submitting
themselves unto the obedience of the Prince: so as there was great abundance
of victuals within our army: and if we had been within our own country,
there could not have come greater store; a thing which made our Prince hope for
a happy success, there being no other difficulty which for the most part
can overthrow a great army as ours was, and withdraw them from their
enterprise. And thus the City of Paguinfou is besieged, and our footmen
camped round about within an arrows shot of all the walls. They within the
city did use great endeavor for The siege of the city of Paguinfou.
their defense, and our Prince omitted nothing for their offense. Axalla having
viewed a great and strong suburb, which was in length almost half a league,
supposed that those of the City kept no watch there: that this must needs be,
for that they would not make him obstinate; he had a determination to win it
in the night, and having imparted it unto the Prince, upon the first watch all
his men were ready, all of them having made provision of ladders, and of such
things as are necessary for winning thereof with handblowes, and having
assaulted it on sundry parts, after the fight had continued two hours,
Axalla remained A great suburb won by Axalla in the night.
the conqueror, and cut in pieces eight thousand men at the least which were
within the same: the spoil was great, there were many of Axalla his me^ slain
of one side, which was that by the which they doubted to be assaulted. But on
the other side, by the which it was taken, there was scarce any one slain. The
taking of this suburb did greatly astonish those of the City, who had marked
the lustiness of our men, and began to enter into doubt of their safety,
which unto this day they accounted as most assured. On the other side they did
see that the Princes promises to be there within fifteen days failed, they
did see this great army which daily wanne footing, the engines and artillery
ready to offer violence on one side by them commanded, the which did greatly
annoy them, so as diverse principal men of the City, desired rather to make
trial of the conquerors clemency, then of his rigor. But he The Governors
speech unto those of the city to stay them from yielding.
which commanded within, who was one of the greatest Lords of the country,
and one of the best beloved with the king, assured them of the kings approach,
so as they should not want succor in time of necessity: that there was no
need thereof at this present, and although they had lost a suburb, it should
be great folly not to be willing to defend a city, and their fortresses being
as yet entire, that for his part, he would make proof of his fidelity unto
his Prince, with the hazard of his life and goods. These words were of no small
importance, and being uttered in the assembly of the people, it caused their
courages for to change, in such sort as every one retired into his quarter,
being resolved with the loss of their city, to lose also their lives. Now
you must understand that the situation of the city was of hard The situation
of the city of Paguinfou.
access, being seated upon a plain, the which was environed round about with
mountains, one of them only approaching the city, which ouerlooked it on front
upon the North side, where was a valley by the which they passed, and there did
run a river: on this side was the suburb situated which had been taken, so
as the means to succor the City was stopped, our soldiers keeping the
passages of these Mountains, the which were in the old time the borders of the
kingdom: for Paguinfou was once governed by the Tartarians, which kept it for
a defense against the Chinois, but had lost the same, and these mountains were
the limits of China against the foresaid Tartarians, who governed Paguinfou at
that time, so as these mountains were of hard access, and there remained no
other way but on the side of the suburb, the which a river compasses about,
running all along the side of a bordering mountain, upon the which we caused
many bridges to be built, for to have thereby a way for to succor our
soldiers, which kept the passages of the mountains on the enemies side: so as
it could not be but hardly succored, or else by a battle the which the Prince
did earnestly desire, as all conquerors should do. I will declare also that
during this time Odmar, Calibes and the Prince of Thanais were commanded often
by the Prince to make war, as well for to hear certain news of the enemy,
as also for to maintain his horsemen, and to keep the place the which he had
chosen as the field for the battle, to the end that he might live there with
his horsemen. He gave also commandment unto his men to gather together great
store of victuals, so as they sacked many small towns, out of the which they
brought a great quantity. In this mean time the king of Chinaes army
approached (even like fair weather) the which was very great, as they brought
us word daily, the Prince determining to go in person and meet with the enemy,
accompanied with his principal horsemen, and to leave the greatest part of his
footmen at the siege, whereunto he had a great desire, omitting nothing that
might weary the besieged, who defended themselves courageously. So the Prince
began to batter, causing The siege of Paguinfou.
his engines to approach, as rams and other munitions, the which he had made
for to come near unto the walls, to the end they might come to hand-blowes
with the enemies: insomuch as the City was assaulted on two sides very
coragiously. They within began to be more affeard then before, there being set
up for the safeguard of the munitions, and of a wall which was fallen down, a
Caualier raised up very high within an arrowshot, which did greatly annoy them,
so as they were constrained to forsake the wall in the day, and this caused
them to begin a trench for to cover themselves, the which was 22. foot in
height, and as much in depth, and fifty foot in breadth; the which being
declared unto our men, they determined to try their fortunes, and to give the^
an assault before they had ended the same, or at the least to win the wall, and
lodge there at the instant. So the Prince sent for Axalla, who was in his own
quarter, this affair depending upon his charge, and having by his industry
ordered in a manner all the siege, and having acquainted him with his pleasure,
commanded him to execute it. The next day putting his me^ in order they
assalted the wall, the which was valiantly defended: but in the end through the
valor of Axalla who gave an assalt with 20000. of his best soldiers, he won
the wall, and lodged there, the Prince having so commanded him to do, to stop
the heat of the soldiers from going any further. Now the Princes purpose was to
co^pound for the city, and not to force it, for two reasons. The first was,
for that he feared, the city being great and rich, that when the soldiers
should sack it, the enemy who was but thirty leagues from thence, should
come upon them, and by this means his army should be found in disorder, also
rich soldiers never serve well: The other was, for that he would draw out of
that city which was rich and wealthy, those commodities which were necessary
for the sure accomplishing of his enterprise, seeing it was necessary to have
such a city for to make a storehouse of necessary things for the army. Thus
although the wall was won, the enemies wanted not courage yet to defend
themselves valiantly, looking for aid according to the news they had
received, that the kings army marched forward. Whilst these things were in
doing, one of our engines shooting a bullet, and having overthrown a piece of
Anuber, the same did hurt the Governor, who at the end of three or four
hours yielded up the ghost, the which caused the soldiers to change their
resolution, there being none which made them obstinate but he, so as they
determined before the Prince should be advertised of the loss of their head,
and especially of the great slaughter of men which they had lost in the fight
of the wall, all of them with one consent The city of Paguinfou yielded unto
Tamerlan upon the death of their Governor
did resolve for to yield themselves unto the Princes mercy, saving their
lives, and the soldiers enjoying their horse and weapons. Now I have forgotten
to declare how this assault had already endured the space of eight days; such
delay did greatly vex the Prince, and on the other side, the king of China
made no great have, but at such time as he understood of the Governor his
death, doubting of that which happened. The Prince then who was advertised that
the enemies army marched unto a batel, was very glad of these news, the which
Axalla, who was advanced upon the walls, had declared unto him, and brought
the Ambassadors unto the Prince, who received them very courteously, assuring
them on the one side of his gentleness, and on the other of the power he had
to punish their disobedience. The conditions were agreed upon, and there came
out of the city eighteen thousand soldiers, the inhabitants remaining in a
manner all: there were therein thirty thousand soldiers at the beginning: the
siege continued two months. Now the king of China in his marching received
news of the yielding up thereof: he caused the Lieutenant of the late Governor
to be punished, and many of the Captains, but pardoned the soldiers: he
stayed in that place atte^ding for our marching forward, which could not be
before eight days after he had taken order about this new conquest, the which
was necessary for him to settle before he proceeded any further. Our Prince
caused a muster to be made of his soldiers having increased their pays, and
contented every one according to his deserts. Reward for deserts.
The honor of taking the city and the happy success therein was attributed
unto Axalla, to whom was given the government of the city with the country
already conquered. But he beseeched the Prince that it would please him to
bestow it upon some other, and for himself he reserved the hope of his master,
wherein he should have part. This answer did greatly content the Prince, for
he greatly desired the service of Axalla, for that he was a Captain, who
besides his valor, had great practice in the knowledge of Arms, and full of
invention, but principally at such time as Axalla skillful in besieging of
Cities.
the question was for the besieging of any place. The Prince offering it unto
him rather to acknowledge his service done unto him, then for any desire he
had to employ him in any other place then about his person. Upon his refusal
this charge was bestowed upon the Prince of Thanais, with the title of Viceroy.
Now as I have already told you, our Prince after he had given such order as was
necessary, and advertised his friends in all parts, and above all the
Emperor, he marched forward, having contented his soldiers, and made a
general muster of his Army, as well of the horse as footmen, the which he
found to be diminished of ten thousand men only. Now our Prince after he
had solemnlie called upon the immortal, Tamerlan his godliness.
invincible, and incomprehensible God, and spent one whole day in prayer, we
enterprised to go on forward, and to go directly unto the enemy, who was at
Sintehu, with all his own forces, and of all his Allies. As soon as he
received news that our Army was passed over the river of Chulifu, it is
reported that barbarously he caused to be published throughout all his Camp,
that every one should prepare himself unto the Battle, for that he was
determined to stay no longer for the enemy within his own country, because
he could not endure to see his subjects spoiled any longer. But certainly he
made it manifestly appear, how his mischief and evil fortune followed him
too near, even at the very heels: for if that he had drawn out the war
in length, he had gotten a great advantage of us, having many strong Cities,
the which we must needs have assaulted, and had been sufficient to overthrow
us utterly, and after he might have had a good bargain of us. For the
wisdom of our Prince would not endure to leave any thing behind him which
might hinder us from victuals: for great Armies cannot otherwise be maintained.
Our Prince was wont to say unto his famiars (for he never boasted himself, and
at such time as fortune was most favorable unto him, then had he most doubt)
that if the king of China were so evil advised as to offer him battle, he
should commit a folly whereof he would repent him, being well assured that he
had brave Captains, and soldiers well experienced in the wars, who knew
well what belonged unto battles. Now the king of China marched directly unto
us with great magnificence: there The king of China his magnificence.
was nothing to be seen but gold and precious stones in his Army: he himself
was commonly in a chariot, wherein there was such a quantity of gold and
rich stones, that every part was full of Diamonds, Rubies, and Pearls. The
king of China was of the age of three and thirty years, who for the most
part had been brought up in pleasures, and not in military exercises, nor
under the bloody ensign of Mars, laden with iron, boisterous and furious, not
with gold, precions stones, and with such kind ofriches: so as he was very
insole^t in thretnings, brauadoes, and in defying unto the battle. He often
said that we had surprised him, and had not warned him to prepare himself, and
that we had stricken him without speaking The customi of the Chin^i^*
any word: for this is the custom of the people in those parts, to do in this
manner. He had two or three kings also with him, his neighbors and Allies, who
marched with the same preparation. The rumor of these riches gave great
courage to the soldiers, for they were covetous of just gain, as is that gotten
by a battle. So both our armies went forward each to approach the other, and
there was a city yielded unto the Prince called Tunicheuoy, the which helped
our Army greatly, so as the Prince having well marked the situation of the
Camp, found it to be much for his advantage, and the waters and pastures in
great abundance, in so much as we determined abiding in that place to behold
the enemies countenance, who if he were so rash as to set upon him at all
adventure, this place seemed unto him very convenient to teach him a new
lesson in. The next day to the end we might give occasion unto the enemy for
to approach nearer, we sent to summon, and at the same time to take possession
of the city of Pannihu, the which in advancing forward we left a little behind
us. The king of China had put many men thereinto, and it was a city
sufficiently well fortified: from Tiaucheuoy to Paguinuhu there were ten
leagues. It vexed the Prince greatly, that in returning directly unto Pannihu
he should turn his back unto the enemy. This was the occasion he went to
content himself with this inuesting only, for two reasons; the one to cause
the enemy the sooner to approach: the other for The proceeding of Tamerlans
army toward the enemy.
to hinder the incursions which the might make: but it fell out much otherwise,
for this matter was no sooner put in deliberation, but that Odmar who had been
at the war brought certain news that the enemies Army was within a days
journey of us, and that the battle in his opinion would be the next day. The
Prince forthwith dispatched one unto Calibes, who was gone thither with 10000.
horse, that he should come unto him, and in the mean time made provision of
all things necessary wherewith he might prevail for obtaining of the
victory. So he advanced his Army within a league of the city Tiaucheuoy,
about noone the next day they had more certain advertisement of the enemies
coming. The Prince who had as merry a countenance as might be, after he had
commanded his Army to take the place for the Battle, which he had chosen in
his judgment with most advantage, and having set down unto Odmar the order he
would have to be observed, he desired to see the coming of this Army: so
sending before him five or six thousand horse as scouts, he advanced forward,
and Calibes with him. Now there were two causes wherefore he marched the
foremost; the one was, for that he would judge of his enemies countenance; the
other, he hoped to draw him to fight in his place of battle the which he had
chosen, and to deal in such sort as the enemy might be the assailant. So
after he had seen this great confused Army which continually came forward, he
commanded Calibes to retire himself as soon as they drew near unto him, and
bring unto him this great cloud, the which he hoped soon to disperse. So the
Prince returned back unto his men for to assure them of the battle: he
caused all his footmen to be placed all along by a great mountain, so as they
had but one head for to doubt. And he planted great store of Artillery for
the guard of his footmen. I am of opinion, that the Prince had about six score
The order of the Princes battle against the king of China.
thousand footmen, whereof many w^^^ armed after the Christian manner, and all
they were commanded by sundry Captains; but all obeyed Axalla, who commanded
them as General. Our horsemen were in battle array in a great level plain,
having the footmen on the left hand, and on the right was the coming of the
enemy, so as upon the least disfavor that might happen, he would retire to be
assisted by his footmen. We had foure-score thousand horse: Calibes with the
Scythians were in the Auantguard, and had the commandment of thirty thousand
horse, who should receive him at such time as he did draw on the enemy, as he
was commanded. It was divided into three troops, each one consisting of 10000.
Odmar had also 30000. horse who should assist him. The Prince remained in the
Arier-ward at the one of the wings of his footmen, which held one of his
principal forces, his purpose was to suffer the threescore and six thousand
horse to maintain the fight against the Barbaria^s, being led by two good
Captains, and if any of them remained the Emperor hoped after of them to have
a good market, by causing his footmen to march forward, and himself with who^
there abode twenty thousand of the best horse, which were sufficient without
hazarding his person for to give a new battle, if so be that any disfauor
should happen unto them: for he had understood that this was the custom of the
kings of China, to enclose themselves within the midst of their chariots with
their footmen, and not to hazard themselves but upon the extremity: so the
enemy failed nothing at all to march directly unto Calibes, and all the Army
marched after following of him and setting upon him, and he even as the
Scithians are always accustomed to do, with his 6000. horse in retiring gave
many charges, killing some of them, and they likewise killing some of his men.
It was a beautiful sight to see this great Army march, for it seemed to be
twice as great as ours, therein being an infinite number of armed chariots,
wherein he put his The beauty and richness of the king of Cl^^^^ Army.
principal trust against the fury of our soldiers; so many gildings of gold
and silver as well in the trappings of their horses, as on their armor, that it
glittered, and was of us all much admired. The Prince who with a troop of
horse did see the Army march after Calibes, commended greatly the manner of
casting their men out of the ranks, for to compel this troop unto fight, and
did see this Army come in good order, and he tried with his eye to note the
place where the kings person was, having near him the Chinois Lord to instruct
him, who knew well their manner of fighting. Now they had neither auant-guard
nor battle, but only an Arier-ward commanded by the king, and enclosed (as I
have said) with his chariots: the which being showed unto him by this Lord, the
Prince turned himself unto Tamerlan his speech of the king of China.
us, and in our language said: Yet must we this day disperse this cloud here
so gilded, and the king of China and my self must make a partition thereof.
Now having seen the enemy sufficiently advanced, and judging that he had had
seen them march a good league, he thought it not convenient to suffer them for
to take breath, nor for to put themselves again into their order; he sent unto
Calibes for to will him to set forward the fight, and that if those whom he had
led with him should be weary, they should come unto him; but it was not in
Calibes power to have this commandment over them. For as soon as they heard
this word of fighting uttered, they required the first charge, with a young
Lord, who commanded over them called Zioctabanes, who made appear unto the
Chinois to what end their flight was, charging very stiffely upon the foremost
of the enemies, the which was an occasion to to begin the first fight. And I
assure you there could not be seen a more furious thing, nor any for to fight
with more desire to manifest the valor of his nation, and for to procure honor
unto his Prince. Now this endured a long hour before the Chinois had
overthrown Calibes. The Prince did see all pacientlie, saying always, that
the great multitude how confused so ever it were, would carry it away from the
order and valor of his The battail^ between the king of China and Tamerlan
soldiers: you could not yet perceive any alteration in the Princes
countenance, adversity and prosperity were so indifferent unto him. Now his
thirty thousand horse were all Scithians, who observe not the same order the
Parthians do. Now before the Prince retired with his men, he did see the first
charge given. Calibes being wounded, retired himself near unto the Prince,
having with him two thousand horse joined together again, and many more
joining themselves together near unto the Prince, who commanded that they
should cure Calibes, viewing the place of his wound, he caused him to be
conducted behind his footmen, and the other which were hurt with him also. Now
Calibes was not able to pierce through this Army, being beaten back; but Odmar
with almost all the Parthian horsemen did handle them more roughly, for he ran
clean through them, and returned by one of the right wings of the Army, where
he fought most valiantly, and having beaten them back eue^ within the kings
chariots, he thought that he should not do wisely to go about to break such
forces. The King of China coming forward, and the horsemen which had been
broken by Odmar joining themselves together for his aid, Odmar only remaining
in the Battle sent unto the Prince for the footme^, and for to set forward
the artillery, and that he should assure himself of the victory. The Prince
who had already set forward, kept aloof off, and sent unto him fifty thousand
footmen, with a part of the artillery, giving charge thereof unto Axalla, who
forthwith set forward, having commandment to set upon the chariots, and to
make an entrance: he set forward the artillery before him, the which did
greatly astonish the enemies: for the governors of the horses belonging to the
kings chariots could not hold them; it made also a great spoil. As soon as
he perceived this disorder, he set forward, and came to handblowes; there were
a hundred and fifty thousand me^ as yet about the kings person. Axalla full of
courage fought so valia^tly, that they never beheld any do more bravely. Odmar
during this fight charged again the horsemen who were retired unto the kings
aid, whom he put to flight. Then the Prince advanced forward with the rest of
his footmen, gave aid unto Axalla, and came even unto the person of the king
of China, who was as yet enclosed within a second rank of Chariots with
thirty or forty thousand men: and after he had fought two or three hours,
the horsemen assisting the footmen, and they principally whom the Prince had
reserved, the king remained wounded within the power of The king of China
wounded and taken prisoner.
the Prince, the battle being won, and all the enemies Camp forced; the
fight endured eight hours, and it was even night which saved the lives of many
of the enemies. There were slain two kings the Allies of the Tamerlans victory
over the king of China.
king of China, and one taken prisoner: there was inestimable riches gotten, as
well in golden vessel as precious stones, and the most rich and fair chariots
that could be seen. The Prince would not see the captiued king until the next
day, being mounted on horseback, and passing through the Camp of the battle
for to stay the slaughter, and to join together again his men, to the end the
accustomed watch might be kept, whereof he gave the charge unto Axalla; to The
custody of the king of China delivered unto Axalla.
whom he gave likewise commandment to keep the king of China within the
midst of his soldiers, having been already dressed of a wound he had
received in his right arm. It was a strange thing to behold the enemies
weapons, and the diversity of streamers wherewith they were decked, the which
seemed unto us a far off as beautiful, as the diversity of colors
plentiful. But to say the truth, the multitude was great which this king had,
notwithstanding there was much difference between their valor and ours: and
it is reported, that he had ranged in battle this very day three hundred and
fifty thousand men, whereof there were an hundred and fifty thousand horsemen,
the rest on foot: the greatest part of them were rude and barbarous people,
which suffered themselves to be slain one upon another, not marking their
advantage, nor having any warlike knowledge, as our men have: A great slaugh*
ter of the Chinois. Tamerlan thankeful unto God for his victory.
there were slain of the enemies some threescore thousand. Now the next day
after the burial of the dead, the Prince having given thanks unto God for his
victory, caused the wounded to be cured, and amongst the others Calibes, who
by reason of the vntemperatenesse of the air, rather then by the blow of the
wound Calibes wounded.
he had received, found himself very ill, yet would he not omit his duty, to
command always his Auant-guard, the which was a great pleasure unto the
Prince, for he alone had commandment over the Emperors forces, being a
Scithian, and greatly beloved of his nation. The Prince dispatched away thirty
thousand horse in the pursuit of one of the king of Chinas brothers, who was
fled away, having joined together again some twelve or fifteen thousand
horse. The Prince sent to summon Pannihu, the which did yield it self unto
him: whereupon our Army approached near unto it, for to advance our selves the
further into the country. Now I forget to declare how the Prince having the
next day caused his tents to be pitched most stately, and his guardes ordered
according to his greatness, the principal of his Army being also near his
person, for all the night he had remained continually on horseback, until
about two of the clock, when as they brought him a tart and his water, for he
never drank wine, and lay down upon a carpet, where he passed the rest of the
the night, I was near unto him and never left him: but I never heard any
vaunting or boasting to proceed out of his mouth, but much bewailed the folly
of this king, which would not deliver up that belonged unto him, and said unto
Odmar, who was near Tamerlan his speech unto Odmar of the goodness of God.
unto him, that his God had led him by the hand, and had given unto him a great
victory, without the loss of any of his servants, at the least of them which
were of mark: that he could not but lament for all those whom he had lost,
accounting them notwithstanding most happy and blessed, dying in the service
of their king, against such cruel and barbarous people. So then he sent a
commandment unto Axalla, for to bring unto him the imprisoned king: who being
come, The coming of the king of China prisoner unto the Emperor Tamerla^
the Emperor issued out of his tents, and went to receive him. This king of
China came with a very proud and haughty countenance, and like a courageous
man, approaching near unto the Emperor, he demanded of Axalla by an
interpreter, which was the Emperor, and being showed him, he spoke fiercely
unto him after this manner: The gods whom I worship, being provoked against
my nation and people, and conspired against my good fortune, have made me at
this day thy prisoner: but for as much as it is reported over all the world,
that Tamerlan makes war for the honor of his nation: thou should be
contented that thou have won it this glory, that the Lord of the world, the
child of the Sun, is in thy power, to receive such law as it shall please
thee to prescribe him. This he said in a brave manner, and without any other
humbling of himself. The Emperor on the other side having saluted him very
courteously, led him into his tent, and willed his interpreter to say unto him;
that every diuiniyt fained or true, which Tamerlan his prin^ely entertainment
and godly speech uttered unto the prisoner King of China.
any do worship and reverence, that certainly an evil matter is always
disagreeable unto them, and that he yielded willingly unto the immortal,
invincible, and incomprehensible God (whom he worshipped) this honor, to
attribute unto him this victory obtained, even as he did the cause of his evil
fortune unto his false gods whom he worshipped; that he might assure himself
to find all gentleness and good entertainment at his hands. So having made a
sign that he allowed of that the Prince said, with thanks unto him, the
Prince remained a certain space after without speaking, having placed him
near unto himself, not contenting himself in beholding this Princes
behavior. He caused his interpreter to dema^d of him, what he did think of the
fashion observed by his people in fighting. He answered, that he accounted the
victory most assured, when as he did see so few men come against him, in
comparison of the great Army that he had; but that the gods had otherwise
disposed thereof. When he asked whether his brother were a prisoner or slain:
he was demanded whether he fought near unto him. He answered, that he
commanded over his horsemen, and that he wor^ the same royal garments that
he himself did. They told him, that he was taken. Whereupon he fetched a
great sigh, and being demanded wherefore he was sorry that his brother should
be with him and run the same fortune: he answered that all his hope of
comforting himself in this mishap was placed in his brother, and all the good
hap also of the Chinois name, therefore he greatly lamented him, commending
much the courage of his brother. Now the Prince knew of certain that he was
escaped away, and therefore (as I have said) was Odmar gone to hinder his
reuniting together. I have forgotten to declare how the riches which were
gotten were innumerable: for the meanest amongst them had much gold about him,
and upon the trappings of their horse. The Lords had such store of precious
stones, as of nothing more. They did bring all the prisoners before the Prince,
and when the two Allies of the king of China did come, the king rose up and did
them great reverence. Then the Prince demanded of him by an interpreter, who
they were. He answered him, that they were his Allies, and that he lamented
more their fortune the^ his own, and that he would die with them. Now this
barbarous king The cruel custom of the Chinois.
thought the matter should be handled after their manner, when as they put to
death their prisoners, and feed of meat made of them, as some of those
countries are accustomed to do. Now the Prince having received them
courteously, did assure them of good entertaiment: for the which the king of
China did show himself greatly contented. The one of them was the king of
Chiampa, the other of ^anchuichina, vndervassals and tributories to the king of
China. Now A description of the king of China.
he was of the age of thirty years; he had a long visage, his eyes black
and great, his beard long, the which he stroaked often, his nose was of a
reasonable bigness, having a grave behavior, and well beseeming a great king.
These prisoner-kings did as it were worship in saluting of him, and he keeping
his gravity, only commanded them to rise from the ground. He is surely a great
Prince, and which has had two hundred famous Cities within his kingdom. There
be many mines of gold and silver, much musk, and A d^scription of China.
also of an herb which the Christians call Rubarbe. There be in like manner
within the kingdom of China fifteen very large Provinces, the which have
Gouerners. It is reported that he has threesore and ten kings wearing crowns,
tributaries unto him. We call this region China, the which they in their
language name Tame, and the people Tangis, the which we call Chinois. This
kingdom does abound in fish, and in great numbers of wilde-foule, by reason of
the great abundance of running waters which do ouerflowe the country, the
which is reasonable temperate: they abound greatly in silks, and the meanest
are apparelled therewith, having small quantity of woll, and not using the
same: they have much cotton and linen in steed thereof. The men do wear their
hair long, the women comb them: they have as many wives as they are able to
maintain. Next unto the king, there is a Governor general whom they call
Tutan, the which was the brother unto the imprisoned king. This is the cause
wherefore he must not forsake the country: but he requested his brother to
accompany him unto this Battle, where they thought assuredly to overcome,
and was so wilful, that he did appoint a Lord in his place, upon whom the king
of China did not rely so much as upon his brother: in so much as this made him
sad, considering the folly which he had committed, in suffering him to come
with him, and to be both of them at one battle. Now for to return unto the
king of China: the Prince having assembled his counsel, to the end he might be
advised how he should use his prisoners and the rest of the victory: he
received news by Odmar, how that the kings brother was arrived at Quantou, the
which he had fortified, and that great store of forces did join themselves
unto him. This was the cause that the Prince having somewhat rested his forces,
commanded two thousand Parthian horse to convey the prisoners unto Paguinfou,
and from thence after they had made abode there, to pass over the mountains,
and to remain at ^urda (a City of old time faithful unto the Emperors of
Scithia) and there to keep them faithfully. This charge was given unto Malaxen
Lieutenant general in the charge of Axalla. Then the Prince made dispatches
unto the Emperor, and to his Lieutenant over the Parthians, and made them
partakers of this great and happy victory, wherein had been slain so many
thousands of the enemies, and he had lost so few of his own. I return unto
the deliberation which the Prince took (after that he had discharged himself
of much carriages, the which he had sent with the king of China,) before he
would go any further forward. Now he had also sent to hasten the forty
thousand footmen which should come from Sachetay, and thirty thousand Scithian
horse, making his account that they should have come unto him, before the
forces of the king of China could oppose themselves against him. So the purpose
and resolution of the Prince was, that it behooued to assault Quantou, and to
shut up, if it were possible, the kings brother within the same, being The
proceedings of the Emperors Army after the victory, and his resolution in the
same.
one of the principal seats belonging unto the king of China, and a city
greatly peopled and strong: it was forty leagues from the place where the
battle was fought. But Odmar being advanced thither, would not retire before
he had express commandment from the Prince, who having sent thither, pitched
his tents round about the said City: having summoned many small cities, the
which yielded themselves wholly unto the Princes mercy, making great
lamentation for their king taken, and for the estate of their affairs, the
abasement being very great throughout all the kingdom, for all the diligence
the king of Chinas brother could use for the quieting of their astonished
minds, and to exhort every one to take new courage. Notwithstanding the
gentleness used by the Conqueror made them to take all their losses with
patience: and because it was also reported, that he had used the king most
friendly, and all the prisoners: for the Prince cause his clemency to be
published unto all that would vouchsafe to cast themselves into his arms, as
he would also show his sharpness unto all those which disobeyed him, and
would withstand his commandementes. For it was the Princes custom to pardon
the humble, and to punish the proud thoroughly, knowing that reward and
punishment are the things which do greatly increase estates. ^ Maxim.
And Princes must learn this as a general rule, that whenever they use
those which are rebels unto them, as those that are obedient, they shall
receive hurt thereby, because every one will take liberty of ill doing,
seeing that the one and the other are equally weighed and regarded by the
Prince, who ought to be a just judge and moderatour of every ones deserts. Now
our Prince had besides another maxim, Tamerlan straitely observed his promise,
and kept his word truly.
that is, he straightly kept that which he promised, although his estate
depended thereupon, if his word were once passed. And you must believe, that
none of his servants durst be so bold, as to make request and speak to the
contrary, so as this same being spread amongst the barbarous people, they were
assured when they had once his word: now you must know that this is of no small
importance unto a victorious Prince, to make his victory perfect. But to
return unto my purpose, our Prince having caused prayers to be celebrated, and
yielded thanks unto God for his victory, as his custom was, he caused money to
be distributed unto the Captains for the cure of them which were wounded. He
went directly unto Quantou, having given commandment unto Odmar to go even
beyond Quantou, to the end that the kings brother should not put any greater
forces thereinto; and if it fell out so, he should not fail to fight with them
and hinder them from the same, for his purpose was to besiege it. I will not
forget to declare Ambassadors sent from the kings brother of China, unto
Tamerlan to visit the king.
how the kings brother had sent Ambassadors to obtain leave for to know of the
kings health, and for to see him, the which the Prince did willingly suffer, to
the end this other should not declare himself king, who would have brought him
more trouble then the other. He attended for the event of Quantou, and had his
eye upon the success of this siege. Now the kings brother having received
news of the affairs of the besieged, he determined (having received aid from
some of his confederates, and also as soon as he had joined together his
forces) either to succor it, or to fight a battle, and came straight unto
Porchio, hoping he might make a bridge of boats whereof there be great store
in these same countries. The Prince understanding this, caused a trench to be
made at the end of the bridge, for to keep it against the enemies: there did
he place three or four thousand men, to the end the bridge might always be at
his commandment, and as he did perceive the enemy approach, he showed
himself in battle ray all along the river. This passe-time continued ten or
twelve days, until such time as the kings brother having caused a great
number of boats to be gathered together, had made a bridge in a very narrow
place of the river: whereof the Prince being advertised, he made no show he
knew it, keeping himself within his Camp, from whence the said place was
some ten leagues from us, called Cambin. Then our scoutes brought us word
that the bridge was made, presently thereupon the Prince commanded Odmar to
mount on horseback with fifteen thousand horsemen, and that he should
suddenly set upon all those that were passed over, and sent all his footmen
after him; we set forward all our horsemen after, the which the Emperor
himself did conduct, having left a sufficient strength within Rochio. The
Prince having considered the time of the diligence the which the kings brother
might use in passing over his army, together with the advertisement which he
had received, made him accordingly advance his army, so as we departing at
midnight came thither by noone, and Odmar half an hour before us, in so much
as he having marked that there were no more of them passed over then he was
appointed to charge, he stayed in hope that half of them would pass over, and
also he looked for the Prince, who did set forward, being behind the
mountains, which were within a league of that place, causing some to descrie
from hour to hour what the enemy did. Now being informed that the half
part were passed, the which was fifty thousand men good, he advertised the
Prince thereof, and went himself unto the fight, and finding them in very ill
order, and nothing at all advertised Odmar set upon the kings brother at the
passing of ariuer, and slew fifty thousand of his men.
of the enemies nearenesse, he gave the charge, and utterly overthrew them;
there remained dead upon the ground some fifty thousand men, but it was not
without great fight, strengthened with the favor of the water, and a great
Marrish wherein they were encamped. Notwithstanding our footmen having won
the bank of the river, began also to win the boats and to sever them by
the means of a great boat the which we with diligence caused to run down
being full of artificial fire, so as at the same A stratagem.
very time that they which were within the boat did draw near, they retired
out of the same, having first kindled the fire within the boat, the which with
a great force rushed against the bridge of boats and overthrew it, and where
it was resisted did burn. This did greatly astonish them that were passed, to
see their return cut off. The kings brother was not yet passed unto the other
side of the water, and he which first had gone over was the king of Cauchina,
who was slain at The king of Cauchina slair^
the first charge fighting very valiantly, in the forefront. The kings brother
did see his men slain and drowned, and could not remedy the same. This second
overthrow was of no small importance, although it was but the third part of the
kings brothers army, and that there remained unto him as yet a hundred
thousand fighting men: but there was no great hope that he durst present
himself before our army. The news hereof being reported at Quantioufou, the
Prince was of opinion that one should carry thither the king of Cauchinas
head, for he was one of the kings greatest vassals, thereby to assure them of
the victory, and that they should not hope for any succor. On the other side,
they did see Axalla who pressed them very near, and what endeavor soever they
made, yet did they mark that daily they lost their honor, and that by little
and little they approached nearer unto the^, in such sort that these 15. days
they had been continually at hand-blowes with our men. In the end they gave
knowledge unto Axalla, that they desired to make trial of the Emperors
clemency. Answer was made unto them, that they had better occasion to trust
unto the Princes mercy at this present, then unto their own forces: and
having by interpreters long time discoursed with Axalla, they demanded eight
days respit, wherein they might advertise the kings brother of the estate of
their affairs: and that if they were not succored within fifteen days, they
promised to yield themselves, so as it would please the Prince, to keep them
in the same fidelity that the kings of China had kept and maintained them.
Axalla made answer, that he had charge from the Prince to receive them upon
composition, and to make them prove all gentleness as soon as they had
yielded unto his mercy: but for preventing of so long delay, for that the
Prince was in person within the country, he would ^end and impart this unto
him, and beseech him for the same: and attending therefore, they should in the
mean time deliver hostages for this purpose, and that from this time forward he
did grant them truce, until the Prince had signified therein his pleasure.
Thereupon Axalla dispatched one of his faithful friends of his country unto
the Prince, to carry unto him these good news: the which was more welcome
unto the Prince, then the overthrow he had given unto the enemy, and agreed
unto all that Axalla demanded, referring all unto his sufficiency and
fidelity, and relying thereuppon he would mark what the kings brother meant
to do. After this last disgrace he was determined, if the enemy did not
retire, to pass over the river, and to pursue him even unto the sea coasts.
Three or four days being spent the Prince took advise for to pass over the
river with his horsemen, but not to advance any further then 3. or 4. leagues
beyond the water: only he meant to hinder the kings brother from attayning unto
the rivers foord, having received advertisement that he would pass over for to
succor Quantoufou. As soon as the enemy understood news of the passing over
of our army, it did greatly astonish him, and thereupon retired ten great
leagues from us, bending toward the sea side into a hilly country, and
uneasy for our horsemen, where he thought to find place of security for his
army, and where the same might be entrenched within the mountains. And there
at leisure he took advise of the greatest about him, to determine what offers
they might make unto the Emperor, as well for the kings ransom, as also for
to assure that which yet remained, and for to make a peace, the which must
needs be had, were it by gold or silver, seeing that blood could do no good
therein, which had not been spared: that there was no more to be done, and
that the gods were offended. Therefore it behooued with them to acknowledge
Tamerlan, they for to favor him, and we to serve him: and having sent to
demand safety for to (...), the Prince granted so much unto them, for such
The city of Quantoufou yielded into the ha^^s of Axalla, who besi^ged the same.
as would come unto him. In this mean time Quantoufou yielded it self into
the hands of Axalla, who caused the garrison to come out of the same, received
the inhabitants into the Princes protection, and they which would might remain
therein unarmed: and he entered Axalla his entrance into Quantoufou with great
magnificence.
thereinto with the joy of all the inhabitants, who did determine to receive
the Emperor into the same with all the magnificence that might be. He caused
30000. men of war to enter thereinto unto who^ was money delivered for to
maintain the^ there, until such time as all the footmen should receive pay for
3. months due unto them, whereof the inhabitants of Quantoufou did furnish the
Prince, to the sum of eight hundred thousand Tentins, the which do amount
unto four hundred and fifty thousand crowns or therabout. The Prince at this
present sent me unto Axalla, whom I found feasting of his Captains and
soldiers, staying for the commandment that I brought unto him, the which was
to remain within Quantoufou, and to cause all his footmen to set forward
directly unto him, the which was done by the Prince, to the end it should
strike a greater terror into the minds of the enemies, who seeing all his
footmen arrived, he supposed they would nothing doubt ( Quantoufou being taken)
but that he would march forward, insomuch as he hoped this would greatly
advance his affairs, considering the estate they were in* I returned from
Quantoufou unto the Emperor, having seen a beautiful and great City, well
fortified, and wonderfully peopled, and round about it there was a fruitful
country. Our army had been two months and a half before it, and I think
we should have continued there one months longer: for therein was no want of
any thing but of men, because many of them had been slain since the siege
began. This was the cause wherefore the Princes brother would have conducted
some thither, and was the occasion that made him advance forward. Many of our
men were also dead by reason of the intemperatenesse of the air, and the heat
of summer the which we had passed, wherewith our men had not bin accustomed: so
as those soldiers which we looked for were necessary for us to advance
forward, if we purposed to attempt any other thing. Axalla who remained
therein, employed all the pains he possibly could, to repair the walls, and
to win the inhabitants good will unto the Prince: for not one of them was
departed with the Governor for to serve the king of China, he leading with him
out of the city, but thirteen thousand, of thirty thousand soldiers, some
being dead, the other remaining with the inh^bitants unarmed, for to receive
the law of the conqueror. It was a thing very worthy the noting of their new
Lord, who was to command them, to mark so great lightness and inconstancy
in forgetting so soon him which had maintained them, he and his ancestors by
the space of two hundred years with great patience and quiet, and preserved
their wealth in great prosperity. This is the cause that they which govern
commonwealths ought to think, that the peoples good will is certainly to be
esteemed: but withal, they must not too much trust thereunto. This was the
cause that Axalla marked that, saying that he was troubled to devise how this
great multitude might be contained in their fidelity, if we should receive
any disfavor, and commanded me to speak unto the Prince, for to treat before
his Army were any more decayed, and after that it was very necessary his
wisdom should consider how to assure this city in his absence, the which was
so peopled, and the people thereof being so light and inconstant. Now as I have
said, there was almost a year spent since we began this enterprise, and our
men were greatly diminished: the fall of the leaf also drawing near, the
which for the most part does yield evil fruit unto armies after their travels,
by the changing of humors, the which engender sickness. And this appeared
already within our army, which caused the Prince to consider of many things;
and not without cause, he doubted also some change within his own country,
the which long absences do often cause, the honor being no less in preserving
of that already gotten, then in conquering of the same. Our Prince also did
never refuse honorable conditions, the which he did more esteem being
obtained by peace then war. He thought that his conquest consisting of almost
half the kingdom, and in making the king tributarie for the rest, he should
have sufficient wherewith to bridle him, if at any time he should deal badly,
and would thereof be well advised: and especially he hoped to assure the same
so well, as their lightness should be thoroughly punished, at what time soever
they would use it. He did think it convenient if they came unto profitable
conditions for his advantage, even as the conquered do yield unto the
conquerors, for to resolve himself to border his conquests on this side. Thus
the Ambassadors being arrived, who were of the kings chiefest vassals, Tamerlan
received them with all human^tie, causing his greatness to appear unto them,
and therewithal the agilitie of his horsemen, to make the^ see with their
eyes, that it would be the destruction of the Chinois name if he proceeded An
Embassage from the king of Chinas brother unto Tamerlan, to treat for peace and
the kings deliverance.
any further. So having saluted the Emperor with all reverence, they uttered
their Embassage unto him, which was that the kings brother had sent them unto
him to treat for two causes: the one, was for the liberty of their king, the
other, for preservation of their country; that he had understood of his
accustomed humanity; that themselves would make trial thereof, rather then to
accuse the Gods of their ingratitude toward the Chinois, repenting themselves
that they did not satisfy our just demands at the first coming of our army;
that they would pay for it, the which was reasonable, and therefore, they came to
receive the law of him, seeing he was the conqueror, and that nothing they
should opposse against him, could cut off his good hap, they must needs be
one of his limits unto posterity. The Prince having heard them, the same being
declared unto him by Interpreters, he answered them, that they had reason to
trust unto his mildness, because that was always The answer of Tamerlan unto
the Ambassadors.
more for the benefit of them that would try it, then were his arms, and that
the same was before any force offered unto them, the use of the one being more
agreeable unto him, then the other; but the ends of the wars, were for the
most part enterprises for to come unto peace, and to make those understand
reason, that refused the same: but seeing at this present, they desired it, he
would yield thereunto. And this was the first word of courtesy he would
pronounce at their first coming: it belonged now unto them to offer the
conditions wherewith he would acquaint his counsel. Thereupon the Prince rose
up, and caused to be said unto them, that they should deliver their offers in
writing, and that present answer should be made thereunto. Thus went they out
of the Princes presence with great joy, and as it were assured of peace, and to
recover their former prosperities. The conditions which they offered were, to
leave Paguinfou and all the country beyond it, with all the fortresses of the
mou^tains; that they would pay all the charges of his army, since the day of
answer made unto his Ambassadors; that they would give two millions of gold, for
their king. This being presented unto the Lord, he made answer thereunto,
Conditions agreed upon between Tamerlan and the Chinois.
which was; that he would keep that which he had conquered within the country,
the which was his own justly, seeing his arms had given it unto him; that he
would have the river where he was now encamped to be his frontier, stretched
unto Hochioy, Tahaucezug, Cauchio, Lulun, even unto Poschio bordering upon the
sea; that the king of China should pay unto him yearly three hundred thousand
crowns, the which should be delivered at Paguinfou, for acknowledgment of
submission unto the Empire, as well for his successors as himself; that they
should pay five hundred thousand crowns in ready money for the charge of the
army; that the king of China should be delivered, and all the Chinois prisoners
should pay ransom unto particular men that took them, except those which carried
the name of kings, who should pay one hundred thousand crowns for peace with
his arms; that no Chinois should be kept as slave, nor sold for such
hereafter, being under the Princes obedience, that trafique and intercourse of
Marchantes should be free between both the nations; that the king of China
should deliver his brother as prisoner, and two kings named, with twelve
principal men of the country for assurance, who should come yearly with
money for assurance of the peace. Behold the Emperors answer and his
resolution; but alas the arms of the Chinois, and their forces, were so
weakened, that they were yet glad to hear that they should be suffered to
enjoy that which yet remained, they accounted al things so certain by lost,
considering the ill haps which on every side did ouerwhelme them: their best
men were dead, and they which remained astonished. The flower of their best me^
of war, with their king taken, two battles lost, and the two principal Citis
of the kingdom taken, and the hardest passages won: so as they did see
nothing but a certain destruction of the conntry, if they came again unto the
trial of arms. The king whose captivity did greatly concern them, could not
be recovered but by peace, they were also advertised, that great store of new
forces marched forward to refresh our army, so as they did exspect nothing but
their certain destruction. Therefore they accepted of such conditions of peace
as pleased the conqueror, hoping that time would bring again unto them their
ancient liberty, and that for a time it behooved them to bear with patience
the yoke of their bondage. Now the Prince had sent two thousand horse, to fetch
the king of China, to the end that being at liberty, he might swear to the
peace solemnly, the which he having performed at Quantoufou, whither the
Prince caused him for to come, he brought with him unto Paguin all the pledges,
and amongst the rest, the kings eldest son, and his brother. The king being
departed for to perform his promise, according to the treaty by him
confirmed, he was received, and as it were worshipped within his country,
with all the joy that might be. In the mean time the Emperor, after he had
provided for the assurance of his new conquest, he left Odmar there to
govern them, and gave unto him an estate of thirty thousand horse and fifty
thousand footmen, to furnish all the fortresses and strong places, the Prince
having led with him, many of the new conquered people, desiring to have them
for to dwell within his country, and to send other Colonies in their places, to
assure himself the better of the lightness of this people, having noted them
to be inclined unto novelties. He gave in charge unto Odmar to make his
principal abode at Quantoufou, and to fortify well the passage: and also
commanded a fortress to be made at Dermio, the better to strengthen his
borders: and after he had left him all things necessary, he recommended unto
him the Odmar left Gouerner of China for Tamerlan.
services of that Lord, who had manifested unto him his great affection. The
Emperor having well tried his faithfulness in his affairs as they fell out,
he carried with him a brother of his, unto whom he gave great gifts within
Sachetay. Then we turned our faces straight unto Cambalu, having aduertized the
great Cham of the happy success of our affairs, whereof many said, he had
lost the opportunity of utterly rooting out the Chinois: but they do nothing
consider, the difficulties therein as yet remaining, and that we must sometimes
content our selves with the mean, A good aduertisment unto Conque^ours.
and know how to preserve them, without desiring at some time extremes,
whereby does often happen such accidents as brings the loss of all, and
makes that we retain nothing of that which we accounted most assured, for
that we sought more then we should have desired. The Prince remained in deed
king of China, holding in his possession, two of the fairest and greatest
Cities of all the whole Country, having an hundred good leagues thereof unto
himself, and many lesser Cities, having extended his borders unto a river, by
which he might go unto the enemy, but they could not come unto him without
passing over the same: having good means to keep it and with advantage. The
king of The tribute paid by the king of China unto Tamerla^ five hundred
thousand crowns yearly.
China moreover was his tributary of five hundred thousand crowns yearly, and
having the means at such time as he would not perform it, to be within the
space of four and twenty hours within his country, and he could not come into
his: so as it was much more commendable to make this honorable treaty, then
tyrannously to seek for to subdue all, and to put unto fire and sword a whole
nation, who willingly cast themselves into his arms as tributaries. Now the
Prince desired above all that the idols which were within his conquest, should
Tamerlan caused all the idols within his conquest to be beaten down,
establishing the worship of one God.
be beaten down, and commanded the worship of one God, establishing the same
after the form of his own country, for he made account that in short time all
would be reduced unto our customs. But the Chinois were not of that mind, and
their patience was founded upon hope of recovering by that means their former
liberty: but they did not weigh, that the Princes foresight had been such, that
he had left there the most wise and sufficient Captain that was in his
kingdom, who would not lose any occasion by his watchfulness to assure his
affairs. When Odmar left the Prince, as the custom is, he humbled himself
too much. The Prince in lifting of him up, said unto him; I see well now that
thou art a Chinois, seeing thou will worship me even as they do their king: the
worship I require of thee, is the remembrance thou shall continually have to do
my commandments, desiring thee to establish in my new conquest, the honor
of God, and after that, my authority through your faithfulness: you know
this estate better then I, call to thy rememberance that the sword has
conquered them, and not love or good will: therefore hope not to have them
assured, whom fear retains, and not any love, I recommend my service unto
thee. I did never see the Prince in greater grief then now at his departure:
but he was driven of necessity to employ the faithfulness and wisdom of
Odmar. So our army wherein was much sickness, began to march, and on the third
day having news of forces which came toward us, the Prince sent them a
commandment not to come any further forward, and that they should march
straight unto Cambalu, where the Prince did suppose to find the Emperor his
uncle, who had set forward toward that place to have the good hap for to see
him, being determined to receive him at Cambula with magnificence and triumphs,
as he well deserved. Now I will declare by the way, how Odmar being severed from
us, all Tamerlan turned his favor unto Axalla.
the Princes favor was turned unto Axalla, unto whom he committed the whole
charge of his army, in so much as Axalla although he was always in great
reputation, notwithstanding the same was much increased by the Prince at
Quantoufou, where the Prince did trust him with the army, in so weighty an
enterprise as that was, and the which he so gloriously achieved: likewise the
manner of entering into the kingdom of China, the intelligences he had: so as
the report of his valor did fly throughout all the Empire. Calibes led the
vantgard, and Axalla was in the battle near unto the Emperor, who gave him
the chiefest place, bestowing upon him Two hundred thousand crowns of yearly
rent given unto Axalla by Tamerlan.
two hundred thousand crowns yearly, for to maintain his ordinary expe^ces.
Now he for his part had no desire to leave his master at quiet, being desirous
to draw him back again into his country, to the end he might afterward
move him to enterprise some great matter, the which might redound as well unto
the glory of his master, as the quiet of the Christians, of whom he was
very careful, whatsoever was the cause thereof. Thus after certain days
journey, we received news, of the Emperors ariuall at Cambula, the Prince
having left his army in a fair country for to winter, where he dismissing
many of our soldiers, we arrived within four leagues of Cambala, whither all
the Princes of the Emperors Court, came for to receive him, together with all
the principal inhabitants, for to gratify our Prince for his happy voyage.
The Prince having received every one, according to his wo^ted courtesy,
retaining notwithstanding convenient Majesty, he was beheld to the great
contentment of all his subjects. He had with him the Empress his wife, who had
not left him in his voyage. The next day the Emperor did him The meeting
between the great Came and Tamerlan at the City of Cambala in Ca^aio.
so much honor, as to come and meet him, with all the magnificence that might
be. He gave a present unto the Emperor his uncle, of all the richest chariots
and fairest horses he had won. And I can assure you, that at such time as the
Prince set foot on ground, for to do reucrence unto his uncle, the Emperor
wept for joy, and this old Prince being on horseback, would have descended;
but our Prince beseeched him not to do him that wrong, and with all the
humility which he did owe unto his Prince and Lord, he hindered him from
alighting. The Emperor was very desirous to see his daughter: he caused her
chariot to be uncovered, and caused her to enter into his: but the Prince
remained on horseback, whom the eyes of all the people could not be satisfied
with admiring. The Prince presented Calibes unto the Emperor, and making a
recital of his faithfulness, and the endeavor of every one, he caused the
Emperor to give unto him an hundred thousand crowns of increase unto his
pension. Axalla was also presented unto the Emperor, who being informed of his
valor, he was received withal the best fouours that might be, and he gave unto
Axalla rewarded by the great Came for his good service and faithfulness.
him, of the revenues belonging unto the Empire, an hundred thousand Tartarins
of gold in a Principality, that he might the better declare unto him how much
he esteemed of his fedelity. This joy and pleasure continued with us all the
winter, where the Prince having received aduertisment how Bajazet Emperor of
the Turks, had enterprised to join the Empire of Greece unto his own, and
fully determined to besiege Constantinople: the which he understanding and
succor being required of him by the Greek Emperor, he dispatched one toward
Bajazet, for to declare unto him his pleasure A message sent by Tamerlan unto
Baiaz^t.
herein, and warned him on his behalf, not to trouble the Emperor Paleologue
who was his confederate. Now this motion came from Prince Axalla, who had
wrought this league, being of kin unto Paleologue, and also thrust forward
with desire to maintain his religion in Greece, where he was borne of the
Geneuois race. Whereunto being answered very proudly, by Bajazet unto our
Emperor, The proud answer of Bajazet.
asking what he had to do therewith, and that he should content himself, with
enioyning laws unto his subjects, and not unto others, seeing he was not borne
his subject. This answer being made, Axalla procured to be very ill accepted
of the Emperor, and in such ^or^, that he determined to hinder this enterprise
of the ^ttomans, not being convenient for the greatness of the Tartarian
Empire, to suffer such a neighbor, who would even trouble his allies: so as
the Ambassador returned from thence assured of the Princes succor against
Bajazet: who in the mean time was not idle, but continued daily his
enterprise, seeking all means to accomplish the same: thinking that what
messages soever were sent unto him, were no other then threatenings. But on the
other side also, the Prince unto whom rest and ease was already become tedious,
egged forward also by Axalla, with the increase of his glory and name, being
desirous of this enterprise, did not cease until the Prince did send him unto
Sachetay, for to give beginning unto the assembling of forces from all parts,
to the end that about the spring time he might march forward. The Emperor also
had received news of the battle lost by the Greeks, and that their affairs
were like to go ill, if they were not succored: the which made the Prince more
forward, also to hinder these Ottoman dogs (for so he called them) mad for
troubling the world. Axalla sent word also unto the Prince how all things
proceeded, and earnestly moved him to depart. Now the Prince had obtained of
the Emperor his uncle an hundred thousand footmen and fourscore thousand
horse, hoping to have as many from Sachetay, besides the Lords who would
accompany him for to win glory, from who^ he made account also of 50000. me^
more that they would bring unto him, besides the other forces. He supposed that
he had ability to deliver the Empire of Greece from the bondage of the
Ottomans. Thus the Prince departed, leaving the Empress with the Emperor her
father, for to serve him as a comfort of his age: it was not without a hard
farewell of the Emperors Hea^i^ parting.
part toward his nephew; but more grievous on the Princes part toward his
wife, who had never left him since the time they were married: but nothing
withheld our Prince, where there was either glory, or means to increase his
reputation, and profit the common wealth: saying often, that he was borne to
this end, and that he A notable saying of Tamerlan.
must take in these exercises his principal delights: for every other thing
wherein he did exercise himself was but borrowed, being appointed and called of
God to punish the pride of tyrants. Neither will I here omit a dream, which
our Prince had the night before he Tamerlan his dream.
departed from Cambalu, which was, that he did see as he thought, a great
multitude of reverent men, who put forth their hands unto him, requiring his
succor against the violence of certain tyrants, who did afflict them with
sundry kinds of torments: he said, that he did never see more reverent
countenances, and that some of them were apparelled in white, and others in
cloth of gold, some having as it were crowns of gold upon their heads, and it
seemed unto the Prince, that he gave the^ his hand, and lift them very high.
This dream he recited unto us the next morning, but no body was able to give
him the interpretation thereof, and him self thought no more of the same. Now
to return again, we departed from Cambalu accompanied with all the City,
with all the love and grief of a good people toward their Prince. In like
manner, the Prince during the time he abode there, used all kinds of
liberalities and magnificences that might be, after he had received all manner
of presents that can be named of every one, as Tamerlan his journey against the
Turk.
a witness of their affection. The Prince was accompanied also with Calibes,
and he commanded the Prince of Tanais to take upon him the state of Colonel
of the footmen, the which Axalla had left: unto whom he gave the charge of
Lieutenant general within his army, with commandment to lead his
auantguard, and Calibes the ariere-ward, being accompanied with far greater
forces then ever he had in any of his armies: for they came unto him from all
parts. The Chinois Lord was licenced by Odmar to go with 20000. men of the
subjects newly conquered, being desirous to show him self unto the Emperor, as
also for to learn our manners and fashions. The absence and separation of our
master was grievous unto none but Odmar, not for the fear of the Chinois his
neighbors, but verily for the change of fortune. The Prince having sent him
word of his purpose, he confirmed the same, and amongst other things, he sent
word unto the Emperor, that he should hope for all good success therein,
seeing he was created by God for to cast down the proud and raise up the
humble: the Prince also did mislike of nothing more the^ cruelty. I remember
well, that when we were at China, when he perceived this fierce nation, he said,
I am sent to pull down the glory of this proud man, I hope to have a good end
thereof. So we arrived leaving our forces, the which came straight unto Ocera,
where they had appointed the general meeting of all the army, and the Prince
took his voyage directly unto Samarcand the place of his birth, three years
Tamerlan returns from the conquest of China unto Samarcand.
being past since he had bin there. Zamay came to meet him, and I verily
believe a million of men, blessing and praising him in all manner of songs. All
the Princes of the country also ran to visit him, he abode there a month.
Axalla in this mean time was already at the meeting place at Ocera, who
prepared all things, looking for the Princes commandment for to go unto him,
aduertising him often of the doings of Bajazet. I have forgotten also to
declare, how the Prince sent unto the Moscouite to b^ favored by him in this
enterprise, who presently sent Ambassadors with offers of what soever should
please him. The Prince made demand The Moscouite ^^leth Tamerlan against the
Turk.
of fifteen thousand horse, and the payment of certain money the which he
owed, the which was granted unto him, and also passage through all his
dominions, being very glad that he did set upon others then on him self, and
that so great a preparation should fall upon them, whose greatness was as
prejudicial and fearful unto him, as it was unto our Prince, the Ottomans at
that time bringing not only suspicion unto their neighbors, but which was
much more, all the earth was astonished at their sudden greatness, and of the
happy success they had in all their enterprises, being of so small a
beginning attained unto so large an Empire. Now this was the very reason that
moved the Emperor to oppose him self against the same, thinking it much
better to go and set upon them within their new conquestes, then for to stay
until they were come nearer unto him, and should come to debate their quarrel
within his Empire unto his damage: A sound deliberation.
a sound deliberation; for the same tends unto two effects, the one is that
it destroys the enemies country, and the other, that any disfavor coming
unto him, his country receives not thereby any astonishment, so as this
enterprise was greatly for his advantage. Now our Prince did all this through
the counsel of Prince Axalla, by whom at that time all the estate was
governed, and the great authority which this man had, was not without the envy
of diverse Courtiers: notwithstanding the ready Axalla governed all the
^state, his commendation.
fashion of Axalla to content every one, accompanied with his singular virtues,
together with so many services that he had done, did uphold him against the
envious; as also for that he was no less acceptable unto the old Emperor then
unto his master, who did often remember the dangers and the brave enterprises
he had executed in the affairs his master had, as well against the
Moscouites, as at the rebellion of Cambalu and Catayo, and in the last conquest
of the kingdom of China: so as his authority was great, with this, that he
was courteous and human, and friendly toward every one, and who spoke daily
unto his master of great matters, and always propounded unto him honorable
enterprises, whereunto he would be the first to set his hands, without sparing
the hazard of his life at all. And although our Emperor was accompanied with
great renowned Princes, yet were they no body in comparison of the virtues and
the greatness the which Axalla had gotten with his master, whether it were in
pomp, in liberality, and in furniture of slaves and horses: for having a a
great mind and sharp wit, he made use thereof politikely to maintain him
self. Moreover he never gave counsel the which he did not offer to execute,
and he was happy for that they had success according to his desire, which
procured him great authority; but he had a grace The comme^dation of Prince
Axalla.
beyond all this: for he was humble unto every body, the which made him well
beloved, in humbling him self (in such greatness) even unto the smallest. I
was one day in a place when the Prince did reprehend him for this so great
mildness. He answered him, that it belonged unto his master to be stately,
but for me it is my trade to play the slave and servant, and as greatness
does well beseem you, so does humility me, for I am not about you but for to
honor you: for if you be honored I shall be also. Also how humbly soever I
carry my self, what need you to care so as I serve you well? if I should be
stately, I should be odious unto the great men of your Court, and I should
sever them from you. I will have them honor me, for serving well of you, and
not for my countenance. This answer did greatly please the Emperor, and it
was a cunning to cause him to be beloved, the which fell out happily for him:
for they honored him more then he would. Now for to come again unto the
Princes purpose, we will for this time leave Axalla, whose nature I was willing
to express unto you, the which shall serve to give you understanding of many
things, that shall be declared of him within this history. So the Emperor sent
unto Axalla to come unto him at Samarcand, for to receive directions from him
for the setting forward of his army. Now having left by the Emperors
commandment the Prince of Thanais to command, he came unto him, and
co^sulted with him of the order for his army: and having resolved that it was
best to pass by the borders of the Moscouite, to go directly unto
Constantinople the seat of the Greek Emrours, whither they said the army of
Bajazet Emperor of the Turks did march, being already come down into Asia
Minor, there was a kinsman of Axallas dispatched, for to assure the Emperor of
Greece of our armies coming forward, and that great provision of victuals was
made from all parts for maintenance of the same. We departed from Samarcand,
for to go unto Ozara, where was the meeting place for all the Princes troops:
and having in that place taken Consultation about the way the army should take
to the Turks Empire.
advise for his journey, that is to say, for to know whether should be more
expedient and favorable, either to go by the coasts of Moscouie directly unto
Capha, or rather on the other side of the sea Bachu to pass by the skirtes of
Persia. It was resolved in the end, after sundry opinions, although the way
were the longer, to pass unto Capha for to come unto Trebisonda and to the
Georgians, and from thence to enter into the limits of the Ottomans. Then our
army after the accustomed ceremonies and prayers made unto God, wherein
Tamerlan his chiefest trust.
our Emperor hoped to find his principal succors, we drew straight unto
Maranis where the army abode three days, looking for the forces which Odmar
did send, whereof they received news. There did the Emperor cause all his
army to be paid, and a general muster was made. He had news also there of
the forces that the Moscouite did send unto him: he likewise caused an infinite
quantity of victuals and the most part of his furniture to be conveyed by the
sea of Bachu, there being some twenty leagues where was Bachu.
want of water and victuals, through the which our army must needs pass,
causing all things necessary to be carried by water, the which was a great
commodity unto us: and there was a commandment given at all the shoares of
the sea, that they should bring all the vessels for to carry the munition of
the army: so as this foresight did greatly ease our army. The Prince went
continually Tamerlan hu^ted by the way toward the Turk.
coasting the sea shore, passing away his time in hu^ting, and his army came
not near unto him by 10. leagues, except such as came to seek necessaries for
the army, the which did exte^d it self some 20. leagues, it was so great. The
Prince abode at Sarasich during the time his army passed the river of Edel at
Mechet, and at two or three other bridges, the which they had caused to be
made; there had he certain news how Bajazet marched Bajazet marched unto the
siege of Constantinople.
unto the siege of Co^sta^tinople, having reduced unto his obedience all
Bithinia, and Bursia a very noble city, the which he caused to be fortified,
and diverse other Cities, using all the cruelties that might be, in so much as
all the adjoining provinces yielded themselves his tributaries: amongst the rest
the noble City of Capha, wherewith the Emperor was greatly moved, because it
had first put it self under his protection before the Turk; and this had bin
compassed by the means of Axalla, where he was borne, Axalla a principal
worker against the Turk for the relieuing of the Greek Empire, and against
Capha the place of his nativity.
who was also the more offended because it was his country, so far forth as
he sent to summo^ them to come and yield a reason unto the Emperor of their
fidelity: whereupon the City received a great astonishment, and the principal
men of the same City came unto the Prince, who sent to be informed of all; and
being ready to receive the punishment for their infidelity, after diverse
presents by them made of very excellent Marterns and other furs, pardon was
granted unto them, and the city was by the Prince given unto Axalla for to
dispose of the same: the which he did, going thither to see his kinsfolk, The
government Axalla did chase.
and to take such order there, as he thought was for the preservation of the
City, as one not ungrateful unto his country: and it was not without seasing
upon Tana, the which was belonging unto the Seigniorie of Genua, of Achea and
Lopeso, who submitted them selves unto the Prince, and commandment was given
unto Axalla to take order therein. This Lord which had refused the
commandment of the kingdom of China and of so many good Cities, did plainly
show, that there is nothing more dear, nor that a man does more esteem, then
his country, whereof after a sort he now received possession. Behold Axalla,
who in the end made there the choice of his resting place, notwithstanding the
greatness he might promise unto him self, being the second person in the
Court of the greatest Monarke of the world: making no reckening thereof, he
rather placed his hope in this little shore of Mar Maiore, then in the limits
of Scithi^ and China, and for to succeed after his master unto all his great
conquests, for that he had all the soldiers at his commandment, and great
credit amongst all the people over whom his Prince commanded. Now the army
had spent some time in refreshing it self, to the end it might be gathered
together, when any need should require; the Prince determining from hence
forward to march within his Tamerlan marched within his army.
army, the which he had not done until this present, having spent his time in
pleasures, leaving the burden of conducting his whole army upon Axalla. Now
as soon as we came near unto the holy mountains, the Circassians and
Georgians sent unto the Emperor for to offer unto him all the help and
assistance they could for his journey. Now they be Christians and a very great
Nation, who have been always tributaries unto the Grecian Emperor,
acknowledging this Empire ever since they were conquered by Pompey. For these
Nations, being part of those over whom the great Mithridates reigned, at such
time as Pompey subdued them, they were very desirous of the coming of this
great power, the which seemed to be sent from heaven for to deliver the Grecian
Empire from the cruel bondage of the Ottomans* Axalla drew many of this people
unto the Princes service, who are greatly esteemed for their brave courage and
strength, being ^ description of the Georgians with the^^ country.
all of them tall men, very beautiful, wearing long hair: they are very
expert in wars, and have often resisted the power of the Ottomans, by reason
of the advantage they have within their country, the which is hard to come
unto, they (for the most part) upon the first rumor of war, burning all their
houses, and making very great wastes to hinder the enemies, and by these
means they are able to resist any power whatsoever that shall come to assalt
them. The Prince took great pleasure to behold these fair people, and was
very glad to hear of their valor, and careful to provide that they should
not be injured in any thing; at this present time they were under the Empire
of Trebiso^da, the which the Grecian Emperors possessed. The Prince was every
where received very friendly, and they brought unto us all the help of
victuals that might be, to supply the want of our army. Here had he certain
news of the siege that was before Constantinople, where the Emperor was shut
up, and all his estate brought unto great necessity, Baiaze^ having a very
great and mighty army, who neither believed, nor once thought that we would
come upon him, so exceeding barbarous was he, that he would not endure any
man so much as to speak only unto him of our army, as despising it, he was
so proud: and there he caused all the bordering people publickely to be
forbidden, to make any vows and prayers for our prosperity. For I will
declare a truth, that we marched with such order* and the soldiers having
such commandment, that none of the people where we passed, were ini^red
Notable justice amongst the Tartarians
in the passage of our army, justice reigned so amongst us. Insomuch as if a
soldier had taken but an apple, he was put to death, and this was severely
observed over all, a thing usual and especially in this journey, the which was
the only cause of overthrowing the tyranny of the Ottomans, and of this proud
Bajazet. So we arrived at Bachichiche, where the army refreshed it self for
the space of eight days. Unto this place came the Ambassadors of Guines, unto
the Emperor, whom the Prince did greatly reverence for his holiness. The
said Ambassadors offered on the behalf of their master, all assistance and
aid unto this enterprise, and brought fair horses unto the Emperor the which
their master had sent unto him, with assurance of good success in his
enterprise: for Guines a great Astrologian.
this foresaid Guines did prophecy, and was a great Astrologian. The Emperor
seemed greatly to honor this Embassage, and sent unto the said Guines great
store of rich furs, and vessel of gold, and whilst we soiourned in that
place, the army made a general muster, and were paid, as well the horsemen
as the footmen, the Prince having made an oration unto them) as his custom
was, at such time as his soldiers made their general muster) and informed
them the manner he would have observed in the fight, to the end they might
observe the military discipline, whereof he was very curious with his
Captains. And also upon this same day it was permitted unto every soldier
The custom of the Tartarrians toward their Emperor.
for to behold him with more boldness then on other days, for as much as he
does for that time lay aside his Imperial Majesty, to humble himself, and
become familiar, so far forth as to exhort his soldiers unto virtue. So the
Emperor after he had caused general prayers to be published, we departed
from Bachichich, and they reckened that there was in our army three hundred
thousand horsemen, and five hundred thousand footme^, of all kinds of Nations.
The Emperor was advertised that the Ottomans were become masters of all Greece,
in so much as the Emperor was of opinion, that Bajazet would pass over into
Europe, when he should perceive that he approached: at the least wise the reason
of war made him judge that he would do so: but it fell out far otherwise: for
as soon as we had gone beyond the Georgians, and were come unto Buisabuiche,
Axalla whom the Prince had not seen in eight days, because he led the head
of the army, came unto the Emperor, knowing very well, that he could not
bring unto him more acceptable news then he did bring, the which was that
Bajazet had raised his siege for to come and defend his new conquest, and that
it was a most certain thing, that he was resolved to come unto a day of
battle: that he had caused all his forces to come out of Greece, as many of
them as he could draw from all parts, trusting not upon the multitude, but
rather in the boldness and experience of his soldiers, who were well trained
up in the wars. This did greatly rejoice the Emperor, but yet it was not
with insolency of vaunting, but rather with the countenance of a personage,
who judged the euentes of battles to be ordinarily doubtful. And he said,
that Tamerlan his saying of battles.
a small number well conducted, is oftentimes victorious. We soiourned three
days at this Buisabuiche, and we caused our soldiers continually to advance
forward, and to pass over Euphrates, for to find better means to maintain
our army upon the spoil of the enemy in attending their coming, rather
then upon our own selves, or on our Allies. From that place the Emperor did
dispatch unto the Emperor his uncle one of the greatest favorites he had
about him, for to certify unto him of the delivery of this noble City of
Constantinople, and how the Ottomans came fully resolved to give battle; and
for to prevent dangers, he gave commandment that they should keep the borders
strong, and all his forces on horseback upon the enemies side: for often times
as in prosperity all your neighbors do smile upon you, and incline toward
you: so whenever an overthrow happens, every one sets upon you, and do
help to spoil you. For A good advertisement for Princes.
this cause should wise Princes assure well that which they do already
possess, least the victorious enemy pursuing his good fortune, take from you
the means to raise your self up again. Our Emperor had always this
wisdom, when such blows happened, for to advertise his countries to stand
upon their guard, rather then to publish unto them his victory. So we
departed from thence after the Prince had assembled all the principal men of
his army, to impart unto them his purpose, and for to receive counsel of
them, the which his courtesy did use of custom, that made him to be beloved.
For the farther you were from him then did he most honor you: there were so
many several Nations within our army, so many Captains sent unto him for
his succor, and then was the time when he principally was humble, and laid
aside his gravity, feasting them for the aid and succor they gave unto our
army. Amongst the strangers this Chinois Lord did ordinarily receive great
honor of the Prince, who was always wont to say, that the virtue of Axalla,
and the love of this Lord toward him, had made him Lord of the fairest
kingdom of Asia. The Emperor was very desirous to acquaint and instruct this
Lord with the manners and fashions of those people by whom we passed, for he
was always near unto the Emperors person; and all the forces he had
co^ducted unto our army, wherein the Prince made show to put great confidence;
they had marched with us these two months, and carried themselves very well,
as all our other forces did, victuals being there in great plenty, that which
gave us so much thereof, was the great justice therein observed. So our army
came unto Garga, where it passed the river Euphrates, the auantgard at
Chinserig; and the general meeting of the army was appointed to be at
Gianich, the which did yield it self: and there had we news that Bajazet his
army was near unto us, within some thirty leagues, which caused us to march
more close. All the cities yielded, the Emperor receiving them graciously, and
those which refused obedience, were cruelly punished, especially such
inhabitants as were Turks, but the Christians set in full liberty, under the
name of the Greek Emperor Emanuell, whom the Emperor would wholly gratify,
Axalla having received this commandment from the Prince: so he caused them
The causes of Tamerlans war against the Turks.
to swear fidelity unto Emanuell, his purpose being to set him again into
his Empire, and to punish this Bajazet for being so rash, as to enterprise to
destroy so flourishing an Empire, as that of the Greeks his Allies. Now the
Emperors quarrel was just against this proud lightning from heaven,
especially in respect of his execrable cruelties he used against all sexes and
ages, usurping an Empire the which had sought all possible means to make peace
with his Arms: but he soon broke it, and falsified his faith unto this poor
Emperor, according as he found the means by little and little, to usurp almost
all from him, there remaining no more unto him, but some small towns belonging
unto his Metropolitan City, the which he had also besieged. It was then an
honorable thing, for the Emperor to deliver this noble Empire from such great
tyranny, an Empire so famous in the world, and a city so ancient, out of the
hands of so wicked and accursed an offspring. This was the cause that made the
Emperor to hope for to have God, his great God for an helper in this
enterprise. But before I begin, I am desirous to speak a word of the
uprightness of the Princes cause, and also for to note the worthiness of his
courage, in giving help unto the weak, and punishing of the proud,
representing by such deeds, the image of the divinity, the which should be
marked in Princes, in upholding the weak ones, and those that require succor
against such oppressions. So God being with us, the army fully replenished
with joy and hope, we departed from Gianich. Axalla who was in the auantguard,
having commanded four thousand Parthian horse for to get Four thousand
Parthia^ horse sent to descrie.
knowledge of the army, under the charge of Chianson Prince of Ciarcian,
commanding him to put all unto fire and sword, and also to bring word unto him
of the place where Bajazet was, and what country that was beyond Sennas; and
if he could learn any thing thereof, he should make relation thereof unto
him. This Captain was of great reputation, and next unto Axalla, he had the
commanding of the auantgard in his absence: this man sent before him a Parthian
light-horseman with five hundred horse. So he had not ridden ten leagues,
but they heard news of the army, and having surprised Sennas, they understood
there the estate of the Turks army, the which was at Tataya, and marched
forward. The which being certified unto the Emperor, commandment was given
unto them, not to retire from that place, until they did see the arrival of
the enemy, and thereof to give advertisement every hour: the Prince
determining to pass on no further, having seen a fair plain, and a country
of advantage for the order of his battle: for he knew that he had to deal
with people expert in wars, and which were accustomed to fight against the
Christians, who are very active and warlike people, who wanted not the
knowledge of warlike stratagemes. They knew also, that his army was greater
then Baiazets: but it was yet of diverse parts, so as it behooued to be well
advised, for it was not against the Chinois soft and effeminate people, but
against soldiers, well acquainted with all manner of fights that are to be
fought. Then the Emperor did not omit any vigilancie for to keep his
advantage, Axalla was sent for by the Emperor to come and accompany him for
to view the said place, and to consider whether it would be for his advantage,
and to have his advise. This place is between the sea and Gianche on the side
of Se^nas bou^ded of one side with a little river which runs into Euphrates.
And he was advised to keep Sennas as long as he could possibly, and sent word
unto those which were within the same, to set it on fire when as they should
withdraw themselves from thence, to the end that the enemy should not have a
desire to encamp therein: but should come forward nearer unto our army into
these plains, the place which we desired to fight in, because we were
stronger in horsemen then the Ottomans. Thus behold this great army of Bajazet
encouraged unto the battle, who thought to have surprised our men within
Sennas, but as soon as they drew near, our men set it on fire, and the
greatest part retiring, there remained some hundred horse to perform the same,
who retired themselves in very A stratageme.
great disorder. Now the Prince of Ciarcan had divided his men into two
troops, and given commandment unto the first troop, that as soon as they
perceived the enemies to pursue the hundred horse, they should receive them,
and retire jointly together. Now he had the rest of his power in a valley
near unto a wood, and having suffered some two thousand of the enemies horse,
Turks auant-currers to pass by him, he charged them behind, and fought with
them, they not fighting but flying as soon as they did see themselves pressed:
many were slain, and many were taken prisoners. This was the first time we
fought, and carried away the victory: all the prisoners were sent unto the
Prince, amongst the rest the Bassa of Natolia, who led this troop, of whom the
Emperor earnestly demanded, what caused Bajazet so little to esteem him, as
to show so great contempt of his Army, and that he should find that he was
well able to punish his pride. The other answered, that his Lord was the Son of
the earth, that A proud answer of a Bassa made unto Tamerlan.
he could not endure a companion, that he surely was astonished, how he from
so far had enterprised so dangerous a journey, to hinder the fortune of his
Lord, in whose favor the heavens did bend themselves, because they were not
able to withstand him, that all the rouud world did subject themselves unto
him, and that he committed great folly in going about to resist the same.
Tamerlans reply unto the Bassa.
The Emperor answered, I am sent from heaven for to punish his rashness, and
to teach him that the proud are punished of God, whose principal action is to
cast down high things, and to raise up the lowly: at the least yet I have
already constrained thy master to raise his siege from before Constantinople.
And moreover, thou have already felt (although I lament thy mishap) what the
valor of my Parthian horse is against thy Turkish. Do thou think (changing
of his speech) that thy master does come to bid me battle? The Passa
answered, yea, assuring you that there is nothing he more desires: and I
beseech you that I may acknowledge your greatness in giving me leave to assist
my Lord at this Battle. The Emperor said unto him; I give thee leave, go and
tell thy Lord that thou have seen me, and that I will fight on horseback in
the place where he shall see a green ensign. The Bassa did swear, that next
unto his Lord he vowed his service unto him. Then he returned, and declared
unto Bajazet how he had seen Tamerlan, reciting unto him all that he was
willed to declare. Of this (said he) I will make trial, and I believe he will
acknowledge his folly before the match be ended. The Bassa did not forget to
publish over all, the mildness of Tamerlan, his greatness, and courtesy,
declaring that he did so far extend his courtesy, as to give unto him a very
fair horse, although he might well think that it was to fight against
himself. So the next day Bajazet his Army drew near unto the sight of ours,
the which marched two leagues: and we encamped within a league the one of the
other. All the night long you might have heard such noise of horses, How
Tamerlans army passed the night before the battle fought against the Turk.
as it seemed the heavens were full of voices, the air did so resound, and
every one was desirous to have the night passed, for to come each one unto the
trial of his valor. Unto the Scithian nation, the which is desirous of goods,
they propounded the great riches they should get by the victory over the
Ottomans. Unto the Parthia^ nation ambitious of rule, the honor and glory of
their nation, being conquerets of them, who only were able to take from them
the Empire of Asia. The Christians who made the fourth part there of, assured
themselves to conquer their greatest enemy. Behold how every one spoke during
the night time, according to his humor. The Prince this night went through his
Camp hearing all this, and was very glad to see the hope that every one of his
soldiers did conceive already of the victory; and I being near him, and he
did me the honor to tell me, that at the time he fought the battle against
the Moscouit, he did hear all the night long all kinds of songs, the which
resounded in his Camp, seeing in a manner no body sleep: I hoped then (said
he) to have some good hap, and I trust to receive the like now. Now after the
second watch the Prince returned unto his lodging, and casting himself upon a
carpet, he meant to sleep: but the desire of day would not suffer him for to
sleep; he then commanded me to give him a book, wherein he did read: therein
was contained the the lives of his fathers and grandfathers, and of other
valiant knights, the which he did ordinarily read: he called me, having light
upon (in reading) the discourse of a battle that his grandfather had lost
against the Persians, the which he had thought to have gotten (very
indiscreetly) having assaulted his enemy, many advantages being propounded
unto him, whereof he might have made good use, all which he neglected, trusting
unto his own valor and that of his soldiers. And having ended his speech, he
commanded me to read the same before him, and said unto me, I always read
this Tamerlan his custom before a battle.
before I begin a battle, to the end I should not so much trust unto the Lions
skin, wherein I wrap my arm, that I should not serve my self with the Foxes, to
wrap therewith my head: for thus (said he) my gra^dfather was in a place of
advantage, and he went out of it to seek his enemy, who was lodged strongly,
and what soever his men said to him, he went on headlong, shutting his ears
against all the counsel and advise of his servants, and demanding of me
whether it were day, he caused the great Chamberlain to be called, and
commanded him to to cause his trumpet to be sounded, and that his horse should
be ready: and having a little slumbred, he gave commandment that Axalla should
be sent for, who came unto him with other Lords and Captains, the chiefest of
the Army, with whom after he had consulted of the order of his battle. He
mounted on horseback, and sent every one for to make themselves ready to do
the like: at the same instant he received news that the enemies Army marched
forward, and came to take his ground for the battle. The Emperor desired to
see him march, that according to his order he might marshall his own: and
having caused three thousand horse to advance forward, unto whom he had given
in charge to begin the skirmish, himself advanced forward to lodge every
man in such places as he had fore seen to be most for his advantage. Now he
seeing the Turkish footmen march, whom they do call The manner of the march of
the Turkish footmen.
Ianizaries, the which were placed in the midst, and upon the two fronts, two
great squadrons of horsemen, the which seemed to be thirty thousand horse, and
another which advanced and covered the batallion of the the Ianizaries. He
thought this order to be very good, and hard to break, and turning himself
unto Axalla, who was near unto him, he said, I had thought to have fought on
foot, but it behooves me this day to fight on horseback, for to give courage
unto my soldiers to open the great Batallion: and my will is, that The order of
Tamerlan his battle.
they come forward unto me as soon as they may: for I will advance forward an
hundred thousand footmen, fifty thousand upon each of my two wings, and in the
midst of them forty thousand of my best horse. My pleasure is, that after
they have tried the force of those me^, that they come unto my auantguard, of
whom I will dispose (and fifty thousand horse more) in three bodies, whom thou
shall command, the which I will assist with foure-score thousand horse, wherein
shall be mine own person, having an hundred thousand footmen behind me, who
shall march in two troops; and for my Arierward forty thousand horse, and
fifty thousand footmen, who shall not march but unto my aid. I will make
choice of ten thousand of the best horse, whom I will send into every part
where I shall think needful within my Army, for to impart my commandments.
Over the first forty thousand the Prince Ciarcian commanded: over the foremost
footmen was the Lord Synopes, a Geneuois, kinsman unto Axalla, and he which was
his Lieutenant over the footmen, a Captain of great estimation. That over
which the Prince Axalla commanded, consisted of five squadrons of horsemen.
Bajazet his Army seemed fair and great, which was advanced continually
forward toward us, who stirred not one whit from the place of the battle.
There were indeed many light horsemen, as well Scithians, Parthians, as
Moscouites, who left their ranks, and shot arrows, and brake lances between
the two Armies. There was a spy who brought word that Bajazet was on foot in
the midst of his Ianizaries, where he meant to fight, that he did not forget
to mount on horseback, giving order over all for the wants of his Army: but
purposed to fight in the midst of those Ianizaries, who are a number of
trusty men, brought What the Turks I anizaries be.
up in exercises from their youth to all manner of warfare, and chosen out of
all nations, the fairest and strongest men, so as they are invincible. By this
bringing up the which they have had together, they do fight with a great force
and courage for their Prince and Lord, who being in the midst of them, they
are as in a half circle within the Army. Now they were thirty thousand men
in this order, wherein Bajazet put his principal hope: he had many other
footmen, but gathered together of all sorts. His battle of horse was very
fair, amounting unto the number of an hundred and forty thousand horse, well
exercised in all manner of fightes. The Sultan of Egypt having aided him with
thirty thousand Mammelues, very good horsemen, and with thirty thousand
footmen. Their Army in that order seemed almost as great as ours: for they
were not so knit together as we were, our forces being directly one after the
other, and theirs all in a front. So the enemies Army advanced forward
continually with an infinite number of cries, and ours was in great silence.
After that common prayer was ended, the Emperor himself advanced continually
forward, beholding the first charge given, and caused Axalla to set forward
after he returned into his order, continually exhorting his men before he left
them. There could not be seen a more furious charge given, then was performed
by the Ottomans upon the Prince of Ciarcian, who had commandment not to fight
before they came unto him: there could not have been chosen a fairer plain, and
where the skillful choice of the place was of less advantage for the one then
for the other, but that we had the river on our left hand, the which was some
advantage for the Emperor, having given commandment, that in any case they
should not lose the same, and that the enemies, whatsoever came thereof, should
not win it: this he did for to have the advantage of the hand in fight. The
Emperor, who above all Maxims Tamerlan his principal Maxim of war.
of war, did use to deal in such manner, that the enemy might be the first
assaulter; he had straightly commanded the^ which were appointed for the first
charge, to suffer the enemy for to give the onset. Now (as I have already
declared) this young Prince of Ciarcian with his forty thousand horse was
almost wholly ouerthrown, having fought as much as he could, but he entered The
battle between Tamerla^ and Bajazet.
even into the midst of the Ianizaries, where the person of Bajazet was,
putting them in disorder, where he was slain. About this time Axalla set upon
the^ with the Aua^tgard, where as he was not in any such danger; for having
surprised one of the enemies wings, he cut it all in pieces, and his footmen
coming to join with him, as they had been commanded, he faced the Batallion
of the Ianizaries. The Prince seeing the charge Axalla had upon his arm, sent
ten thousand horse from his battle for to succor him, and knit together the
maine battle of Axalla, and to give once again a charge upon another
Batallion of footmen, the which did show it self, and came toioine with and
strengthen that of the Ianizaries, who behaved themselves valiantly for the
safety of their Prince. This fight continued one hour, and yet you could not
have seen any scattered, fighting resolutely the one against the other. You
might have seen the mountains of horses rush one against another, the men
die, cry, lament, and threaten at one yerie time. The Prince had patience to
see this fight ended, and when he did perceive that his men did give place, he
sent ten thousand of his horse to join again with the ten thousand appointed
for the Arierward, and commanded them to assist him, at such time as he
should have need thereof. At this very time the Emperor charge, and made
them give him room, causing the footmen to assault, over whom the Prince of
Thanais commanded; who gave a furious onset upon the batallion of the
Ianizaries, wherein was yet the person of Bajazet, who had sustained a great
burden. But the multitude, and not valor, did prevail; for as much as might
be done in fight, was by the Ianizaries performed, for to preserve the person
of their Prince. But in the end the horsemen, wherein was the Emperors person,
gave a new charge, and his Auantguard was wholly knit again unto him, he
renewed another forcing, and was fully victorious. Tamerlan his notable
victory obtained against Bajazet wherein he was taken prisoner.
Bajazet having retired on horseback out of the troop of Ianizaries wounded,
fell alive into the hands of Axalla, unto whom he yielded himself, supposing
it had been Tamerlan: then Axalla seeing him so followed, (being for a time not
known but for some great Lord of the Ottomans) twenty thousand horse did not
fight at all, but only in pursuing the victory, and they made a great
slaughter. The Prince had his horse slain under him with the blow of a lance,
but he was soon remounted again on horseback. This day the wisdom of the
Emperor gave the victory unto his soldiers: Tamerlan his wisdom the cause of
the victory, and wherein performed.
for the judgment which he had in tyring of the strong forces of the Ottomans,
was the safeguard of his. For if all had gone unto the battle in one front,
surely the mutitude had put it self into a confusion: but this manner of aiding
his men made every one profitable. The Emperor judging (like a great Captain)
of the need that every one of his soldiers had, so that this manner of
proceeding was the getting of the victory. They accounted threescore thousand
men slain of the Ottomans, and twenty thousand of ours. The Prince of Tirzis
was slain as I have said: the head of the Georgians slain, Calibes was very
sorry he had so easy a reckening in his Arier-ward, being very courageous,
and a gentle knight: the Despote of Seruia was taken prisonerer, who did
accompany Bajazet, and was a Christian: they gave him this day of battle
much reputation. The Emperor gave unto him very good entertainment,
reproouing him, for that he did accompany Bajazet against him, who did come in
favor of his Emperor. He answered him, that it was not according to his
duty, but the prosperity of Bajazet, unto whom it seemed, that all the world
did bend for to subject it self unto him, and that his safety had caused him
to set forward. The Emperor presently thereupon gave him leave to depart at his
pleasure. He took care to get into his hands Bajazet his children: he gave
commandment that Bajazet should be cured, and after brought before him: who
at such time as he was there, Bajazet brought before Tamerlan, with his pride.
never made any show of humility. The Emperor saying unto him, that it lay in
him to cause him to lose his life; he answered: Do it, that loss shall be my
happiness. And demanding of him what made him so rash, for to enterprise to
bring into subjection so noble a Prince as was the Emperor of the Greeks. He
answered him, the desire of glory and rule. Wherefore do thou (said the
Emperor unto him) use so great cruelty toward men, so far forth that
neither thou nor thine do pardon either sex or age? This do I (answered he) to
give the greater terror to my enemies. Then said the Emperor, so shall thou
receive the like reward: and causing him to be conveyed again out of his
presence, he turned unto his followers, and said, behold a proud and fierce
countenance, he deserves Tamerlan his saying of Bajazet.
to be punished with cruelty, and it is necessary that he be made an
exemplarie punishment to all the cruel of the world, of the just wrath of God
against them. I acknowledge that God has this day delivered into my hands a
great enemy, we must give thanks unto God for the same: the which was
performed, being yet day: for the battle was won at four of the clock,
and there was as yet five hours of daylight. The children of Bajazet were
brought before him: he caused them to be used courteously, and as the children
of an Emperor. The next day he commanded the dead to be buried: they found
the Prince of Tirzis dead in the midst of the Ianizaries, where he remained
enclosed. The Emperor did greatly lament this young Prince, who was his
kinseman, and would have been one day worthy for to do him great service. In
that battle there-died many Captains, and almost all the chief of the
Ottomans. This was a great Battle, the which was fought from seven unto four
of the clock, in such sort that they knew not unto whom the victory did
incline. Our Army stayed until the next day, every one causing his friends to
be buried. The Prince of Tirzis was embalmed, and conveyed with two thousand
horse unto Samarcand until the Emperor returned. All the other dead bodies
were buried at Sanas with all the honor that might be. Axalla was much grieved
for his kinsman, because he was very well beloved of the Prince: his charge
was given unto one of his brethren who was very famous; in fighting this same
day, we might judge the events of the matters of the world. Behold this
Emperor Bajazet, who was, as he thought, superior to fortune, which in an
instant found himself and his estate by one battle only overthrown even
unto the lowest place, and at such time as he thought least thereof. He used to
say, that he was justly punished, for despising the multitude we had, for the
assurance that he had in the valor of his horsemen, and especially of his
Ianizaries. He was three days (as they report) The despair of Bajazet after
he was taken prisoner.
before he could be pacified, as a desperate man, seeking after death, and
calling for it. The Emperor did not use him at all courteously, but caused
small account to be made of him: and for to manifest that he knew how to
punish the proud; upon festival days, when as he mounted on horseback, they
brought this proud man unto him, and he served Bajazet Tamerlans footstool to
mount on horseback.
him in steed of a footstool: this did he for to manifest the folly and
arrogancy of men, and how justly God had humbled him. The next day the Prince
marched directly toward Bursia, whither all the remainder of Bajazet his
Army was retired, with the Bassa Mustapha. All the country yielded unto us,
and the Prince caused all the holds and fortresses to be overthrown and
destroyed, and punished all those which were so evil advised as to stay until
they were besieged. I had forgotten to declare, how he caused the Prince of
Tirzis body to be accompanied with diverse prisoners chained and tied together,
whom he did send unto Samarcand, the which the Prince had determined to make
great, for a perpetual memory of his greatness. Even so had he greatly
peopled it Tamerlan his policy for to increase his city Samercand*
with people of China, which had been taken in the Battles, and of those
likewise which were taken out of the two great Cities, Paguinfou, and
Quantoufou. Now this battle did bring great astonishment unto all the
countries possessed by Bajazet, and no body resisted us, even unto Bursia,
whither this army was fled, and therein were also two sons of Bajazet very
young. Axalla being always advanced forward before our Army, with forty
thousand horse, and an hundred thousand footmen without any carriages, who
hindered the enemies from joining themselves again together: and he made a
cruel war upon the Ottomans, delivering the Grecians from the tyranny of
Axalla cruel against the Ottomans for the delivery of Greece.
Bajazet. He approached near unto Bursia, where the Ottomans did not stay the
coming of Axallas Army, but only they which could not run remained behind.
Bajazet his two sons were sent unto the Greekish Emperor for to bring them
up, and to have mercy upon them; the rest went unto Gallipoli, for to go unto
Andrinopoli, the which they held, having conquered it from the Grecians. Now
the Prince (for to return unto my purpose) dispatched toward the Emperor his
uncle, and unto the Empress his wife one of his familiars, called Lieban,
Captain of his chamber, for to carry Presents sent by Tamerlan unto the great
Cham his uncle
him news of this victory, and to join it also unto all the rest. He sent
unto him Bajazet his sword and bow, and the caparisons of his horse, the which
was esteemed to be worth above two hundred thousand ducats. You may easily
think that Prince Lieban was well entertained of the old Emperor, and of the
young Princess, bringing word unto them, that all the world did bend it self
to make our Prince victorious, who surely received these victories from God
without insolency, and at such time as he sent him most glory, then did his
men note him to be least puffed up. He was never bold, but in the day of
battle, and on the eeue for to command severely, and with greater majesty.
To tell you what he was in adversity, I did never see him in that estate: but
it is to be thought, that they which be not insolent in prosperity, are not
faint-hearted in adversity. So our victorious Prince marched directly unto
Bursia, laden with spoils and Trophies which he daily got, departing from
the Cities which did come and yield themselves unto him; therein observing the
same manner of proceeding the which we did in the conquest of China; they which
did yield unto him without fighting, were well used, and the obstinate well
punished, the Prince knowing that reward and punishment are the moderators of
commonwealths, the one to be used toward the good, and the other toward the
evil. In the end we received news by Axalla, that he had received Bursia in
the Emperors name, and how the inhabitants thereof had punished the garrisons of
Bajazet, having driven them away, and slain many. He sent word also unto the
Prince, that the Ambassadors of the Greekish Emperor Emanuel were come unto
him, the most honorable persons of his Court, and that he had stayed them from
passing any further. The Prince sent word, that they should stay for him in
that City: so we arrived in short time, and all the inhabitants of the City
came to meet the Emperor bare-headed, in token of bondage: and the Prince
entered into Bursia with great magnificence. Axalla with the Ambassadors came
to meet him, whom the Emperor received with all the honor that might be, and
showed unto the^ all his magnificence, and the order of his Army, whereat they
wondered: for our Army resembled a City, for the order that was therein, the
which did bring unto us plenty of all kind of victuals and merchandise. The
Embassage of the Greek Emperor was, that he submitted all his The effect of
the Greek Emperors Emb^ssage unto Tamerlan.
Empire and his person unto our Emperor, and that he would be unto him a most
faithful subject and vassal, himself and his subjects, and that he would be
think him how to dispose of his goods, the which he offered thereby as his
own, and that he was bound for to do this, for that he was delivered by him
from the yoke and bondage of the most cruel Tigre that might be; that the
far countries he had passed, and the discommodities he had endured, and the
loss of his men, could not be recompensed, but by the offer of his own life
and his subjects, the which he did dedicate for ever to his service; that he
should always find therefore such faithfulness as so great a bond toward him
does deserve. Besides, the so many virtues and rare gifts, which made his name
famous throughout all the world inhabited, did bind him unto the same; that he
would attend him in his chief city, for to deliver it into his hands as his
own, and all the Empire of Greece, over which he commanded, to cause the same
for to obey him. Now the Greek Ambassadors looked for no less then to fall
into bondage, thinking that to be so great which they did offer, and a morsel
so delicate, that it would not be refused, especially of a conquering Prince,
as was Tamerlan; and that accepting thereof in mildness and friendship, was the
best bargain they could make therein: but they received answer far otherwise:
for the Prince with The worthy answer of Tamerlan unto the Greek Ambassadors.
a mild countenance answered them; that he was not come from so far a cuntrie,
nor had taken so much pains to conquer countries; that it was too base a thing
for him to put himself into so great travail and dangers, but rather to win
honor, and thereby for to make his name famous and glorious unto all the world:
therefore would he make it well appear, that he was come to aid him, being
requested as a friend and allie, the which had happy success. That his
upright meaning therein was the greatest cause that God had beheld from above
his power, by the which he bruised the head of the most fierce enemy unto
mankind that was under heaven: and for to get him now an immortal glory and
eternal name, he would make free so great and flourishing a city, governed by
so noble and ancient a house; that with his courage he had always faith
joined, the which would never make so great a breach in his reputation, that it
should be reported of him, he came The worthy mind of Tamerlan.
to help as a friend under the pretense to invade the dominions of his Allie;
that he would have the service he had done ot the Greek Emperors engraven in
the memory of the posterity, to the end they might wish well unto him and his
successors, by remembering that he had done good unto them; that he contented
himself to carry away the honor and glory thereof; that long might he live
to govern his estate; and that before his departure he should consider so well
to establish him, as that he should not fall again into so great ieopardie,
that he delivered into his hands the two sons of Bajazet, to do with them
as he should think good; that he should be wise and provident in well aduising
himself hereafter; that his good will should be always most favorable
toward him. You may easily judge what joy these Greekish Princes received,
hearing the Emperor pronounce these words, full of so great clemency, who for
that he would not be seen to break his faith, refused an Empire offered unto
him, and the most stately and magnificent City of the world. I do think there
be few Princes that would perform such a part, so be there likewise but few
Tamerlans in the world. Axalla had commandment from the Prince to feast these
Ambassadors, and to do them all the honor that might be: one of the^ was sent
unto the Emperor to carry him these news, who looked for some clean
contrary: but having received word thereof, then was the time to make bonfires
Bonfires made in Constantinople for the worthy answer received from Tamerlan.
within Constantinople, and the opportunity to rejoice with all kind of
pleasures. The Greekish Emperor having assembled his Counsel, to know whether
he should not go unto him and give him thanks, it was so resolved on by all
the Princes of the Court. So the Emperor was advertised of his journey, who
was very glad thereof, and even upon the first days journey Axalla was sent
by the Emperor for to certify him of the joy that he conceived to have the
good hap for to see him, as also for to conduct him even unto Bursia, whither
the Emperor understanding the Greek The meeting of Tamerlan and the Greek
Emperor at Bursia.
came, went to meet him, and with all kinds of magnificences, they were one
whole day together. The next day the Greekish Emperor took his leave of the
Prince, who did accompany him out of the City. Now the Emperor had as great
a desire as might be, to see this so famous a City, as was Constantinople, but
he would not go thither but as a private person; the which Axalla handled
without making any show thereof, desiring to be received thereinto privately
by the Greekish Emperor. The which Tamerlan his secret going to Constantinople
was accomplished with all the familiarity possible, and therein was no rare
and excellent thing which was not showed unto the Emperor. The Greekish Prince
having advised himself of all the means to do him pleasure, and unto all
them which did accompany him, who were in a manner all apparelled after the
Greek fashion, insomuch as they were greatly astonished to understand that we
had been there. The Greek Emperor was curious to show unto our Emperor all
the fair gardens, the which be all along the sea coast, a league or two from
Constantinople, and he conducted him in private company, so as five or six
days were spent with all the mirth that might be possible. The Prince would
often say, he had never seen a fairer city; that this was indeed the city
(considering his fair and rich situation) which ought to command all the
world. He wondered at the costly buildings of the Temples, The rare things in
Constantinople.
the fair engraven pillars, the fair Pirimades of wonderful height, the
which the Emperor Constantine had caused to be brought thither out of Egypt,
and the making of the fair gardens: and he was wont to say, that he did
nothing repent him of his voyage, for that he had preserved from fire and
blood, so noble a City as that was: he greatly commended the mildness and
courtesy of the Greek Emperor. Now the Greek Emperor knowing the Prince
very curious for fair The Greek Emperor gave unto Tamerlan fair horses.
horses, he gave unto him thirty of the fairest, strongest, and readiest that
might be gotten, with the most rich cloth of gold, and excellent silk that
could be seen. The Greek sent likewise to gratify all the Princes and Lords
of the army with presents, and caused all things to be delivered unto them,
the which he thought to be necessary for the army. So as having rested almost
fifteen days, we began to think upon the accomplishing of our purposes:
and after a straight friendship was sworn between the two Princes, our
Emperor determined before he returned, to make the Sultan of Egypt know his
power, who had given aid unto Bajazet against him, to the end that all the
world should know, that he was mild and courteous unto his friends, and unto
his enemies terrible and fearful. So we departed from Bursia, having
delivered the same into the hands of the Greek Emperor, and having driven
out all the Ottomans out of all the fortresses, and having left the Greek
Emperor in the same liberty, he was before our army came, there being
nothing now in Asia that took the Ottomans part, unless he had gotten unto
the mountains or passed over into Europe, so fearful was our army become by
the victory obtained against Bajazet. Andronicus Paleologus, nephew unto the
Greek Emperor, followed our Emperor with ten thousand horse, the which the
Greek Emperor delivered unto him, for the war which he enterprised against
the Sultan of Egypt, with whom he had often fought. Now for to accomplish the
Emperors good hap, he received news from his court, that the Empress The
Empress delivered of a goodly boy.
was delivered of a goodly boy: for the which were made bonfires, and great
rejoicing in the Army. He had also news how all was quiet in his estate, and
the old Emperor his uncle in good health, the which was one of the things did
most comfort him: for he feared especially least the old Prince should die in
his absence, and by this means some trouble might arise within his estate, by
some great men, and certain favorites which were near unto the old Emperor.
Notwithstanding they which had played the fools in his absence, were so well
punished, that (as I think) others should take thereby example, and it is a
general rule, that after a Prince has once his weapons in his hands, there
will be no great reuolting in his absence, nor novelties within his country,
how far soever he be severed. For first and foremost all the seditious and
ambitious fellows, do ordinarily follow him unto the war, and moreover he
that is on horseback is feared. On the contrary part, whenever a Prince is
softly and effemenate, his soldiers which are not employed, do go unto him
that has any coffeehouse, or rather who is desirous of reigning: so as the
Prince being found unarmed, before he has made an Army, and gathered together
his garrisons, the seditious have already played well their parts, and the
mischief has entered very far. There were six months passed since we
departed from Samarcand, and it grieved many that the Emperor would not
return into his country: insomuch as this being declared unto the Prince by
Axalla, it was thought convenient the Prince should again reuiew the order of
his army, and should speak unto his soldiers, causing a general reuiew to
be made of his army, and that this same might give them the greater courage
for to endure all discommodities for the service of the Prince. So being come
unto Calestria, a general reuiew was commanded, the Prince being himself
there in person, where he spoke first unto the Parthians in this manner: I can
not believe my Tamerlan his oration unto his soldiers at Calestria perswa^iue,
to follow him unto new enterprises
countriemen and soldiers, that you have any desire to see your country, and
that you are fainting to win glory unto your Nation, seeing all people do
hazard all and every kind of happiness for to win unto them selves the same:
you with me, and I with you, have within certain years gotten many victories,
whereby we have made our Nation superior unto others, and our name made famous
over all the world. If you be weary in following my glorious ensigns,
remember your selves, how it may be reported, that Tamerlan your Emperor has
finished his victories through the valor of another Nation, and not by his own:
and consider what reproach you shall bring unto ours, renowned by so great
success obtained against so many and sundry warlike people. You my soldiers,
whose reputation flies through all the world, shall I believe this of you? I
will not, neither ought I to believe it: therefore follow me, and let us go and
assault the Mamelues, who you know of long time have opposed themselves (how
far soever from us) against our happiness, having joined themselves unto the
Ottomans for our destruction. Would you that I should punish their rashness
without you? Would you that the Scithians and my allies, should have part in my
victories, and in the mean time, you should go rest your selves, and lose the
glory already gotten? The Prince had no sooner made an end, but they all
cried with a loud voice, that they would live and die with him, and as they
followed him into China, so would they also follow him throughout all the
world: but they besought him to have regard unto their wounds, to comfort
their old age, and that he would give the^ hope of rest: the which the Prince
promised unto them. Unto the others the Emperor spoke nothing at all, for they
were very glad to have this glory over the Parthians, in perceiving them
willing to return, insomuch as when the Prince came to pass before the
Scithian horsemen, they all cried in their language: Victorious Emperor what
do thou? march forward, for we will follow thee. The which did greatly
content the Emperor. Now the Parthians and Scithians Tamerlan his care of his
sick soldiers very commendable and imitable.
were the principal forces the Prince had in his army: now the Emperor did
nourish wisely emulation between them, which of them should best manifest his
faithful affection. The Pince commanded that the sick and wounded should be
viewed throughout all the army, and that the Treasurer of the wars should
distribute money among the companies, over and above the ordinary pay due unto
every soldier: so our army departed, and in the auantguard with Axalla was
placed Andronicus together with him, for to lead the head of the army: and it
was reported unto the Emperor, that the Sultan of Egypt prepared forces from
all parts, for to resist the power which came against him, but he knew that he
should have much to do, and that it was very hard to stop a victorious
army, wherein there were such a multitude of men, who had overthrown the
strongest and most warlike Monarch that was in all Asia. Insomuch as this gave
a great terror unto the Mamelues. But the Sultan, who commanded over them at
that present was a young Prince, who had been chosen for the great virtue and
courage which was in him, rather then for his great experience in war like
affairs, insomuch as he had not as yet since his election showed his
affection, and as little his valor unto his subjects: he had indeed his
courage puffed up, by seeing himself through this choice Lord of many great
cities well fortified, The Sultan his brave resolution.
so as he resolved to be overthrown bravely. In such sort as he put his hope
in the winning of a battle, from the which what chance soever did happen, he
might retire himself at any time into a place of such advantage, that he might
have the means to hazard again another, and hope thereby for a revenge. Whereof
the Emperor was advertised, and after he had conferred with Axalla and
Andronicus, for to be advised whither he should direct the head of his army,
for to constrain the enemy the sooner to come unto battle: it was in the end
concluded that he should pass by Caramania, directly unto Geuolache, the which
was the first city of the Mamelues Empire, being one of the Soldans frontier
towns which did separate him from the Turk, even there where the peace was
sworn betwixt them, the which Bajazet had sought, to the end he might have
aid from him to stre^gthen himself thereby against the army which came upon
him. So this place was well defended by the Sultan, and it was well fortified:
Axalla advancing forward his auantgard did summon the same to yield, or else
they should receive the just reward of their rashness and folly. They made
answer, that they were children of obedience, and had commandment to die
therein. And that willingly they would there endure until death for their
Prince and country. This wilfulness put the Prince into great choler (who
since he departed from his kingdom, had not seen any one place which brought
not to him their keys twenty leagues off before he came unto the^) to see a
mean city dare to stay his coming, and for to prepare to let his army. The
which the Emperor perceiving, he commanded Axalla to march on, and to lodge
near Aleppo: the which he summoning, did yield it self, having no other then
the inhabitants within the same. The Prince in the mean time, prepared himself
unto the siege, whereto having caused his footmen to march, and his artillery
to be planted, there was an assault given, which was bravely defended by the^
within, and there were of our men slain to the number of 1200. The Emperor
greatly stirred, determined to assault the^ once again, and having given a
fresh assalt, wherein the Prince of Thanais was wounded, our men lodged upon the
wall, and leaving no respite unto them within, they killed a great number of
the^. The Prince understanding that the Sultan had promised the^ aid, whereof
he was well advertised, and did certainly know that he marched forward, he
supposed that he had committed a fault, in causing Axalla to advance so far,
so as he determined to set forward to overtake him, hoping by that means to
surprise the enemy, who came directly toward Axalla for to fight with him.
But the enemy did not look for him so soon: so having left all his cariages
behind at the siege, where the Prince of Thanais remained with thirty thousand
men only, the rest he caused to march with him without any baggage unto Bogras;
thither did Axalla send him word that the Sultan had passed the river at
Confincan, and that he came for to aid the besieged: and it was reported that
he had 74000. horse, and an hundred thousand footmen. Now the Emperor being
arrived at Aleppo, understood where the enemy was, and determining with
himself to surprise him, he caused Axalla to advance forward with his
auantgard, himself staying half a day, and then presently he followed his
auantguard. Axalla having set forward some fifteen hundred horse, they were
encountered and almost all slain, he not being able to aid them as he desired,
by reason of the unfitness of the country, and judging that they were
compassed about, he did not assist them. Now the enemies thinking to deal with
none but those which were at Aleppo led by Axalla, they came forward unto the
fight ill advised: so as Axalla had them upon him before he supposed; he
advertised the Emperor to come forward, and sent him word that he went unto the
battle, but that he would dally with the enemy as long as he could, to the
end he might have leisure to draw near and assist him, and that he would not
fail to choose his place of battle as much as he could for his advantage,
whilst he looked for him, he set forward presently twenty thousand horse with
speed under the leading of Calibes. In the mean time the enemy by reason of
the place which was narrow, and a valley wherein his men could not march, but in
single rank, he advanced not so soon: the which Axalla supposed, for
otherwise he would have retired, but in the best manner he might unto the
Emperor. So he determined to choose a place for the battle, and to make his men
for to fight in small troops, to entertain the enemy in coming down the
mountain, perceiving that his purpose was to take his place for the battle at
the foot of the same mou^tain. This sport endured 2. or 3. hours, until
Calibes came with 20000. horse for the assistance of Axalla, who had also full
30000. more, Andronicus between 8. and 10. thousand, the most part Albanois,
who were good horsemen: he requested the first charge, the which Axalla did
grant unto him, being loath to discontent him; in the which having fought
valiantly, and overthrown and slain many of the enemies, he was one of the
first that was slain, for want of being aided by his men. A Prince surely of
such a courage, as did much grace him, and who verily in this his youth, did
follow the honor and nobility of the blood of them from whom he was
descended. Axalla assisted him with all his power, who were in a manner all
Parthians or Christians in the Princes pay, who gave a great shocke upon the
Soldans troops, and passing through them, he found directly before him all
their footmen, he busied himself in fighting with the^: in the mean time a
troop of five and twenty thousand A battle between the Sultan of Egypt and
the Emperor Tamerlan.
horse did set upon Prince Calibes, they say, that therein was the Sultan
himself, who fought the one against the other very obstinately, and in this
mean space Axalla fought with these footmen, which he leaving half
overthrown sounded a retrait, and seeing Prince Calibes hardly beset, he went
directly toward him, and perceiving the place where the enemies had the
greatest advantage and his men the worst, he charged this maine power on the
flank; which 15000. horsemen seeing, who were behind these footmen, whom the
Sultan had commanded that they should not fight but upon need, they came upon
Axalla on that side he had given his charge, and setting furiously upon him,
they fought a long time, so as he was wounded, his horse slain under him, and
himself taken prisoner. Which being reported Axalla taken prisoner.
unto the Emperor by one that fled; he coming forward with as much speed as
he could, was greatly vexed, having his chief confidence in this Captain.
This caused the Emperor to make the more have, who if he had not come in so
good time, that day had made an end of his good fortune: but having commanded
10000. horse to advance before him and give an onset, he assisted the^ with
25000. of his most faithful horsemen, having upon his wings 20000. horse of
his aiders. The Sultan did not see this maine power, by reason of the valley
they came in, and he was greatly astonished for to behold the rest, during the
time that Prince Calibes and Axallas men did fight. Behold in an instant 10000
horse which set upon the Mamelus, who were almost masters of the field. The
Prince also advanced forward with all his footmen and horsemen. The Sultan not
being able to resist so great a force, he sou^ded a retrait, finding the falt
he had committed, seeing all the whole army upon him. Now Axalla, being
overthrown by him who held him prisoner, was on foot, and Tamerlan his
victory over the Sultan.
he was mounted again on horseback: his wou^d was but a small matter: the
Emperor followed the victory three leagues. It is reported, that the Sultan
had been thrice mounted on horseback during the battle, so well did he
perform the duty of a good soldier and captain, but the fault he had
committed was great, for he did not mark that all our army did not follow. We
co^mited another fault also, in so much advancing forward our auantgard, which
was like to have cost us dear: for had it not been for the art Axalla used,
the Emperor had never come in time to assist him: but we may say that fortune
the mistress of all did bring to pass, that our faults were often turned into
stratagems of war, so great hap did accompany our Prince: so his coming was
the victory of his me^. Behold how this war was much shortened against the
opinion of many: for it was known how the Sultan was counseled (and wisely)
to draw this war into length, notwithstanding he could not shun his ill hap.
Our Army could not lie in one place for the great multitude, and especially
the country being also in many places unfruitful. These news being come to the
Prince of Thanais at Goulach, and he making the same known unto the enemies,
they were greatly astonished, as soon had he commandment from the Prince to
punish the^ well for their rashness, and to put all unto the sword, without
any mercy, to give terror unto those which would wilfully resist his forces,
and also he would have it to be an example unto others: which was done, being
won by assault, their courage failing them, by reason of the loss their men
had received, as also for that the number of their soldiers was much
diminished by the fight given unto the^ night and day. The Prince would not
return back again, but abode at Aleppo, where the Prince of Thanais came and
joined with him, not hindering Axalla from adua^cing forward with the horsemen
of the auantgard, to the end that the Sultan should have no respit to take
breath, who was retired with 40000. horse. There died in the battle full 80000.
men, and no men of mark but Andronicus and three Parthia^ Captains of great
estimation, the Soldans cariages were the next day taken, wherein was great
riches. He made dispatches unto all his allies, and also unto the Greek
Emperor, co^forting him for the loss of Prince Andronicus, as also for to
receive order from him for a new co^mander over the Greeks. He sent also some
for to carry news of his victory into all his kingdoms. In this mean space
the Sultan withdrew himself into Egypt, and fortified all his cities,
dema^ding aid of me^ and money of all his allies. He divided the rest of his
army, where he thought was need thereof; he burnt and spoiled before our army,
sparing nothing, to hinder us from passing any further, a thing which brought
unto us great disco^modity, and want began to be in our army, it was so great:
in so much as it behooved the Prince to make a reuiew of all his army, to see
what unprofitable members were therein, and to se^d the^ from the same. He was
advised to divide his army into three parts, the first under the Prince, the
other under Axalla, and the third under Calibes, who should conduct the cariages
with one part of the footmen, which should bend directly toward Persia,
coasting the river Euphrates, and in that space put all the country there under
the Princes obedience, were he should find nothing to stop him, our army The
Emperor Tamerlan his army divided into three several parts marched sundry
ways.
being advanced forward, which ouer-ran the same. So the Emperor took the
coast of the sea, Axalla the coast of Arabia. There was with the Prince 6000.
horse and 100000. footme^, with Axalla 40000. horse and 50000 footmen. Calibes
had thirty thousand horse, and fifty thousand footme^, insomuch as all the
earth was covered with men: so as by means that good government was observed in
our Army, victuals for men was there in great plenty, and for the horses were
many pastures. Now the Sultan had always Axalla following him, but in the end
he divided his army, where the most part of his me^ forsook him: they say he
retired into Arabia, where our great army could not lie. He often showed
himself with some 4000. horse for to hinder Axalla, who having the smallest
troop did follow him more near then we. All the cities upon the sea coast
submitted themselves under the Emperors obedience, as Magata, Aman, Tortosa,
Gibelleto, Certain Citie^ submit themselves unto the Emperor Tamerlan.
Barut, Nephthalim. Damascus having received a garrison, refused to open the
gates, and the Lord laid siege thereto. This was a strong city, wherinto the
Sultan had put the Prince Zamadzen, who endeavored to defend himself, but we
having planted all sorts of engines, we overthrew much of the wall. The Prince
of Thanais gave th'assalt, and wan the city, there remaining only a castle of
wonderful strength and invincible, but there being a great multitude of me^
retired into the same, they died for hunger. In the end being willing to yield,
the Prince would Damascus taken by assault.
not receive the^ unto mercy, for to make the^ feel what it was to hold out
against him: so that dying with famine they yielded unto his mercy, and were
all taken prisoners or slain, and so punished for their rashness. This caused
that 30. leagues off, they brought unto us the keys of their cities: for they
which did so were not any ways molested, but only in paying the charges of the
army. This city was no sooner tak^, but we turned our head directly unto
I^rusale^, at such time as they did drive out the Soldans garrison. The like
did almost all Judea also, and came to submit themselves unto the Emperor, who
used them very graciously, restored unto them their liberty, promised them for
to visit the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, according to the holy customs of our
law, and with this honor and reverence he granted unto them whatso ever they
demanded. We came unto Coracin, the which city had received commandment to
stand firm, and wherein the Sultan had left a garrison of 6000. men, who
resolved to fight lustily: but at the length, the same was astonished, seeing
the siege laid before it, and that we were determined to take it, and having
approached the walls, they Coracin yielded upon Composition.
besought mercy, which was granted unto them. The Prince left a garrison
therein, for to stop the roades that certain Mamelues made upon our army,
departing from Nasuia, from whence the Prince sent a commandment unto Calibes
to besiege Cities, and to set himself against those forces which joined
themselves together near unto him, the which kept the coming of victuals from
the army. In the mean time the Solda^ having fained to draw toward Arabia, he
went toward Caire in Egypt, opposing himself against us only by small
incursions, spoiling continually the corn before us, endeavoring to keep our
Army from victuals; but our light horsemen did press so near upon them, that
he could not execute that he would have done: the people also who willingly
submitted them selves, did hinder the waste. The Emperor being come unto
Miserill, he did forbid the Army to pass over the river of Jordan, for to
preserve that country, from whence came great store of victuals unto the
Army, and himself rode unto Jerusalem with certain horsemen for his guard,
he determined like a godly Prince to visit the Sepurcher Tamerlan his coming
unto Jerusalem, and his godly reverent behavior therei^.
(the which is had in so great reverence of all the nations) and there for to
make his offerings; and being arrived into Jerusalem, there he was received of
the inhabitants: he therein sought out all the antiquities of the ancient
Temple, and would be conducted into all the places wherein Jesus Christ had
preached, even as the Pilgrims do; and seeing the Sepulcher, he gave thereunto
great plenty of riches, and precious gifts; two things made him wonder; which
was that he dema^ding of certain religious men where the body of their Lord
was, they answered, in heaven at the right hand of God; he asked of us where
our Prophet was placed: the Cherit who was Cherit.
near unto him answered, it was true, and that he held the chiefest place in
heaven, because he was there before him, and that as he was borne of heaven,
unto heaven he was returned, having there first taken the place. Then kneeled
he down, and ever after had his name in great reverence; and when he was
returned unto Samarcand he builded a most rich Church unto his honor, and
would be heard to speak daily of his miracles. And as he did visit al, he came
unto the place, where Jesus Christ having left his desciples, went up into
heaven: in which place, there is a print of his foot, he greatly wondered
thereat, and the story being recited unto him of the Pilgrim, who had been
ravished in spirit, he accounted him very happy. Axalla came thither also, and
all the Christians who did accompany him, having conducted his army unto Tema,
for to set it forward into Egypt. There had the Emperor news that the Sultan
gathered forces on all sides, and was entered into Alexandria, which is one of
the chiefest Cities of Egypt. All the people were very glad to see our Prince
honor the holy places, but the Jews did greatly blame him for so doing, but
they were a people whom the Prince misliked, and called them the accursed
Tamerlan called the Jews the accursed of God.
of God. Axalla gave great gifts and honor unto the holy Sepulcher. Now the
Prince did greatly honor them that were devout, and afterward returned from
thence with commandment that they should advance forward the head of his army
directly unto Damieta, the which was reported unto the Emperor, to be in
expugnable, as well in respect of the Castle, as for that the Sultan had put
many soldiers into the same. Now this is a City upon the sea coast, and one
of the chiefest of Judea, so as the same was in great reputation, for that it
had held out many great sieges, in so much as many did dissuade the Prince from
going thither, but rather for to cause his army to march higher, and not
enclose himself within a corner. But the Emperor who thought nothing could
hinder his good fortune, would needs go thither, and having commanded Axalla to
set upon it, he caused the rest of the army to march thither. Axalla having
summoned them, and declared to the inhabitants, who were most of them
Christians, the mildness, and courtesy of the Prince, who himself was, and
what religion he held, causing many of the Greek Emperors captains to speak
unto them, and made them understand the misery wherein they were obeying
barbarous Mores and Mamelus: they determined to venture their lives, for to put
all the Mamelues out of the city, and all those that favored the Sultan.
Damieta wo^ by intelligence in the night.
So as they having taken arms in the night, made themselves masters of one
quarter of the city, and delivering one gate to Axalla, all the Mamelues were
either slain or taken, and the city put under the obedience of the Prince.
These news being come unto the Emperor, who was already marching forward,
made him hope for a good end of his affairs: for to leave such a city within
the arms of the river Nilus, and himself to pass on further, would be the
destruction of his army. He trusted also that by this haven victuals should
come unto him from all the parts of Greece, according as the Emperor Emanuell
had promised him, and wherein he nothing failed him: unto the which the Prince
having made his entry, there were left in garrison two thousand soldiers of
the Emperor Emanuell his forces, and there he placed a Governor, and caused
them to take an oath of obedience, the Prince desiring to become master
thereof, for to hold the Sultan thereby the more short. The Prince found this
city to be very fair; they of Arissa did the like, and he put garrisons into
all the walled towns upon the sea coast, for to make victuals come (as I have
said) conveniently unto us: for this was the Princes chiefest care, considering
the multitude of his army, the which had felt no want thereof. The Prince
having remained a space at Damieta, he caused his auantguard to march toward
Alexandria, and having passed over the river, even in an instant, he went
directly unto Caire, a thing which did greatly astonish the Sultan, who made
provision for the defense of Alexandria; as soon as he understood these news,
he used so great diligence, that he entered thereinto even as we approached the
same, and he himself in person determined for to defend it, and for to keep
us from passing over the river of Nilus for to go unto Alexandria; they
reported that the Sultan entered thereinto with forty thousand horse, and
threescore thousand footmen. The Emperor could Practice with ^^^ues of Caire.
not believe it: and then was our army at Buldac seven leagues from Caire, at
such time as the Sultan arrived there, who came thither in necessary time: for
the slaves (whereof there be an infinite number) began to settle themselves for
to rebel, and had entered into the same without doubt, the which was very
evil news for the advancement of our affairs: for to remain The Sige of
Caire.
long time before it was impossible for* us to do, by reason of the want of
victuals: yet the Prince notwithstanding all this did not leave to draw near
unto it, and encamped with all his army near unto the same, having caused a
great trench to be made for to cover his horsemen, and thereby for to lodge his
army the more safely. So the Prince during that time, caused diverse onsets to
be made, the which he did, both to know the enemies countenance, as also for to
cause thereby slaves to issue out, who did bring us news in what estate they
were, against whom we always had the better, and shut the^ into the city. Now
it happened that the Emperor one day thought good to show his army before the
city, for to try whether the enemiy had a desire to come unto a day of
battle, and to view what forces he had, and indeed to seek occasion for to
fight: he hoped also that if the enemies did put out all their army, some
revolt would happen within the city, as well by the slaves unto whom liberty
was promised, as of many discontented with the insolences of the Mamelus whom
the Sultan had caused to enter with him. So the Emperor was betimes in battle
array, but no body issued out, contrary to our expectation. The Emperor in the
mean while viewed the situation of the city, and showed unto them his power,
having certified the inhabitants that he sought not their destruction, but only
of the Mamelus his enemies: so as the same being declared by certain slaves of
the nation, who fained to fly from our army, he be thought the^ of the means
how to drive out the Mamelues: the which being made known unto the Emperor by
the slaves, he determined to advance forward his footmen within half a league
of the city, and there to encampe the same determining so thereby the more to
favor the Mores enemies unto the Mamelues, who promised to take arms in his
behalf. The Emperor having sent for the principal leaders of his army, he
propounded unto them that which he had determined for to do, the which he did
as well for to have their advise, as also if the same were concluded upon, for
to make them know his pleasure, and the order wherein they should march: and he
declared unto his Captains how he was come on a sudden before this city, not
imagining the Mamulus should enter into the same, knowing there being none but
the inhabitants he might easily have taken it, and out of the same draw
commodities for the maintenance of his army: but the sudden arriual of such an
army did put great difficulties before his eyes. The first was that he could
not long remain before the City, for the want of victuals, and the season by
reason of the excessive heat was very hurtful unto his men, for that they had
not been thereunto accustomed; that he doubted least he going about to famish
others, mortality should join it self unto the famine, and so come into his
army; that he had bounded his enterprises upon that part between the Cities of
Caire and Alexandria, and this being taken he would return victorious into his
country, and laden with the spoils of all Asia; that it were dishonorable
for him to recoile before the enemies Army with that victory which he had
obtained, a victorious Army Perswasiue reasons of Tamerlan for to ^oue his
soldiers not to return before they had won the City of Caire from the Sultan.
before a conquered and flying Army, the which had done nothing else but seek
the deserts and strong places since the time of the overthrow that the same had
received, not daring for to show it self before ours, very near these three
months; that at this present it was within a great City, acknowledging that
therein they had a great advantage. But on the other side in number of soldiers
he was much their superior, so as the forces being greater which he had, did
counteruaile the enemies walls; and that he did not doubt but our victorious
arms already over the^, would be a terror to make them fly before us, as soon
as we came to hand-blowes with the^; that it was a thing whereon the enemy did
not depend, in thinking himself invincible by means of the tre^ches they had
made within their streets, who do you think will arm themselves when as they
shall see us to set upon them unlooked for. I hold opinion we shall have a
happy end: for it is a more honorable thing then shamefully to retire and
show our backs unto the enemy, who have so often seen our faces unto their
hurt. A thing which the great God has granted us, having been these twenty
years passed in continual wars against so many warlike nations,
notwithstanding by you even the Parthian name has been victorious. To be
short, in doing of this we must by that means bury our reputation and all our
victories, if we should retire this day shamefully from before this City, the
which will come out after us, hindering us from victuals on every side, and
spread a rumor of our disgrace, so as they which do now incline unto us, will
make head against us, and they which do obey will rebel against us: and if we
having lost this occasion, would bend our selves against them, they will
presently run into their dens, so as on every part we shall have great
difficulties. Advise your selves herein, for there are but two ways; either to
raise the siege and retire before their army, or else to assault them. The
Prince by his speech made all the Captains astonished, not knowing well which
of the matches for to take, considering the waightinesse of the matter. This
was also a fight which they had not tried for to force an army within their
walls, notwithstanding they must prefer their reputation before death, and run
into all hazardes. At the last the Prince seeing that none did speak, he
commanded Axalla for to begin and to declare his advise, who did rise up, and
Consultation.
after he had taken leave of the Emperor to show his Axalla his worthy speech
unto Tamerla^ thereupon.
opinion, he said aloude. My Lord, what is this thou do of us demand, have
not thou always tried the courages of thy Captains and soldiers, prefering
the honor of thy reputation, before their own lives? What is it then thou
requirest at our hands? lead us against the Mamelues, and thou shall see
whether the love and true affection to thy service, and desire of the
immortality of thy name be any thing diminished? Do thou think (according to
thy speech unto us) that the walls do hinder our valor, and the force of our
horses? The first horse of ours that shall put his head within Caire will give
entrance for all the Army Axalla had no sooner made an end of speaking, but all
the Captains cried that they might be led unto the fight, and that they were
ready to die for the greatness and glory of their Prince. The Emperor having
thanked the^, began to declare the manner of the order he would his army should
march in: he divided his footmen into three parts, the Lieutenant general of
the footmen marched with 30000. me^. The Prince of Thanais had the head
assisting him with 50000 footmen about his person, and all his horsemen after
him, this day all the horsemen being reserved to atte^d upon his person, having
given unto Axalla in whom he had his chiefest trust, the charge of the whole
army, who was on foot. Now the Princes determination was to take one of the
Cities of Caire, and there to encampe himself, and so to advance forward by
little and little fighting with the enemy. Now within the city the which was over
against us, was the Sultan encamped and all his forces: he had 60000. footmen
and 50000. horse, whereof there were 30000 Mamelues, brave men, and exercised in
warlike affairs, and of whose arms we made trial in the last war; as for the
footme^, they were gathered together out of Arabia, Persia, and Libia, with
many slaves The siege of Caire in Egypt by Tamerlan.
unto whom he had given freedom, his experienced soldiers being ouerthrown in
the last battle. The Emperor who had not declared any thing of the hope he had
in the slaves and Mores, did now utter the same unto Axalla. So after this
conclusion was taken, the Emperor determined to give an assault, and having
brought his footmen unto the place where he would have them give the onset,
even upon the face of their enemies, as soon as he did see that they had set
lustily upon their trenches, he commanded the Prince of Thanais to assault
them with 50000 men: this was a furious fight. In the mean time Axalla went
along by certain palm trees, for that he judged the enemy had forsaken that
place, to go and assist their own men, as soon as they perceived the Prince
of Thanais to enter, wherein he was not deceived: for having found but small
resistance, he passed over the tre^ches, and having received commandment from
the Prince that they should presently make rome for the horsemen to pass,
whither (during the time he employed himself therein) the enemy sent 20000 men
for to stop him; the^ did Axalla advance forward, leaving 3000. of his men to
make an end of filling up the ditches, and himself went to the fight; he found
the Mamelues who fought on horseback, and had almost beaten back the Prince of
Thanais. As soon as the way was made plain, the 10000 horse set forward, who
charged the Mamelues behind, where. the Solda^ himself was. Now the Emperor
caused 10000 more to advance forward, after them he followed with all his
power: then did the enemies retire unto a second trench the which they had made
in another City. The fight had continued full the space of seven hours, and it
could not be judged to which side the victory inclined, for they did
courageously defend their advantages. But the Prince having in the end caused a
retraite to be sounded, contented himself in having driven the enemies out of
their trenches and won their lodging from them, hoping the next day to win all
the rest: we possessed a third part of the City, all the footmen lodging upon
the enemies trench, and there were continual assaults given, so desirous were
our men to overcome. There were slain this day of the enemies, sixteen
thousand men at the least, and of ours, between seven and eight thousand.
Draguen Lieutenant general of the footmen was slain with many of his
soldiers, for he sustained all the brunt of the fight, the stratageme of war
used by Axalla, and his judgment was for us a great advantage. The Prince
about night having aduertisment that the Sultan would retire, and pass over
the river, he forthwith commanded ten thousand horse to lodge themselves that
night for garding of the river banks. But the Sultan thinking those to be all,
the horsemen durst not pass over, having been informed that the whole army was
there. The break of day being come, the Prince caused them to begin to fill up
the enemies tre^ches, and to set his army in batel array. The Prince of Thanais
did once again begin it, and Axalla upon an other side; but after they had
fought, the Sultan determined for to make a retraite and so to go out of the
city. For these footme^ did so obstinatly press on unto the battle, and after
he had performed his endeavor seeing our men already masters of the trenches,
doubting lest he should have our horsemen upon him likewise, he determined to go
out and encamp himself all along the river, and to accomplish the purpose he
had failed in the night. They determined to retire unto Alexandria if he could
pass over the water, and having withdrawn his men from the fight, as well as
he could, he encamped him between the water and the City, for to pass over the
same. As the Prince had passed over the tre^ches, the soldiers killed and
sacked all the whole city as conquerers. The Great Caire won by Tamerlan*
Prince having present knowledge of the Soldans flight, settled himself to
follow him with his horsemen, who only were in order, and having knit together
as he might, some of his footmen busied in the spoil of the city, and being
informed that the enemy passed the water with great diligence, he set forward
directly toward him, for to stop him upon a narrow cawsey, where were certain
marshes made for to stay the over flowing of Nilus: but the Sultan had opposed
12. of 15. thousand men whom he called his slaves, to favor his passage, who
were his best soldiers, and stood firmly, the place being greatly for their
advantage. Now our footmen with whom it be hooued us to fight, were busied in
pillage, and did come forward softly and unwillingly, leaving the city the
which others did spoil: so as the Prince was driven to promise to regard
especially and to acknowledge their good service. Now as soon as they were
come, they forced the enemies, but not without great The courage of the Soldans
men swimming ever the river of Nilus, with one hand, and their weapon in the
other.
loss, they seeing that they could not resist so great a multitude and such a
force, they cast themselves to swimming, and made an honorable retraite: for
every man had his weapons in one of his hands, and with the other hand
swimming, did arrive upon the other bank, one part of the horsemen were cut in
pieces, and the other drowned. This was the end of the Sultan, who staying a
long time (as it is reported) did busy himself in beholding from far, how
they did spoil this great city. Now when the night came upon us, he thought
our men should be sufficiently troubled in enjoying of the victory, without
following of him. It is reported, The Sultan his speech unto those about him
after his over throw at Caire.
he said unto his soldiers, in comforting of them, that they were not men
which had conquered them, but rather some God, so great wisdom, force, and
valor, did he observe in our soldiers. There went away with him some
eighteen thousand horse, the rest were fled sundry ways, and many drowned.
On the morrow he withdrew himself directly unto Alexandria, making much of
those slaves which remained alive, who had so well endeavored themselves for the
safeguard of their Master, having resisted the force of all our Army for the
space of two long hours, yea even after they had made such a glorious and
memorable a retraite. The Prince caused diverse of those which had been taken
in the battle to come before him, and gratified them in what he might, he
gave them presents, and desired to be served by them, but they all refused
that offer: notwithstanding The faithfulness of the Soldans men toward their
Master.
the Emperor (seeing their fidelity toward their master) did not forbear to
give them liberty to go and find again the Sultan: for the Emperor did make
himself to be noted in his victories for some notable act of clemency, a
thing very well Tamerlan merciful.
be seeming great men: for bounty is the part which makes us to beloved, and
valor and force makes us to be feared and admired. The Emperor after he had
beheld this spectable withdrew himself, and caused his pauilion to be placed
between the river of Nile and A wise foresight in Tamerlan after his victory.
the City, for to assure his army, the which he did foresee was easy to be
overcome, during the sacking of so rich and wealthy a city. That night he
mounted on horsbacke, and accompanied with some of his most faithful servants,
did ride thorough all his camp, visiting his guards himself, making much of
his soldiers, and commending them for their endeavors: on the morrow he made
his entry into the city, where there was speech of receiving the Castle,
wherein the Soldans had put their riches, for it was their ancient dwelling:
the which the Prince did in his own person, and lodged himself with all his
army round about the same fortress, the which is at one of the ends of the
city; having given commandment to cease the pillage, the same having
continued the space of 24. hours, and every soldier being also enjoined by
the same proclamation to return under their ensigns, and lodge in the armies
quarter. The Prince commanded the next day, that they should set at The bounty
of Tamerlan.
liberty all the inhabitants of the city, and that he adjudged none unto
bondage. There was within this city an infinite quantity of riches and treasure
^ound, the which they report the Sultan Princes have of long time kept there,
not being suffered to employ any part thereof, but upon great necessity. And
this was in my opinion, one of the chiefest occasions, that made the Sultan
come thither with such diligence as he did. They report also, that in the night
time he had conveyed out of the same place much thereof: and some say, that he
did not enter therinto, and that he took out nothing for fear of making his
soldiers for to think that he would retire, a thing which might bewray the
retrait he meant for to make; others hold opinion, that all the treasure was
there, and that he did not think ever to be forced in such a city, and with
such forces as he had put into the same, referring such a deed of arms unto
the Divinity, wherein his men had bin overcome with such advantage. Now the
Prince after he had certified Calibes of this victory, who was all along by the
river of Euphrates with his army, which daily increased, having taken many
cities, it was a great astonishment unto all Persia, and there rained at that
present time over those Nations a multitude of small kings, some of them
observing the law of the Prophet, the other being Christians. The Prince had a
purpose in his return to subject all that under his obedience; he sent Calibes
word of his victory, and that he gave him the government of all Egypt. So the
Prince having taken order for all that was necessary for the keeping of such a
city, he caused his army to pass over the river for to go and follow the
Sultan unto Alexandria, to the end he should not leave his victory imperfect.
And having caused his auantguard to pass over; and distributed unto every one
before the passage, a reward according to their deserts, Axalla passed over
with the auantguard to go with all speed into Alexandria, for to hinder the
Sultan from joining of his forces together. The Emperor remaining with the
maine forces of the army, did make no longer abode at Caire: for all the
people came and yec^ded themselves unto him, and after he had taken the oath
of fidelity of the people and city, and of all the near adjoining cities,
and having established as great security as he could, he determined to
stretch even so far the borders of Scithia: he left ten thousand soldiers
within that city, and brought away those he thought might hurt him: he
changed almost all the people therein, having a great multitude of men within
his army, of whom he planted every where as he passed new Colonies for to
assure the places, and in a manner even unto Cana all yielded to his obedience:
and Ambassadors came from all parts, as well from Arabia the happy, as out of
all Africa, for to submit themselves under his obedience, so much was the
terror of his name printed in the hearts of all those people adjoining unto his
conquests. And referring the disposing of the affairs of Egypt until his
return from Alexandria unto Caire, his own person went upon the river of
Nilus for his pleasure, having caused all his army to pass over under the
conduct of the Prince of Thanais: and himself with a part of his Tamerlan went
by the river of Nilus unto Alexandria.
soldiers determined to go by water, and causing an infinite number of boats
to be prepared for himself, and those he carried with him, the Prince took
great pleasure in beholding this fair river, and his swift course sometimes,
and in an instant to become so calm. The news being come unto Alexandria of
the marching forward of the army, made the people consult and think upon
their safety: insomuch as going unto the Sultan, they be sought him to have
compassion on their estate* and to withdraw himself into Libia, and for
themselves they were determined for to do as the time served, and not to
resist any more so great a force* against the which they had so often in vain
opposed themselves: but now they knew not what to do, they must give place
unto fortune, and that Tamerlan his Army could not pass strong into Libia:
and if weak, he might defend himself from the same, that they would observe
the faith promised unto him at his coming thither, and upon the first occasion
offered, they would make the same appear unto him, that he would only preserve
his person. The Sultan who did see all things desperate, determined for to
retire, hoping that time would bring unto him some change, as also that our
army would not remain there, and that in the mean time he should have
opportunity to attempt some thing, he went out of the city of Alexandria, The
Soldan^ words when he fled from Alexandria.
the tears in his eyes, repeating often these words; That God was provoked
against his people, and that he must of necessity suffer the fatal overthrow
of so flourishing an estate; that himself had done as much as in him lay,
according to the charge and choice they had made of him; that he hoped to
return with strong forces for to deliver them from that bondage whereinto they
must needs submit their heads, and bear the yoke. These words were declared
unto Axalla, being the most advanced, who sent them unto the Prince: he sent
him word also, that unto Alexandria came much people to obey his commandments,
and that for the space of more then fifty leagues, all came for to submit
themselves unto his obedience. So the Prince, having received these news, he
was very glad: and seeing his purposes so to prosper, he conceived hope of a
happy return. But notwithstanding he was greatly vexed, that he could not get
the Sultan into his hands: this caused the Prince for to use cruelty toward
them which took his part, and carried them with him, doubting some alteration
in his absence. Now as we approached within a days journey unto Alexandria, the
Prince sent word unto Axalla, that he should bring with him the chiefest that
came, promising unto him obedience and fidelity. The Prince having made his
entry into Alexandria with all his army, he encamped the same near unto the
City, and for the safety of his person caused to enter thereinto 6000. horse,
and 20000. footmen, and having given commandment unto Axalla, to pursue the
Sultan with the auantguard, the Emperors person remained long time in
Alexandria, staying until he might hear news from Calibes, unto whom he had
sent Lochestan his great Chamberlain, for to succeed in his place, a man of
good desert, having always commanded over ten thousand horse in the army, who
carrying with him his regiment which was of ten thousand horse, Calibes took as
many for to come forward toward us with all his carriage. Behold how there
needed no mediation with the Prince; he remembering in the absence of his
servants, their valor and deserts, and the honor whereof they were worthy; one
of the parts that did so much reco^mend the Emperor. Insomuch as no man did
sue for anything, neither demanded any honors, or estates near unto his
person* no not for the government of his estate. As we departed from Alcaire
the Emperor received news that the Emperor his uncle was very sick, the which
made him very sad: but he relied upon the wisdom of the Empress his wife,
who would so well gratify the kings and princes his subjects, that there
should happen no trouble when soever this ill hap should fall out. For his
affairs being prosperous, and many victories daily obtained* who was he in all
the world that durst so much as lift up his head against him? much less within
his own kingdoms. The Empress also sent him word, that she looked for his
coming home, unto the circum^ision of his eldest son, who^ God had given
unto him, the which was well nourished, so as in Alcaire were the certain
limits of his conquests, and also of the prosperity of his fathers in
heritance. He had news also that the Chinois would have rebelled, and how the
Viceroy Odmar had punished the^ severely, and had won a battle wherein the
kings brother was slain, so as his borders were on that side most assured, and
increased even unto Cauchechina, after that they went about for to rebel:
notwithstanding, Odmar had a commandment from the old Emperor to pacify and
keep that which he had couquered beyond the river of Flezan. Now Axalla having
passed beyond Alexandria, had thereby given so great a fright unto all Africa
(they supposing that the Emperor did follow) that 22 kings of Libia sent their
Ambassadors unto him, for to offer their obedience unto the Emperor. The
Sultan having passed further forsaken of al his men, who came daily to yield
themselves unto Axalla our Lieutenant general, Arsanibei sent to demand
security of the Arsanibei his ^reachery against Tamerlan.
Emperor, who seeing all things desperate, beseeched him to accept of his
service. The Emperor who was mild, received him courteously, granting unto
him as much as he desired, and thereupon did swear fidelity unto him: but he
had notwithstanding another matter in his mind, for he had promised the Sultan
to give an attempt upon the Emperors person: and there were full four thousand
Mamelues received into the Princes service, who should have done this execution
within Alexandria, where the Prince did continue intending the establishing of
his new conquests. Now the enterprise was appointed in the morning when the
Prince should give audience to every one (according to his custom) having of
his guard only 1200. soldiers, appointed every day out of 10000. ordained for
the preservation of the Princes person: he had also imparted this enterprise
unto diverse of the inhabitants, who should have taken arms as soon as the
same should be executed. Now as the enterprise was dangerous, so seemed it
easy as he thereof persuaded himself, having caused all his men to enter one
by one into the army, whither they had yielded themselves: and it was three
weeks since he devised this enterprise. So the day came when he should do this
execution, the Prince having the day before made him a present of one of the
most coragious horses of his stable, and having commanded his men to show all
courtesy and good entertainment unto him and his company. Now in the morning
he drew near unto the Emperor, who was in his tent, whither every one
repaired that had any business with him. Now you must understand, that
Alexandria is builded in such a fashion, that they go upon the tops of the
houses, the which are in manner of vaultes, where the traitor had secretly
placed those who should assist him after the mischief were committed. He came
then and showed himself a far off; the Prince (full of gentleness) asked him
what he desired, astonished notwithstanding that he came into that place which
was not fit for his dignity, the Prince only ministering justice for those which
had not access unto his person, as were the poor people and soldiers: but he
knew not yet that custom: so as the Prince perceiving him change color in
holding some petition, the Prince had always an eye to that he did; on a
sudden he drew near unto the Prince, with his sword in his Tamerlan his
great danger and valiant defense of him self, to the mischief of the traitor.
hand: the Prince having his ready as soon as he, missed not him as he had
done; the Prince retired back one pase for to avoid the thrust he cast at him:
the Emperor having stricken him, did almost cut off one of his arms, the which
he put forward for to strike him. In this instant they ran unto the Princes
succor, and one of his servants coming, did give him another blow upon the
head: but a small matter wherewith he fell down. The Prince having stayed them
from killing of him, to the end he might know his companions, then cried he
out, and with great lamentations bewailed his good master, sending unto him
this his deed, as the last witness of his fidelity. The Prince demanded of
him, wherefore he did not kill him in the battle, but would traitorously at
this present under the pretense of friendship and service take his life from
him? The other answered only; let me die, let me die. The chief Judge of the
Imperial Justice took and examined him, together with the Princes most privy
Council. In the mean time they caused every man to take arms, the Princes
horsemen mounted on horseback, the gards were increased, they made the haven
sure, the Prince withdrew himself into his lodging, being happy that he had
saved his life from this blow. You might have seen both Captains and soldiers
run unto the Emperors lodging, and would have forced the guards for to see
whether the Prince were well, who was desirous to take rest: he was compelled
to show himself unto his Captains and soldiers, for to assure the^ of his
health: yea he was constrained to mount on horsbacke, and to go every where
even into the camp. And at such time as they did see the Prince, you would
have said, that the heavens did break with cries, through the joy they made
over all for the health of their Prince, so great Idolaters were the soldiers
of their Emperor. The other was presently put to the torture, who courageously
confessed all the enterprise requiring death. Some went unto the place where
the named were; there were three hundred yet shut up, who were all tied and put
in prison, the others sought out here and there. He missed not to accuse those
of the city, unto whom he had delivered letters of credit from the Sultan. The
Prince who was an enemy unto cruelty, perceiving that the end of this
business would prove long, he went out of Alexandria, for that he knew the
discovery of all the partakers, and to the end execution might be made of
those of the enterprise. It was a miserable spectacle to behold all these
things thus performed within the City, at such time as they apprehended the
conspirators, who being convinced, were put to death openly: and the game began
at Arzambei, who being Arzambei beheaded for treason against Tamerla^, with
diverse of his companions at Alexandria
strangled, his head was set up for a memory of that treason upon the market
place, and his body divided into four quarters. And the very same punishment
was taken of all the conspired inhabitants of the city, or any others. Those
which were suspected, and might any ways be detected, were led away
prisoners, and made slaves, being changed from that place. Behold the end of
this conspiracy, the which the valorand majesty of the Prince alone did
defend, and no other force at all: but as I have often heard the Prince say, he
had an imagination, that this mad fellow would do him some mischief, and if it
had not been for fear of committing any thing unworthy his greatness and
faith given, he would have caused him to be apprehended, but he had good regard
unto his practices. The Prince was often wont to say, that he did not fear
such wicked A resolute saying of Tamerla^
murderers, for that he had a good keeper near unto him: and this he meant
(as I understood afterward) by a defending Angel, whom he called Meaniel,
unto whom it was enjoined (as he said) by God, for to defend him against all
dangers, whose picture he carried as a mark in his ensigns and impreses,
causing the croissant mark of the Ottomans to be blotted out of all Asia, and
his own to be planted there. Now Axalla having passed further, and made the
Princes arms to be felt over all, having also brought all the nether Libia to
be subject unto Alexandria: the Prince finding this country to be very fair
and pleasant, he looked daily for the coming of Calibes, and he in the mean
time ordered the affairs of his new estate, causing his Army to refresh it
self, the which was spread over all: he suffered none but Axalla to keep the
order of an army before him. The heat was very great at that present, the
which our soldiers did endure with great discommoditie: the Parthians
especially whose temperate climate does incline more unto cold then heat. This
being ended, the Emperor returned into Alexandria, whither diverse Ambassadors
from the kings of Libia and Barbary came unto him, swearing obedience Obedience
sw^^ne unto Tamerlan by almost all the kings of Afri^^
of fidelity between his hands. The nearest gave hostages for the other
further off: the Prince contented himself with their faith, and with the
outward signs of their good wills. Behold how every one came to acknowledge
this new Lord, and he would have the great enlargeme^t of the bounds of his
Empire appear unto the world. Now the Prince had a desire more then he used to
have, to see the sweetness of his native country, age bringing unto him a desire
to rest himself. And he was wont to say, that he had heard the Emperor his
father declare, that the favor of fortune was at his period unto a man of 45*
years of age, for any increasing; that it A strange opi^ion in Tamerlan of
Fortu^es favor.
behooued after that time to study how to preserve it, and not any more to
augment the same: because fortune does often change her countenance, like unto
that of man, the which does become wrinckled and old. He had moreover, to
perform the building of Samarca^d, where he meant to eternize his memory, the
which he greatly desired: so as he was curious to search in all parts
artificers and skillful men for to send thither, and all the fair people he
could find in any place where he was the co^queror. In this very place he said
that he would make his tomb, where he had received breath, weighing it in a
just and equal balance, to deliver unto the earth the same which it had
brought forth, without using any ingratitude unto the same. And he being one
day demanded by a Pagan (unto who^ he made this discourse, and who beheld his
stately tomb) where he would build one for his soul? The Prince showed unto
him heaven, saying, that it should return to heaven, from whence it did come:
for this same (said he) is a parcel of the high God* And seeing we are come
unto this matter, I will speak a word thereof by the way: which was, that being
one day reprehe^ded by one of his great Priests, because he did not constrain
with the sword, all religions to embrace his. Ah my friend (said he) I will
never do The Author says, that this may be praised in a Pagan and infidel, not
in a Christian Prince.
it: for I cannot believe but God is delighted with the diversity of religions,
hating only those which are without any religion; and my self would willingly
have root^d out from the face of the earth such kind of people, but not the
other. I believe the fashion I use in praying unto God, is the most acceptable
unto him, and therefore I serve him in this manner. This is the cause wherefore I
suffer within my dominions every one to worship God in any manner whatsoever, so
as his principal end be ^o honor, and not to despise him. I have said this by
the way; seeing I write this history for you, it is very convenient I declare
unto you what his religion was. This was his manner also, that whenever he did
speak of God, it was with so great reverence, that he durst not almost lift up
his eyes alo^t, so fearful was he of the sovereign majesty: and of all men I
did never see any more fearful of the divinity. He was also wont to say, that
every one should continue in that wherein he was borne and first instructed, if
it were of that religion as served one only God. Our Prince had so good
conditions and so agreeable unto every one, that it shall be hard for me to
utter and declare them unto posterity, neither can I sufficiently commend
them, nor lively represent them in that perfection I desire, as I have
undertaken for to do. Now for to return again unto our history, the Emperor
received news of Calibes marching forward, and of receiving his great
Chamberlain into his Army. We looked for his coming with great devotion,
being daily desirous to return, after we had run so many forrtunes of all
kinds, and the Prince having subdued and brought under his obedience so many
sundry people. Axalla was commanded to march toward us* and the whole Army
was summoned from all parts for to assemble themselves together. The Prince
carried away from Alexandria even to the number of seven or eight thousand men,
and put thereinto for to inhabit other people, whom he had brought from sundry
places: he left therein six thousand horsemen, and ten thousand footmen: he
appointed a sufficient Gouerner under Calibes, who arrived there presently. The
Emperor after he had declared unto him his pleasure, and appointed what he
should do, the Army was commanded to set forward directly toward Caire:
the Prince having left within Alexandria Zamolzan, a man of great reputation,
to be Lieutenant general under Calibes. The number of forces left by the
Prince unto the said Gouerner, was forty thousand horse, and fifty thousand
footmen, whereof part were dispersed into all the strong places and forts, and
principally all along the sea side: the rest were left in the plain fields
toward Alexandria, where Zamolzan commanded them. Staying until such time as
the Prince were departed from Caire, whether he did go for to conduct Calibes,
whom (as I have said) the Emperor had appointed for to command over all Syria
and Egypt, together with Calibe^ made Governor of Siria with the rest conquered
in Africa.
the countries newly conquered in Libia and Barbary. Then the Emperor after he
had taken order for all things belonging unto the preservation of his new
conquest, perceiving that every one of those countries did like well of his
government, acknowledging his great mildness and great Justice observed every
where, it seemed that every one did like well of this change, and to be
governed by so victorious a Prince, and whose power was so great for to de^end
them. So after he had received the solemn oath of the people, as well of
Alexandria, of Caire and other Cities, of all Syria and the bordering
countries: we began to set forward our Auauntguard, and the Battle with the
Prince of Tha^^^^. So the Emperor dis^issed Calibes, after he had instructed
him, after what fashion he would have those kingdoms governed, over the which
he had given him charge, and himself having friendly committed them unto God,
not as a master, but like a companion, he seemed to be sorry for to leave
them destitute of his presence. The Prince himself with few returned unto
Tamerlan his devotion (...) Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, where he remained eleven days, for to visit daily the Sepulcher
of Jesus Christ the God of the Christians: and was curious to bring away great
quantity of the earth from that place; saying that he would honor therewith
the places of devotion within his new City. He was also desi^o^s for to ^ee
the (...) of Solomon his Temple; saying, that he would cause one to be builded
like unto that at Sa^aroand* In like sor^ did he wonder at Jerusalem the seat
of D^uid^* kingdom, and of that great Solomon: he lamented the ruins
thereof, for that he did not see them fully in their former beauty, so
greatly did the devotion unto all holiness conduct him. He only despised the
Jews, which had committed so cruel a murder against him who came to save
them. The Emperor having this affection Tamerlan, granted great privileges
unto Jerusalem.
unto Jerusalem, did declare the same to be free from all subsidies, and
garrisons of men of war. He gave great gifts unto the Monasteries* and
honored them as long as he remained in that place. I will return to declare
how the great Chamberlain, as soon as he was come into his Army, had
besieged a City called Meleg upon the river of Euphrates, staying for the
Emperor, the which being brought unto great necessity, and even after he had
greatly battered the same, was constrained for to raise the siege from before
it, being succored by all the Lords of Quilean, of C^ld^r, and others
assembled, believing the Empero^s was overthrown, by one only report they
had received from certain false messengers; in so much as that which was
peaceable before, presently was in arms, and he had upon his arm all the
forces thereabout. He in the mean time remained within his Camp, having no
commandment from the Prince to give any battle, and being retired himself
all along the river of E^phrates, The great Chamberlain his dis^r^^t cariag^
of himself in Ass^ria and Persia*
the enemies pa^sing over the river, began to press upon him for to fight: he
which had no such commission, kept himself as well as he could within his
trenches, having already advertised the Emperor of all that had passed, and
not thinking of the enemies rashness, could not imagine they would come and
assault him within his trenches; but being grown vainglorious by repulsing of
him from before the City, they did attribute unto themselves therefore a great
glory, and unto us a great disgrace: so as they desired when their soldiers
had this advantage, to win a greater for the^, if they could. So they
determined to force our Camp, over the which commanded a Captain, who was (as
they supposed) more trained up within the Court then in Armies. (And certainly
the fear and reputation of Calibes was great, the which made him feared: for
when they reckened up the names of our chief Captains, next after Axalla they
put the name of Calibes for his valor and experience.) So far forth that
despising this new head, they busied their heads in thinking the victory to be
on their sides most certain, for lack of experience in him which commanded
it, by reason of his youth. So in a morning they came and lodged their Camp
near unto ours: the great Chamberlain having commanded his soldiers not to
issue out of the Camp, but for to defend themselves with the advantage they
had by reason of their trenches, and set his army in order* disposing thereof
for the better defense of the same; and having of that, as of other matters*
taken the advice of hi^ Captains* he st^^ed for the enemies with this
resolution assuring himself by that means they would not disobey the Prince^
commandment. The enemies failed not with all sorts of cries forceably to come
and assault our Camp: they were in number 50000* footme^, who in two several
places gave the assalt* Now the camp was made in that fashio* that a certain
place to issue out was left in the same* by the which the horsemen might go unto
the battle, and fight under the safeguard of the trenches, of which cunning
the enemies did nothing at all doubt. For they had sent their horsemen unto the
other side of a little river, by the which they doubted that our men, not having
the courage to sustain the fight, and seeing themselves assalted, would fly
away, to the end they might set upon them in their retrait. Now our men were no
more but eighteen thousand horse, and forty thousand footmen: there was indeed
therein a great multitude of cariages and prisoners, whom the great
Chamberlain had caused to work so well in the intrenching* that they were
stronger then the City they had besieged; and from whence they had raised
their siege. So the ^ight endured two or three hours, when as he perceiving
that our men did courageously repulse them, and that an infinite number of the
enemies were slain, the Chamberlain thought it a ^it time to assalt them: so
The pollitick^ and valiant service performed by the great Chamberlain.
he issued out of the Camp by the same place that I have declared, with ten
thousand of the best horses within his Army, and having first given order to
busy them, he came and set upon them on a sudden; and sl^e a great number of
them, in so much as ou^ men became weary with killing, their horsemen being
advertised often his evil hap befallen unto their ^ootmen; thought good to
repa^^e again this river* the which the great Chamberlain perc^^^ing,
founde^d the retraite, not willing to hazard any thing to no good purpose: for
their horsemen were in n^^erfull (...) thousand. This day did they lose five and
twenty thousand men, that were slain as well in the field, as in the fight of
the trenches. The (...) of the faction was ^^aine* who was called (...) king of
A^^e^^ia. In this mean time the Prince who had received news of his Armies
disgrace, had dispatched Axalla with speed, for to advance himself forward with
the Parthian horsemen, for the assistance of the great Chamberlain. And Axalla
having received news of the victory within two or three days journey, he
sent word of the same unto the Emperor, during which time he remained at
Damasco, staying for the Princes commandment: who after he had received these
news did publish the same over all, and especially advertised Calibes thereof,
to the end the same should stay their troublesome spirits, who already did
believe that the Army of the great Chamberlain was overthrown. I will
declare by the way, that I marked in the Prince a greater joy for this
victory, then I did note in him for any other he had where his own person
commanded. And this he did in my opinion, for that he rejoiced that he was not
deceived in the choice which he had made of the great Chamberlain, who was as
yet too young for such a charge. For he thought this same would yield matter
unto some for to blame him, not to have sufficiently weighed such a charge: but
seeing the wisdom he had showed in keeping his advantage, and likewise the
obedience and respect he had unto the Princes commandment, this same did
greatly content him. Some also report, that the Prince would not busy himself
any longer, desiring to return unto his ancestors kingdoms, for to assure
them, fearing least the long time of his absence should cause some ^edicions,
by reason of some disgrace his Army might receive at the length: and therefore
he would return and pass over the Mountains of Ima^s before the rigor of
winter came, the which drew near. Prince Axalla was commanded to abide and
attend the Emperors coming who marched forward, putting garrisons in the
strong forts of Judea and Siria, and dispeopling all those places he thought
were likely to revolt in his absence. The which was not done without
dismanteling of all those towns he meant not for to keep; commanding the like
to b^e done throughout all Egypt. I have forgotten to declare how the Prince
dismissed the aid sent unto him from the Emperor of Greece, having first
given great presents unto the Captains and also unto the Lieutenant of the
late Prince Ca^ta Cusni, so that the meanest soldier rested well contented,
assuring you that our Prince was much renowned, for knowing how to bound his
ambition, who knew how to stretch the same over all the world: for having with
good success joined thereunto the Empire of the Sultan, it had been easy for
him to have made Constantinople the principal seat of his conquests, and by
these means to join all his countries together, whereof the Sea might have
been his limits: the which being declared unto him by one of his counselors
that kept the seal, whom they call Chanceller, An^table conference ^etwhen
Tamerlan and his great Cha^celler
and whom the Prince did credit in many of his affairs, that such large bounds
it was easy for him to have at his return, saying unto him; that it behooved
great men to use their faith and friendship unto their most advantage; and that
he was a public person, under whose government so many people and several
nations did wholly repose themselves; and that he should not neglect so great a
benefit, which would bring so much glory and greatness unto the Parthian
nation. He answered, that he liked better to leave their limits founded upon
his virtue, then increased to his dishonor by infidelity. Whenever the
Greek Emperor shall give me any other occasion, then as a friend and good
neighbor, then shall he feel my power, and God will assist my good cause. I
think (my friend) that I never did any thing more of the honor and glory of
my Empire, and unto the Parthian nation, then for to leave a memorial unto
posterity, that a Parthian Emperor did come so long a journey, for to
minister justice upon such a tyrant dog as Bajazet: and for to set at
liberty this worthy nobility, whom he would bring into bondage. And having
power to perform it, I have not done the same, but have in such sort bounded
my ambition, as to abstain from commanding over the fairest and richest
Empire, and for to govern the most beautiful City in the world. I will
reason with you (my friend) and say, that I have not obtained any such
victory as that is, although I be the Conqueror of so many several people
and nations so far off, and that my Arms, even unto this present, through
the almighty favor of the great God my God, have always been victorious. It
is an ordinary matter to win battles, to conquer kingdoms, and for to
prescribe laws unto Empires, many have done the same: but there be few to be
found amongst the great Princes and Potentates, who have balanced justice and
equity with their ambition: but putting themselves by right or wrong into the
midst of the world, have held only force for justice, the which some have
used, not having regard either unto equity or faith. I will at the least wise
leave this example unto posterity. Do you not see how this faith which I keep
with mine enemies, makes them become my faithful friends? What force and
virtue (think you) will it have with them which be my friends already? And how
greatly shall my honor and reputation be increased? Commend me then I pray
you, and leave to blame me. The Chanceller being returned from him, who was
very wise, declared this discourse unto me, the which I would not omit, to
make the good nature of my Prince the better known, whose history I do set
forth. As also that his conditions should be the better represented before
the eyes of those which have not diligently considered the same: or rather for
such as hear speech of the blessing that God has bestowed upon him in so
many happy conquestes, to the end his goodness should be acknowledged, and
not attributed unto fortune or blind chance, the which raises up the vicious
as soon as the virtuous. So the Prince came unto Damasco, where he found
Axalla, who stayed his coming with the Auaunt-guard, who had made an end of
utterly destroying it, for that he Damasco destroyed by Tamerlan.
knew the same to be evil affected. His Army encamped eight days therein,
Prince Axalla having received commandment to send six thousand horse unto the
great Chamberlain, to the end that he might pass over the river of Euphrates
with safety: and he went to besiege Mebeg again, the which within three days
he took, and Raflan also, and all the country yielded unto the Emperors
obedience, and especially the Cities situated upon the river of Euphrates. The
Prince gave vno him a commandment, to stay at the passage for to join with
him, and himself in person to come vno him: all the which he performed
accordingly. The Prince did give him very good entertainment, greatly
commending his valor and courage before all the Captains of the Army, and
afterward sent him back unto his charge, having commandment to join a part
of his forces with those of Axalla, and himself was appointed unto the
Tamerlan* with his Army marched into Persia.
Arier-guard, over the which Calibes had been leader: although indeed our Army
marched all in a front: for the Prince marched in the midst, Axalla on the
right hand, and the great Chamberlain upon the left: the Prince of Thanais was
in the Battle near unto the Prince. I do not here set down by name so many
Princes and other great Captains, the which commanded over troops as well of
horse as footmen. So the Emperor came unto Mebeg, where he passed over the
river of Euphrates, from the which place he sent other ten thousand horse unto
Calibes, under the conduct of the Prince of Atacen, together with fifteen or
sixteen thousand footmen for aid, he being commanded to take his way by
Babylon, and to make the same subject unto the Prince; and he remained in the
same place to understand what success Atacen had, he being also commanded to
remain in that same place to hear news from Calibes, and to advertise him
what need he had of him, the Emperor having been certified of some stirring of
the Sultan. Notwithstanding Calibes sent word, that they came from all parts to
submit themselves under the Princes obedience. In the end, after some abode, he
caused the front of his army to march directly into Armenia, being desirous to
pass by Diaberoth, and punish these little kings, who had rebelled against his
men, being also desirous to bring under the subjection of the Parthian Empire
those countries which lie even at the mouth of Euphrates, which the Prince of
Atecen did happily bring to pass: and Ambassadors came from all the kings
which commanded to take the oath of fidelity for the same: for you must
understand, that since the Empire of the Christians, which they call Romans,
they were sometimes governed by the Ottomans, sometimes by the Soldans,
sometimes by the Califes, and sometimes by the Lieutenants general of the
Romans; so as these people were now at the strongest, but greatly destroyed by
means of these wars. Now the Prince would assure himself of the passage over
the river of Euphrates, for to succor from thence the provinces of Egypt, at
such time as they should have need thereof: and being ready to draw straight
into Armenia, he received news from Calibes, beseeching his Majesty to
dispatch aid unto him. Presently Aid sent unto Calibes into Egypt.
was the Prince of Atacen sent back again, and commanded to set forward into
Egypt, and the Prince in person went unto Babylon, leaving Axalla with the
Auaunt-guard, not to leave the iourny into Armenia. The Prince being advised to
go thither himself in person, to the end for to bring unto them a great
astonishment and assurance in his bounty, when they would trust to the same.
We came in eleven days unto Babylon: the Prince having received all those
people under his obedience, he left the great Chamberlain at Romedat for to
fortify it, and also for to command all the river of Euphrates, even to the
Armenians. He reco^mended unto him the inhabitants of Babylon, who had showed
themselves very affectioned toward him, and the which was almost wholly
peopled by the Tartarians: for the late Prince of Sachetay his father having
made an enterprise thither, did take the same, and for the better keeping
thereof, he caused the Parthian Colonies to come thither; who in the end were
so vexed by their neighbors, as well Mamelues as Persia^s, that they were of
necessity compelled to submit themselves under their Empire, the affection and
remembrance of their ancient original remaining always with them. The
Emperor for this consideration showed them all mildness, and upon this
occasion desired to make himself Lord of this country, by this right, that
the late Prince his father had once conquered it by a Lieutenant general of
his, called Sahali, whose remembrance was yet very fresh, for the services he
had done unto the Empire of Sachetay. From this place the Prince returned in
great have, being advertised by Prince Axalla, how the Persian Guines came to
visit him in peaceable Guines the holy Persian.
manner, for to submit under his obedience whatsoever countries he held, the
which were not many. The Emperor who did wonder at his holiness, and honored
him, having understood thus much, made haste to set forward for to honor him
the more: for he held an opinion always of him as of an holy personage, in so
much as the Emperor was determined for to see him, for the estimation of his
holiness and religion. Now understanding that he came in this manner toward
him, he left his troops to come softly under the charge of the Prince of
Thanais, and himself advanced forward unto Axalla, who looked for the Persian
Guines: who presently dispatched toward him the Prince of Liseauceu and the
great Chanceller for to gratify him, and to assure him of the great desire the
Emperor had of his coming. The Prince wondering greatly at his holy life,
determined to yield him all the honor he could possibly, and to devise all
means to pleasure him. So the Emperor set forward to meet with this Guines,
who did come in The strange coming of Guines unto Tamerlan.
very humble manner, bringing also with him an infinite number of sundry
kinds of beasts, the which he kept tame, and by the which he taught men. As
soon as he did see the Emperout, he began to make his prayers toward the
heavens, for the greatness of the health of the Emperor, for the greatness
of the religion of the Prophet, excommunicating with all his power the
Ottomans, as enemies unto the faithful believers. The Emperor who came in
great pomp, was greatly astonished, to see this man in such furniture as he
was, and as he was by nature, a great wonderer at such kind of of people, there
was he more then ever before: and being willing to gratify him, he offered him
part of the enemies spoils he had conquered, giving unto him fifteen or
sixteen thousand prisoners, to the end they might be instructed in his
religion, a present the which was very acceptable unto Guines, in as much as
this same did greatly help to augment and also increase him, causing the most
part of them to conform themselves according to his manners and opinion. But
as this devout humor pleased the Emperor, so diverse on the other side did
reprove the strange fashions in this Prince, who through holiness knew well
how to bring so many countries under his obedience. Now diverse blamed the
Emperor for making so great account of his holiness: but when I consider the
honor and reverence which man owes unto religion, I am not of those, which
will say, that a prince ought not to have so much thereof: for certainly it is a
thing whereof any do seldom complain. Now after all this great show of
religion, he came not unto the Emperor for nothing, but rather for two ends,
whereof the one was, the fear he had of Guines religion abused for the
increase of his greatness.
this army, which he desired to be favorable unto him: and the other, to
receive by means thereof, increase of his affairs, under show of devotion,
knowing the Emperor to be inclined as much as might be to godliness, and also
that he might be always near unto the Emperors person, as protector of all
the countries near unto him, the which by his means and intercession did
submit themselves under the Princes greatness: and himself was the first that
thereunto did willingly submit all the jurisdiction he had, although the
Emperor made no request for the same. But this humility did serve him to good
purpose, and to his successors also: for this was his preservation, and the
foundation of their greatness: so as the Prince, having subdued all Persia
excepting Tauris.
the city of Tauris, the which is a very great and rich city, and having made
unto it self a peculiar kind of government, did hinder as much as in it lay,
the greatness of Guines, and a great part of the country also that was
obedient unto him, and in the same was a Captain who did command them, called
Talismahar, who Talismahar.
was thoroughly advertised of the credit Guines had with the Emperor, and who
would not fail to solicit him for to enterprise and conquer this city, and
thereof change also the government: and he having an opinion that the Emperor
being desirous to return, would not busy himself about him, if he set but a
countenance of well defending of himself, and so having taken such order, he
sent his Ambassadors unto the Emperor for to inform him of the usurpations
Guines had made, and his purposes under the pretense of a fained religion. The
Emperor would hear nothing of all that he sent him word. But he himself
would declare his own reasons, and would demand the ancient right his
predecessors had unto this country: or for want thereof, he would make
appear how hurtful the same would be unto the^. The Emperor omitted not to
here them, and noted very well the means he might have to make himself
greater through these divisions: acknowledging and considering well thereof, he
found that every where they did abuse the same, and especially that the cloak
of religion is big and large enough for to cover all the world: but he
dissembled it, and setting forward carried Guines with him, and received a new
oath of all the people, and in the strong cities he planted new Colonies: to
conclude, the Emperors determination was to bring all Persia under his
subjection. Now Prince Guines having already submitted himself under his
obedience, had given an example unto many: but the Emperor who considered
that Tauris was a great city, and the chiefest of that country, he sought to
have practices under hand, having sent some of his men unto this end, promising
unto this Captain a government within his own country: but he who was
hated of Guines, could not assure himself, so as he persuaded the people to
resolve upon the extremity of a siege, the which did greatly displease the
Emperor, unto whom it being declared, that the presence of Guines was very
prejudicial unto him, for the bringing of this city under his obedience, he
advertised him thereof, and having presented him with all sorts of gifts and
honors, he returned from thence into his own country, having remained with
the Emperor some fifteen days: the borders of his dominion stretched from
Saucausan on our side, and on the Axalla marched with his army into the
country of Tauris.
other side, even unto the Caspian sea. Now Axalla was commanded to advance
forward with the auantgard: and as soon as he entered into the territory of
Tauris, to put unto fire and sword all them which should resist him. Behold how
the Emperor could serve himself with this occasion, for to put under his
subjection all Glautere and Taperestan, the which until this present had
maintained themselves against the often roades of the Tartarians. Now as soon
as Talismahar understood our army approached unto his territory, he entered
into opinion to advance forward with all his horsemen, and some footmen for to
furnish the strong places, the which might busy the Emperors army. He had
with him full thirty thousand good horse, he being also a most famous
Captain, being able greatly to distress our army, the which was we arie with
wants, and through the long time it had marched and encamped, even unto the
beginning of winter. But the inhabitants of Tauris being very light and
inconstant, he thought that the events of war are doubtful, and oftentimes
uncertain, and that if there should happen any disgrace unto his army, he
doubted least some change and alteration should happen within the city, where
he hoped to find his chiefest safety. He therefore sent his horsemen under
the charge of one of his Lieutenants called Camares, who Camares.
was of very great experience, he being enioined to weary our army, and if he
found opportunity to fight with it, assuring himself that there would be
sufficient to assault the same: but above all, that he should fight by surprise,
and not in open battle, knowing well, that so great a multitude of men did take
up a great country, and lay strongly being joined together. The Emperor being
advertised of this resolution, sent word thereof unto Axalla, to the end he
should not be assaulted on a sudden, and having summoned a city the which they
called Cafechion, Camares had put men thereinto when he did see our army go
that way, so as the same made a refusal. Now Axalla having invested it, he
began to assault the same, having with the great number of pioners he had,
raised up a Caualier, the which did defend our men approaching unto the wall,
and from whence likewise they did continually fight with them that were within,
who did resolutely defend themselves. Axalla having assaulted them on every
side, in the end they were overcome, their courages failing them, and also
because they were almost all wounded, our soldiers entered thereinto, and so
they were all cut in pieces. About the time that our men spoiled, and put all
unto fire and sword, the Emperor being as yet three leagues from the siege,
Camares showed himself with his horsemen, and began the Encounters between
Axalla and Camares Lieutenant unto Talismahar.
fight upon two thousand horse, the which some had caused to advance forward on
a sudden, doubting of the enemy, and they came even where the maine battle
of Axalla was, driving that troop forward in fight, but wisely and like a
Captain, advancing no more then four thousand horse to perform this exploit,
and him self coming after in very good order, and having caused the retrait
for to sound, Prince Axalla commanded six thousand Parthian horse for to
follow them, and if they could mingle themselves amongst them, the which being
very well and diligently performed by the Captain which did conduct the^, the
auant-currers of these four thousand horse, having perceived Axallaes maine
forces to advance forward, following the lightness of these Parthians, began
presently to turn themselves, and retire in very good order, leaving the four
thousand horse to make head against the six thousand Parthians,
notwithstanding in retyring themselves in the end, at the passage of a river,
Camares did stay, and put all his troops in battle array, assisting of his
men, who were somewhat pressed by the enemy, although the fight was in a
manner equal, and there were some six or seven hundred men slain of either
side, Camares making a show of lodging, was careful for to send to defend all
the passages. Axalla having advanced forward the footmen with him, forced the
passage, and found the enemy retired ten leagues beyond the same, who wisely
had put into a city near adjoining, a sufficient garrison for to defend it,
and hold out for the space of eight days: and Camares in the mean time did
weary our army, and made great spoil of all kind of victuals, hoping to draw
things into length. But the example of those the which had been handled so
roughly, caused them not to be so obstinate: for it is a Maxim to A Maxim.
shorten the war, that by punishing well the obstinate by their lives, the
neighbors become wise through their example, not to play the fools in the
same manner: so did it fall out with Gorgechin, the which in steed of being
obstinate, came to parley, and was received by composition, and well used.
Axalla being advertised that Camares was at Archiech, ten leagues beyond that
place, he made choice of ten thousand Parthians, and of six thousand
Scithians, and of ten thousand choice Stradiots, determining for to surprise
the enemy, and caused a rumor to be spread by some sent between, that they of
Gorgechin looked for his succor, and had not yielded themselves; and that they
did greatly batter the same, the which Axalla hoping to accomplish, A
stratageme.
advanced directly toward them, having commanded the rest of the army to
approach as near as they could. By this means he surprised them in a morning,
being encamped within a great village, and having found a thousand of their
horsemen at their ease, he caused them to be pursued even into the camp, and
putting himself into battle array, to the end they should not come forth
without fighting, he encamped himself upon the ways into their camp,
hoping very soon either to famish them, or for to compel them to come unto a
battle. Now there was but one way to issue out in order: the Prince Axalla
having caused the footmen he had with him to advance forward, he placed the
same upon the ways unto their camp. Now they had left their footmen behind
them, and had none but their horsemen, the which Prince Axalla perceiving, he
caused trenches to be made for to hinder them, and having sent word unto the
Emperor of this deed, he set forward with all diligence. Now Camares thought
he had all the whole army upon him, therefore he began to think upon his
safety, seeing himself compelled for to fight, having but one issuing place,
the which was upon the side of the enemies camp. Now he had caused a
counter-trench to be made, the which was along by a little mountain, wherewith
he hoped to strengthen himself so well, as to set himself in battle array,
and to force four thousand horse which were his guard. I have forgotten to
declare, that the Emperor as soon as he had received these news, caused the
Prince of Thanais to march on forward, with twenty thousand horse that were
already arrived, the which caused our enemies to believe that our whole army
was encamped. Now the enemy was determined to make his retrait, and for to cut
in pieces this standing watch of four thousand horse, and this matter fell out
about midnight, when as the Moon did shine bright. Prince Axalla by chance
came to visit his watches, and had some 2000. horse which followed him, and he
being advertised that the enemy caused fires to be kindled within the
counter-trenches, the which we sought to force and win, he doubted of that the
enemy did in deed: so as he secretly commanded all the army to mount on
horseback, notwithstanding this could not be so soon performed, that the
enemy had not first attempted forceably to execute his enterprise, and began
to put two thousand horse before him, for to try the hazard of fortune, who
ran clean through the guards which were on foot. Now our men had already
begun a counter-trench for to be opposite against that same which they had
made. This did hinder them, and our soldiers hearing the noise, began to
take arms, and to resist the enemies, who did strongly assault our men, and
upon their first coming being followed by certain footmen, they did win our
counter-trench, and began to labor for to level the same, for to pass over
their horsemen, where happened a very great disorder: for our footmen being
astonished, their horsemen having passed, the most part of them were cut in
pieces, wherein the enemies busying themselves longer then they should have
done, our men were soon upon them (the which were the six thousand horse that
were in guard half a league from thence) who arriving found the enemies in this
disorder, and charged upon them: but Camares was already passed over the
first trench. About the same time Prince Axalla (who was on horseback) being
advertised of this disorder, came unto the allarum with two or three thousand
horse, the which The ^aliantnesse of Axalla.
were presently in a readiness, and finding the danger of his men, did hazard
himself into the fight: but the enemy made no head at all, but did
continually retire, Axalla always joining together those of the camp, who
came unto the allarum: but the enemy coming unto a passage, the which place
Axalla had commanded six thousand men for to keep, the enemy not thinking
to find any hinderance there, was beaten back: he busied himself in seeking
for to force the passage. In the end he went lower for to pass over, resolved
for to fight if they did urge him to it. Now Axalla The battle between Axalla
and Camares.
following him very near, the enemy turned his head, and like unto a furious
beast, he came unto the charge very courageously as one desperate, and
returning in good order, he found Axalla, who was in the forefront of seven
thousand horse that followed him: the other had yet also twelve or thirteen
thousand horse with him. It behooued Axalla to show his courage and valor at
this present: for seeing himself engaged, he did run thorough the thirteen
thousand horse, and having his horse slain underneath him with the blow of a
lance, upon the second charge he was mounted again and succored, at such
time as behold eight or ten thousand horse, led by Damascen (whom Axalla had
commanded to assist and follow him, who did bear the brunt of all) arriving,
they found our men almost all overthrown, notwithstanding maintaining the
fight resolutely. Then was the enemy forced to forsake the place of fight, our
men overthrowing them. Camares seeing such evil hap light upon him, together
with The overthrow and death of Camares.
them that were joined with him, threw himself headlong, and was slain
fighting, the fight was performed all by Moon light. The Prince of Thanais
remained within the camp for to guard it. In the morning the Emperor in
person arrived, who found this fair sight, and as he commended the valor of
Axalla and his diligence, so he blamed the Captains who were in guard, because
they had ill performed their endeavor in repulsing of the enemies first
horsemen: the Emperor caused their indictment to be framed, and two were
condemned, who according to the laws for war were punished about ten of the
clock in the morning. They of the City, wherein remained full two thousand
horse whom they had gathered together, and about six thousand footmen, seeing
their men overthrown, and especially beholding the head of Camares, lost their
courage, and entered into communication: and the Emperor having given them his
word, they came out to treat, there was a composition made with them, upon A
composition with certain of the inhabitants of Tauris.
condition, that none of them should reteturne into Tauris, but might otherwise
go whither they would: so they required to be conducted unto Louan, promising
to subject themselves unto whatsoever the inhabitants of Tauris would yield
unto, who were greatly astonished at the evil hap which did light upon
Camares, accusing him of the fault he had committed, to suffer himself to be
shut up in this manner. So as the Emperor at that very instant caused his
Army to march as soon as it was joined together, and he encamped within
eight leagues of Tauris, his maine battle at Sedema, and caused his auantguard
(wherein was Axalla) to lodge at Chiara, who having showed unto them of Tauris
the head of him that was over their Army, they were greatly astonished, and
the Princes pleasure being sent unto them by an Herald, they were in great
trouble, as well by means of the part Prince Guines had within the City, who
upon this disgrace happening unto the contrary party, would make no doubt to
be obeyed, upon which occasion they being all of them retired into one of the
quarters of Tauris, they determined openly to favor the Emperor, assuring
themselves of peace and mildness. Now you must Talismahar chosen Prince of
Tauris.
understand that the inhabitants of Tauris had chosen Thalismahar for their
Prince, and sworn fealty between his hands after they had perceived the
approach of the Emperors Army* so as he was no longer acknowledged only as
Captain general, but for their Prince, and having received a solemn oath of
them all, they had every one sworn unto him to dye, rather then obey the
Tartarians, or to acknowledge any thing that comes from them: but seeing
their affairs for to change, they repented themselves already, so inconstant
a thing is the election of a new Prince, who took upon him to fight with the
Tartarians in a raunged battle, and to drive the^ fighting even into their own
country. But now when they did see so great an Army draw near unto them,
being victorious over so many sundry nations, and especially the experience
of their force and valor by the overthrow of Democares, it troubled them much
to be shutvp, especially seeing he had made them promise, that the enemy
should not approach within four leagues of their walls. This murmuring was
spoken aloude, and the most obstinate, who were their Priests, and who did
abhor the change of the religion they held, and which would not receive the
new reformation of Guines, nor his superstitions, they were the first which
began to stir up the people, and to exhort them to think upon their
safety, declaring unto them how vain their Princes promise was, and that he
deceived them, their destruction being a thing most manifest; that they should
remember them selves of Caire, and so many thousands of Cities, the which this
Tamerlan has brought under his subjection, and peradventure he would not
constrain them to obey Guines, but the Emperor only: and that it was the
best way to send unto him. This opinion remained three A great ^^tin^e within
the city of Tauris.
days to be considered of amongst the people, and even the greatest fell into
this opinion, although they did see that they were able to make resistance more
then three months, but hoping for no other succor but the death of Tamerlan
who was young, and that even his Captains would not leave his glory
imperfect, before they had achieved this glorious enterprise, that all this
did bring unto them small hope of safety. Axalla was advertised of all this by
the spies which went and came to and fro, being most advanced, and thereof gave
intelligence unto the Emperor. But in the end, fear together with the desire
of change prevailed The faction of Guines within the city of Tauris sent unto
Tamer^^.
so much with them, that they of Guines faction sent unto the Emperor for to
know his pleasure, and to take assurance for their safety. But they were not
the sixth part: notwithstanding a body cannot have so small an evil in any
one of his parts, that it shall not greatly empaire the health of all the rest.
This canker although it was little at the beginning, did daily increase and went
on augmenting. The Prince of Tauris being advertised of these two factions, the
one of Guines sent unto the Emperor, knew not how to remidie the same; for the
enemy being so near, and things so disposed, he doubted a great revolt, and
did wisely bear all with patience until some extremity, when as he purposed
to use extreme remedies for his benefit. Now within the City of Guines
faction were some thirty thousand men, whereof they having assured the Emrour,
and having been comforted to assure themselves of his assistance, they returned
from thence, spreading over all, the courtesy they had found there with the
Emperor, and they published the same aloude amongst the people and that there
was no evil meant unto any, but to the new chosen Prince; and that the
Emperor required nothing of them but their obedience; and that notwithstanding
the folly which some seditious had committed in choosing this man for Prince,
yet was it not fit to overthrow so flourishing a City and so many honest men,
for such a light matter; that the Emperor required but the life of this new
elected, and of his confederates, and not of the inhabitants. In the end
matters came unto this pass, that they of Guines faction had assembled the
people, and caused the same Ambassadors whom they had sent unto Tamerlan, to
declare aloude unto the people, being assembled, what they had heard the
Emperor say, the which was; that he directed his arms only against the
elected Prince, and not against the City. Presently thereupon some cried; let
us arm our selves against ^^^mult within the City of Tauris.
such as will gainsay this: and there was neither the majesty of the senators,
nor the arms of the soldiers, that could stay this sedition. The new Prince
withdrew himself into his lodging, where being entrenched and desirous to
entermeddle his authority, he was desired to retire unto the Palace, into
some corner about his Castle, with those of his faction: and seeing himself
weak, he determined to forsake the City, and to withdraw himself unto the
Mountains. The Emperor being aduertized of this happy success by Axalla, who
came unto him, and declared unto him this purpose, to the end he might have
leave to cut of the way unto the Prince elected. But the Emperor having
meditated long thereupon would not hazard any thing rashly but let him go, and
rather take that great city through their division then by his arms: he
therefore commanded Axalla to suffer him to retire, and to send none unto the
war, being unwilling to enterprise any thing by arms, to the end they should
have a greater confidence in his mercy. The night following the Prince elected
departed away, together with those of his faction, who The Prince elected
departs out of Tauris.
had been only fifteen days Prince of the common wealth, whereof he had bin
Captain the space of eight and twenty years with all prosperity, having
stoutly resisted the supstitions of Guines, and the tyranny the which he would
under color of this new godliness bring upon the Persians: and surely if the
over sight of Camares had not been, his affairs had not received so bad
success, which does teach us that the matters of war are so uncertain, as
it is necessary to have always regard unto the most sure way, and preserve the
principal matter. For if those forces had not departed out of Tauris nor
hazarded them, there had been work for our Army the space of six months.
And you know what chances and novelties do commonly happen in the estate of so
great a monarkie as is ours, the which having so great a breadth of country, it
is not possible but some new alteration must daily needs happen within the
same, especially seeing long sieges are oftentimes the destruction of great
armies, and principally in such an estate as ours was, which having bin out of
his own country the space of two years, it drew near home, so as it was hard
to keep them from seuering during so long abode. The Prince elected had many
perfections, and was surely worthy to succeed in this monarchy before Guines:
but the destiny had thus limited his glory That same having happened, all the
City being joined together, sent unto the Emperor, desiring eight days
respite for to treat with him, and yield them selves under his obedience, the
which the Emperor granted them willingly. And this they did, to the end they
might have time to provide the means to keep them selves from the government
of Guines, and his superstition, or rather reformation in the Prophets law: for
the faction of Guines which was small in respect of the other parties could do
very little. So the time being come, they sent to treat with the Emperor: and
the first article was, that Articles of treaty sent by the inhabitants of
Tau^is unto Tamerlan.
they did beseech that it would please him to cause them to be governed by one
of his own subjects, and that they might not be severed from his obedience;
that they doubted not but that Guines would remember the resistance 1
they had made against him; that they beseeched his imperial Majesty, he
might have no commandment over them; a thing very acceptable unto the Prince,
what good answer soever he had given unto Guines to bring them subject under
him. The other was, that they should 2
be maintained in their privileges, and acknowledged as subjects unto the
Tartarian Empire, and not any longer unto that of the Persians. That they
wished this great 3
Monarchy that had so long time flourished, should be changed in the time,
and under the reign of so great and coragious an Emperor of the Tartarian
nation, as our Prince Tamerlan was: to the end the reproach of their nation
might be the less. That they desired not to be 4
freed from ordinary tributes, although it might please the Emperor to
consider the great wars they had lately maintained against Guines for
preservation of their liberty; and that it would please him to ease them of
the same. The Emperor who was of a courteous nature, made show there of in good
earnest toward this people, and made grant unto them that they should live
without any constraint in their religion, as well after the reformation of
Guines, as after the law of Mahomet according unto the interpretation of Haly,
and also the Christians and Jews should be likewise free, as they had always
used and accustomed. All other demands being granted, they submitted themselves
under his obedience, and the next day came from thence three hundred principal
men of the city, who performed the oath of fealty, in the name of all the
people. The Emperor after this, determined of his entry: so Prince Axalla was
commanded to enter the first thereinto with fifteen thousand horse, and thirty
thousand footmen; they delivered into his hands all the fortresses giving
commandment for honor and obedience Tamerlan his entrance into the city of
Thanais.
unto the Emperor: he seized upon the gates, and caused proclamation to be
made, that all the Citizens should bring their weapons into his lodging, the
which was done. So the Emperor arrived there in great magnificence, being
received with the full rejoicing of all the people, and he was almost
worshipped of every one, thinking themselves happy to be saved from such a
shipwreck. The next day the Emperor had news of the death of the Emperor
his uncle, by the Empress who had apprehended some great men that would have
raised up some tumult: he made great lamentation for him; yet it was the less
grievous unto him, for that he knew his great sickness, which did threaten him
with death of long time: and had not the kindness of the Empress his daughter
bin, who had such care of him as she ought for to have, old age had made an end
of him long before. The Emperor caused these news to be concealed from the
army, bewailing the same privately, he dispatched Prince Axalla (in whom amongst
all the rest of Prince Axalla dispatched by Tamerlan into Tartaria after the
death of the great Cham.
his Captains he reposed greatest trust) for that he had chiefest authority
with him, to the end he might assist and aid the Empress with counsel, with
full power of Lieutena^t general under the Empress: he carried thirty thousand
horse with him, causing a rumor to be spread, that the Emperor advanced
forward. Who in the mean time gave order for the assuring of Persia and
restraining Guines, of whom he had discovered many practices, that tended unto
the Monarchy of the Persians. Axalla being also contrary unto him, and having
as much as he could favored the contrary faction, he had set down as a
Maxim unto the Emperor the assuring of Persia, and that he should seek the
weakening of Guines faction. But he Emperor having sent him far from him,
being naturally religious, suffered him self to be carried away with the fained
holiness of Guines, which did great hurt, but not during Tamerlan abused
through Guines holiness.
the Emperors time: for he durst not during his life, but yet unto his
posterity: Monarkes deserving no less blame for not providing for the quiet
of their posterity, as for seeking an assurance only during their reign. For
the Emperor having suffered Guines to come near unto him, he knew so cunningly
to behave him self, winning the Chancellor and the other Princes of the
Emperors Guines pra^^ise with the Chancellor and other Princes about Tamerlan.
counsel, that they brought him near unto the Emperor; and being there he
knew so well to carry him self, that he made the Prince for to taste his manner
of serving God, as most answereable unto the last will of the Prophet.
Notwithstanding the Emperor knowing how much the change of his manner of
serving God, was acceptable unto the people who^ he governed, although he
allowed it, he did not practice the same: but very secretly he assembled
together the principal men of the law, to make trial for to agree this
controversy: but he did see this to be impossible, so stiffely every one held
his interpretation to be according to the true meaning of the Prophet, wherein
having spent some time in vain, in the mean time he received the oath of all
the Persians, and gathered together great store of money, wherewith he had
paid his army, and gratified his men of war, rewarding them after their
deserts, he established the Prince of Thanais to command over them in his
absence, with whom he left an hundred thousand feotemen of his army, to the
end for to suffer the same to winter in all the Cities, and through all the
country, to keep all in subjection, and refresh it self. The rest did the
Emperor conduct with him, and all his prisoners of what quality soever,
except those whom he The cunning practices of Guines under the cloak of
religion.
gave unto Guines, for to instruct them in his reformation. But the matter fell
out much otherwise, for having framed them well unto the war, as soon as the
Princes death happened, he used their service for to assure his affairs
amongst the Persians, upon the first occasion should be offered, whereby he
thought he might attain unto his purposes: for the Prince having led him with
him, he made him believe that he had no kind of ambition, but only religion;
in so much as he making profession of his religion near unto the Emperors
person, many applied themselves unto the same. Now he perceived well that the
Prince had some jealousy of him: this was the occasion he desired to follow
him, assuring him self the Tartarians would in short time cause themselves to
be hated of the Persians. The Emperor invited all the greatest Lords of Persia
to accompany him unto Samarca^d, which they did upon the commandment of the
said Emperor, being desirous to teach them for to serve him, the Persian
gentlemen being so many little kings, and also that during the time he was in
his Court he made them for to know his courtesy and magnificence, and did win
them by good deeds, advancing them also unto the honors of his Court, and unto
the charges of his kingdoms, wherein he employed them: so as Persia as long as
he lived was much affected unto him: which greatly served him for the keeping
as well of Siria as of the Soldans Empire, leaving continually me^ there, and
drawing out colonies, the better to settle his affairs in those places. So the
Emperor leaving the Prince of Thanais with his Army to attend his pleasure, he
marched with the rest of his forces into his own country, with all the joys
and triumphs that might be possible, the chiefest prisoners marching before
the Emperor, amongst the which was Bajazet Emperor of the Turks all chained,
and was a spectacle unto all the world of fortunes inconstancy: he continued
notwithstanding in the same fierceness was wont to be in him. So where soever
the Emperor passed, the people assembled themselves by thousands, praising and
singing his victories. We arrived at the last at Samarcand with all our
spoils, in very great magnificence: Tamerlan and his army came unto Samercand
with all their spoils.
where after we had bin the space of one month or two in feastings and
magnificences, the Emperor with his accustomed devotion, having in great
solemnity Tamerlan his (...) unto God.
vowed a Church and Hospital unto his God, the most magnificent that might be
devised. Whereuppo^ to perform the same, he began to search out all sorts of
handicratfs men for to honor this city, the which he had a desire to make one
of the stateliest Cities in the world. And in one of the corners thereof he
began, and did build there his Temple and Hospital, making an account to
increase yet this City, as large Tamerlan built a temple and hospital at
Samarcand.
again as it was, and to people the same, with so many several kinds of
people and nations as he had brought with wim, giving libe^tie unto them all
to frame and build their houses, causing money to be distributed to do the
same, and giving all kinds of privileges and freedoms unto the prisoners, for
to give the^ a greater desire to build and settle themselves there: and having
caused the streets and places to be plotted, and having appointed a place for
every one to build upon, he took no other pleasure, neither had he any other
care, then the preserving the good will of his most famous soldiers, whose
names he having caused to be written in a general muster book, the which he
commanded to be made, from day to day, they (not thinking thereof) received
honors, and good turns of the Prince, in recompense of their so great
services. Now he declared the death of the Emperor his uncle unto his
Counsel, and forgot no ceremony due unto the honor of the said Emperor,
outwardly showing the grief he conceived for his death; where after he had
rested some eight days, he determined to go unto Quinzai for to see the
Empress, and having left Bajazet in the custody of the governor of Zachetay,
the Emperor Tamerlan his ordinary court of forty thousand horse and threescore
thousand footmen.
set forward with his ordinary court, which was of forty thousand horse, and
threescore thousand footmen. I had forgotten to declare, that the Emperor sent
back the Mosciuites forces with rich presents, and dispatched Sinopes nephew
of Prince Axalla, for to conduct them out of the country of his obedience, as
also to the end for to confirm a new friendship with him: for to leave nothing
during his voyage that might be an occasion of nouelty, having for that time
made an end of his enterprises, he was altogether bent to preserve the
friendship of his allies, and for the maintenance of his conquestes. This was
the cause that before he departed Tamerlan his wise foresight.
from Quinzai, he dispatched toward the Prince of Thanais, one of his most
faithful counselors called Nobazes, to the end he should have an eye unto the
factions of the Persians, and also for to succor all the places that should
have need, as well on the side of Caire as toward the Mediterran sea, to the
end that nothing should be changed during his absence, giving him charge
moreover that the policy and discipline should in his Army be carefully
observed, and commanding him to credit Nobazes, very expert in the art of
war. So the Emperor being come unto Cambalu, he received news of the
battle Odmar had won against the king of Chinas Captain general, and how
he pursued his victory, having taken three or four great and rich Cities, the
which did yield themselves unto him, and that again the Chinois did desire
peace. The Emperor Articles of a new agreement between Tamerlan and the king
of China.
sent the Articles he required, which were that before all other things the
king of China should pay the arrerages of the tribute the which he had agreed
with the Emperor. First he should come in person to do homage 1
unto his Majesty, and acknowledge himself as vassal unto his Empire. That
the Army should withwraw 2
it self during his voyage, and he should deliver up unto him all his Cities,
saving three such as the Emperor should nominate; and that the things should
be restored 3
unto the same estate they were in before the war, when the Emperor made the
first peace; that he should pay the 4
army for six months, and should also satisfy all the expenses of the war,
seeing he had begun it, and was author of the breach of peace. Then the Emperor
gratified Odmar, sending unto him for wife one of his sisters with all
magnificence that might be, for to make him the more affectioned unto him. I
will declare how the Emperor was received at Cambalu by his subjects with all
the magnificence possible, the Emperor for to gratify them having restored
their privileges, the which he had taken from them, for the rebellion they
had committed with Calix: so as the Emperor went over all gratifying his
subjects for this new succession that was lately fallen unto him, all the
companies coming unto him: for in these countries they have no certain
dwellings, they are always wandering in troops wheresoever they go: thither
the Empress (having left Prince Axalla to govern at Quinzai) came unto him.
The Prince remained there almost two months, having in this place given order
for all the affairs he had. Cambalu Mount Althay the burying place of the
Scithian Emperors called the great Came.
was also near unto mount Althay, where they use to bury the Scithian
Emperors, whom we do call the great Cham. The Emperor caused the body of the
Emperor his uncle to be brought thither, and him self would conduct it with
all pomp, honoring not only his body, but also all that he had loved in the
world, The magnificent funeral of the great Came of Tartaria.
and although it was not the custom to cause women for to assist the funerals,
yet would he afford this honor unto the Empress, that she should assist the
bringing of the body, going near unto the same. This he did, the more to make
appear how much he honored the memory of the late Emperor in his wife, being
his daughter, and also to the end that if God did take him away his children
being small, she should have the greater authority, and be the better
acknowledged worthy to govern in the minority of his children; and also for
that she had been brought up always in authority even since she was married.
The Prince desiring thereby the more to acknowledge the honor the Emperor his
uncle had done him, by adopting him as his son, and in having left him so great
and large an Empire, as that was, whereof he left unto Tamerlan his virtuous
and cha^^ love unto his good wife.
him the possession. Now the Emperor loved her only, having no other
affection in such pleasure, but only the happiness of a fair offspring, the
which he hoped for. Now the body of the late Emperor being come unto Cambalu,
he determined to conduct it unto the burial according unto the accustomed
ceremony, and to put the body with the kings and Emperors his ancesters. After
he had from point to point performed the last will and testament of the late
Emperor, he returned from thence unto Cambalu, where he spent all winter in
tilt and turneying, going a hunting, making his abode there, because he was in
a place nearest unto the kingdom of China, to know how matters passed there,
having now brought thither his last affairs, purposing to go thither in person
the next winter, if Odmar did not make an end of the wars already begun, and if
the king of China did not submit himself wholly under his obedience, having
determined not to depart from Cambalu until this country were pacified, the
mark he shot at being only to keep that which his valor was able to conquer
through his good fortune, being desirous to spend the rest of his life in
enjoying the fruits of his travels, and for to publish his praises unto his
people, and with millions to maintain them in peace. He had also a purpose to
bring unto an end that which he had determined to do at Samarcand. Now Axalla
was at Quinzai, as well unto the co^tentment of all the men of war, as the
inhabitants, who desired much to see their Prince, and having caused Prince
Axalla in their behalf to beseech it, that it would please the Emperor to cause
his son to be brought The young Prince made gouerner of Quinzai and over all
the country.
up amongst them there, the which he did grant unto the^ in favor of the said
Prince Axalla, establishing him for to command in the absence of the Prince his
son, whom he made governor of Quinzai, from Cambalu even unto the sea. This
country was replenished with some three hundred cities, and was in largeness
more then four hundred leagues, besides an finite number of villages. To make
short, it was that the Emperor his uncle governed, where this Prince Axalla
was his Lieutenant general, under the authority of the young Prince his Axalla
appointed the young Princes governor, and authorized over all the kingdoms of
Tamerlan, as gouerner general.
son, unto whom he delivered him in charge for to be his governor, authorizing
him unto the government general of all his kingdoms: for the great wisdom
that was in this knight, made him beloved in all the countries under the
Emperors obedience: the services also and great victories the which he had
caused the Emperor to obtain by his stout courage, and good conduct, who for
these occasions put his principal trust in him, and after himself he thought
him only worthy to preserve for his children his kingdom and Empress. Now he
received news that the Prince of Thanais set forward for to go into Syria, and
to join with the governor, for that the Sultan had these three months
besieged Caire with a great army, notwithstanding the inahbitants had showed
great faithfulness: they were indeed all The Prince of Thanais sent into Egypt
to assist Calibes.
new colonies, not trusting unto the old Citizens: for had not that course bin
taken, there should have bin many reuolts seen, the gouerner not having
sufficient forces to be able to assist it. The Emperor once again had given
commandment unto the Prince of Thanais, to march thither in diligence with his
army, wherein were the old soldiers ordained by the Emperor, and his co^panio^s
in all his wars; there were of them an hundred thousand of this kind of
warfarre, amongst the which there were thirty thousand Parthian horse remaining
continually in the army. Now they lamented much the absence of Axalla: but
next unto him the Prince of Thanais was most beloved of them; this Prince was
the Emperors cousin german, who as you have heard, had served him very well;
he had been continually in all the enterprises of war under Axalla, whom the
Emperor had commanded for to lead him unto all the services of war, to the
end he might be made fit for to do him service; so as the Prince of Thanais
being in Syria, and Prince Axalla at Quinzai, they were established in the two
furthermost parts of his kingdoms, Princes and Captains who had always
assisted and served him faithfully. So the Prince of Thanais being with
Calibes, and having gathered together part of the Great Chamberlaines forces
upon the coast of Babylon, he marched directly unto Aleppo, having their forces
joined together, being two hundred thousand fighting men. The Sultan perceiving
the Prince of Thanais to draw near, remembered well, that those were they which
had overcome him. But he encouraged him self, because this great Tamerlan and
his fortune were not there present; that he had to deal with a young Prince
desirous of glory, and who peradventure to get it would do something
unadvisedly; and to resolve him self for to fight, was a thing he had too much
proved unto his hurt, except the hot blood of this young Prince did move him
inconsiderately to seek for to force his trenches and succor the necessity
of those of Caire, whose victuals failed the^. So he intre^ched himself all
along the river, by the which only the inhabitans might be relieved: for so
great a city cannot be victualltd by carts, but very hardly: he made his
trenches even at his pleasure, our army advancing forward slowly. Good
foresight in the Prince of Thanais ^or the victualing of Caire and Egypt from
the Grecian Islands
The counsel of ours was to send throughout all Siria to gather together store
of corn, and to cause it to be brought unto Alexandria by sea, for to victual
therewith Caire, as well from all the Isles of Greece, as from all the sea
coasts. Being obedient unto his commandment they showed great diligence, so as
within short time there was gotten together a great quantity of corn. Our army
in the mean time marched continually forward, drawing near unto Caire, the
enemy being retired at the same present, seeing our army come along by the
river side, having made great provision of boats to pass over his army, and
for to keep us from the river. In the The Prince of Thanais does bring
victuals into Caire.
end, the Prince of Thanais, having approached his army, and marked the enemies
countenance, who was entrenched within his camp, he entered into Caire, where
having with good order distributed that which he had brought in carts, and
upon Mules and Camels, by the hands of Commisioners who^ he had appointed,
seeing the people had victuals sufficient for 15. days, having taken the advice of the Captains of his counsel, he was counseled to cut off victuals
from the enemies, and to take from them the river, and thereby the victuals
which did come unto them from three or four cities they had taken, The Prince
of Thanais actions in Egypt, and happy success in the same.
the which had put them in hope they should be able to famish this great city;
he resolved to take those from them. In the mean time they prepared in
Alexandria the victualing again thereof by the river, and whilst some rigged
certain armed boats for to fight with those of the Sultan, the Prince of
Thanais marched directly above Caire, straight unto Muiare, the which he
summoned to yield it self unto the great Emperor of Asia his master, the
which they having refused were besieged, and having caused all his engines to
be planted, and great hollow trenches to be made, to the end he might approach
near unto a tower, the which he determined to win by undermining, because it
did defend all the courtaine, so as our men as well by the height thereof, as
for that there was an infinite quantity of artificial fire therein, were
greatly endamaged. The siege of Muiare, with the taking of the same by ^^^ce.
The Prince of Thanais having caused it tobe viewed by him who had the charge
of mines in the Army, he promised within four days to overthrow it, the
which he having performed, our men did win the courtaine. Now the Prince of
Thanais having caused an engine to approach, they tried the wall, and finding it
weak, they brought four more thereunto, the which did beat down a great
part of the wall unto the ground. This being done, our men were commanded to
give an assault, the which was given, and the city won, all being cut in
pieces which were within the same, the women and little children only excepted.
The other cities seeing the diligence we had used, and the small succor they
had received from the Sultan, yielded themselves upon the first summons, and
were received upon good composition. The Prince of Thanais having left two or
three thousand horse and 4000. footmen within the places he had taken, he
thought it not convenient to stay any longer, considering the want of victuals,
whereof he doubted: and surely the Sultan, who was a great Captain, had with
great wisdom provided for the well fortifying of those cities which were above
him: for it had been our overthrow if they had obeyed the commandment he gave
them, being certain that within fifteen days, victuals would have failed us.
But it falls out often times, that the Generals are blamed, and that their
enterprises have ill success, not for that they have provided ill for that
which should be done, but rather because there was either fear or disobedience
in the^ which are commanded, and who were credited in a matter of importance.
As soon as the Sultan understood these news, he began new practices,
especially knowing for certain that our army by sea set forward from
Alexandria. And having caused his storehouses to be reuiewed, and calling
together the generals for victuals within his army, they did assure him that he
might continue thirty days without having any want, and to perform this, he
drove out of his army all that were unprofitable, and caused them to pass over
the water, thrusting them out to try their fortune, The unmerciful act of the
Sultan.
to retire into Libia, or whither they would at the conquerors mercy. The
Prince of Thanais whose resolution had taken good effect, the which seemed
impossible unto the old Captains, got thereby amongst his soldiers great
reputation, and even verily judging that the event of the victory, and of the
deliberation of Caire proceeded from that part: but it behooued to end well,
and this was the hardest to be performed, and it seemed unto every one that
this was a prize for a master to execute, every one lamenting the Emperors
absence for this purpose, one wishing his boldness, another his diligence, and
another his reputation, the which only made his enemies for to fly: others
said of the Prince of Thanais, that at such time as he The speech of the
soldiers in the Prince of Thanais camp^.
did any thing bravely, or rather whenever he had any good success, that he
remembered well the Emperors fashions, and that he was a good scholar,
presently they wished for the liberality of Prince Axalla, and remembered the
dangers whereinto he would put himself one of the first. This was the speech
of the soldiers, when as they remembered those that had so often commanded
them. Now the Prince of Thanais encamped his army under Echied and Sebeit,
upon a river which makes an arm of Nilus, but to be passed over in many
places. The Sultan was entrenched as I have declared at Buldao, having made
wonderful trenches on every side, The number of the Soldans army.
even unto the river of Nilus. There were in his army threescore thousand
footmen and forty thousand horse: but all very good men, and the most part of
them were his old soldiers. Now he had fed them much with the hope of taking
Caire, whereupon he grounded the recovering of his kingdom: but the soldiers
perceiving there came no more any thing from above down the river, began to
despair: notwithstanding the Sultan assured himself, that within fifteen
days our army should be driven to retire, and that Caire would be consumed
with famine, so as he kept himself close and secret, busying himself only in
keeping the river with a great number of boats. The Prince on the other side
seeing his enemy entrenched, he exercised his soldiers in making a trench
before the enemy, being a dangerous thing for to be encamped without a trench
near unto an army, although our army was greater by one third part of
footmen more then horsemen. Now we made our abode staying for Calibes, who
came forward with the victual that was provided. In the mean time we
forbear not to make daily skirmishes, to the end for to discover where we
might with greatest advantage set upon the enemies, thereby to make them keep
close within their trenches, and also to the end they should not have the means
to hinder our men from passing, in succouring their army which was upon the
water, at such time as our men would pass along with Calibes coming down the
river of Nilus to victual Caire.
the victuals. So Calibes coming forwards, forgot not to advertise the Prince
of Thanais of the meeting place, to the end he might receive 20000. men from
his army, the which it was necessaire also to embarke and put upon the water,
the which he was desirous to do without the enemies knowledge: for he made
small reckening of the forces which were come from Alexandria. Calibes was
determined to fight upon the water, with hope to cause his victuals for to
pass, or else to die himself and his company. The Prince of Thanais
earnestly desired to undertake this charge: but some declared unto him, that
the importance of the fight was upon the land, as also it belonged unto Calibes
to dispose of all within his government, for to fight at the very same time
(according to the enemies countenance) with the whole army, the enemies being
within their trenches, if in case he did sever himself from his footmen, to
assist his army upon the water, or else if he went about to put fresh
soldiers into his boats and Galliottes: for we were within two thousand paces
the one from the other, so as every one was assured that the day would not
pass away, but they would set upon the enemies within their trenches,
especially they which knew the heat of this young Prince, the which had come
to pass, but that the Emperor had placed two old Counselors near about
him, who knew how to temper this his forwardness, who was notwithstanding
greatly commended for animating of the soldiers, accustomed under the good
fortune of the Emperor to attempt any thing, although very hard and dangerous.
So the Prince of Thanais having heard news of the army by water, he sent
thither with all speed thirteen or fourteen thousand of the most expert
soldiers within his army, under the conduct of the Colonel of his footmen
(who was his Lieutenant when as the Emperor himself commanded in his army)
called Synopes, brought up a Captain under Prince Synopes.
Axalla, at such time as he had the general commandment over the footmen. The
Prince at the same very time he supposed the fleet to draw near unto that
place the enemy had fortified with oaks, with botes, and galliots, caused all
the army to mount on horseback, and appointed forty thousand soldiers to
march directly unto a place the which he had noted to be most easy and for his
best advantage, for that the enemy had as he thought traueled least in that
place, who (doubting the Prince would lodge between the city of Caire and
him) had there employed the most of his time. There was also in this place a
little mountain, the which he d^sired this day for to win, and which he had
reserved upon this occasion to force, the better to entertain the enemies, and
restrain them if they went about to succor their men that were assaulted by
water. Now as he had determined, so did he force this place strongly, but the
greatest matter was to stay the fury of those which had given the onset: for
they would have gone unto the second trench, the which the Sultan did think:
and the Prince of Thanais making show to give the onset, busied the Sultan so
in the mean time, that he could not succor his men, having enough to do for to
defend himself, so as during the time he was thus hindered, he did behold our
Navy fighting, and all his Galleys to be broken in pieces, and yet could not
aid them: for our men having landed in an Island from whence they were greatly
annoyed, having assaulted it, they did force it, and whatsoever was entrenched
within the same, and then this Ila^d which was as a Caualier for the defense of
their me^, who defended the bridges of boats they had made, being taken, was a
great disadua^tage unto the^: insomuch The valor of Synopes, by means whereof
he obtained ^ notable victory of the Soldans men entre^ched within an Island in
the river of Nilus. Calibes drowned.
as this fight after it had continued for the space of three hours, the
victory inclined on our sides, by the valor of Synopes, who seeing Calibes
drowned, and most part of his men in flight, he renewed the fight, and being
resolute, carried away the victory, and utterly overthrew the enemies bridge,
the which they had forsaken by the means of a current of water full of
artificial fire, the which coming to rush against it, did burn the whole
bridge, which was one of the principal causes of the victory. So A stratageme.
the victuals passed, and our victorious army encamped within this Island, the
which our men had won, for to give passage unto the rest of the victuals. The
Prince of Thanais caused three engines of artillery to be embarked presently,
for to shoot into the enemies camp upon the rivers bank, at such time as they
should show themselves for to hinder our victuals. It was a great loss of
Calibes, because he was a person in whom the Emperor put great trust, and he
had done him great services. They busied themselves in seking for his body, the
which could not be found, by reason of the great multitude of bodies which were
within the river. They hold opinion that there died twenty thousand men this
day on both sides, few of Calibes men being saved, who had given the onset upon
the left wing of the enemies. Synopes obtained great honor, and this day was
the occasion of his good fortune. Also he had done a notable piece of service
worthy to be remembered, there being no possible means to succor Caire, but
by that same place: for this great city was so weakened, that it required a
long time for to repair it, the which could not be done by land, but only by
the river, looking for the revolt the which could not be sooner the^ three
months. Now after this victory Synopes encamped himself within this Island to
hinder the Soldans men from passing, notwithstanding they passed over in the
night from the one shore unto the other, and they judged that the enemies were
forced unto the fight, or unto a shamfull flight, the which could not be but by
the other side of the water; for by land he had no retrait at all, but by the
swords point, having no place but beyond the water, the which bred suspicion
that he would make his retrait by water. For he might well think that Caire was
not for him, and that his enterprise on that side was weak. As for those which
favored him within Alexandria, all was changed there, and in a manner every
where. Therefore it behooved the Prince of Thanais, to have a watchful eye unto
the enemies new practices, and to provide well for the maintenance of his army,
the which could not be done without difficulty, by reason of the scarceness
of the victuals: for by feeding his army he famished Caire. For there could
not come victuals sufficient, neither by land nor water, for to victual it
being encamped so near unto the enemy: our army having made provision for
victuals but for 8. days, keeping themselves encamped in one place, so as it
was resolved by the Counsel to retire themselves as soon as they had delivered
Caire, and seen the same victualled. For they supposed the enemies had made
great provision of victuals to be able to continue in their camp, their army
not being so great as ours. Insomuch as it was resolved to pass over half our
Army unto the other side, and that Synopes should not remove out of the
Island, our purpose being no other then to hinder that the enemies should not
keep the victuals from entering into Caire. This counsel was very secret* in
so much as the enemies perceiving their victuals for to fail, had the same
purpose that we had, the which was to retire themselves, the which they could
not do but in the night. Having as yet many boats they rigged them, and the
day before made a show to draw toward Syria, having caused part of their
Army to go out of their Camp, supposing that as soon as they should show
themselves to go out, our Army would be on horseback, and by that means
should deceive our men, hoping that this would make them think they had a
purpose to retire themselves on this part, the which they did: for having in
the night made show of assaulting our Army, and having kindled fires, he
caused his men to pass over, and to lodge themselves along the river, what
hindrance soever Synopes could do unto them, for that the night was very
dark. The first that passed over was the Sultan, having left within his Camp
his Lieutenant general with all his footmen. In the morning we knew that
their Army passed in part; the Prince of Thanais was of opinion to assalt the
enemies within their camp, and was very stiff in this resolution, but the old
Captains were not of this opinion, but rather to strengthen Synopes with men
and engines, to the intent to endamage them therewith; and that threescore
thousand men were not to be forced within their trenches. So all was deferred:
they were yet of opinion, that if noise were heard, and that they passed over,
to attempt for to force the Camp upon their retrait. Now the Sultan seeing
his passage had good success, he commanded his men to do the like that he had
done: but he was not advertised of the supply Synopes had received: so as he
returning for to look his men, and guiding the foremost unto the passage along
by the bank side, he was assaulted by Synopes, who began the fight, wherein the
Sultan was wounded: notwithstanding he passed over The Sultan wounded in
passing the river.
the water and came unto his men, who had already passed. There were many of
his men slain, and diverse of his boats sunk, so as there remained about
twenty thousand within the Camp, out of hope of being able to retire and
join themselves unto the other Army. Our The Prince of Thanais ass^l^ed the
Soldans camp, wherein were twenty thousand footmen left, who upon parley
yielded themselves.
soldiers having assaulted the Camp, did win the first trenches: but the
second being compassed with men, and well fortified, they were not of opinion
to assault them, to the end we should not hazard that which w^o held assured,
in so much as our men being wisely conducted, remained encamped within the
first trenches: and it is very certain, that if they had gone on further they
had overcome them, so much did fear and despair take from them their courage:
but it was better to set forward slowly, then to deliver unto changeable
fortune, that which the eye of reason judged certain, by the rules of war: for
that had been a deed of folly and rashness. Now the enemy seeing our men so near
the^, began to parley, and to cause their interpreters to speak, asking for
the Prince of Thanais; amongst the rest there was a Parthian Ensign, who
enquired for the said Prince, who at that time was visiting the guards of the
trenches: he commanded that he should be brought unto him, and having talked
with the said Captain, who had been long a soldier under his ensigns, and
remaining sick, had been taken, and had given himself unto the Soldans
service, who had made him Ensign general, whom we do call Colonel of all the
footmen: he beseeched the Prince to receive from the^ the victory without
shedding the blood of his soldiers, or of his own men. The which the Prince did
grant unto them, causing them to swear to remain for ever slaves unto the
Emperor, and his subjects The Prince of Thanais notable victory against the
Sultan.
for to make war wheresoever it should please him: the which they did swear
unto. The Soldans Lieutenant being in the night retired with some of the
Captains into a boat. Now the Sultan being hurt, retired himself with his
horsemen some twenty leagues, unto certain places which he held, where he
died of his hurt. The Prince of Thanais pursuing the said Sultan, found him,
being not yet buried within Palema, and was The death of the Sultan.
careful to give an honorable burial unto the said Sultan, and entertained
all his servants courteously. There remained a son of his, with whom did
join themselves the most part of those which would not submit themselves under
the Empire of the Parthians, and withdrew themselves unto the borders of Libia
into certain places, whither very hardly (by reason of the deserts of Libia)
any could come unto them, in hope to revenge their miserable fortune against
the Parthian name. Thus ended this war, the which had put the Emperor into a
deliberation to go thither in person. When as he received perfect news of our
victory, the^ did he commend the valor and courage of the Prince of Thanais,
and above all the noble mind of Synopes: but the loss of Calibes did hinder
the full rejoicing for this happy victory: for the Emperor did hold the loss
of such a person to be great, who was greatly to be commended for the
experience he had in the art of war. The Prince of Thanais was appointed by the
Emperor to command over Calibes charge: but the Army was The Prince of
Thanais appointed governor of Siria and Egypt after the death of Calibes.
commanded to return from thence into Persia, for such assaires as might
happen there. Synopes also was appointed Colonel general of the footmen in the
Emperors army. The Prince of Thanais remaining Gouerner over Syria and Egypt,
with the same estate of the former Governor, the Army was conducted back
again by the great Chamberlain, who was come thither upon the end of the
affairs with new forces for to aid the Prince of Thanais, if he had any need
of the same: the Emperor having this custom, to send out forces upon forces,
unto such places as he thought had need thereof. This happy success coming
unto the Prince, by the means of his Lieutenants general, made him for to
know how necessary his presence is within his realm, for to give aid in
every place, where there were affairs. Now for to return unto the Emperors
Court: the king of China came to visit him at his Court, according unto the
couenantes offered The king of China came unto the Emperor Tamerlans court,
and did swear unto him once again obedience.
unto him, the which he accepted: he did swear once again obedience unto the
Emperor, who caused him to see all his greatest cities, for to make himself
the more to be feared of this Barbarian, who kept no more promise then pleased
himself. He was astonished to behold so many soldiers, and the country so
well replenished with people; and above all, that they used so little curiosity
of riches in their apparel and garments, wondering that the Emperor was
apparelled in mean cloth of one color, without any other fashion: but The
mean apparel of Tamerlan*
to counteruaile that, he had about him men which seemed to be kings. At the
same time when the king of China was at the court, the Emperor received news
of the victory against the Sultan, for the which the Emperor rejoiced, making
feasts and turnies in his Court in token of mirth, and this rejoicing
continued for the space of eight days. After the Emperor had given order for
the double paying of his Army that came into Persia, under the conduct of the
great Cha^berlaine, and Synopes Colonel general in the imperial Army, the
Emperor went unto Quinzay for to see his son, and visit the people of this
country, who desired his presence, and also for the affairs which he had not
as yet established in these countries, as he had done in all the rest of his
kingdoms, Prince Axalla not being willing to take so much authority upon him,
although the Emperor had sent unto him a special commandment of the same: but
he doubting least this people would take some occasion to murmr, and the
fault thereof might have been laid upon him, being wont always to say wisely,
that these manner of affairs were the prises of a skillful Master, having
always referred the^ unto the Emperors coming. Then did the Prince with
equity cause all to use the like laws, the same waightes and measures, and he
imposed certain tributes throughout all his kingdoms, every one according to
their ability, for to help his affairs, and lay the foundation of his
revenues, and storehouses for victuals, the which were dispersed as the want
in his Armies required: for the Emperor was wont to say, An apt comparison.
that an Army must be made like unto the shape of a man; he called the
Captains the head, the soldiers the arms, money the feet which made it for
to march, and victuals the belly that nourished the whole. In so A notable
saying of Tamerlan.
much as he often said, that an Army was invincible which had a perfect man:
for (said he) it fights when it will, and never hazardeth any thing to ill
purpose: for the ouersights of war do happen at such time as this body is
lame of a leg, or maimed in an arm, or that the belly is famished, or when
the head is sick. At such time as he sent the Prince of Thanais against the
Sultan, he doubted nothing but the head and the belly; because the Prince of
Thanais was a young Prince: and for victuals, he had but bad provision of them:
for he was wont at such time as he was to begin any war, for to make a great
collection of victuals the year before, the which was not done now,
attributing this victory unto his good fortune, which would not turn her
back upon him, and not unto his wisdom. So the Emperor arriving near unto
Quinzay, Prince Axalla coming to meet him two days journey off, with all the
chief Lords of the country, together with the principal Citizens, who were
preparing for the Emperor the most magnificent receiving that might be, as
well by water as by land. As this city is one of the richest The description
of the city of Quinzai with the wonderful situation thereof
in the world, so is it one of the greatest, and of the most wonderful
situation, being all wholly divided and ouerthwarted with cha^nels, upon the
which are framed wonderful and stately buildings, accompanied with an infinite
number of bridges, upon the which they pass over channels: this city
abounds with all kind of spices and in great quantity, likewise with all
manner of marchandizes. The Emperor as soon as he was arrived, Tamerlan
received with great magnifice^ce into Quinzai with rich and rare presents
received presents of the Citizens, the which were esteemed to be worth above
two millions of gold, with a wonderful variety of all rare and singular
things, the which they presented unto him, for to testify the love and
obedience they did owe unto him. The Emperor was desirous to see his son, whom
they brought up with the accustomed greatness of Princes: and having caused the
child to be brought before him, being of the age The order (...) took for his
sons education.
of seven years: he forbad from hence forward they should suffer him to wear
any thing upon his head, and himself did hang a bow about his neck, saying
aloud, that they which from their birth were called unto soueraignties, should
be used both unto cold and heat, and should be exercised in Arms betimes,
and not brought up delicately and easily, reprehending them which had the
bringing of him up, demanding of them, if they meant to make a woman of him?
And they answering, that he was tender. If he be not borne Tamerlan his notable
saying of succession in his Empire.
(said he) for to be strong in Arms, he will not be worthy to succeed me: for
he must not be an effeminate Prince that shall preserve the Parthian Empire.
Now he had sent the Empress unto Samarcand to be delivered, where she was
honorably received, having never been there since she was married. He received
news that she was there delivered of another goodly son, a The Empress
delivered of an other son at Samarcand i^ Parthia.
thing which he caused to be published over all, and himself in token of joy,
made feasts 15. days, with all kinds of magnificent turneys: this he did for
to show his agility unto this people, to the end, that as he excelled all his
court in virtues, that they should also judge him worthy to govern the^ above
all other men. After he continued there a month, and having visited all the
seatownes near unto Quinzai, hunting all kinds of chases, Tamerlan his
recreations, and notable saying thereof.
neglecting nothing notwithstanding which belonged to his charge, saying often,
that the recreations he did take, were helps for to ease him in the pains of
his pubpublike affairs whereunto God had called him. Having upon his return
called together all the people, he published his laws, which were all
reuere^ced of this people, as though they had proceeded from the divinity, so
much admiration had every one of the greatness of this Prince. The which I
will truly declare unto you, that so long as the Emperor was there, this
people The admiration and exceeding love the people of Quinz^i did did bear^
unto their Emperor.
did almost nothing, being for the most part busied in beholding of him, not
finding any greater contentation then that. Some of his courtiers, and amongst
the rest Prince Axalla said one day unto him, that this was a City fit for his
abode. O my friend, it is not so: if they should see me daily, they would make
no more account of me. It is a maxim, that the Lord of this great City must
not go thither but once in ten years, and The nature of the people of Quinzai
toward their Emperor.
when he is there, it behooves him to temper his actions, as if he were upon a
scaffold ready for to play some Comedy, where gravity and good grace is
necessary for to content the beholders: for the people do easily receive an
evil impression of their Prince, as they also do a good, if you perform it
well unto them. Now I have forgotten to tell you how the Emperor sent Prince
Axalla sent into China for to establish a peace there.
Prince Axalla in his name from Quinzai into China, and his imperial Majesty
did not depart out of the Province before he returned: he went thither with
great diligence for to establish peace there, and faithfully for to report unto
the Prince Odmar his carriage of himself with the king of China, and for to
temper all things there. Also for that the Emperor, who loved his servants,
desired to see Odmar. This was a thing very acceptable unto Prince Axalla: for
he was greatly honored in those countries, and he was also very desirous to
show by all good offices his affection at his being with Prince Odmar. The
Emperor having a A great virtue in Princes.
virtue the which is seldom to be found amongst great Princes: for he kept his
servants in great love and union together, giving them often warning to love
one another, to bear good will each unto other, and faith and obedience unto
him, two flowers which raised him up unto his greatness. There was also
another occasion, which was, that the Chinois would not by any means swear
obedience unto Odmar, as representing the Emperors person, by reason of
certain complaints he made against them. The Emperor who did temper all
things with his mildness, did honor Axalla with this charge and commandment,
for to end all these particular matters. Axalla found Prince Odmar upon the
entrance of the borders, who received him with all the magnificence that might
be: and having honored and feasted him the space of three days with all the
royalty that might be, after he had imparted unto him the affairs of the
Emperor his Lord and master, he set forward toward him with all diligence,
and Prince Axalla went forward toward Paguin, where he was received of the
Governor with all possible honor. And having assembled all the Emperors
forces, he set forward toward the borders of China, to have an enteruiew at
Pochio, where the meeting place was agreed upon. He passed by Quantou: there
did he view this strong city, which he had won against the hope even of his
master, who supposed the same was able to resist him six months, he having
taken it in three: so as every one for his valor came to reverence him,
honoring and magnifying him, desiring his government, because he was mild,
courteous, and of easy access to them that had business with him. To be
short, the Emperor who knew with wisdom and readiness how to order his
affairs, could not reform them but by the changing of Odmar, who in truth was
severe and grave: but Axalla being mild and courteous, did knit again every one
unto the Emperors obedience: so Prince Axalla went forward unto Pochio,
whither the king came also to meet with him; and he entered full fifty leagues
into the country newly conquered. It seemed unto him a thing too much
derogating from the greatness of the Emperor, the majesty of whose person he
represented, if he went any further to see this barbarous king, being more fit
that he should come forward into the country conquered lately from him by
Odmar, after he had obtained the victory, then to go into his countries
although he had subjected them unto the Emperor, and The meeting of Prince
Axalla with the king of China at Po^hio.
did pay a very great tribute. So the king of China arrived within a league of
Pochio with all his Court: he set forward unto a plain, where he and Prince
Axalla did see each other, who was much better accompanied, from whom the king
did as much differ as from the Emperors own person. They met three several
times together: the king desired to be admitted into a City, which the Emperor
had granted unto him by the treaty. Prince Odmar declared that it was of great
importance, therefore Prince Axalla was by the Emperor appointed for to be
judge of this controversy. In the end they required another further within the
country, the which the king accepted: so he was put into possession of that
city, the situatio^ whereof was very pleasant, being compassed about with a
lake. Axalla having discovered that this barbarous king did earnestly desire it
only for his pleasure, and not for any other evil intent, the city which he
delivered being seated upon a river further within his country, and that other
within our country compassed about with our fortresses: but Odmar did not
allow of that, and supposed it to be for an evil purpose, as for to contriue
some new practices. Odmar being an old man, who knew the kings unfaithfulness,
although he had made him know it well enough unto his smart, having (as I have
said) won twenty or thirty Cities from him, and above four-score leagues of
country, at such time as he obtained the last battle, during the time that
the Emperor was in his last voyage against the Persians. So the enteruiewe
continued yet between Prince Axalla and the king of China on the plain, a
tent being pitched, whither Prince Axalla did come unto him, whom he
continually honored as much as the Emperors own person, where after they had
long time treated by interpreters, it was in the end agreed that the king of
China should enter again into Quinanci, not suffering him to put any Garrison
into it, nor to fortify the same: but even as a prisoner and subject unto the
Emperor, he should enjoy it, and it should be his own, inioying all the
revenue thereof, neither should he carry any kingly ensigns, without the
express The resolution of the meeting between Axalla and the king of China.
leave of the Governor for the Emperor: he should notwithstanding have a
guard of three hundred men for his person; and should give knowledge unto the
said Governor of his journey, before he entered into the Emperors countries,
the which he must pass for to go thither. Now the City was situated in the
midst of a very great lake, in the which were many Islands, wherein there
were an infinite number of houses of pleasure, and it had been always a very
delicate place, where the kings of China were wont to recreate themselves in
alkinds of pleasures that were there to be found: in so much as this barbarous
king did not respect the conditions propounded unto him, so as he might make
his abode there, as it were in an Hermitage. Having left unto his brother the
government of his whole kingdom, through the displeasure he had of his
bondage whereunto he was brought; a courage certainly magnanimous, and worthy
a nation made civil with the best learning, and unworthy the name of a
Barbarian wherewith we called him. So Prince Axalla having visited all the
cities newly conquered, and delivered up by the king of China, having brought
all things into a peaceable estate, he sent unto the Emperor to beseech that
it would please him to grant unto his return, and also for to understand, if
he allowed of all things which he had done. The Emperor Tamerlan his custom in
placing gouerners over his provinces.
who used this custom, often to change the Gouerners of his Provinces, would
gladly have retained Prince Odmar near unto his person, and put another into
his place, seeing him old, and also for that he was not liked of the soldiers
and people, by means of his age and frowardness, the which the Emperor
perceiving, did purpose for to bring him near unto his person* and for to send
in his place the great Chamberlain, who was young, and would be more
acceptable the he, and more able to sustain all things, as well in respect of
the vntemperatenesse of the air, as also for the pains of wars; determining
that if a very necessary occasion did not happen, to have him near his
person, for to serve him with counsel, and to ease him in the government of
his estate. So Axalla was called back again, being commanded to come unto
the Emperor, who was at Cambalu, where he stayed his return, and to suffer
in staying the great Chamberlain to come thither. The Prince of Vauguefu, who
had of long time very faithfully served the Emperor, and whose faithfulness
was most especially acknowledged in all his wars he had conducted,
wherewith both himself and a brother of his had served very well.
Notwithstanding it was not convenient to leave him for to command absolutely,
as well for that often times honors do change the affection upon occasion, as
also because the Parthians do very unwillingly obey strangers. The Emperor
had also a desire to honout him with another government, where he should do
him better service then there: for the Emperor had this custom, to make a
note of those that Tamerlan his worthy custom
were fit to do him service, and he remembered such, to employ them in the
government of his estate, whether it were in peace or war, without being
importuned with demanding, there being no man in his court so bold as to
demand any estates or honors of him: for money and goods it was permitted,
but not for any other thing, esteeming that they which do ambitiouslie seek
for governments and charges, do it not to use them well, neither for the
Princes or peoples profit. He had also this Maxim, that he did change them,
and they for all that did not think themselves any thing disgraced, thinking
it verily the destruction of an estate, how flourishing soever it be, to
deliver countries and places unto Gouerners as heritages: for in the end they
usurp them as their own, and the estate how great and mighty souer it be
(being knit together) coming to be severed in pieces, is at the end of his
power and authority, and becomes nothing. And always for the most part he
did employ them from a less unto a greater charge of country: sometimes he
called them near unto his person, to lead his Armies, the which was the
greatest honor within the Empire: and they were obeyed throughout all his
countries even as the Emperors own person. I have seen two of them alone,
after that four, then seven, as at this present; they are come unto this
number even as the Empire increased unto his greatness: none of the other
having jurisdiction of all the Empire but they, and upon whom as on seven
pillars, the Princes person does rely his greatest affairs, of the which they
do not speak but in the presence of the Prince, and as he propounds the
matters, for to have their advise therein, whether it be of peace or war. Now
to return unto the Prince, who was at Cambalu, accompanied with Odmar and
Axalla, Odmar an old man persuading the Emperor unto peace, and Axalla who was
warlike, an enemy unto rest, and desirous of glory, did provoke him unto
war. But the Princes borders were stretched out so far from the Court, that
he could not set down any plot for that matter: so as seeing the country of
Quinzay a country of quiet, he judged this estate to be fit for Odmar, who was
already old, and allied unto the Emperor, who would be fitter then he to
govern this country, as also this reverent old age which was in him, would
be very convenient for to train up the youth of the young Prince, who was
brought up in this place, and that there was none fitter then he: but the means
how to set this forward was a thing he durst not undertake, because he would
not be noted to have any other purpose then that which proceeded from the will
of his master. Now it fell out that after a certain time the Emperor
received news that the ancient discipline of the Army did degenerate, in so
much that every soldier desired the Emperors presence, rebelling often
against their heads which were there, for that they had not the accustomed
authority for to suppress them. Now this Army was the life of the estate,
the terror of the whole world, and that which maintained in obedience so many
countries conquered with the sword. The Emperor being advertised hereof by the
Captains, was troubled: for to go thithither in person, always to remain
there, his pleasure and rest which he promised unto himself did withholde him,
so as having secretly sent for Odmar and Consultatio^.
Axalla about these affairs, and to know whether it were necessary he should
go thither: Axalla presently persuaded him unto this voyage, and to leave
Odmar there in his countries where he was, whose wisdom would provide for
all. But the Prince who did already perceive the sweetness that was in
Cities, in comparison of the wild life in Armies; as heretofore he had taken
delight therein, so at this present apprehending this manner of living, he
determined to preserve his estate by his Lieutenants, and himself to rest, and
enjoy the fruits of his travail, being already of the age of fifty years,
he thought before he died to take his rest, and to content himself with the
remembrance and contemplation of so many happy victories and worthy deeds,
and to preserve in full peace his conquestes without enterprising or attempting
any thing but in his own defense: so as he turned himself toward Prince
Axalla, and said unto him, that surely he would maintain Odmar in quiet as
long as he could; and surely Resolution.
he should have been ungrateful unto his services, if he had not provided
for him a quiet life: that his opinion did greatly content him, for to give
unto him this government, that he might end his days in those quiet and
peaceable countries, in continuing with honor the faithfulness of his
service. That his own person would make his abode at Sachetay, to be the nearer
unto the occasions his Army might have of his presence in Persia, where he
would leave the same, and would increase it with the number of thirty thousand
horse: but his pleasure was that he should go and command over it, for that he
knew him the only person in his Empire which could perform that service,
having tried the affection that the soldiers did bear unto him, together with
the care he always had for the observation of military discipline: that he
trusted him with all his estate, trusting him with his Army, whereupon only
depended the keeping of so many great provinces, and the terror unto so many
nations, differing both in language and manners, over whom he commanded, and of
whom he was the conqueror; that he only should have an eye unto all that
should be necessary for the maintenance of his Army; and that the first
foundation of his revenues and the best should be appointed thereunto, as well
for the recompense of his soldiers, as for the ordinary paymentes; that he
would have them to be kept in the ancient discipline The discipline of the
Parthians.
of the Parthians, the which is, to lodge in the open fields, and to keep
within the Camp, and from three months unto three months to diflodge, buying
all, and paying for all; that he had always been brought up within his Army,
for to consider the valor and deserts of every one; that he had governed
them; that the Captains and soldiers should be recompensed as he should
appoint according to their deserts; that Persia was the place where he would
keep his Army, for that their minds are more stirring and impatient in
bondage. Also that the borders of Siria, were near for to help the same upon
occasions offered, if there were any need. And turning himself unto Prince
Odmar, he said, he would commit two parts of his estate unto him, the bot^ome
of his riches, and his most precious treasure his son; that all things were
in great quietness where he would have him for to govern; that he should be
there honored in all peace, an estate fit for his old age, and for the
recompense of his services. Calling (after that) his Chancellor unto him* who
was not at this discourse* he commanded Commissions dispatched by the
Chauncellor unto Odmar and Axalla for their gouernements.
him to dispatch out Commissions, the one for Odmar in the authority and
government of all the estate of Quinzai and Cambalu, even unto the sea, and
unto the mountains, being the borders of China. Unto Axalla the government of
Lieutenant general over his army* and the authority and commandment in all
the Provinces, through the which the same did march, even as the Emperors own
person. This rumor being spread touching Axalla for his government over the
army, and come unto the camp, there was never seen so much joy amongst the
Captains and soldiers, every one of them remembering the particular affection
they did bear him, and his deserts toward every ma^^ Better news co^ld not
be brought unto Synopes, who was made by him, and a duanced by his hand. Odmar
was left at Cambalu to make preparation for his journey unto Quinzai, very well
satisfied with the choice the Emperor had made of him: and the Emperor having
caused him to be instructed in his affairs, and particularly of his Provinces,
he himself did command him that as soon as his son should be ten years
old, he should be brought up in the affairs, and that all should be imparted
unto him, to the end he might learn be times to serve the common wealth, not
willing to trouble his head before that age, but for to suffer him to play with
those of his own years. Kam Tai^^hie^ was the name of this young Prince, the
which is as much as to say in the Parthian tongue, as, The love of men; he had
received his name of the Emperor his uncle in the absence of his father, and
in truth, this name was very convenient for him: for many men did love him,
and principally the Prouice wherein he was borne, the Emperor not being able
to carry him with himself unto Samarcand, where the Empress was, and it
seemed unto the people of Quinzai, that they were utterly undone, if they
should loose his presence, and if he should go out of their city. In the end
they so earnestly be sought his Majesty, that he granted them the bringing of
him up in his youth amongst them. So the Emperor went unto Samarcand, having
taken such order as was convenient throughout all his Empire: he determines to
make his ordinary abode there, and to make this city (the place of his birth)
worthy to be the seat of his successors, so fair would he make it, large,
and beautified with all manner of fair buildings. Devotion did also draw him
unto solitariness, where unto his nature inclined as much as was possible.
Where had it not been for a certain desire of glory he had, which forced his
nature of long time, he had played this part. It is also a great wisdom to
know how to command his inclination, and also to be able to content himself
with glory, and to suppress his ambition, and enjoying it, to begin in good
time to give unto himself a happy end, if it be possible, and that this is
the will of fortune the enemy unto man's quiet: for oftentimes that which men
purpose, God the chief governor of all things does frame it after another
manner: but the hap of the Emperor* the which I do attribute unto the honor
and reverence he did bear unto the Divinity, was the cause the same had care
of him, and favored his purposes. Now returning back again unto Prince
Axalla, who after he had received this commandment, was nothing sluggish: so
as he gathered together from all parts the old soldiers which had been
discharged, it seeming unto him they had enjoyed sufficient rest: he sent also
on the other side unto the Moscouite, to draw from thence soldiers on
horseback for his guard, trusting greatly in their valor and courage, and all
the way he entertained the Emperor about the order it would please him should
be observed in his army. Axalla propounded unto him that which was convenient
to be done: the Emperor then did either add thereunto Tamerlan the most
excellent man in the art of war.
or take away as it seemed good unto him: for in the art of war he had so
great knowledge and experience, that no man was equal unto him. Prince Axalla
was the next unto him in this virtue for the faithful and witty executing of
his commandments. The Emperor going by small iourneyes, by reason of the
Court which was great, and the train of his carts, the which were in great
numbers, which did greatly vex Prince Axalla: for his dispatch was referred
unto the coming to Samarcand, the Emperor continuing sometimes Tamerlan loved
hunting but as a good exercise.
where he found good hunting: he greatly loved these honest exercises, the
which kept him (as he said) in breath, that he should not find the pains of
arms strange unto him: but Axalla drew forward the Emperor as much as he
could unto Samarcand, where he arrived at the end of Summer, where he found the
Empress, who had a very fair son ready for circumcision, for the which
were made an infinite number of magnificences. In the mean time Axalla
dispatched his affairs, and the estate of his army: for the Emperor had in
the midst of his greatest pleasures, certain hours for the affairs of his
estate, the which he never omitted. All matters thus dispatched, Prince Axalla
having taken his leave of the Imperial Majesty, he set forward, and had with
him some twenty thousand horse, all the flourishing youth of the Court
acco^panying him. The Emperor desiring they should be trained up in the pains
of wars, rather then in the delicacies of a Court: for the Prince did advance
unto charges those which were in his army, and not such as remained in his
Court, except they were by his express commandment near about his own
person. The Emperor whilst these matters passed thus, received news from the
Prince of Thanais, appointed Governor over Siria and Egypt; who sent him word,
that all things in those parts were very quiet, a thing which brought great
contentment unto the Prince, who had his mind wholly bent unto peace, busying
himself in building of his city of Samarcand, and in decking of a sumptuous
Temple Tamerla^ built a Temple at Samarcand, and called it the Temple of
Solomon.
the which he had built; wherein he meant to make his Tomb, and for his
successors, the which he caused to be named the Temple of Solomon. And there
did he hang up all the Trophes which he had conquered from his enemies: he
caused also therein to be graven all the battles he had fought, together with
the diversity of Tamerlan his Zealous gratefulness toward God.
Nations he had overcome, and the countries he had conquered. To the end he
might (he said) show unto his great God, how greatly he did acknowledge his
benefits and goodness. And because he had many Christians of all kinds of
arts and occupations, whom he had brought from all parts where they had given
them unto him: his pleasure was they should have a Temple built for to pray in
the same, the which he called the Temple of Jesus. This had Axalla obtained of
the Prince, who lived according unto this law, and many others also, of whom
our army was compounded, the Emperor serving himself with them indifferently,
having suffered thoroughout all his kingdoms the honor and reverence of Jesus
Christ, even within the army it self, and the sacrifices of the Christians
were offered, the Christians being his best soldiers, and the chiefest in his
Court: so had he also many countries under his obedience the which were all
wholly Christians, whose service he used in his wars, who would not be forced
nor held for other then such as were of his religion, in as much as they
worshipped one only God, and not allowing (no more then he) the plurality of
Gods, the which above all other things he had in detestation and horror,
driving away and destroying the Idolaters, declaring them slaves in all the
countries of his obedience. And as this Emperor was religious, he would often
hear holy men, as well of his own religion, as of the Christians, whose
austeritie he wondered at, being without ostentation as that of Guines was, and
of others fayning holiness for to get honor and praise amongst the people:
but he did see one thing throughout all Egypt, whereat he greatly wondered,
religious people who lived with dried things, refusing all moist things, which
were in the deserts for the name of Jesus Christ, whom they account God,
depriving themselves of all delights for to follow his cross and passion,
things worthy admiration. He heard also recited the persecutions of the Roman
Emperors against the Christians: this same caused in the Emperor (who was
naturally religious) a respect toward them which were of this religion,
recommending himself unto their prayers, and putting as much trust in them as
in his other subjects, maintaining them in the liberty and exercise of their
conscience, as if they had been his own natural subjects. And we must
commend in the Emperor two actions, the which were without intermission
exercised by him, that is to say, godliness and justice: for three times The
godliness and justice of Tamerlan.
in the week at Samarcand he ministered open justice unto the meanest, in his
Imperial Majesty, a thing which made him beloved of the people over whom he
comanded. In the other days he gave secret audience for the affairs of his
estate, and took advice for matters of importance, which were decided daily in
his presence. He had such severity in his counsel, that they must needs deal
truly before him, and without all passion in discoursing. Notwithstanding he
always showed himself courteous in his conversation, and made himself both
beloved and feared of his people: he never changed his servants except Tamerlan
his great liberality
they committed great falts against him: of all the servants of the late
Emperor his uncle he did not change one of them, but he did withal increase
their estates, making the^ in this change to feel his liberality, which he
made strangers for to taste also, unto whom he was accustomed to give, to bind
the^ unto him. He drew great store of money yearly for tribute of the
Moscouite: but he distributed it within the same country for to maintain his
authority there, winning those for his which might have hurt him, by means of
giving unto the^. He Tamerlan his care of his re^enue.
had great care of his revenues, and he had such a readiness, that he did see
his estate from three months unto three months within one hour, both the
ordinary and extraordinary expenses, they presented it so well digested unto
him. His revenue was not certain, for he augmented or increased it according
unto his own good pleasure, and one certain day in the year he increased or
deminished the same. His great Tresurer was very familiar with him, as one who
made him continually an account of his doings, and also for to receive at every
hour his commandments: the great Treasurer paid the estates of all the
Princes and great officers with his own hands, and all the revenues by
himself or by deputies for whom he was answerable, being administered generally
in all the Provinces by him for to distribute them according to the Princes
will. These estates were very dangerous: I have seen two of them punished
with death most cruelly, being found to abuse their offices. After the death of
the old Emperor, Severe punishment against deceitful treasurers.
all money was reduced under the image and arms of the Prince, and all other
forbidden. During the time that the Emperor did remain at Samarcand, he did
greatly reform the estate of his revenues, and every one made account that he
would make a great foundation therein, and they knew not wherefore he made so
great a heap thereof: he was accounted to be very liberal, which is a point
of no small commendation in Tamerlan very liberal.
the great; the same was very ordinary, and as it were borne with him, being
wont to say, that on the day he had not given something, that he had done
nothing in all that day: saying, that giving does commend men, making them
like unto God. Often glorying that never any had refused that which he
offered unto them. Now let us return again unto Axalla, who as soon as he
was come unto the army, caused the old laws to be published, the which the
Emperor did observe when he did first begin his wars, the which had been
cancelled, and left in all the orders of warfare, many strange fashions being
mingled therein, which did cause the decay of the military discipline. Prince
Axalla assembled the Captains of the army, declaring unto the^, the disorders
which were amongst their companies, for the which he did not blame them, but
the heads which had commanded them these two or three years: but he de^ired
them, together with himself to take the pains for to reduce all things into
the first form of the Parthian discipline; that he would not give unto them
any new thing, but he was only desirous indeed for to cause the ancient
discipline to be observed. The which was, first to encampe every where; The
Parthian discipline.
to entrench the camp, commanding that the soldier who was become dainty in
the garrisons, should accustom himself again from hence forward unto the
pains of the field, strengthening himself by traveling with those which were
appointed only for the fortifying of the camp, the number of whom was always
five and twenty thousand in the Imperial Army* That he would have the first
number wherein there was any commandment amongst the footmen, should be ten,
The order of Tamerlan his standing ca^pe.
next an hundred, then a thousand, and afterward ten thousand, over whom one
should command alone underneath the Colonel general: amongst the horsemen an
hundred, next a thousand, then ten thousand, and after that the general of the
army should command over all. He caused particular viewes to be made, for to
settle this order. He had threescore thousand footmen within his army, over
whom commanded six Colonels under the Colonel general, there were 40000.
horse under four heads, whereof there were ten thousand light horsemen. He
had his particular gards beside these, which did amount unto 2000 horse, and
4000 footmen, these encamped about the generals person. Behold the estate which
the Emperor commanded to be observed within the Army, the which only they
called Imperial, the others not having that name: for there is in Siria an
army of thre-score thousand me^, twenty thousand horsemen, and forty thousand
footme^, as many in China: as many toward Cambalu: as many toward Moscouie:
as many toward Cherroneze, but not in the field, except then when need
required. But this army thus ordered was a sound body, the which was fit to
strengthen the other bodies of his armies (the which were weak and ill
ordered) upon the first need. Prince Axalla traveled also to search out the
inventions which the Christians had, and this caused he to be performed by
means of the Jews, who did traficke into all parts: and he spared no cost
for to get all sorts of inventions and engines, the which might serve in the
art military, wherein was all his study, for to excel in the same. So as he
obtained the invention of artillery, the which was The invention of Artillery
amongst the Christians.
new amongst the Christians, and it was brought unto him by a Greek, who had
served him ever since the death of Prince Andronicus. The same did greatly
astonish every one, to behold the violence of the powder: that caused them also
to study the more thereon, for to get the full perfection thereof, wherein the
Emperor did spend greatly, in causing some of them to be made, after he had
gotten people which had skill to make them, as also for to get some of them
already made. For we had always indeed this invention, to thrust forward a
bullet by a violent motion, but with this powder it was a thing wonderful, and
of great astonishment. The Emperor would have the praise of this invention to
be given unto Prince Axalla, the which he caused to be written within the
history of his reign for an eternal memory, amongst the services he had done
him for the increase of his Empire, even as also he had acknowledged them in
earnest, having given unto him more then a million of revenues, besides his
ordinary pensions, the which did amount unto as much. Odmar had not much
less, and also the Prince of Thanais had a great estate. I have left unspoken
of an infinite number of other acknowledgements of services, the which he
bestowed upon them that served him well: for the meanest soldier might hope
for the greatest honors of the Empire: for the first notable service of the
soldier was remembered, for to encourage him to do the better, so as the reward
for the good, and punishment for the wicked, were distributed according unto
their deserts. That same held this great Empire linked together, in such sort,
as it could not disseuer what onset soever he had, how great soever the same
were; so as by that order, as soon as any war was begun, it was as soon
ended. And for his new conquests, they did order the same so well for him, that
reuoltes did seldom happen in the same; and if any did chance, they were well
punished, and but of small weight. Thus our estate was in his force, and at his
period, and very hardly could be greater. Our Prince waxed old, and became
heavy, his sons grew to be great, and me^ began to worship the son rising.
But the Emperor did bear such love unto them, that there was nothing did vex
him, nor any jealousy, but the fear he had that after his death they should
not have so much valor and wisdom, as to preserve his estate together, fearing
diuisio^s, often lame^ting that he had not a third son for to agree them both
when as they should be at strife, as it is a thing which does often happen; and
he was therein a Prophet: for this great Monarchy through division of the
brethren was ouerthrown and dispersed after his death, as we shall see in their
history. Now to return unto the affairs that passed there, Prince Axalla,
who was desirous to be doing, being returned from Babylon, whither he went
upon some revolt, gave the Emperor to understand that the Ottamans having
knowledge of the death of the Emperor Bajazet within the prison at Samarcand,
had chosen his second son called Calepin, and that they gathered together, a
great Army for to conquer all Natolia again. And that the Emperor who was
troubled much with the inward war against his brethren in Greece, harkened
not after the affairs of Asia. That this was of great importance for his
greatness. That even within Persia Democares had gathered forces together, and
came toward him. That he thought good to give his Majesty understanding of
these news, to the end it would please him to advise himself therein; that
he was most ready to receive his commandments, and that he would set forward
after he had received the same; that he did assure him, his army was well
disposed to do him service; that it was much better to go and meet the^, and
to fortify his borders, the^ for to stay for the wars in Persia, where their
minds were not as yet sufficiently confirmed in his friendship; that Lichibanes
who was governor in Natolia, had retired his forces upon this rumor out of
Bursia, the which he had vnma^teled and destroyed, not having sufficient forces
for to keep it, and had retired themselves unto the mountains looking for the
forces he hoped to receive from his Majesty, seeing there was no city of
importance in the champion country. These news being come unto the Emperor,
he assembled together his Consultation.
counsel, where these affairs were consuled of, whereupon it was in the end
resolved, that Prince Axalla should R^solution.
set forward with the Imperial Army directly toward Natolia for to join with
Lichibanes; that the Emperor should send Odmar with the forces of Quinzai and
Cambalu toward the frontiers of the Muscouite, Zerisanes with twenty
thousand horse, the which should be sent unto the Moscouit and his allies, for
to require of him the forces he owes unto the Emperor by his submission, the
which was ten thousand horse; that the Prince of Thanais should also set
forward with as many as he could raise, with his horsemen; unto the governor
of Babylon also to raise even to the number of twenty thousand horse, and
fifty thousand footmen; a commandment into Persia to leauie men every where.
And to this end there was a commandment sent from the Emperor unto all the
Cities of his kingdoms, and Commisioners were appointed for to make choice of
the me^, some for wars, the other for the works* Victuals were commanded in
all the Emperors countries for setting forward of the Army. The great
governor of Parthiae Zamai was dispatched unto Deristan, to be there for to
receive all the troops, and commandment was given unto the Commissioners for
victuals and munitions to convey them thither. It was published over all that
the Emperor went thither in proper person, for to punish once again this
proud race of the Ottomans. In the mean time Aralla marched directly toward
the borders, and he went like a ball of snow, his Army always increasing,
being glad of so good occasion. The Emperor having sent unto him his
resolution, with a commandment also to take and leave all that should be
necessary for the maintenance of his Army, in all the places of the Emperors
revenues. Axalla marched with diligence, being desirous to come unto the
borders, and to join with the forces that stayed for him, for to fight with
and expulse the enemy, before the Emperor should come unto him, whereof he had
an express commandment, the Emperor for this occasion marching slowly, in
such manner as he greatly desired to execute the same by Prince Axalla, this
journey being troublesome unto him, by reason of his indisposition. Where to
the end nothing should be wanting unto him, he sent a commandment unto the
Prince of Thanais to go and meet with Prince Axalla, as soon as he had settled
his government. He caused also two or three thousand horse to go one after
another, who came unto him with diligence. Passing also by Tauris, he drew from
thence five thousand horsemen, and ten thousand footmen of ordinary garrison,
over whom commanded a Lord called Aliren, greatly affectioned unto the Emperors
service, and principality of Prince Axalla. Arriving also in Armenia he drew
out of the garrisons as many as amounted unto twenty thousand horse, so as his
army was very near 80000 horsemen, and 160000 footme^: the Emperor making
account to be accompanied also with as many forces from Parthia, as also from
the Moscouite. Now the Emperor could not come before Tamarlan waxed sickly.
it was near six months and slowly as I have said marched his own person,
not being well at ease, having complanied these 3. months of a pain in his
reins, in so much as some doubted greatly lest this sickness would bring some
other accident; for he decayed greatly, and did eat nothing, notwithstanding
this was only known amongst his familiars, who greatly feared the
inconvenience that happened. Notwithstanding some report, that an Astrologian
did say, that he should give a Astrologians.
battle unto all the East, and that he should be victorious; another did
advertise him, to take heed of the third day of the Moon, of the ninth month
of the year wherein he now was; so as the Emperor did think he should dye in
some battle and not in his bed. For he often said amongst his men, that he did
acknowledge him self to be mortal, and that he was subject unto the law of
nature; that he did often think of paying his tribute. Now he looked for
Odmar, who should bring the Prince his eldest son unto him, providing wisely
for his affairs before he would march any further, faining to be desirous to
carry him with him, and to teach him to know his subjects, and the means to
serve him self with them if any ill fortune happened unto him. But I believe
the Emperor was desirous for to see him before he departed, determining to
leave him at Samarcand with Odmar and the Empress his mother; and what soever
his destiny appointed for him, he determined to pass over Bosphorus unto
Constantinople, and enter into Greece to root out for ever the Empire of the
Ottomans; and that he must once again do this violence for to assure his
estate, and settle the foundation of his glory. Now during the time that the
Emperor stayed the coming of the Prince his son, who by reason of his young
age came slowly with Prince Odmar, Prince Axalla whose desire of reputation and
glory did waken Tam^rlan his second journey against the ^^^^mans.
him an hundred times in a night, went in great diligence, and so well, that he
came unto Turcomanie, where the Georgian troops which the Emperor did there
intertaine came unto him, and he drew out of them full fifteen thousand men,
very gallant and well trained in the wars. At the length he arrived at Garga,
whither the Governor of the Province did come unto him for to receive the
Emperors commandments. Being come thither, he would not enterprise any thing
before the Prince of Thanais were come, who made great have; he brought but
15000. horse and 30000. footmen with him. As soon as he was come, he made him
partaker of the Emperors co^mandeme^ts, and imparted unto him the honor of
leading the aua^tguard of the Imperial army, and unto the governor of the
country the arier-guard: for he was a man of great authority, and had bin
long time honored of the Emperor; the end of his government was limited on
the one side with Persia, and on the other with Syria. Now the most part of the
countries which the Emperor had conquered in Natolia, he had delivered Tribute
paid by the Emperor of Greece unto Tam^^la^ for the most part of Nat^lia.
them unto the obedience of the Grecian Prince, who should pay a certain
yearly tribute for the same unto the Emperor, the which amounted unto four
hundred thousand ducats of gold, and eight hundred thousand frankes of silver.
Axalla sent unto the Emperor of Greece to give him understanding that he was
come unto Garga, in the which place he gathered together his forces, and that
the Emperor his Lord had sent him to prepare his army there, and that his own
person did march thither in his old age, for to perform the same good office
unto him the which he had done unto the late Emperor his father; that he
desired him to pacify the inward quarrels, for to remedy the evils abroad,
the which increased; and that he would in the end put his estate into the same
or greater danger then it had bin, if he did not think upon quenching the
civil and particular discordes, for to take care for public matters. All this
could prevail nothing with these Princes, who had made division of the Empire,
and were at debate every one about his portion: but they considered not, that
by this division they did build a portion for a third, the which was greatly
for his advantage, if they did not remedy Dis^ord between the brethren for the
Empire of Greece, being divided amongst them.
the same, whereunto he persuaded them. At such time as the Ambassador came,
who was a very wise man, they thought Prince Axalla had only certain troops
of ten of twelve thousand horse: but as soon as they understood of the great
army he had, they entered into suspicion, that the same might be as well against
them as Calepin, although he assured them of all manner of good will of the
Emperors part, insomuch as presently it was negotiated to treat some argreement
between the brethren, at the least a truce, but peruailed nothing: for they
would not trust their elder brother. Upon the Ambassadors return, we learned
where Calepin was and his army, and of what quantity it was. After he had made
a general reuiew, and caused a muster to be had of all the soldiers, he
marched directly toward the enemy who was in Caramania. Calepin was greatly
astonished to see the diligence this Army had made, the which he had caused to
be viewed by his spies; he did think it had been but of ten or twelve
thousand men only: but when he knew how great an Army it was, he entered into
a great fear, insomuch as having committed the whole charge of his Army unto a
Bassa, he retired toward the sea; he remaining only of the stock of the
Ottomans, they thought it not good he should hazard his person unto the event
of the battle, although his Army were great. But the Persians and the
Mamelues had the principal forces, which made him doubt least any disgrace
happening unto him, they should make their agreement unto his damage, the which
was not ill advised. He had also intelligence from Persia that the Emperor
marched forward, for to assist his forces with another great Army, insomuch as
he repented that he had stirred the sleeping dog. The Greek on the other
side entered into a great suspicion, of the great preperation the which was made
in every place, not thinking that it was only for Calepin: but in respect of
his estate he began to seek the means The Greek Emperor did seek aid of
the Turk his mortal enemy, against Tamerlan his approved friend.
to assure the same, and also to demand succor of Calepin, affirming that the
plot of this war was begun against them both, and that the Emperor would not
content himself to have the T^gean sea for his borders, but would certainly
(if he could) stretch forth his conquestes beyond Constantinople; that he did
perceive it was necessary for him to the assuring of his estate, to join
themselves together; that he had especially heretofore very little favored the
governor the which the Emperor had left, after the death of the Greek
Emperor his father. Also he had not desired the Parthian Emperor to
undertake this voyage, and much less had made any countenance to favor him,
for fear of breaking with Calepin, with whom he had made a certain
agreement, so faint hearted was he. All these matters put him in a great
doubt, and made him to think upon joining himself with Calepin in good
earnest, for to resist our forces if he might. All these cogitations were
good, but it was very late to advise there of now, matters being very doubtful
in respect of Calepin, who was of the same mind, if he had had the leisure: but
all remained now upon the hazard of a battle, the which he was constrained to
adventure, seeing that delay did bring more hurt then profit. Also the forces
which he did hazard, were most of them Persians and Mamelues, banished men and
fugitives, who had taken the contrary part against the Emperor. I hold opinion
that the Bassa had fifteen thousand Persian horsemen very good, and thirty
thousand footmen, commanded The Turk and the Sold an joined together against
Tamerlan.
by the Prince of Tauris a fugitive: the Mamelues were in number twenty
thousand horse, commanded by a Sultan whom they had chosen, and it is five
years since he has made war in Arabia, from whence he was driven: in the
end, he had bin entised by Calepin, and had entered into this league upon hope
that if his affairs had Calepin his forces.
good success, he would give him aid for the recovering of Syria and Egypt,
and of the principality of the Mamelues. The Bassa had five and twenty
thousand horse, and thirty thousand footmen, Calepin having brought six
thousand of them with him for his guard, so as the Bassa who was a great
Captain, did assure himself to overcome our men, who he said were compounded
of people nothing affected unto the Parthian name (but he was greatly
deceived.) This same was the Bassa who was taken the day before the battle,
wherein Bajazet was taken, unto whom the Emperor did give a horse: he said
that he was assured that he knew our manner of fight, and had noted well the
fault Bajazet had committed in the battle the which he had lost, the which did
bring them more hurt by reason of the said Emperors presence, being a Captive,
then for any other loss, the same having been much more bloody on our side:
and he said true. And this was the occasion wherefore he would not have Calepin
commit Bajazet his fault; behold the reasons of the Ottomans. Prince Axalla as
I have said, had made a general muster, he had found to be in the Imperial
Army an hundred thousand footmen, and foure-score thousand horsemen, there
were of them threescore thousand most brave and resolute men, of the Princes
trained men and all of them old soldiers, there were four score thousand very
good men who where commanded by Sinopes, desirous of honor and glory. As soon
as the enemy had turned his face toward us, and that Prince Axalla had asked
the advice of the Princes and Captains of the Army, he marched straight
toward him unto Goualache, the which was yet thirty leagues from us; who
marched in small iourneyes, never going far from the sea side, in respect of
victuals, whereof they received with ease good quantity, so as all things
abounded within their Army, but we had some want thereof. Now in the end Prince
Axalla commanded a Parthian Captain called Stucan, who did lead the light
horsemen of the Army, to have an eye that the enemies did not surpirse the
Army, and that we should not fail but have word thereof, as soon as they drue
near unto us. Now he was a very witty and vigilant Captain and a man of
enterprise, insomuch as having a soldier of the country with him unto the
place where their Army was lodged, knowing the language, he thought with
himself that in an Army of sundry nations he might intermingle himself as
it did march, and perform some brave piece of service: the which he having
imparted unto Prince Axalla, he allowed well of the enterprise, and thought
that it might be performed. So Stucan advanced forward with three thousand
horse within ten leagues of the Army, and arrived at Regdin, where he found a
part of the Ottomans Army advanced, and having gotten understanding by some
prisoners, that the enemies marched toward the forefront of the Army, having
viewed their Camp, he determined to enter into the same by the means of this
soldier, who understood the language, fayning that he came from some service,
whither he had been sent for to be a guide unto two thousand Persian horse, who
returned from thence, and that at this very time he would mingle himself and
surprise them unawares, the which fell out: for having advanced two hundred
horse with A stratageme.
these soldiers, they mingled themselves within the The worthy exployt
performen by St^^an with three thousand light horse in the Turks Camp, in tho
night.
army, and being followed by Stucan, he made himself master of that which was
the safeguard of the army, the which were their light horsemen, and there were
slain of them more then three thousand men of those which were advanced
forward: the rest of the army being on horseback, did not pursue our men in
their retraite, thinking it had been our whole army, the which caused them to
hold the bridle with their footmen, choosing rather to loose their stradiots
then the substance of the army. In the morning they were greatly astonished
when they understood our Army was as yet ten leagues off, and that they were
but three thousand horse, the which had put so great disorder in the camp. The
Bassa was determined to stay for our army, and if it were possible to weary the
same before he came unto the battle, being advertised that we had not victuals
at our own pleasure. Prince Axalla being come within five leagues of the
enemies army, he entrenched his army, and made a show of abiding there. Now he
was very desirous to view the situation of the enemies Camp, and having one
day advanced all his Army in a plain within two leagues of the enemies Army,
he would set forward for to view their countenance, and the place where they
were encamped: the which he having done, he perceived the way by which their
victuals did come unto them, and raising the Camp, he determided either to
compel them for to fight, or else to lodge between them and the sea, for to
cut off the way of their victuals: for he was well advertised of the enemies
purposes: and being vncamped, he marched in battle array directly toward the
enemy, as if he meant to have assaulted him within his trenches. In the mean
time he caused his Army to be lodged within a league of him. Now the Bassa who
had not stirred out of his Camp, knew not what was our purpose, our army
having been in battle array, within the view of their Camp above eight
hours, in the mean time our soldiers lodged. The enemy who did not think
any such matter, was greatly astonished, when some of his men came and declared
unto him that we were lodged so near unto him, and did hinder their victuals,
and having assembled the chief Captains of his Army, to have their advise,
he determined to come unto the fight, and give a battle, if he did perceive
that our purpose was to hinder him from the sea, he would yet endeavor as much
as he could to procure that his victuals might come, making trial by scoutes
to do the same. So the day being come, the Bassa caused six thousand horse to
issue out for to discover our purposes, giving commandment unto the^ who^ he
sent to hazard nothing, but to retire if they did see that any did stop the
passage: so as it falling out that the Captain of our side, the which had this
charge, was this day on horseback, with x. thousand horse, who upon the first
alarm of his enemy, did beat them bravely into their Camp, the which the
Bassa perceiving, and that it was the purpose of our me^, he supposed he could
no longer shun the battle. And the same night he began to approach unto the
point of their camp near unto a mountain, the which was nearer unto them
then us, to lodge there in parcels, and also to the end we should not lodge
there at all, the which they did foresee might greatly prejudice them if we
should win the same before them. So in the morning Prince Axalla had certain
news that the enemies Army did dislodge, the which he desiring to descrie,
mounted on horseback, and advanced forward with some twenty thousand horse
for to behold their dislodging, determining to set upon them if he saw cause,
and followed them to take an occasion to do it upon their lodging. But it fell
out otherwise: for seeing their countenance, he supposed presently what they
would do, and having called unto him the Prince of Thanais and Sinopes, he
said unto them, that he thought it not convenient to suffer the enemy for to
entrench upon this mountain, for the discommodities we should receive thereby.
For this cause he commanded Sinopes to set upon them with twenty thousand
men, and to hinder them from this mountain, assuring himself that if he did
win it, he should have the victory of the battle most assured. Now the place
was such, as the horsemen could by no means do any service there, by reason
of a marrish that was at the foot of the same mountain, the which did stretch
a good league, but the footmen did easily march thither. Prince Axalla assured
himself he had good footmen, and that Sinopes who was desirous of honor,
would not omit to give a strong assault upon the enemies upon this occasion. So
our army being wholly ranged in battle arraie, Prince Axalla caused all his
footmen to advance forward: he determined to fight on foot if the enemies did
wilfully attempt the same mountain, and having commanded the Prince of Thanais
to keep himself at the head of all the horsemen who were in battle array, he
advanced forward, for to succor Sinopes in good time, who advanced lustily with
twenty thousand men only. Prince Axalla having advised with himself, as the
best, to cause them to march along by a little hill, and that by this way they
should do their endeavors by surprising of the enemy, who could not perceive
them: so as they should as soon feel their blows and assault, as see their
persons; this being A Maxim.
a Maxim that an enemy thoroughly viewed is half conquered: this was the cause
that the same became so great an astonishme^t unto the enemy, to see himself
assaulted not knowing whether it were with all the footmen, or part of the
same. The enemies Army was at the other end of the marrish, and we were within
the view the one of the other: but even as our men did give this onset, you
might have seen their whole army stir, for to resist the strong force of our
men, the which continued a good hour. The Bassa who was a discreet Captain,
commanded all the footmen he had to aid the^ which where upon this mountain,
and although our men upon the first fury had won the top of the mountain, so
as then the enemies did fight on foot coming up, the which was a great
advantage for our men. Axalla perceiving this aid mount up, commanded also
20000 of our men to oppose themselves against this new troop which mounted,
and after them he sent 25000 more, and came to this point, that he himself
alighted, determining for to lead the third succor, saying, that as soon as
he should perceive another great troop of footmen for to stir, it was his
turn to march. The Prince of Thanais understanding that he would go thither in
person, sent to beseech him for to suffer the Colonels of the footmen to
perform that, and that it belonged unto him only to command. Prince Axalla
sent him word that this was a special match, and that if they did win the
mountain they should also win the battle; that he would this day obey him,
and be his soldier. About this time he did see this great body move, which
was the remainder of the enemies footmen, the most part Ianizaries, who at
their coming, performed a wonderful act: but in the end Prince Axalla coming
with many of the brauest men about him, he put the enemies to flight, and did
win the mountain, and remained Master thereof before he departed, and lodged
there, intrenching himself on the enemies side. He left Sinopes to command
there, who had this day gotten great honor. There died of our men fifteen
thousand, and above thirty thousand of the enemies: the fight endured from
eight of the clock even until night, our horsemen being lookers on, not any
ways able to help the footmen. The enemy having received this disgrace,
marched ten good leagues that night, and forsook his Camp as overcome, but it
was not without having The discomfiture of the Bassa with his flight by night
the Prince of Thanais and Stucan at their tail, with his light horsemen,
Prince Axalla continually following them, encamped within two leagues of them,
having always the coast of the sea, and they bending toward Caramania. Now
the Bassa having received again his spirits after this disgrace would encampe
himself: but the Prince of Thanais disco^tented for that he had not fought,
adua^ced in such sort, that eue^ as we were ready to lodge had news that it
behooved to aid him with diligence, the which Prince Axalla understanding,
caused the sign of battle to be given speedily, and he himself with all the
horsemen advanced forward. Now it was a little river he had passed over, not
thinking the enemy had been so near unto him: which the enemies perceiving,
they commanded 10000 Persian horse to give the first charge, the which they
having valiantly performed, our men being engaged, without any other delay,
were constrained to come unto the fight strong and resolutely, and defended The
r^s^nesse of the Prince of Thanais.
themselves: but the enemies were forth with backed with 20000 horse after
them, the first charge not having been but for to engage them: the fight was
very furious, and our men were almost overthrown, when as behold ten
thousand Persian horse led by the Prince of Hallicen, who set forward with
great diligence, and came for to assist the Prince of Thanais, who fought
valiantly, and had two horses already killed under him, and did fight upon the
third: Stucan was Stucan slain.
slain, and all the light-horsemen overthrown. Prince Axalla who perceived
the fault which the Prince of Thanais had committed, did bite his lip, saying,
that God had given him a goodly victory, and that he must loose the same
through another folly, and turning him self unto his companions, he said unto
them, that this was the day wherein they must fight, not for glory, but for
the safety of all the Parthian people. Having sent forward with all diligence,
ten thousand horse more for to maintain the fight, he came speedily unto the
order of fight, and advanced forward with forty thousand horse, the which he
put into three troops: on front he followed the enemy, who had knit himself
together, and put our men to flight, having had always the better in all the
former charges they had given. The Prince of Thanais at the third charge was
overthrown to the ground as dead in the enemies power: but the 10000. horse
whereof I did speak, compelled the enemy to make head against Prince Axalla,
who would not suffer The battle b^tween Axalla and the Bassa
this occasion to be lost without revenging the overthrow of his men. Now he
did perceive there was but two hours left of the day, the which caused him to
press forward unto the battle, and to constrain and force the enemy to
come unto the same. Now the Bassa had not as yet fought at all, who advanced
forward with fifteen thousand fresh horse* strengthening this charge: but
Prince Axalla coming unto the fight, he could not resist so great a troup, and
was ouerthrown. The Governor also of Natolia called Lenauen, who as yet had
not fought, assisted Prince Axalla, and had yet ten thousand horse, who
gathering our men together again, they all joined with Axalla, and repulsed
the horsemen within their footmen, who giving themselves Axalla his victory
against the Bassa.
over to flight, did forsake them: they could not stay our horsemen from
assaulting them, so as they were almost all slain, having fought even until
night: notwithstanding there retired above twenty thousand in order of
battle, the most part of them Ianizaries, who passed over the water, and
hindered our horsemen from having so large a victory as they otherwise should
have had. Notwithstanding the next day we sent part of our horsemen under the
Governor, for to keep that none of the enemies should join themselves
together. They marched all that night led by their Captain, whom they call
Ag^, the Ianizaries went in very good order, speaking reproaches of their
horsemen, who had thus forsaken them: they fortified themselves, being resolved
all of them to die for the The brave resolution of the Ianizaries.
preservation of their Prince. After the dead were buri^d, and care taken for
the wounded, the Prince Axalla left the Prince of Thanais sore wounded upon one
The Prince of Thanais sore wounded.
of his legs, and himself advanced forward more then ten leagues, the
enemies horsemen being as yet knit together fourteen thousand horse strong.
The Prince Axalla having left all his carriages, followed the enemies, who
could not join themselves with their Ianizaries, for we had gotten between
them. The Ianizaries in this order wherein they marched, came along by the sea,
the which Prince Axalla understanding, he sent ten thousand horse after them,
and commanded that all the footmen of the army which had not yet fought,
should march with diligence directly toward them for to set upon them: but
they had gone The Ianizaries pass over at Gallipoli into Europe to join with
Calepin.
two great iournyes, and embarked themselves at Gallipoli, for to pass over
into Europe, and join with Calepin, who accused the Bassa for that he had
forsaken them, and was fled away from them. There were above five and forty
thousand of the enemies slain in this last day: these were two battles happily
achieved; there were slain of our men above twenty thousand, and Prince
Stucan was found amongst the dead underneath his horse, his target being upon
his face, all the whole army made great lamentation for his death; he had
greatly ouershot himself, for he had like to have overthrown all the whole
army. There was great joy made for the safety of the Prince of Thanais, so
preserved Axalla greatly reprehended the Prince of Thanais for his rashness.
amongst the dead. The Prince Axalla did greatly reprehend him for his
rashness, having been the occasion of the death of twenty thousand men, and
to make the victory unto us bloody, the which had not otherwise been so,
seeing we might have had the same better cheap. The Prince of Thanais excused
himself upon Stucan and the light horsemen, who had advanced themselves too
far, and also he did not think to find the maine forces of the enemies so
near at hand. Prince Axalla said unto him, that he was in great doubt least
such a matter would fall out, and for this cause he had advanced the army as
near unto the river as he could. But Prince Axalla notwithstanding all these
great and happy victories, had not that which he desired, and showing himself
very sad for that he knew the indisposition and sickness of the Axalla very
sad for the indisposition of the Emperor his master.
Emperor as incurable, he purposed to return unto the Court, to the end he
might win the good favor of the young Prince, whom he knew the Emperor his
father had sent for. And having assembled the Counsel, he caused the dispatch
to be read, the which he did send unto the Emperor of the happy success of
the victory: and in the mean time he sent after the enemies, to the end they
should have no more leisure, but only to get the mountains, and having given
this commandment, very early in the morning he followed after with the rest of
the army. The greatest part of the Persians sent to sue for their pardon, and
did come and yield themselves, the Prince their chief having been slain; the
head of the Bassa was brought by a soldier, The Bassaes head brought unto
Axalla.
who had killed him in his retiring, at such time as he did see the Persians
forsake him. This was the same Bassa, who had been taken before in the battle
wherein the Emperor Bajazet was taken prisoner. The prince Axalla followed
continually the small remnant of the enemies Army that remained: they made
foul war upon the Mamelues, because the most part of them had falsified
their faith given unto the Prince of Thanais, for the rest they made them fair
war. In less then fifteen days this army was wholly ouerthowne, and
Calepin retired into Europe, all the cities upon the sea coast yielded
themselves. The winter drawing near, the Army demanded their pay, whereupon
they took advise, and having considered where the same might winter, it
retired toward Goualache. The Prince of Thanais was desirous to withdraw
himself into his government, and lead back his troops, as also to prevent
the novelties the which the indisposition of the Emperor might bring forth,
and Prince Axalla A league of friendship sworn between Prince Axalla and the
Prince of Thanais.
and he, having sworn great friendship each unto other, he went his way. The
Prince having a determination to overthrow the Empire of Greece the next Sommet
following, to the end he might take from the Ottomans all opportunity of
waxing great, seeing the Greek Emperor did favor them, and having conquered
again all that which Calepin had won, without any great resistance. The
Prince of Thanais was gone twenty leagues or thereabout, when as behold there
came a post, who brought news of the Emperors death, the which did happen two
days after The death of the Emperor Tamerlan.
he had received the news of this victory, having done nothing after the
receipt of these news, but quietly end this life, speaking even unto the last
gasp, with sound and good sense, taking order for the affairs of his Empire,
without any alteration in his accustomed Axalla lamented the death of the
Emperor Tamerlan privately, but bitterly.
manner. The Prince Axalla having received these news whereof he doubted,
withdrew himself alone, and with all kinds of complaints, he bewailed the
death of his good master, he concealed his death certain days, and having
with all diligence sent these news unto the Prince of Thanais, he desired that
it would please him they might meet for to consult of their affairs. So they
appointed a place to meet in about this accident. This post brought his
dispatch signed with the name Sautochio our Emperor, by the which he was
commanded to leave 40000 men with the Governor of the borders, and himself
to take his journey thorough Persia with his army. This post was followed by a
favorite of the new Emperor, who came unto Prince Axalla for to gratify him,
and to make him an affectioned servant unto the Emperor, as a person whom he
knew very necessary for to maintain the greatness of his Empire, holding in
his power at this day, the principal forces, besides the great authority he
had of long time enjoyed with the late Emperor: so as the quiet of the Empire
depended more upon Prince Axalla, then upon any one, especially having had very
lately so famous a victory. This same did greatly procure him the good will,
both of the Captains and soldiers: but there was nothing but worthiness in
Prince Axallaes mind, who The worthy mind of Prince Axalla toward his new
Prince.
assured the new Prince of his faithfulness, and obedience unto his
commandments. I will not forget to declare, that during the time the army did
refresh it self, the Prince of Thanais came to meet with Prince Axalla, where
interchangeably they did swear faith the one unto the other, for the
preservation of their honors and The meeting of the Prince of Thanais and
Prince Axalla ^o what end.
estates. They thought it best to co^ceale the death of the late Emperor, the
one of them in the army, the other in his government: but even as evil news
does disperse abroad sooner then good, so did Axalla upon his return find
these news spread over all, the which he perceiving, thought good to cause the
army to be assembled together, and there for to give them understanding of
the loss of their Emperor. You did never The lamentation for the Emperors
death by the whole army.
see so many cries, and so much shedding of tears: he exhorted them unto the
same faithfulness and affection toward the young Prince his son, for the
honor of the late Emperor: the which they promised, even Axallaes faith
fullness unto the Prince.
unto the meanest soldier. Axalla caused the oath of fidelity to be
particularly taken by the chiefest of the Army, and after he had covered all
the standarts with mourning weed, according to our custom, and had made also
a muster of all his soldiers, where he did again exhort them to honor the
memory of their late Emperor, toward the Prince his son, saying unto them,
that he did not die at all, seeing he had a son, who deserved to be beloved
of every one for his virtues, under whose good fortune they should
henceforward fight, who would acknowledge their services. That it was
convenient to go unto him for to receive the recompense of their faithfulness;
that he was young for to exercise the young, and liberal for to consider well
of their travels; that he would never forsake them, but would be always their
Protector. After that was done, he severed unto the Governor those men as he
thought necessary to remain with him, for to keep this country in peace,
and to hinder the enemies from fortifying of themselves: the which Prince
Axalla having performed, he advanced two days iournies forward. Now for to
recite that which passed at the Emperors death, this it is, that feeling
himself ill disposed, having from all parts sought for health: in the end,
seeing nature did decay in him, he called for Sautochio his eldest son, unto
whom in the presence of Odmar, and of all his Council, he discoursed The
Emperor Tamerlan his discourse unto his son before all his counsel lying
upon his death bed.
of the course of his life ever since the death of his father Zachetay, who
being given over to contemplation, had left unto him three personages near
unto his person, for to assist and counsel him, of whom (said he) there
remains none alive at this present but only Odmar, being the youngest of the
three, the which had brought him up as well in the actions of war, as the
affairs of peace, whereof you may judge by the great enlargement he has added
unto Zachetay, the which he had obtained as well through his great reputation,
as by force; and that the hope every one conceived of his virtue in his youth,
had called him unto the full succession of the Tartarian Empire. For having by
the counsel of these three, as fathers, enterprised the war against the
Moscouite, whose arms were at that time the most to be feared of all Asia,
this enterprise having had good success, not only all his neighbors, but all
his kinsemen, desired to have peace and friendship with his arms, and the
Emperor his uncle, whose purpose was to divide his Empires amongst his
Princes, whom he loved, for my valor changed his determination, hearing my
reputation to resound, and that I had in this young age thorough my good
conduct, overcome the common enemy unto our Nation: whereupon I was judged by
him worthy to command the same, and sending to offer his daughter unto me in
marriage, he made choice of me to succeed him in this monarchy, hoping that I
would ease his old age, and that I would guide the years which remained unto
him in peace, thorough my travel, and the reputation of my arms. He was not
deceived in me, having honored him always as my Lord, and loved him as
another father, carrying my self so cunningly during his life, that at such
time as his death happened, I kept this great Empire, without any co^motion
therein, but rather all subjection and obedience. I will tell thee my son, that
I did not only succeed him in the Empire, but also in the love of all his
servants, whom thou do see about me, who have served me faithfully these
twenty years, ever since I have enjoyed this great large country, unto whom
the late Emperor my uncle did promise only recompense of their service, but my
self have been so much acccompanied with good hap, that I have been able to
give unto them. I leave unto thee then these servants, who are worthy to be
kings; honor them, and reign with them: they will be faithful unto thee, and
have remembrance of me for to serve thee faithfully, and do know how to excuse
thy youth and guide the same: believe their counsel. And taking Odmar by the
hand, pulled him on the right side of the place where he was set, and looking
upon the other side, he turned unto the young Prince his son, saying unto
him: This side and place here shall be kept for Axalla, who is absent, whose
faithfulness and affection he had proved, the worthy acts of whom were so
recommendable unto all this Empire and himself, that he would speak no more
unto him of the same; that he commanded him to believe their counsel even as
he had done, wherein he had found great good; that the Prince of Thanais was
his kinsman, that he should esteem of his faithfulness, and serve himself
therewith; that he might assure himself he would yield him obedience, even to
the spending of his own life. In the end that he recommended unto him so
many worthy Lords and Captains, who had served him faithfully in so many
wars he had made for the greatness of the Parthian Empire, over the which
he had left him to command without any desert but for a fair hope, and for
that he was his son. And giving his hand unto all the Princes and Lords, which
he had caused to come before him, he presented them unto his son, saying
unto him, that this was his Empire and good fortune, and demanding his seal
of the great Chanceller, he put it into the hands of the young Prince, and
caused the same to be redeliuered unto him again, and having continued a
certain space without speaking, he said unto him: My son, love justice,
minister it as well unto the little as unto the great, this is your duty, and
he shall ease you therein sometimes. Remember your self, that the weapons which
you have in your hands, are but to make execution of the same: this is the
cause therefore that it behooves the wars you begin be justly enterprised,
and then will they have happy success. As his speech was directed unto the
young Prince, he had the Chanceller near him; whereupon during the same, there
was a great noise more then was accustomed in the Emperors outward chamber, and
asking what the matter was, they caused a Lord to enter in, sent from Axalla
(now the Emperor had nothing at all left the care of his affairs, as he was
accustomed, although they were somewhat the more slowely dispatched,) who
brought news of the happy success of two battles won in Natolia, by the
Army led by Prince Axalla, victorious over Calepins News brought unto the
Emperor Tamerlan of Axallas victories in Natolia against Calepins forces
forces; and declaring this happy success in his affairs, the messenger of
these news said unto him, that he hoped the next summer his person marching
forward, the Empire of Greece should be easy for him to conquer, seeing the
astonishment the enemies had. Tamerlan his speech unto the messenger, and to
the Prince his son.
He answered him, that he never doubted of his soldiers affections, but that
he was called by a greater then himself, and unto a more happy conquest,
seated in a more high place, whither he must needs go. Tell Axalla (said he
unto the Lord which spoke unto him) that from hence forward he must receive my
sons commandments. And drawing a ring from off his thombe, commanded that it
should be carried unto Prince Axalla, to signify unto him the contentment he
had in his service, and in witness of his faithfulness. He demanded in
general of the health of all those of his Army, recommending them unto his
son, every one according to their virtues and deserts: amongst the rest he
recommended the services of the Prince of Thanais, commanding his son to
honor him as his kinsman, and to continue him in the charges and honors the
which he had put into his hands, for that he did deserve the same; that he
should be well served by him. And returning again to speak, he commanded his
son, that if he committed his armies unto any man to be commanded, it should
be unto Prince Axalla, a thing notwithstanding which he did counsel him to do
the latest he could, because it was so precious a thing, and that if it were
possible, he should not trust it with any man but himself; that it was fit
for the Parthian Emperors to be in the midst of their armies, and amongst the
soldiers, even as householders are with their children, and that by this means
he should preserve this great Empire, which he left to him by inheritance,
hoping in time he would deserve it by his virtues. And as his last words he
persuaded him to be gentle and courteous unto his friends, and terrible unto
his enemies, and if they demand peace of you, do not in any case refuse it,
and forgive your particular occasions, and do justice for the love of your
people. This young Prince had the tears in his eyes, and the Emperor
contrariwise uttering these words, had a majesty in his countenance more then
accustomed, and causing his son to go out, he sent him unto the Empress for
to comfort her. And having again called for Odmar, he recommended unto him the
young years of his son, the love and faithfulness unto his service, willing
that his younger son should be brought up to obey his elder brother: for of the
love and agreement of the two brethren depends (said he) the quiet and
preservation of this estate: and sending for them both, he was desirous to give
them his last blessing. And they being come before him, he commanded the
younger to obey his elder brother, and both of them Tamerlan his last speech
and blessing unto his sons.
together to honor the Empress: and beginning to give them his blessing,
touching the head of Sautochio, he pressed it down, and touching the head of
the younger, he raised it up, lifting up his chinne, a presage that Letrochio
the younger should be lifted up unto the Empire, and should be the overthrow
of his elder brother, as it fell out afterward through their divisions, the
which caused the destruction of the Empire. Night being come he slept very
sweetly, and about the break of day, according to his custom, he caused them
to be called unto him which had any business with him: and Axallas dispatch
being presented unto him for to sign, upon this last victory obtained, he
signed it without any change of countenance, and after turning himself, a
slumbring took him again, and they perceived he passed away unto another
life, they ran for to call the Emperor his son, who as soon The death of
the Emperor Tamerlan.
as he was come shut his eyes, pouring out tears, as also did all his
servants. The Prince Sautochio his eldest Prince Santochio proclaimed Emperor
and signed dispatches.
son within two hours after was proclaimed Emperor throughouut all the whole
Army, and dispatches were made from all parts to advertise the Governors of
provinces thereof, the letters being signed with the hand of the new Emperor,
who having assembled all the Army together, he made an oration unto the
Captains and soldiers, and caused them to make a general muster, gratifying
all the ancient servants of the Emperor his father: he would not dispose of
any thing before he had seen Prince Axalla, and was joined with the imperial
Army. This young Prince, when he came unto this Empire was nineteen years
old, Prince Sautochio 19. years old when he came unto his Empire.
he was fair, and had much of the Emperor his fathers natural disposition.
They hoped that he would wisely (through the good counsel that was about him)
maintain this great Empire: but they feared greatly the young Prince
Letrochio his brother (whom his mother loved) would cause divisions, as it
happened in the times of their great grandfather between two brethren, who had
been occasion of the destruction of their estate, the which was relieved and
lifted up again unto his height by the valor of Tamerlan.

FINIS.

