TEARS ON THE DEATH of Meliades.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Heart, and are to be sold at his shop on the
North-side of the high street, a little beneath the Cross, 1613.

To the Author.
IN waves of Woe thy sighs my Soul do toss,
And do burst up the Conduits of my tears,
Whose ranckling wound no smoothing Baume long bears,
But freshly bleedes when ought vpbraides my loss.
Then thou so sweetly Sorrow makes to sing,
And troubled Passions do so well accord,
That more delight thy Anguish does afford,
Then others Joys can satisfaction bring.
What sacred Wits (when ravished) do affect
To force Affections, Metamorphose minds,
Whilst numbrous power the Soul in secret binds,
Thou have performed transforming in effect.
For never plaints did greater pity move,
The best applause that can such notes approve.
S. W. ALEXANDER

TEARS ON THE DEATH of Meliades.
O Heavens, then is it true that thou art gone,
And left this woeful I Will her loss to moan,
Meliades, bright Day Star of the West,
A Comet blazing terror to the East:
And neither that thy Spirit so heavenly wise,
Nor Body [though of earth] more pure then Skies,
Nor royal Stem, nor thy sweet tender Age,
Of cruel Destinies could quench the rage?
O fading hopes! O short-while-lasting joy
Of earth-borne man, that one hour can destroy!
Then even of Virtues spoils Death Trophies reares,
As if he gloried most in many tears.
Forced be hard Fates, do Heavens neglect our cries?
Are Stars set only to act Tragedies?
And let them do their worst, since thou art gone;
Raise whom they lift to Thrones, enthroned dethrone,
Stain Princely Bowres with blood, and even to Gange,
In Cypress sad, glad Hymen's torches change.
Ah thou has left to live, and in the time,
When scarce thou blossomed in thy pleasant Prime.
So falls by Northen blast a virgin Rose,
At half that does her bashful bosom close:
So a sweet Flourish languishing decays,
That late did blush when kissed by Phoebus rays.
So Phoebus mounting the Meridians hight,
Choked by pale Phoebe, faints unto our sight:
Astonished Nature sullen stands to see
The Life of all this All, so changed to be,
In gloomie gowns the Stars about deplore,
The Sea with murmuring mountains beats the shore,
Black Darkness reeles over all, in thousand shoures
The weeping Air on Earth her sorrow poures,
That in a palsy, quakes to see so soon
Her Lover set, and Night burst forth ere Noone.
If Heaven alas ordaind thee young to die,
Why was it not where thou might thy valor try?
And to the wondering world at least set forth
Some little spark of thy exspected worth?
Meliades, O that by Isters streams
Mong sounding trumpets, fiery twinkling gleames
Of warm vermilion swords, and cannons roar,
Balls thick as rain powered by the Caspian shore;
Mong broken spears, mong ringing helmes and shieldes,
Huge heaps of slaughtred bodies long the fields,
In Turkish blood made red like Marses star,
Thou ended had thy life and Christian war!
Or as brave Burbon, thou had made old Rome
Queen of the world, thy triumph and thy tomb.
So Heavens fair face to coming worlds which reeds,
A book had been of thy illustrous deeds.
So to their nephews aged Syres had told
The high exploits performed by thee of old;
Towns razed, and raised, victorious, vanquished bands,
Fierce Tyrants flying, foiled, killed by thy hands.
And in dear Arras, Virgins fair had wrought
The Bays and Trophies to thy country brought:
While some great Homer imping wings to fame,
Deaf Nilus dwellers had made hear thy name.
That thou did not attain these honors spheres,
Through lack of power it was not, but of years.
A brauer youth, pale Troy with trembling walls
Did never see, nor she whose name appalls
Both Titans golden bowres, in bloody fights
Mustring on Marses field, such Mars-like knights.
The Heavens had brought thee to the highest hight
Of wit and courage, showing all their might
When they thee framed. Aim that what is brave
On earth, they as their own so soon should crave!
Meliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
When Forth thy nurse, Forth where thou first did pass
Thy tender days, [who smylde often on her glass,
To see thee gaze] Meandring with her streams,
Heard thou had left this round, from Phoebus beams
She sought to fly, but forced to return
By neighbor brooks, she gave her self to mourn:
And as she rush't her Cyclades among,
She seemed to plain, that Heaven had done her wrong.
With a hoarse plaint, Cleyd down her steppie rocks,
And Tweid through her green mountains cled with flocks,
Did wound the Ocean, murmuring thy death;
The Ocean that roared about the earth,
And to the Mauritanian Atlas told;
Who shrunk through grief, and down his white hairs rold
Huge streams of tears, which changed were in floods,
Wherewith he drowned the neighbor plains and woods.
The lesser brooks as they did bubling go,
Did keep a consort unto public woe.
The Shepherds left their flocks, with down cast eyes
Sdaining to look up to the angry Skies:
Some brake their pipes, and some in sweete-sad lays
Made senseless things amazed at thy praise.
His reed Alexis hang upon a tree,
And with his tears made Doven great to be.
Meliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore
From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
Chaste Maids which haunt fair Aganippe Well,
And you in Tempes sacred shade who dwell,
Let fall your harpes, cease tunes of joy to sing,
Discheueled make all Parnassus ring
With Antheames sad, thy Music Phoebus turn
In doleful plaints, whilst Joy it self does mourn.
Dead is thy Darling who decor'd thy Bays,
Who often was wont to cherish thy sweet lays,
And to a trumpet raise thy amorous style,
That flotting Delos envied might this I Will.
You Acidalian Archers break your Bows,
Your bra^dons quench, with tears blot Beauties snowes,
And bid your weeping Mother yet again
A second Adons death, nay Marses plain.
His Eyes once were your darts, nay even his Name,
Where ever heard, did every heart inflame.
Tagus did court his love with Golden streams,
Rheine with his Towns, fair Seine with all she claims.
But ah (poor Lovers) Death them did betray,
And not suspected made their Hopes, his Pray!
Tagus bewailes his loss with Golden streams,
Rheine with his Towns, fair Seine with all she claims.
Meliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore
From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
Fair Meades amidst whose grassie velvet springs
White, golden, azure flowers which once were kings,
In mourning black, their shining colors dye,
Bow down their heads, whiles sighing Zephyrs fly.
Queen of the fields, whose blushes stains the Morn
Sweet Rose, a Princes death in purple mourn.
O Hyacinthes for ay your Al keep still,
Nay, with more marks of woe your leaves now fill.
Your green locks Forests cut, in weeping Mirres,
The deadly Cypress, and inke-dropping Firres,
Your Palms and Mirtles turn; from shadows dark
Winged Syreins wail, and you sad Echoes mark
The lamentable accents of their moan,
And plain that brave Meliades is gone.
Stay Sky thy turning course, and now become
A stately Arche, unto the Earth his tomb;
Over which ay the watrie Iris keep,
And soft-eyed Pleiades which still do weep,
Meliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore
From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
Dear Ghost forgive these our untimely tears,
By which our loving mind, though w(...)ares.
Our loss, not thine [when we complaine] we weep,
The glistring walls of Heaven for thee do keep,
Beyond the Planets wheels, boue highest source
Of Spheres, that turns the lower in his course.
Where Sun does never set, nor ugly Night
Ever appears in mourning garments dight:
Where Boreas stormy trumpet does not sound,
Nor clouds in lightnings bursting, minds astound.
From cares cold climates far, and hot Desire,
Where Time's exild, and Ages never expire:
Mong purest spirits environed with beams,
Thou thinks all things below, to have been but dreams;
And joys to look down to the azur'd bars
Of Heaven, poudred with troops of streaming stars:
And in their turning Temples, to behold
In silver robe the Moon, the Sun in gold,
Like young eye-speaking lovers in a dance,
With majesty, by turns retire, advance.
Thou wonders The Earth to see hang like a ball
Closd in the gha^^^ly Cloister of this All:
And that poor m^^ should prove so madly fond,
To toss themselves for a small foot of ground.
Nay, that they even dare brave the powers above,
From this base stage of change, that cannot move.
All worldly pomp, and pride thou see arise
Like smoke that's scattred in the empty skies.
Other Hills and Forests, other sumptuous Towers
Amazed thou finds excelling our poor Bowres;
Courts void of flattery, of malice Minds,
Pleasures which last, not such as reason blinds.
More sweeter songs thou hears and carrollings,
Whilst Heavens do dance, and quire of Angels sings,
Then moldie minds could feign, even our annoy
[If it approach that place] is changed in joy.
Rest blessed spirit, rest, satiat with the sight
Of him whose beams (though dazeling) do delight,
Life of all lives, Cause of each other cause,
The Sphere and Center where the mind does pause:
Narcyssus of himself, himself the Well,
Lover, and Beauty that does all excel.
Rest happy Ghost, and wonder in that Glass,
Where seen is all that shall be, is, or was,
While shall be, is, or was, do pass away,
And nothing be, but an Eternal day.
For ever rest, thy praise Fame may enroule,
In golden Annals, while about the Pole
The slow Boots turns, or Sun does rise
With scarlet scarf to cheer the mourning Skies.
The Virgins to thy tomb may garlands bear
Of flowers, and with each flower let fall a tear.
Meliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore
From ruddy Hesp'rus rising to Aurore.
W. Dr.

FINIS.
OF IET,
Or PORPHERIE,
Or that white stone
PAROS affoordes alone,
Or these in AZVRE dye,
which seem to scorn the SKY:
Here Memphis Wonders do not set,
Nor ARTEMISIAS huge frame,
that keeps so long her Lovers Name:
make no great marble Atlas tremble with gold
To please a vulgar eye that does behold.
Phoebus, the Muses, Love, has raised of their tears
A Crystal tomb to him where through his worth appears.
STay Passenger, see where enclosed lies,
Wits Paragone, and Natures daintiest frame,
Virtues fair Temple, Wonder unto Fame,
In whom was found the best Heaven could devise:
At least that part the Earth of him could claim,
Of Elements combind that did arise,
For as to his brave Spirit, and glorious Name,
The one the World, the other fills the Skies.
Arabian odours, Mirtles youthful Bays*
Roses, and that sweet flower (...)ares,
Spread on this stone, while I these doleful lays
Sigh forth, and wash it over with my tears.
Then go and tell from Gades unto Inde,
Thou saw where Earths perfections were co^finde.

