

THE OWL

By Michaell Drayton Esquire.

Noctuas Athenas.

PRVDENS NON LOQVAX


LONDON

Printed by E. A. for E. White and N. Ling. and are to sold near the little
north door of S. Paul's Church, at the signc of the Gun. 1604.

TO THE WORTHY AND MY MOST ESTEEMED Patron Sir Walter Aston, Knight of the
Honorable Order of the BATH
FOr the shril Trumpet and stern Tragic sounds,
Objects out-ragious and so full of fear;
Our Pen late steeped in English Barons wounds,
Sent warlike accents to your tune-full ear.
Our active Muse to gentler Morals dight;
Her slight conceits, in humbled tunes does sing;
And with the Bird (regardlesse of the light)
Slowely does move her late high-mounting wing.
The wreathe is Iuye that ingirts our brows,
Where-in this Nights-Bird harboreth all the day:
We dare not look at other Crowning boughs,
But leave the Laurel unto them that may.
Low as the earth, though our Invention move:
High yet as heaven (to you) our spotles love.
Michaell Drayton.

To the Reader.
REader, I think it not amiss breefely to let thee know, that a year is
almost now past, since this small Poem was lastly finished: At which time (it
gave place by my inforcement) undertaking then in the general joye of the
Kingdom, and my zeal to his Highness, to write his Majesty's descent in a
Poem gratulatorie. And now, for that this subject may (perhapes) seem idle
and worthless: I might this answer (to him that will see in reading, or read
with understanding) that the greatest masters in this Art (though my self,
not for any affectation of singularity) have written upon as slight matter.
As the Princes of the Greckes and Latins, the first of the Frogs war, the
latter of a poor Gnatte: and VIDA very wittily of the Chest-playe and
Silke-worme. Besides many other that I could recite of the like kind. By how
much immateriall, so much the more difficult to handle with any encommiastick
defense, or passionate comparison, (as their strong testimony) who can give
virtue her due, and by the powrefulnes of wit, maintain vice not viciously.
Some other likewise in a paradoxicall manner, as ISOCRATES Oration in praise of
HELLEN whom all the world dispray seth: AGRIPPA'S declamation vponthe vanity of
the Sciences, which knowledge, all the world admireth. Thus leaving thee
favorably to censure of my poor labors, I end.

M. DR.

In Noctuam Draytoni.
QVae noua Lemniacas deturbant tela Volucres?
Quis furor aligero perstringit corpore Graios
Transfixo, proceres? Posita Paeantius ira
Contulit Herculeas ad Troica fata pharetras.
Fallimur? an puro tonuit pater altus Olympo?
Aut tremuit sonitu Phoebaej Caelifer arcus?
Novimus augurium: tanto Deus ille tumultu
Sacrorum exagitat mortalia pectora vatum.
Hinc furor in syluas Draytouum mittit: oberrat
Hinc saltus nullo signatos tramite Musa:
Hinc and in aeriam libratur machina gentem:
Quae ferit immemores (iterato verbere) reges:
Proterit and Vulgus (audaci more) profanum.
Eia, age: dum crebro fugiat tremebundus abictu
Immitis seruus vitij, dece dat aboris
Anglorum long: lustratis lampade sancta
Cujus conjuncti exultant fulgore Britanni.
A. GRENEVVAI.

THE OVVLE
WHat time the Sun by his all-quickning power,
Gives life and birth to every plant and flower,
The strength and feruor of whose pregnant ray,
Buds every branche and blossoms every spray;
As the frim sap the yearly course assyg'nde
From the full root, does swell the plenteous rynde,
The vital spirits long nourisht at the heart,
Fly with fresh fire, to each exterior part:
Which stirs desire in hot and youthful bloods;
To breath their dear thoughts to the listening woods.
With those light flocks the garish fields frequent,
This frolic season luckylie I went,
And as the rest did, did I franckly too,
Least is he marck'd, that does as most men do.
But whether by some casual defect,
All Flowers alike the time did not respect:
Some whose new roots never saw a former May,
Floorish now fair, those withered quite away,
Into my thoughts that incidently brings
The inconstant passage of all worldly things.
The rarest work whereat we wonder long,
Obscured by time that envy could not wrong.
And what in life can mortal men desire,
That scarsly comm'n, but quickly does retier?
The Monarchies had time to grow to head,
And at the height their conquered hours fled:
And by their wane those latter kingdoms rose,
That had their age to win their hours to lose,
Which with much sorrow brought into my mind
Their wretched souls so ignorantly blind,
(When even the great'st things in the world unstable)
Clyme but to fall, and damned for a babble.
Whilst thus my thoughts were strongly entertained
The greatest lamp of heaven his height had gayn'd;
Seeking some shade might lend content to me,
Lo near at hand I spied a goodly tree;
Under the'xtenture of whose lordly arms,
The small Birds warbled their harmonious charms
Where sitting down to cool the burning heat,
Through the moist pores euap'rating by sweat,
Yielding my pleased thought to content (by chance)
Upon a sudden dropped into a trance,
Wherein me thought some God or power divine
Did my clear knowledge wondrously refine.
For that amongst those sundry varying notes,
Which the Birds sent from their Melodious throats
Each Siluan sound I truly understood,
Become a perfect Linguist of the Wood:
Their flight, their song, and every other sign,
By which the world did anciently divine,
As the old Tuskans in that skill profound,
Which first great Car, and wise Tyresias found, Diuinatio^ by Birds.

To me bequeathed their knowledge, to discry
The depth and secrets of their Augury.
One I could hear appoynting with his sweeting,
A place convenient for their secret meeting,
Others, when Winter shortly should declyne,
How they would couple at Saint Valentine. The tim when Birds Couple.

Some other Birds that of their Loves for saken,
To the close deserts had themselves betaken,
And in the dark Groaues where they made abode,
Sang many a sad and mournful Palinod.
And every Bird showed in his proper kind,
What virtue, nature had to him assignde.
The pretty Turtle, and the kissing Dove,
Their faiths in Wedlock, and chaste nuptial Love:
The Hens (to women) sanctity express,
Hallowing their eggs: the Swallow clenlinesse,
Sweeting her nest, and purging it of dong
And every hour is pickiug ofhir young.
The Herne, by soaring shows tempestuous showers,
The princely Cock bistinguisheth the hours.
The Kite his train him guiding in the air,
Prescribes the helm, instructing how to stere.
The Crane to labor, fearing some rough slawe,
With sand and gravel burthening his crawe:
Noted by man, which by the same did find
To ballast ships for steddines in wind.
And by the form and order in his flight,
To march in war, and taught to watch by night.
The first of house that ere did groundsell lay,
Which then was homely of rude lome and clay
Learned of the Martin: Philomel in spring,
Teaching by art her little one to singe;
By whose clear voice sweet music first was found,
Before Amphyon ever knew a sound.
Covering with Moss the deads unclosed eye:
The little Red-breast teaches charity.
So many that in sundry things excel,
Time scarce could serve their properties to tell.
I cannot judge if it the place should be,
That should present this pretty dream to me,
That near the Eaues and shelter of a stacke
(Set to support it) at a Beeches back
In a stub'd Ttee with Iuy ouer-growne,
On whom the sun had scarsly ever shone:
A broade-Fac'd Ceature, hanging of the wing,
Was set to sleep whilst every Bird did sing.
His drowsy head still leaning on his breast,
For all the sweet tunes Philomel expressed:
Noe sign of joy did in his looks appear,
Or ever moved his melancholy cheer.
Ascallaphus that brought into my head,
In Ouids changes Metamorphised, Ascallaphus in Bubone^

Or very like: but him I read aright,
Solemn of looks as he was slow of sight;
And to assure me that it was the same;
The Birds about him strangely woundring came.
Fie, quoth the Lennet tripping on the spray;
Rowse thee thou sluggish Bird this mirthfull May,
For shame come forth and leave thy Luskye nest,
And haunt these Forests bravely as the best.
Take thy delight in yonder goodly Tree,
Where the sweet Merle and warbling Mauis be.
Next, quoth the Titmouse which at hand did sit,
Shake off this moody melancholy fit.
See the small brooks as through these groves they travel
Sporting for joy upon the Silver gravel,
Mock the sweet notes the neighboring Siluans sing
With the smooth cadence of their murmuring.
Each Be with Honey laden to the thye,
From Palm to Palm (as carelessly they fly)
Catch the soft wind, and him his course bereaues,
To stay and dally with th'inamored leaves.
This while the Owl, which well himself could bear,
That to their short speech lent a listening ear:
Begins at length to rowse him in the Beech,
And to the rest thus frames his reverend speech.
O all you feathered Quiresters of nature,
That mighty power distinguished every creature;
Gave several uses unto every one:
As several seeds, or things that live upon;
Some as the Lark that takes delight to build,
Far from resort amid the Vastie field.
The Pelican in deserts far abroad,
Her deare-lou'd issue safely does unload.
The Sparrowe and the Robinet again,
To live near to the Mansion place of men;
And nature wisely which has each thing taught,
This Place best fitting my content forethought,
Though not presuming in the statly Trees,
Yet where foresight less threatening danger sees,
The tempest thrilling from the troubled air,
Strikes not the shrub the place of my repair.
The Fowlers snares in Ambush never laid
T'intrap my steps which often you betrayed.
A silent sleep my gentle fellow Birds,
By day, a calm of sweet content affords;
By night I tower the heaven deuoy'd of fear,
Nor dread the Griphon to surprise me theare.
And into many a secret place I peep,
And see strange things whilst you securelye sleep.
Wonder not Birds although my heavy eyes,
By day seem dim to see those vanities.
Happie's that sight the secret'st things can spy,
By seeming blind unto community;
And blessed are they that to their own content,
See that by night that some by day repent. Caelius. Secure vi dit qui dum
omnia nouit opinione^ tamen, etc.

Did not mine nyes seem dim to others sight,
Without suspect they could not see so right.
O silly creatures, happy is the state,
Thatwayes not pity, nor respects hate:
Better's that place though homely and obscure
Where we repose in safety and secure,
Then where great Birds with Lordly tallants seize Eras, Cui plus licet quam
par est, etc.

Not what they ought, but what their fancies please:
And by their power prevailing in this sort,
To rob the poor, account it but a sport:
Therefore of two I chose the lesser evil,
Better sit still then rise to meet the devil.
Thus the poor Owl unhappily could preach,
Some that came near in compass of his reach,
Taking this Item with a general ear,
( A guilty conscience feels continual fear)
Soon to their sorrow secretly do find,
Some that had winck'd not altogether blind.
And finding now which they before had heard,
Wisdom not all, in every garish Bird,
Shrewdly suspect that breuyting by night,
Under pretense that he was ill of sight,
Slily had seen which secretly not kept,
Simply they waked; he subtly had slept.
The envious Crow that is so full of spite,
The hateful Buzzard, and the ravenous Kite.
The greedy Raven that for death does call, Pliny.

Spoiling poor Lambs as from their Dams they fall.
That picketh out the dying creatures eye;
The theeuish Dawe, and the dissembling Pie,
That only live upon the poorers spoil,
That feed on Dung-hilles by thelothsome foil.
The Woodpecker whose hardened beak has broke,
And perc'd the heart of many a sollid Oak.
That where the Kingly Eagle wont to pray
In the calm shade in heat of Summers day:
Of thousand of fair Trees there stands not one
For him to perch or set his foot upon.
And now they see they safely had him here,
T'eschew the effect of every future fear:
Upon the sudden all these murdrous foul,
Fasten together on the harmeles Owl.
The cruel Kite because his claws were keen,
Upon his broad-face wreaks his angry teene.
His weasant next the ravenous Raven plyes,
The Pie and Buzzard tugging at his eyes.
The Crow is digging at his breast amain;
The sharp-nebd Hecco stabbing at his brain,
That had the Falcon not by chance been near, The natural love of the Falcon
to the Owl. Pliny.

That loved the Owl and held him only dear,
Come to his rescue at the present tide,
The honest Owl undoubtedly had did.
And whilst the gentle Bird does yet pursue,
The riot done by this rebellious crew,
The lesser Birds that keep the lower spring,
There-at much grieve with woeful murmuring,
Yet wanting power to remedy his wrongs,
Who took their lives, restrained not their tonguest
The Lark, the Lennet, and the gentler sort,
Those sweet Musitions, with whose shrill report,
The senceles woods, and the obdurate rock,
Have often been moved: the warbling Throstle Cock,
The Ousell, and the Nightingale among
That charms the night calm by her powerful song,
In Phoebus Laurel that do take delight,
Whom Jove's fearce thunder has no Power to smite.
Justice say they, ah whether art thou fled?
Or this vile world, have thou abandoned?
O why fair virtue were thou made in vain?
Freedom is lost and liberty is slain:
Whylst some whose power restrained not their rage,
Loudly exclame upon the enuyous age,
That rocks for petty do resume them ears,
The earth so wette with plenty of their tears.
But thus it haps in heat of all these things,
As Kings rules realms, God rules the hearts of Kings,
The Princely Eagle leaving his abode,
Was from his Court stolen secretly abroad,
And from the covert, closely where he stood,
To find how things were censured in the wood;
Far in the thickets might a chattring hear,
To which soon lending an officious ear,
With a still flight his easy course does make
Toward where the sound he perfectly does take.
At every stroke (with his Imperial wings)
The gentle air unto his feathers clings;
And through his soft and callow down does flow,
As loath so soon his presence to forgo,
And being at last arrived at the place
Where the poor Owl in miserable case
(For women much sorrow every where was heard)
Sadly bemoaned of many a helples Bird.
But when this Princely Iouiall Foul they saw,
As now deliu'red from their former awe:
Each little creature lifted up a wing,
With Aue Coesar to their sovereign King.
Who seeing the Owl thus miserably forlorn,
Spoiled of his feathers, mangled, scratcht and torn:
Wil'd him his name and qualitye to show,
How and wherefore he suffered all this woe.
Which the Owl hearing, taking heart thereby,
Though somewhat daunted with his pearcing eye,
(With a deep sigh) my sovereign Leidge, quoth he,
Though now thus poor and wretched as you see,
Athens sometime the Muses Nurcerie,
The source of Science and Philosophy,
Allowed me freedom in her learned Bowers,
Where I was set in the Cecropian towers,
Armed Bellona (Goddess of the field)
Honored my Portraict in her warlike Shield.
And for my study (of all other Foul)
To wise Minerua challenged the Owl.
For which, those grave and stil-autentique Sages
Which sought for knoledge inthose golden ages,
Of whom we hold the science that we have;
For wisdom, me their Hiroglifique gave.
The fruitful Ceres to great Saturn borne,
That first with Sickle cropped the ripening Corn,
That bore the swartye Acheron, whose birth
Scarsely yet perfect, loathing of the earth,
And flying all community with men,
Thrust hos black head into the Stigian fen;
Where the Nymph Orphne in the infernal shade,
As in his stream she carelessly did wade:
The flood Embracing craftily beguilde;
By whom soon after she conceau'd with child,
Of her dear son Ascallaphus, whose youth Ovid Metam. Lib. quinto.

So cherished Justice, and respected truth;
As to the gods he faithfully did tell,
The tasted fruit by Proserpine in hell:
Which an offense imagined so foul,
Ceres trans-form'd into the harmeles Owl.
To our disgrace though it be urged by some,
Our harmeles kind to Creet does never come;
The Cretians ever liars, nor come we thither,
For truth and falsehood cannot live together.
And those that spurn at our contented state,
With Viperous envy and degenerate hate;
Strive to produce us from that Lesbian bed,
Wherewith blind lust the fleshly letcher led
On his own child, unnaturally to pray,
(For that foul fact) transformed Nyctimene, Ovid. Metam. Libr. Secund.

But sildome seen unto the public eye,
The shreeking Litch-Owle that does never cry,
But boding death and quick her self interres,
In darksom graves and hollow sepulchers.
Thus much, my Sovereign, whence my fathers came
Now for the cause of this my present shame,
Few words may serve a mischief to unfold,
For in short speech long sorrow may be told.
But for my freedom that I vsd of late,
To lanch the infection of a poisoned state,
Wherein my free and uncorrupted tongue,
Lightly gave taste of their injurious wrong.
The Kyte, the Crow, and all the Birds of pray,
That thy Liege people hauock night and day;
Rushing upon me, and with foul despite,
Thus have they dressed me in this piteous plight.
The Eagle now a serious ear that lent,
To the religious and devout intent,
Of the good Owl, whom too injurious fate
Had thus rewarded; does commiserate
The poor distressed Bird, hoping to hear
What all the rest through negligence or fear,
Smothred in silence, and had buried still,
Covering the sore of many a festred ill,
Not only grants him liberty of speech,
But further dayning kindly to beseech,
The virtuous Bird no longer to refrain:
Who thus emboldned by his Sovereign,
At length his silence resolutely brake,
And thus the Eagles majesty be-spake.
Mighty, said he, though my plain homely words,
Have not that grace that elegance affoords.
Truth of it self is of sufficient worth;
That needs no gloss of art to set it forth.
These hoary plumes like moss upon that Oak,
By seeing much, yet suffering more I took.
Long have I seen the worlds unconstant change,
Joy mooues not me, affliction is not strange.
I care not for contempt, I seek not fame,
Knowledge I love, and glory in the same. Bartas.

Th'ambicious judgment seat I never sought,
Where God is sold for Coin, the poor for naught.
I am a helples Bird, a harmles wretch,
Wanting the power that needful is to teach.
Yet care of your great good and general weal,
Unlocks my tongue, and with a fervent zeal
Breaks through my lips which otherwise were pent Pithago

To that severe Grave Samnites document.
I know before my harmles Tale be told,
The gripple Vulture argues me too bold.
The Cormorant (whom spoil cannot suffice)
Sticks not to charge and slander me with lies.
The Parrts tax me to be vainly proud,
And all cry shame the Owl should be allowed,
Which with this Axiom does them all confute,
When Kings bid speak, what subject can be mute?
The latest winter that rore-went our prime,
O nightie prince, upon a certain time
I got into thy Palace on a night,
There to revive my melancholy spright,
And there (for darkness) waiting all alone,
To view (by night) what Lords by day look on,
Where I beheld so many Candles light,
As they had mok'd the Tapers of the night.
Where for it grew upon the time of rest,
And many, great sincerity professed,
Expecting prayer should presently proceed;
To ask forgiveness for the days misdeed,
There is soft Down the liquerous Sparow sat,
Pampered with meats, proud, insolent and fat.
His Drugs, his drinks, and sirrops does apply,
To heat his blood and quicken luxury;
Which by his billing female was embraced,
Clasping her wings about his wanton waste.
O God thought I, what is here? by light within,
Where some in darkness should have feared to sin.
The Cormorant set closely to devise
How he might compass strange Monopolies.
The gaudy Gold-finch and his courtly mate,
The jolly Bunting power-full in the state,
Quickly agreed, and but at little stick;
To share a thousand for a Bishopric,
And scramble up some feathers from the Lark,
What though a Pastor and a learned Clarke?
And for his reverence though he wear a Cowle, Mantuan Bardo cuculatus caput,
etc.

Yet at his entrance he must pay them tole.
I saw a Buzzard scorning of the black,
That but of late did cloth his needy back
With Ostridge feathers had adorned his crest,
As he were bred a Faulcon at the least.
Thus strouts he daily in his borrowed plume
And but or shame he boldly durst presume,
With Princely Eglets to compare his sight:
Not the proud Iris in her coullers dight,
Could with this base Kyte equally compare.
What foul before him stood not humbly bare?
No less then Lords attending every beck,
At his command his betters brook his check.
But O my Liege, the Birds of Noble race,
Know whence he is and who affoords him grace,
And inlie grieve to see a servile mate,
Crept up by favor to out-braue a State.
The poor Implumed Birds that by offense,
Or some disgrace have lost pre-eminence
Can point and say, this feather once was mine:
Some winck, some would, some grieve, and some repine
Besides all this, I saw a Bird did scower,
A Serpents teeth, that daily did devour,
Widows and Orphans, yet th'Egiptian Sawes,
Commend this Bird for clensing Serpents Jaws.
For the base Trochyle thinks it no pain,
To scowre vile Carrion for a sauorie gain.
When soon I saw about the Serpents nest,
Whilst this slave Bird his nastie grinders dressed.
A thousand little Flies, as many Birds,
Of laboring Bees, a thousand thousand herds,
A thousand sundry Foul, that strangely carp
And curse that beak that made his goomes so sharp.
Yet in this base Bird I might well discry,
The prosperous fruit of thriuing Policy.
Casting mine eye and looking through a glass,
I saw a Gos-howke (that in state did pass)
That by fair shows did men's affections feel,
Gold (his attendant) always at hes heel.
Whole Manors did him reverence as he staid,
Whose name (if written) could possession plead
In any Lordship that adjoined his:
Law was his vassal, he and purchase kis.
Zeal was his fool, and learning was his ieaster,
Pride was his page, and Gluttony his taster.
A thousand suitors waited at his hand,
Some called his honor Patron of the land;
The sole commander of the Commonweal,
And unto him they humbly all appeal.
When in a Closset strangely I beheld,
That was adjoining to a pleasant field,
How every suter when he was retired
Bought out his peace, or his promotion hy'rd;
Yet what he won with cursses was rewarded,
When the poor Birds for bribes alone regarded.
To th'secret of all secrets when I came,
Having mine eyes even glewd with grief and shame:
I tell not how the vulture fate apart,
Spending the blood and marrow of his heart,
And by all means his faculties t'apply,
To taynt the Phoenix by his surquedry,
That of her kind had she been more then one, Claudian: de Phoenice.

(Parent and Infant to her self alone)
This heavenly Bird (in touching their defame)
Had had her purple soyled with their shame.
And for the Turtle would not be unchaste,
Her did they banish to the barren waste.
I dare not say how every sort were searched,
Nor dare I tell how Avarice was perched
Under the pillow of the grauest head,
(That freedom with the golden world is dead)
How age had cast off a religious life,
Humor of late become Opinions wife.
Counsel secure, nor Companies with care,
The wit that wounds zeal, accounted rare.
But whither wandreth my hye rauish't Muse?
O pardon Leidge, the feirce exclaimes I use;
And let my Barque (through gales of your good grace
Through these rough Seas) bear sail a little space.
Scarce had these words found vtrance through my lips
But ther-with all a prattling Parrot skips
About the private lodging of his Peers.
His eyes were watchful, open were his ears.
He had a tongue for every language fit,
A cheuerell Conscience, and a serching wit.
Coming in have as he hadcrost the Main,
And brought some strange intelligence from Spain
Yet even at midnight (for the Rogue was poor)
I found him knocking at a great man's door;
And where of course the wise are turned away,
His errand brooks no dilatorie stay,
But presently conducted (by a light)
Into a Chamber very richly dight,
Where sat the Vulture with a dreadful frown,
Proud and ambitious, gaping for renown:
His talents red with blood of murdered fowls,
His full eye quickly every vay controles.
Which when this Parrot sted fastly beheld,
His feathers brisled and his stomach sweld;
Anp to the Vulture opens where he sat,
(Whose ears attentive listing still thereat)
The state and hauiour of each private man,
Laid out for searching Avarice to scan.
Whereby strict rule and subtilties in art,
Such traqs are set, as not a man can start.
And where th'offenders maintenance was great,
Their working heads they busily do beat,
By some strange quiddit or some wrested clause,
To find him guilty of the breach of laws,
That he this present injury to shift,
To buy his own, accounts a Princely gift.
And for a cloak to their corrupt Decrees,
The Vulture with this subtle Bird agrees;
That they that thus convicted are aparte,
Shall be surpised by policy and art.
Then pick they forth such thieves as hace the light,
The black eyed Bat (the watchman of the night)
That to each private family can pry,
And the least slip can easily discrie;
And since his Conscience is both loose and la, ge,
Is only set to undergo this charge;
Adrest to drink of every private Cup,
And not a word slips but hecakes it up.
To minister occasion of discourse,
And ther-with-all, some dingerous Theme in-force,
To urge a doubtful speech unto the worst,
To broach new treasons and disclose them first;
Where-by himself still cleeres: and vn-awares
Intraps the Foul, unskillful of these snares.
And (against law) he bears his Lords Protection,
As a it mean and by the States direction.
O worthy Birds, prevent this ill in time,
And suffer not this rau'nous Bat to climb;
That is occasion of the bests offense,
The brat of riot and of indigence,
The moath and canker of the Commou-weale,
Bred by corruption to disquiet zeal.
Holla thou wandering Infant of my brain,
Whither thus fling'st thou? yet divert thy strain;
Return we back unto our former gate,
From which a little we digrest of late,
And leave this monster beating of his head,
The honest Owl has quickly stroke him dead.
And forth agame the Parrot let us find,
That winning credit so the world does blind,
Under protection of so dread a hand,
Spoils and familes ransacketh thy land.
The Pelican that by his fathers teaching,
Has with devout zeal folow'd wholesome preaching
That rent his bosom and enforced his tongue,
To teach his tender and beloved young.
When now these fauters of all vile abuse
Have found a stand where they may note his use,
How father-like he gives affliction bread,
Converting souls; through blind-folde error led.
The naked Orphan in his bosom wraps,
With the poor widow does bewail her haps;
And never reaps his plentious field so clean,
But leaves his harvest that the poor may gleanc;
Steps in this false pie, this promoting wretch,
Closely betrays him that he gives to each:
And for his deeds of charity and grace,
Roots up his godly Hospitale place.
Most like to that sharp-sighted Alcatras, The Alcatras.

That beats the air above the liquid glass:
The New-wotlds Bird, that proud imperious foul,
Whose dreadful presence frights the harmeles Owl:
That on the land not only works his wish,
But on the Ocean killes the flying fish.
Which since the Owl has truly done his arrant,
O Princely Eagle look unto this tyrant:
But if my words thou wilfully impung,
Thy pcacefull Empire that has flourished long,
Headlong at length shall to confusion run;
As was this great globe ere the world begun:
When in an huge heap and unwieldy mass,
This All was shut and nature smothered was.
And in this Lump and Chaos out of frame,
The contraries conuers'd and one became,
Strictly together th'Elaments were clasped
And in their rough hands one the other grasped:
That each did others quallitie deface,
Beauty was buried, light could find no place.
But when th'al-seeing Sovereign did disperse,
Each to his place upon the universe,
To his own region and his contrary;
Enuy'd his place, impungn'd his quality.
Fire, Air, Earth, Water, in their Mansion sat,
By that great God to them appropriate.
All is composed within this goodly room;
A perfect shape this Embrion is become;
Which thus disseuered by their friendly jarres,
Contriue the worlds continuance by their wars.
So in confusion members are inclosd,
To frame a state if orderly disposed:
For to the proud maleuolent aspect,
Of angry Saturn that would all direct,
The long exiled but Imperious Love,
When for his regal Sovereignty he strove,
With god-like state and presence of a King;
Calmes Saturnes rage, his fury limiting.
But leave we those unto their own decay,
Other occasions hasten us away:
Let Princes view what their poor subjects try,
Blind is that sight, that is with another eye;
It is full time that we should get us hence,
O mightic Sovereign Oceans of offense,
Stand here opposed in my passing by,
When in a Chamber nere thy Majesty
A jetting Iaye accomplished and brave,
That well could speak, well could himself behave;
His Congeis Courtly, his demeanor rare,
As strangely fashioned as his clothes he ware;
Which could each man with complement salute,
And to the VVood-Cocke framed a special suit.
Who him embracing like a braineles fool,
Desired him sit, commanding him a stool.
The jolly Iaye thus graced by a Peer,
Pluckes up his spirits, and with a formal cheer
Breaks ther-with-all into most strange reports,
Of Flemmish news, surprising Towns and Fortes.
Of troubles raised in France against the King,
Spanish Armadoes and embattailing,
Protesting method in Intelligence
To be a thing mighty consequence;
And pawnes his soul, he can devise away,
Which put in act, the Leaguers loose the day,
To frame a Bridge of Bow-string over the Rhine,
Supplant the Alps and lay them smooth and plain,
And that if all the Princes of the North,
Will with an Army Royal set him forth,
Before the year expyr'd that is to come,
He will with Burbon new be-leaguer Row.
Then of his knowledge in the Cabalist,
And what pertaines unto an Exorcist.
Then of Philacters what their virtue be,
Homers Nepenthe and of his degree;
Each several use in practique what it is;
How much he wants that does these secrets miss,
And by some little pillar in that place,
To give some Window or some Chymnie grace,
Now to proportion presently does run,
And talks of the Collossus of the Sun:
Of Columes the Diameters does tell,
Even from the Bace unto the Capitell.
And by the Roose he something both allude,
And will demonstrate of the Magnitude.
And what is all this from his addle pate,
But like a Starling that is taught to prate,
And with a lisping garb (this most rare man)
Speaks French, Dutch, Spanish, and Italian.
No day does pass, he does his compass miss,
To send to that Lord, or to visit this,
And kissing of his clawe, his Cox-combe bare,
Is come to see how their good graces fare.
And presently unto their face reports,
Their rare perfections woundred at in Courts;
Scratching the Idiot by his itching ears;
Heavens spit down vengeance or dissolve in tears,
And send the Ibis to repulse our shame, The Bird Ibis, a destroyer of the
locust. Pliny.

to drive those Locusts to whence first they came.
Woe to these slaves whose shape the devil took,
To tempt the holy Esaias at his book.
O moral Mantuan live thy verses long,
Honor attend thee and thy reverend Song.
Who seeks for truth (say thou) must tread the path
Of the sweet private life, which ennies wrath,
Which poys'ned tongues, which vain affected prase
Can-not by scorn suppress, by flatrery raise.
For Adulation but if search be made,
His daily mansion and his usual trade,
Is in the Monarchs Court, in Princes Halles,
Where Godly zeal he by contempt inthralles.
There calls he evil good, the good terms evil,
And makes a Saint of an incarnate devil.
These boldly censure and dare set at naught,
The noblest wit, the most Heroique thought.
This Carrion Iaye approaching to the spring
Where the sweet Muses wont to sit and sing,
With filthy ordure so the same defyl'd,
As they from thence are utterly exyl'd.
Banish their issue, from whose Sacred rage
Flows the full glory of each plentious age.
Still with the Prophets chalenging their parts,
The sweet Companions of the Liberal Arts.
Those rare Promethij fetching fire from Heaven;
To whom the functions of the Gods are given,
Raising frail dust with their redoubled flame,
Mounted with Hymns upon the wings of Fame;
Ordayn'd by nature (Truch-men for the great)
To fire their Noble hearts with glorious heat.
You Sun-bred Ayerie, whose immortal birth
Bears you aloft beyond the sight of earth,
The heauen-tuch'd feathers of whose sprightly wings,
Strikes (from above) the Palaces of Kings,
By how much nearer you ascend the Sky,
Do lessen still to every mortal eye;
Who in this time contemptfull greatness late
Scorned and disgraced which erst renowned her state.
O basterd minds unto this vylenes brought,
To loath the means which first your honors wrought
But who their great profession can protect,
That rob them selves of their own due respect?
For they whose minds should be exhaled and hye,
As free and noble as clear Poesye,
In the slight favor of some Lord to come,
Basely do crouch to his attending grome.
Immortal gift that art not bought with gold!
That thou to peasants should be basely sold!
And thus even cloyed with business of the Court,
To neighbor Groves inuyting my resort,
Where I supposed the solitary Owl
Might live secure unseen of any foul;
Lo in a valley peopled thick with trees,
Where the soft day continual Evening sees,
Where in the moist and melancholy shade,
The grass grows rank, but yields a bitter blade.
I found a poor Crane sitting all alone.
That from his breast sent many a throbbing groan;
Groueling he lay, that sometime stood upright;
Maimed of his joints in many a doubtful fight.
His Ashie coat that bore a gloss so fair,
So often kis'd of the enamored air;
Worn all to rags and fretted so with rust,
That with his feet he troad it in the dust:
And wanting strength to bear him to the springs,
The spyders woue their webbs even in his wings:
And in his train their filmie netting cast,
He eat not worms, worms eat on him so fast.
His wakefull eyes that in proud foes despite,
Had watched the walls in many a Winters night,
And never winck'd nor from their object fled,
When heavens dread thunder ratled ore his head,
Now covered over with dim cloudy kelles,
And shruncken up into their slymie shelles.
Poor Bird that striving to bemoane thy plight,
I cannot do thy miseries their right;
Perceiving well he found me where I stood,
And he alone thus poorly in the Wood:
To him I stepped desiring him to show,
The cause of his calamity and woe.
Nights-Bird (quoth he) what make thou in this place
To view my wretched miserable case?
Ill Orators are aged men at Arms,
That wont to wreake and not bewail their harms:
And repetition where there wants relief,
In lessening sorrow, but redoubleth grief.
Seven sundry Battails, served I in the feeld,
Against the Pigmies, in whose battered sheeld,
My prowes stands apparently expres'd,
Besides these scarres upon my manly breast,
Along the Mid-land coasts my troops I led,
And Affrickes pride with fear astonished;
And maym'd I was of this decrepit wing,
When as the foul from the Proponticke spring, The Sea from Hellespont to
Bosphorus Thracius.

Filled all Th'Egean with their stemning ores,
And made the Isles even tremble from the shores.
I saw when from the Adriaticke seas;
The crosse-adoring Fowls to Europs praise,
Before Lepanto and Morae a fought, wrought
Where heaven by wind, earths wonder strangely
Weary at length and trusting to my worth,
I took my flight unto the happy North:
Where nobly bred as I was well allied,
I hoped to have my fortune there supplied,
But there arryu'd, disgrace was all my gain,
Experience scorned of every scuruye swayne.
Other had got for which I long did serve.
Still fed with words whilst I with wants did sterue.
Having small means but yet a mighty heart,
How ere in fame, not honored for desert,
That small I had, I forced was to gage,
To cure my wounds and to sustain mine age;
Whilst those that scarce did ere behold a foe,
Exult and triumph in my ouer-throwe.
And seeing in vain with misery I strove,
Retired me to this solitary Grove;
Where in despair (even loathing of my breath)
I long to dwell in the cold arms of death.
Here sanke down in a sound and could no more,
And I return from whence I came before.
Where by the way the country Rooke deplored,
The grip and hunger of this ravenous Lord.
The cruel Castrell which with deuilish claws,
Scratcheth out of the miserable jaws
Of the poor tennant, to his ruin bent,
Raising new Fynes, redoubling ancient rent;
By strong enclosure of old Common land,
Rackes the dear sweat from his laborious hand,
Whilst he that digs for breath out of the stones,
Cracks his stiff Sinews and consumes his bones;
Yet forced to reap continually with strife,
Snarling contention feeding on his life.
Yet hoping Fortune bettered by his heirs,
He has their love, his hate made only theires;
Laboring to keep him in his quiet state,
When envy does his gathered Manors threat:
And being favored of sonie higher Peer,
Who not for Love, enforcing by his fear,
Which by their Clownish industry and art,
Now to the Court reduce him from the Cart,
With slight provision that defrayes his charge,
Whilst with his grain he ballast many a Barge,
And fo his gripple Avarice he serve,
What recks this rancke-hinde if his Country sterue?
Hell on that wealth is purchased with shame,
Gold in the Trunck, and in the grave defame:
Yet his claws blunt and when he can no more,
The needy Rooke is turned out of the door.
And lastly does his wrechednes bewail,
A bond-slaue to the miserable Iayle.
Thus wearied with the sight of worldly crimes,
The wane of kingdoms, and the change of times;
Betook my self by searching to espy,
What sins in secret did in Cities lie:
For there I deemed where law had chiefest force,
Strongly to limmit every lewder course,
Things turned to nature and disdained excess,
That plaguey foe to human happiness.
And as I went (with busy search about)
Casting by cunning how to find them out,
I found the Fesant that the Hawk does fear
Seeking for safety bred his Aerye there:
Yet is accused through close informing hate,
By lawles lending to offend the state.
Who being Rich, and loving coin and ease,
Still buyldeth low for fear he should displease.
Yet the Blad- Buzzard being appointed Judge,
To this base, muddy, miserable, drudge:
A pair of young ones taking from his nest,
And leaves this fearful Recreant the rest,
Who gives him thanks his goodness would so do,
Might take the Aerye and the old one too.
He lived best that most lived out of sight:
I dare not say that Birds were all upright;
For some had golden Beaks but brazen claws,
That held the guildes to minister their laws:
The Castrell for possession of his heir,
Is by the Ringtayle offered woundrous fair,
To have a match betwixt their goodly breed,
T increase their lands, and raise their happy seed.
But the coye Castrell turns it to a mock,
And scorns to match in his ignoble stock,
For which the Ryng-taile by a secret plot,
Subbornes the Starling, which has closely got,
To be the Broker slily to seduce
The Castrels Heir, by giving thriftlesse use.
And in strong Statutes to enthrall him so,
To lyme him sure which way so ere he go.
For this young Foul (drawn from his fathers eye)
Will with the fond world swim in vanitye.
The subtle Ring-tayle never thus does leave,
Till he the Castrell cunningly deceive.
And caught this young one in the Cities snare,
Deuoures his Manors ere he be aware.
Among which the Dawe (by giving of a bribe)
Became a Clerk amongst the learned Tribe;
That being a Bankerout, a dis-honest better;
Can get his living only by the letter,
Whilst Arts go beg, and in a servile weed,
Are made the slaves of penury and need.
The Goose exyled, humbly does appeal
To all the Birds, professing faith and zeal.
And though he proves by the Roman book, Plutarke.

What care to keep the Capital he took;
Yet is not heard: The Dove without a gall Columba sine fell.

Is left forsaken, and contemned of all.
There grows such difference and such strange confusions,
Twixt old decrees, and later Institutions:
Yet being inspyr'd, desisteth not to speak,
To edify the conscience that is weak,
And by approved arguments of's own,
By scriptures, Fathers, and great writers known,
Discovers their abominable trade;
So that the Storke their vmpyre being made,
Judges the Dawe should from the Church be driven,
To prate in corners, and to preach by Even.
And since his art and cunning was so scant,
To have no patron but the Ignorant;
And by his doctrine only teaching fools,
To be exilde and hissed out of the Schools.
Hence like the seed Thebes-buylder Cadmus throws,
More armed mischiefs sudainely arose:
The Bittor brings his action against the Quayle,
And on th'arest allows him hardly bail;
Because he durst presume amongst the Reeds,
To let his Lemmon where his female breeds.
And Mistress Titmouse a neat merry dame,
With her friend VVagtaile, one of special name;
Su'de by the Cucco in his proper wrong,
For accusation of a sclanderous tongue.
That to the bar his Advocate does bring,
That has by rote the acts of many a King.
The Laws, the Statutes and decrees assignde,
Customs so old, as almost out of mind.
A day of hearing good my Lord cries he,
For Master Cucco that retains me;
Whom the lewd VVagtayl basely has abused,
In'so vile terms as cannot be excused:
The parties likewise present here in Court,
And it is a case that well deserves report:
For which a Jury summoned with speed,
And to the trial presently proceed.
The Braine-bald Coot a formal witless Ass,
Must now the foreman on this matter pass:
The Sottish Dotterill, ignorant and dull;
And next to him the Mawe-cram'd gluttonous Gull.
The Lecherous Mallard called unto the book,
The squealing Lapwing, the rediculous Rooke,
The witles Woodcock, and his neighbor Snite,
That will be hyr'd to pass on every rite,
With all the rest empanyled to wait:
Which when the Iurye fully was compleyte,
Called to the Bar, admitted and alow'd:
Up start the Pecocke insolent and proud;
Of goodly stature and of gracious port,
In presence of the honorable court:
Thus for the Playntiffe learnedly began.
My Lord (says he) was never worthy man,
So nobly bred and of so high descent,
Of so fair liuely-hood, and so large a rent
As is the Cucco, when our plea shall try,
His loss sustained by their infamye.
First for the worth and honor of his name,
You may the better censure his defame;
From mighty Birds descended every way,
And by his birth (the messenger to may)
His house still loyal, and his Coat as fair,
His fathers tunes he never did impair.
His name and nature do so well agree,
As shows his blood repurifyed to be.
In fruitful Sparta, it is since now long,
That famous Greece took notice of his wrong,
When for his wanton and unchaste desire,
A thousand ships stuf'd with reuengefull fire,
To Tenedos the proud Aegean laddes,
Whence sprang those high immortal Illiades.
And since the Romans from the Asian broils,
Returned with conquest and victorious spoils.
The Cuci here continually have been,
As by their ancient Evidence is seen. Liuius.

Of Consul Cuccus, from whose mighty name,
These living Cuccos lineally came.
To him, the Ancients, Temples did erect,
Which with great pomp and ornament were decked.
The Italians call him Becco (of a nod)
With all the reverence that belongs a god.
What though in love supposed to be used,
What is his virtue need not be excused?
The wise man tells (if nature be our guide)
In following her, we sildome slip aside.
And in this Bird (who can her power deny)
If nature framed him to communitye?
Then wisely thus considering his profession,
You reverend Judges of this lawful Session:
As you are patrones of the righteous cause,
Vouchsafe my clyent judgment. Here does pause.
Scarce could the Peacocke his conclusion make,
When straight his turn the Turkie-cocke does take
A learned Lawyer (worthy of his gown)
Of reputation both in Court and town.
And to the Bench for audience having cried,
Thus to the Peacock learnedly replied.
Grave reverend fathers of the Law (he said)
The matter that our adversaries plead
Is vain and idle; we the point enforce
Against the Cucco and his lawles course.
The Peacock here a cunning speech has made,
To help his clyent and uphold his trade;
But strip this mask that does conceal the cause,
Examine each particular and clause
Against proose so poor, so indigent of truth,
The Bastard Cucco bringing from his youth,
First laid and hatched up in a nothers nest,
Such vileness reigned in his base parents breast,
Who since that time they never sought for shame, Plinic.

Nor but their vice dare for his birthright claim:
The Hedge-Sparrow, (this wicked Bird that bred)
That him so long and diligently fed,
(By her kind tendance) getting strength and power,
His careful Nurse does cruelly deuower:
Base as his birth, so baser is his trade,
And to the world a bye-word now is made:
No Nation names the Cucco but in scorn,
And no man hears him, but he fears the horn:
No month regards him but lascivious May,
Wherein whilst youth is dallying with the day;
His song still tends to vanity and lust:
Amorous deceits; poligamies injust.
But to cut off these tedious allegations,
The Law commands these public defamations,
Be straightly punished in the Noblest men.
Why should you spare the cursed Cucco then?
Who all his life to lewdnes being bent,
Rightly deserves the publick'st punishment.
Then gentle Jurors, good men, and elect,
As vou your safeties carefully respect,
If loves sweet Music and his blisfull cheer;
E're touched your hearts or mollify'd your ear;
Tender the case, and evermore the wed
Shall praise your conscience both at board and bed.
Thus said, he ceased; the Jurors step't aside,
Wisely consulting, warily they tryde
The circumstance of every secret sin;
Thus they returned and brought their verdict in,
Cast is the Cucco guilty of the deed,
And for a fine, for his deserved meed
Allows to Mistres Titmouse for her charge,
That she shall after have her tail at large:
And when she Reuells as she did before,
T'exclude the Cucco freely out of door:
And such offenders as they could present,
Likewise adiudg'd deserved punishment.
The Ringdoue plag'd with Maggots in the Mawe,
The VVoodcocke gets the swelling of the crawe,
The Crow with dropsy (whilst yet living) rottes,
The Quayle a Leaper filled with loathsome spots.
The Buzzard of the Letergie is sick,
The Kyte with Feuors falls Lunaticke,
The Epilepsy grew upon the Iaye,
And of a sweat the Bunting drops away.
When now the Owl that with a vigelent eye,
All these demensions perfectly could try:
Fore-sawe the perrill threatened unto all,
Apt by their loose credulity to fall,
And whose prevention if they did fore-slowe,
Their utter spoil immedately should grow.
My friends (quoth he) look warily about,
Many the dangers which you are to doubt:
This gallant Oak wherein so often you play,
Perhaps (at length) your safety may betray.
And though his shade be delicate and sweet,
His truncke bears lyme that may entrap your feet.
If, fearing what is requisite and fit,
You like my judgment and allow my wit;
Yours is the good: but if you fondly deem,
Things be within, as outwardly they seem;
Headlong run on, and fall into the snare,
And say a friend once warned you to beware.
Thus spoke the Owl, whose talk could not be heard,
So little, fools good counsel does regard,
But thinking frensy him his wits beguylde,
The honest Bird despightfully reuilde.
But mark their end who set advice at naught,
Fools still too dear have sound experience bought;
The Husbandman surueying of his ground,
Mong'st all the trees this Oak had quickly found:
And by all signs and likelihood of trade,
The Birds therein there nightly roosting made.
And by the lyme that issued from the tree,
They all entangled easily might be.
Taking the same, he spreads it on the sprayes,
And through the thicket closely creepes his ways.
When the sad arndern shutting in the light,
Wan-sighted Cynthia (Lady of the night)
Proudly ascending the aetherial state,
Whence the bright Phoebus but dismounted late,
The dull-ey'd evening his moist vapors threw,
Strewing the still earth with sweet showers of deawe.
When every Bird replenished with food,
Clapping his stretched wings lively from the wood,
And on each small branch of this large-lymb'd Oak
Their pretty lodgings carelessly they took,
No ill suspecting, fondly unawares,
Quickly entangled in the Fowlers snares.
Whose mournful chirping and their chattering cries
Incites the Owl before his hour to rise,
And hearing from his melancholy seat,
The Birds themselves thus woefully to beat,
(The deed discovered with the mornings light)
Flewe from his perch: though grieved at the sight,
Yet with a smile, his wisdom that became,
Which mocked their folly, though bemoaned their shame,
Quoth he, you foolish Burgers of the field,
That in contempt my counsels lewdly held
That, where at late you did but laugh and jeere,
Now to your ruin plainly does appear
The greatest thing you lightly are to lose,
Only your plumes that fortune can dispose.
It Is yet a comfort in the depth of smart;
Envy but seazeth on the outward part.
But present peril in a thing of price,
Rather craves action then does stay advice.
Therefore to help you will my power assay:
Wherewith his wing does presently display,
And with his claws, the birds of every kind
Pluckes from the lyme, that left their plumes behind.
The little Robin featherles and free.
Regreets the Owl with many a cap and knee.
The warbling Mauis mirth-full Peans sung,
The Nightingale with her melodious tongue
Gave him such music (to declare their thanks)
That springes and rivers dance above theirbanks;
That (with the repercusion of the Air)
Shook the great Eagle sitting in his Chair:
Which from the mountain (with a radiant eye)
Brau'd the bright Cressit of the glorious sky;
Moving his princely majesty to see,
Whence this applause so suddenly should be,
Whose sinewed wings (in their resistles course)
Beat the thin Air, with such a viloent force,
That the light Birds drip't headlong from the skies,
The rocks and forests trembling with the noyes,
Somewhat amazed at this vn-usuall sight,
To see his people in this piteous plight:
His sovereign ear does presently address,
Willing to hear the cause of their distress,
To whom the poor Owl) his obedience done)
Thus to his Liege Lord, reverently begone.
Monarche of all that beat the air with wings,
Thou Bird of Jove, beloved amongst kings:
Here stands an Oak well tymbred, largely spread,
That many a day has borne his curled head,
Above his fellows dwelling far and near,
That in the Forest never found his peer;
Whose root well fastened in the fruitful ground,
His bark so lovely and his heart so sound,
(Through his great wealth) grew insolent and proud,
Because the Birds that in his boughs did shroud,
Unto his praise continually did sing,
And kept their vigils to th'enamored spring.
The virgin-huntresse sworn to Dians Bow,
Here in this shade her quarries did bestow,
And for their Nimphals, building amorous Bowers,
Often dressed this tree with Anadems of flowers;
And Flora chose her Nurcery here to shield,
Her tender buds the Infants of the field.
By which, this tree grew arrogant in time,
In his rank sap has bred a loath-some slyme,
Whose nature and vile quality is such,
Strongly to hold what ever it does tutch,
And not content to minister this mean,
Which in short time might have undone us clean;
But even his boughs the Birds have honored so,
Lastly employed unto their general woe,
That when thy subjects dreading no deceit,
Came to this Tree as to their safe retreit
Falsely betrayed, and he that sped the best,
Hardly escaped, with feathers at the least.
Those that I could as I had power and might,
Though with much pain, yet lastly did acquight.
The rest whose freedom does exceed my reach,
O King of Birds I humbly thee beseech
In mercy, let thy mightines puruay,
To ransom from this imminent decay.
When now the Eagle cutting off his tale,
And even for sorrow wexing wan and pale;
At which sad sight, this poor implumed crew,
Stand faintly trembling in their Soueraigns view:
And having strech't his Lordly tallant forth,
To show th'acceptance of this deed of worth;
You sillye Birds, you wretched Fowls (quoth he)
Henceforth let this a freindly warning be.
Had you (as nature and our laws admit)
Built where your noble Ancestors did sit,
VVisely providing to maintain their state,
Whose names and freedoms you participate,
You had not thus been spoiled of your goods,
For subtlety now dwells in the woods.
For if too high and haughtily you soar,
Those see your falls that houer near the shore.
If in the Cedar you your nests dispose,
The dreadful lightning ever threatens those.
If in the low earth (in the flattering shade)
The Foulers snares there secretly are laid.
Then my dear subjects, as you wish my good,
Or have respect to your succeding brood,
Let your wise fathers an example give,
And by their rules learn thriftily to live.
Let these weak Birds, that want wher-with to fight,
Submit to those that are of grip and might.
Let those of power, the weaker still protect,
So none shall need his safety to suspect;
Suppressing those enormities that are,
Whose cure belongs unto our Sovereign care.
For when wealth grows into a few men's hands,
And to the great, the poor in many bands;
The pride in Court does make the Country lean,
The abject rich holds ancient honor mean.
Men's wits employed to base and seruyle shifts,
And Laymen taught, by learned men's subtle drifts;
Ill with this state 't must incidently fare.
For even as from the infection of the air,
Sundry contagious sicknesses proceed,
These mischiefs more continually do breed.
Shun beastly lust (you young well feathered Foul)
That wounds the body, and confounds the soul.
That as the subtil'st of the Sirens brood,
Binds all the spirits and ouer-comes the blood;
Darkning the pureness of the inward light,
Weakneth the sense and murd'reth reason quite.
And you that sit as Judges of the Law,
Let not vile gain your equal Balance draw.
O! still retain the Ethiopians guise,
(As just and upright, as select and wise)
That in their judgments (sacred and profound)
Disposed them ever meekely on the ground,
To show the Angels (siting over head)
Them were to judge, as they had censured.
Thus spoke the Eagle, when with muttering noise
The rest attentive to his power-full voice;
Giving a signal of their admiration,
The Owl this while in serious contemplation
Softly replies: O mighty sovereign!
With all the Synod of thy winged train,
Th'aboundant joys that in my heart do throng,
Require more organs then the only tongue.
O blessed Birds! how sweet is your subjection
Under the safe and absolute protection?
Of so exact and excellent a King,
So sole and perfect in his governing:
The reason this (my grave selected Peers)
Because it is known that in these latter years,
The peaceful state prepost'rously disturbed,
By such whose power the great have hardly curbed.
The iocund Throstle for his varying note,
Clad by the Eagle in a speckled coat,
Because his voye had judgment for the Palm,
Supposed him self sole patron of our calm.
All say, for singing he had never peer:
But there were some that did his virtue fear.
Why should thou then ambitiously despise
The manly Falcon? on whose courage lies
The Kingdoms safety, which abroad does rome,
By foreign wars to keep us safe at home.
I know, the strain of an alluring tongue
Can tie the full ear and detain it long,
But other fortunes, and the altered place,
Crave new directions and an active grace.
The former virtue may consist alone,
But better two (if firmly joined in one)
Experience once (by service in the wars)
Did quote his strong Authorityes in scarres;
But in this latter time, it has been said,
The tongue does all contemning the others aid.
Virtue whose chief praise in the act does stand,
Could wish the tongue still coupled with the hand.
But in the Cock which death untimely wrack't,
In him was both the elegance and act.
O when that Bird was ravished from our sight,
(Intombing him) the world intomd'd delight.
Lot never accent pass my mournful pen,
That leaves his fame vnregistred to men.
The Muses vayled with sad Cypres tree;
Upon his grave, shall power their tears with me.
O! if the world can weep so many tears
As his loss craves, or if in Heaven appears
More plentious sorrow; let them both agree
T'lament that hour that reft the earth of thee.
O! thought I not some spirit could give thee more
Then this small portion of my scantled store!
I would not leave (I first would leave to live)
To give thee fame: O who can greater give?
This said: sunk down, as growing faint with speaking,
Sighing withal, as though his heart were breaking.
The Princely Eagle pitying of his plight,
To cheer the poor Owl doing all he might.
The Birds applauding with a free consent
Followed the Eagle (with devout intent)
To the great mountain, to have all amended:
Thus I awak't, and here my Dream was ended.
FINIS.

