A new Counsel against the Pestilence, declaring what kind of disease it is,
of what cause it proceeds, the signs and tokens thereof: With the order of
curing the same.

depiction of furnace

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood for Andrew Maunsell, in Paul's Church
yard, at the sign of the Parrot.

To the Right honorable, Sir James Hawes Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London.
IT is the duty of every good Magistrate, Right honorable, not only to
establishe good Laws for the preservation of a common wealth: but also to
provide for the health of the commons. And since during the time, next under
God, and our most virtuous Prince, the government of this City of London is
committed to your charge: I could not devise a fitter* Patron for this book
entitled, A new counsel against the Pestilence, latelye by me Englished, both
for the good will I am assured you bear toward the City, and the welfare
thereof: As also for that under the auctoritye of your Honors name, that it
might be the more thankfully received, and better lyked of within the same. In
which City this grievous plague of Pestilence, has more fiercely raged at
other times, then now it does: God be thanked therefore, whom I beseech it
may do less: and should do less at this present, I suppose, if at your
Lordships commandment, the officers looked more nighlye unto the precise
execution of such wholesome ordinances as are made in that behalf, as also for
the clean and sweet keeping of the streets and other places: by omitting
whereof, the air becomes corrupt and contagious, bringing the City into
obloquie, the Citizens into contempt, impouerishing the commons, and depriving
many of Gods people of their lives. Some private causes there be also, not
now to be recited, pricking me thus boldlye forward to trouble your Honor
with this small trauaill, both in respect of your virtues many ways, and for
the worthiness of the writer, in whose commendation for want of time and place,
I will say nothing, the work sufficientlye praising it self, which
notwithstanding, I commit unto your Honors most favorable tuition, with my
self, as a simple, yet hartye welwyller, and your Honors most humble at
commandment:

T. T.

To the Right honorable the Lord Vidam Chartres, Prince of Chabanoys. Peter
Droet Physician sends greeting.
SO many are your benefits bestowed upon me, (Right honorable Patron, where
by you would have me bounden unto you all the days of my life, both in
bestowing part of your goods upon me, and in imparting the rare gifts of
your mind: that if I would endeavor to declare the same in words, truly I
were not able* And first to let pass the gifts of fortune wherewith you have
sufficiently increaced my wealth, I would willingly rehearse the countries
which I have traueyled with you: and what secrets of nature I have learned by
your means and industry: what questions you have proposed unto me and other
professors of Physic, drawn out of the deepest secrets and bowels of nature,
whereat both they and I being astonished: have wondered at your singular
learning, and merueled at your sharpnes of wit, yea, I myself remember how
often I have read over the works of Hippocrates and Galen only to be able to
satissie your demaundes, who would dispute with more sharpness of wit then
is accustomablye used in our public schools, whereby you have so pricked me
forward that whatsoever excellency is in me in the knowledge of Physic, which
I would have to be taken as spoken without brag, I acknowledge that I have
received it by your means only. For by the help of you, and your wisdom, I
have had conference with the best learned Physicians both in England, Germany,
and many other places: and for your sake I have learned many things of them
concerning the secrets of our faculty, and found them to be true by practice
and experience, whereby I am able to cure many kinds of diseases. Among all
which secrets* I have gathered together many rare and very effectual
remedies against the Fever quartaine, against the infectious Pestilence, to
break the stone, and against certain other stubburne diseases, never set forth
in the writings of any Physicians as far as I do know. Which when I had
imparted unto certain well learned Physicians, my friends and acquaintance, I
regarded them so much that by often requesting of me, they obtained, that I
should setfoorth into light such special remedies as I had gathered against
the plague, to the commodity of the miserable estate of mankind. Wherefore
(Right honorable Mecoenas and Patron) though I be mindful of your good
turns on me bestowed, wherewith you have bound me and all mine to be at your
commandment for ever: notwithstanding since it is the part of an honest and
liberal heart to desire to be more beholden to him to whom he is much
beholden, I would thus much request of you, that this bookegoing forth under
the salfconduct of your honorable name, and being already approved by your
singular learning, and presuming on your authority, may come abroad into men's
hands, whereby the posterity may wonder at you, and worthily praise you for
being not only a prince of war, but a student also of liberal sciences.
Fare you well From my study, the iiij. of the Ides of June. 1572.

A new counsel against the Pestilence.
The 1. Chap.
SIcknesses breed, says Hippocrates, partlye of Hippoc. in his book of the
nature of mankind.
our diet: and partlye of our breath, by drawing in whereof we live.

They which come of our diet, are Gal. in the preface of the. 1. book of
Epidem.
called Sporadici: and by our breathing are engendered Endemij, and Epidemii.
We term those Sporadici, which according to the diverse and sundry trades of
life do happen to this or that man, as does Bronchocele, or rupture of the
throat, unto weemen which dwell by the lake Lemanus, and the inhabitants near
to Geneua by drinking snowie water: Likewise great and swelling myltes, by
drynking of cold, ysie, and troubled waters: as also they which used to eat
of a kind of pulse, like vetches, called Eruum, were troubled with pain in
the knees: and such as fead on other kind of pulse, became weak in the thies.
Of these diseases has Hippocrates entreated in his bok^ of the diet in sharp
sicknesses, as Galen is auctour in his commentary upon the ninth sentence of
the second book of sharp sicknesses. And they were called Sporadici diseases,
of the Islands named Sporadas which lie straggling, as it were, here and there
dispersed, and as Galen likewise in the third book of the administration of
Anatomy, and in his book of ye dissection of the veins, calls certain
veins which lie here and there one not far from another upon the skin, by name
of Sporadas. The sicknesses called Endemij, be they which by reason of the
contagion of the heaven, or particulare air, do always molest some one place:
according as Aristotle recites in his book entitled: Of the world, and
dedicated unto Alexander, how poysned airs rose out of corrupt Dens and
Caves, which infected those that came near them, partlye with an outrageous
kind of madness, and partly consumed the^ with a pestilent quality.

There are some also that kill a man presently, as in Phrygia: and there be
many Wells, and small Lakes, and bituminous springes, or standing waters, and
places where Metals have been dug, and the stinking pudles of Auernus and
Lucrinus, whose loathsome vapor kylleth the Dogs that do but once lick of
it, be it never so little, and stifleth the Fowls that fly over it. Of these
diseases has Hippocrates Galen in the same place.
entreated in his book of the air, places, and waters.

The Epidemij sicknesses, are taken by Hippocrates, in two significations.
After one sort the Epidemius sickness is taken for some disease which takes a
great many of people away, whether it be flixe, or tercian ague, or some like
disease which reigns among the people in some one place: howbeit for ye more
part, the Greek words Limos, Galen in the same place.
and Diathesis Limodes, are taken for the Pestilence, which inuading men,
weemen and children, of all ages, dispatcheth many out of their lives: whether
it proceed first of the air, or by infection, of which diseases Hippocrates
has entreated in his book entitled Epidemiorum. Wherefore, what kind of
disease the Pestilence is, what the substance thereof is, and of what causes
it proceeds, we must now declare.

The. 2. Chap.
THE Pestilence is a contagious air, not being the disease it self, but the
nearest and most principal cause thereof, either raised with in the bodies, or
caught abroad, suddeinly weakening the spirits, and the powers which govern
the body.

The cause of this Pestilence, the Galen in the second book of Fevers.
more part of learned writers ascribe unto the air, but not all one way: for
some are of opinion that the poisoning infection is sent down from the stars
and planets, and so dispersed through the air: other say that the air it
self is putrified, the cause of which putrefaction they ascribe unto the
conjunctions and oppositions of the planets, the Eclips of the Sun, and
Moon, and the conjunction of Saturnus, with other evil planets, by means
whereof ensue sundry tempests, and great change of the air, and consequently
thereof comes diverse rottennes, and putrifactions. For the air has manifest
causes of alteracion, as namelye the mingling of other strange air with it,
or of some kind of substance else, which is most contrary unto us, as are
rotten vapors: and thereof it putrifieth and waxes pestilent, and is changed
into the nature of poison. Whereby it comes to pass, that according to
proportion, this plague rages sumtime among men, sumtime among beasts, and
sumtime among grass, fruit, and corn. And there be many things very common
that are good for cattle, and will hurt men: and contrariwise will slay cattle,
that will do men good. Like as many do perceive, that the feeding on naughty
meats engenders the plague, as if a man should fall into the plague, by using
such evil diet, as is commonly seen in the dearth of corn and other
victuals: then immediately shall he infect others, and when that disease by
going from one to other has gathered strength, and has invaded many of all
ages and sexes: it is called the Pestilence. Again, they suppose that sumtime
the air is infected by lower causes, of things rotten and putrified, as of
carcasies unburied, wythred and putrified herbs and weeds, priuies, dunghils
and such like: which afterward being drawn into our bodies breeds the
plague, as some do write of the Putauian pyt. Surely that this is the very
just judgment and revenge of God, our barbarous nation being the very
uttermost land of this part of the world, does acknowledge and profess, a
most manifest testimonye whereof we have in Ezechiel, and in the second
Ioseplius, the 7. book and. 13. cha.
of the Kings, the four and twentye Chapter.

The. 3* Chap.
THat secret force of infection which our senses cannot discern, consists
in an humor, or some other kind of substance: for a force and power of a
bodily substance, cannot so much anoy our bodies. Wherefore, I think it very
requisite for to know perfitlye upon what part of our body this secret
poison exercises his tyra^nie, seeing according to the diversity of the place
where it setleth, there arises not only diverse kinds of pestilences: but
also a diverse order of cure is required for them. For if it be received Galen
in the. 3. of his co^met. upon the. 3. of Epid.
into the substance of the heart, it resembles the likeness of an Hecticke
or consuming fever: and many times it surpriseth the spyrites, and kylleth the
man presently: As not yet full six years since I my self saw in the
Pestilence which raged in Lions: where men fell down dead to the ground, eue^
as they were going in the streets. Sometime it rests in the Liver, and
according to the nature of the humor which it infecteth: it causes a fever,
as namely the fever called Synochus, if it have infected the blood, and a
burning fever if it be choler, and the like judgment is also to be given of
the other humors. A like plague unto this whereof I speak, not fullye
fifteen years ago reigned in Eueris, and at Vernoyle: whereas a Surgeon
through the grace of God, and mine instructions, saved a great many: at which
time John Renart the Apothecarye, a man very well learned, used singular
diligence toward our cuntreymen, and Citizens. It happens also sometime, that
the poysned air being drawn through the nostrels into the brain, first
hurts the same, for sufficient proof whereof shall serve the discourse which
follows.

The. 4. Chap.
IT is well known by the doctrine of In his book of kernels.
Hippocrates, and the college of Arabians, that the principal parts have
their voiding places, issues, or, as they term them Emunctories, into which
they cleanse and rid away whatsoever is noysom unto them, specially if those
parts be strong, and thereby, as they say, is conjecture made of the part
affected: as for example, if the botch appear in the grine, it is a sign that
the disease is in the Liver, or in the parts beneath the midriffe: but if the
sore break forth in the arm pits, they say that the heart and the parts
above the midriffe are infected: as they likewise gather that the infection is
in the brain, if the poisoned swelling gather behind the ears, or in places
thereabout: although many times there chances inflammation of the kernels
about the ears, called Parotides, when a more vehement heat has lifted the
matter up higher, as says Galen in the fourth book of commentaries upon the
Aphorisms, the. 75. Aphorism.

Moreover, the urine confirms this opinion of ours, being sometime thick and
troubled, yealowe, and white, as we see the same to be altered according to the
humors offending, and diuersitye of the parts affected: as many times the
skull being eaten with rottennes, and the rhyme of the brain perished with a
stripe or putrified, and when stoare of matter is gathered within the skull, a
man shall perceive the urine to be little or nothing at all changed. For when
the venim feeds upon the sound substance of the parts, the urine is like
the urine of one that is whole, which shall be proved to be true, by this that
hereafter follows.

The. 5. Chap.
BUT for as much as we concluded before, that this infection is in the ay^^
which we draw in by breathing, (...)s received into the inner parts of the
body through the pores of the skin, by the motion of the arteyres: how
chau^ceth it then that the heart is not always infected, for as much as in our
large breathing, the air which is drawn in by the Lungues, imparteth the
contagio^ sooner unto the heart because of their neerenes, then Galen in the.
3. of his co^met. upon the. 3. of Epid.
unto parts be farther of, as the Liver and the Brain? Note this common
reason, says Galen, that a corrupt humor which is engendered in all by one
constitucion, does not affect the same places, for that in respect of al their
natures, the body was not in the same co^stitution at that present, but one
part was weaker then another. For those parts which be stronger in quality or
quantity, use to expulse and drive away the offending bumour into another
that is of less resistaunce. Wherefore, if the heart, either of it self, or by
help of Physic, be strong: then will it drive the venomous air, either to
the Liver, or to the Brain. Moreover, the proportion of the putrefaction may
be in cause thereof, for whatsoever has the force to do any thing, does not
immediately execute the same upon what ever it meets withal, but necessary
it is that there be some natural likeness Galen. 1. book and 4. chapter of
the differences of feuer^.
between the thing Agent, and the Pacient: and after this manner we affirm
that Purgations draw this or that humor by reason of the likeness unto them
of nature or substance. And therefore the old writers said very well, that
every thing cannot work upon every thing, but only whatsoever has some
agreement with the Agent in matter, or in manner of applying them together: like
as the Ephemerum Colchicum, a venomous herb so called, and the Uiper, bear
enmity against the Liver, as may easilye be perceived by the bloody flixe,
dropsy, and other accidents which both of them do cause, and as the biting of
certain Beasts breeds the iaundice, corrupting and converting the blood into
choler. Galen. 5. book and. 7 chap of places affected.


Besides this, Henbaine, and the Aspe, molest that part of the Brain, wherein
the Animal faculty rests, the last bringing vnwakeable sleep, the first
distracting ye mind, which it does not by Galen in his book of Triacle unto
Piso.
reason of cold, as late writers affirm.

For Brionie, which is hot, works also the same effect, howbeit ye extreme
cold that is in Houselike, in Lettice, or Poppie, troubles not the wits.
The Basiliske, slays a man suddenly, consuming the spirits which he does,
they say, by sight and hyssing. The Taxus, Galen in the same place Dioscorides
in the. 4. book.
which seem suppose to be the Ewtree, kylleth with his shaddowe, specially in
hot countries, those that sleep under it* strangling them presently, like as
the Hemlock, with his passing cold quality, extinguisheth natural heat.

These causes of so sudde in death proceeds from no other thing, then ye
peculiar kind of poison, which at the first assault inuadeth ye castle of life.
For every thing has his peculiar mixtion, from whence spring forth those
properties of substance. And these things are no less proper unto the air
also, then they are common unto plants, and brute beasts, so that the diverse
kind of putrefaction which is in the air, infecteth or affects the diverse
parts of our bodies, after a diverse kind of manner. Hippocr. in his book of
the air. etc
For look what the air is, such must needs our humors and spirits be,
wherein the soundness or infirmity of the parts consists. And this was the
cause that Hippocrates wrote, how that the sundry mutacio^ of times, procures
many diseases: as namely, if the Summer be dry, and the wind North, the
Harvest very rainy, and the wind South, the winter following are like to ensue
pain in the head, coughes, horsenes, rewmes, and stuffing in the head, and
many shall fall into consumptions: likewise some other disposition of the Summer
and Harvest, ingendreth other kinds of diseases: so that sometime they
proceed from the brain, and sometime depend upon other parts, according to
the diverse temperature of the air, and Hippocrates very learnedly has set
down in the third book of his Aphorisms, in his book of Epidemies, and of
the air, places, and waters.

But the auctoritye of D. Ambrosius Pareus, whom posterity acknowledges for
the third sun of Aesculapius, does much lighten and confyrme this opinion: who
opening the bed wherein one lay sick of the Plague, felt a most filthye and
pestilent savor, rising from the plaguie botch and carbuncle, which so struck
his Brain, that presently he fell in a sown to the ground, without feeling
any pain at the heart, or other accident that might declare that the heart, or
stomach, or any other part of the body were affected: at length, recovering
strength he arose, and his brain began to expulse that contagious air, with
so forcible sneesing, that the blood therewith gusshed out of his nose: and
unless, said he, the expulsive faculty of my brain had been strong,
doubtless I had died, for the Animal or living faculty had been therewith
utterly oppressed.

Thus you see, loving Reader, by the example and judgment of so notable a man,
that this poison may first infect the brain, no other part being hurt.

For there is a perpetual drawing of Gal. in his comment. upon Hippocr. of
humors.
air into the brain, in every breathing creature, in at ye nostrels through
the bones called Istmoidea into ye foremoste ventricle or sell of the brain,
where the smelling virtue remains, whereby it comes that it imparteth most
readelye unto the brain that infection which it receives, before that it
convey it unto the heart. For it cannot come unto the heart until such time as
it be well labored in the Lungues, whereas by the tareing there it loses
some part of the venomous quality* or else infecteth the hollownesse of the
Lungues, or the thin skins and rimes within the breast, or the Midriffe,
whereby many times in the Pestilence, comes spetting of blood, as Guido de
Cauliaco has noted in the same plague which beginning first at Auenion. was
dispersed over all Europe. Likewise the painful Cathar with shortness of
breath, which the Frenchmen termed Coqueluche, which awhile ago raged over all
Europe, was caused by the air, declaring it self to be pestilent even by the
very force thereof, and going from man to man which was the kind of that
infection do to: and notwithstanding, all Gale. in his comment.
the accidents and tokens declared that by similitude of passion, the brain
was likewise affected, as were heaviness and pain in the head with desire to
sleep, the mur, stuffing in the head, and distillacion into the Lungues and
stomach. The like unto this, is to be found in Hippocrates in the third
book of Epedemies, where he describes a pestilent state: For many were
diseased in the Jaws, had impedimentes in their speech, their bellyes were
troubled with laskes, many wared rotten, and fell into consumptions, so that
the next winter following, we were much troubled with contagious squincies in
these quarters, which came to pass with changing of the wind from the South
to the North, as it is to be learned out of the twentye fowrth Aphorism of the
first book of Hippocrates Aphorisines. And afterward Hippocrates adds, and
the diseases, says he, which the pestilent air does bring, if it once offend
the Liver, are burning fevers, dropsies, putrefaction of the lower part of the
bellye, and priuities, and when, says he, the rottennes had taken deeper
roots, many lost their arms, and from some the whole cubite from the elbowe
foreward fell away.

The like kind of Pestilence was 1. Book of fevers. and. 5. of simple
medicines.
that which Galen cites out of Thucidides, to have reigned in Athens. But if
all these proofs can not sufficientlye persuade thee, rememember that the
Leprosy is a contagious disease, the contagion whereof proceeds of the air,
corrupt and infected by leprous persons, which being drawn in by breathing:
infecteth others, the contagion taking hold on ye Liver, which is the seat of
the Leprosy: eeuen so, one that is sick of the plague, disperseth the
infection abroad in the air, which infecteth those that are about him with the
same sickness: whereby it happens that the same disease, and having the very
same accidents many times continues a year or two together, as I remember
it chanced once in England.

Measelles, by consent of all ancient writers, take their original of an
infection sent down from the celestial bodies into the air, and are of the
kind of Epedimious diseases, and the forerunners of some grievous and mortal
pestilence, the cause whereof is the heat and boiling of blood, and are to be
numbered among diseases of the liver. And that there is in these a most manifest
infection to be taken one of another, every simple woman can tell, and Rases
makes them one kind of the Pestilence.

Thus all that we have hitherto said do prove* that the Pestilent air sumtyme
infecteth the Brain, sumtyme the Liver, and sumtime the heart, according to
the diuersitye of the putryfaction* and the diverse disposition of the body.

For as fire is sooner kyndled in dry Aphrodiseus the. 88. question of the. 2.
book.
straw, then in green wood: so likewise the infected air being dispersed
abroad and breathed in, sooner overthrows such bodies as are stuffed with
evil humors, then those that are clean and pure from any such, and for this
cause you shall see among a great many that were about one which was sick of
the plague, one only many times to escape the sickness: and even so all that
look upon sore eyes, become not sore eyed: but such only in whom the
infection had like matter to work upon. And this is the The. 104. question of
the. 2. book of problemes. The. 5. question of the 6. book of problemes.
cause, why for the most part, soreness and blearenesse of the eyes uses to
come before a plague, as Aphrodiseus writes. Because, says he, the plague is
a disease of the spirits, and when this troubled and corrupted spirit is
carried up to the head, it molesteth the eyes, and hurts them before any other
thing, for being subtle and moveable, it goes first unto the eyes. Not unlike
unto this, is that which Aristotle very fitlye demands, how it chances
that when evil tydinges or sorrowful news are told us, we suddeinly shake
and quiver: and ye beholding of affections in other before our eyes, breed the
like affections in us also: for when we see another eat some sower thing, our
teeth wax in an edge, and if we hear a saw filed, or a Pumice The. ^.
question of the 7. of the problemes.
stone cut, we tremble and quake for cold? The cause of al these, as says
Aristotle is the spirit, which entering within our senses, moves us, altering,
and many times extinguishing the spyrites which are within our bodies, howbeit
then by lykelyhood and proportion they should more easily change the spirits
which remain in she heart, Brain, and Liver, then in the uttermost part of
the teeth. But a man shall not easily persuade the common people* or the new
writers in this point, as that the filthy and stynking Kennels and durty places
of the City, do only hurt the Brain.

The Colicke (whereof next after The. 3. book chap. of the pain of the colic,
and chap. of the palsy, and Hipp. also.
Hippocrates, Paulus Aegineta makes mention) in the year. 1572* reigned
generallye, and did very much harm, kylling many: For all that were sick of
it, fell into the Paulsie, or falling sickness, and many dyed thereof, either
in the fyt, or not long after, as I observed it in the house of my good Lord
and exhibitour, and in the Monasterye of Casa dei, or Gods house, near unto
our dwelling called Rugla: for the Nu^nes which dwelt there, could not provide
for their health by any other means then by flight, and change of place.

And more then fifteen year since, this grievous disease much afflicted our
cuntreymen and Citizens also, and even this last winter it wandered here among
our next neighbors, as it reigned at Abbeuille, in the year of our Lord.
Emerius in his book of the pestil.
1554. of the cure whereof I mean Godwylling to entreat in my book of
diseases which came by inheritance.

And this much thou have already, Loving Reader, concerning the cause, and
place of the Pestilence: and now harken farther to the signs and tokens
thereof.

The. 6. Chap.
IF the putrefaction of the corrupted Signs of ^ the infectio^ be in the
spirits.
air do take hold on the spirits, the heat is not sharp nor pricking, the
patie^ts feel a greater heat in their breast, then in any other part of the
body, the pulse is nothing weak, but sumtime more quick then it is wont,
but yet not to swift as when the imperfection is in the humors: the urine is
like unto the natural, there issues no sweat, but some moisture appears on
the forehead and in the neck, the tongue is dry and rough, they thyrst not
much, nor toss them selves hither and thither, because the natural strength
is whollye overthrown: they sown often, there appears upon them neither
botche, nor blaine, nor Gods marks, neither have they the laske, but dye
suddeinlie, unless they be well looked unto at the first assault of the
sickness.

But when the putrefaction has invaded If in the substance of the heart.
the sound substance of the heart then it brings a fever, as I have said,
like to an Hecticke or a consuming fever: in which there is no great heat, but
that which is lurketh within, consuming and putrefiing the substance of the
heart, burning it and all that is therein: the pacients feel not themselves to
be in an ague, or to be sick at all, and so sone as they have eaten meat*
they fall into a cold sweat, their pulse is indifferent, almost natural, but
sumdeale quicker and weaker: their urine is like ones in good health, they rave
not, they are not troubled with the laske, nor grieved with any other accident.
The like plague unto this, reigned at Lions and Vienna, in the year of our
Lord. 1525. as Montuus reports.

If the pestilent air being drawn If in the brain.
in at the nose or otherwise, have possessed the brain: the signs thereof are
tremblinges and sadness, the party feels great pain in ye head, be raueth
at the first assault of the sickness, he is troubled with a choleric
distillation out of the head into the stomach, Lungues, and nether parts, he
is either very sleepie, or abounds in over watching, he has swelling in his
neck, and about the ears, the daysling of the head, hyssing in the ears, with
readnesse of the face, and beating of the temples. This plague raygned in
Auernia, in the year of our Lord. 1546.

Many are of opinion that the Pestilence If in the Liver.
is a third kind of the burning Fever, and judge that it proceeds of
Melancholicke blood, either putryfying, or boiling by reason of the putryfying:
which they gather to be so, by the resemblaunce which it has to a continual
quartaine, and the smellings which use to appear in such Fevers. Howbeit
unless all the ancient writers, and this our learned age also, have been
very much ouerseene, the Fever is not of the very substance of the
sickness. For albe it for the more part she join her self unto it as a most
painful companion, and a whelpe of the same hair, notwithstanding the whole
order of the cure shows that they differ even by whole kind. And because the
place of making blood and other humors, is by nature appointed unto the Liver,
I will show the signs If in blood.
of every one: beginning first with the signs that declare the infection to
be in the blood, which are these, heat not biting, but gentle and mild, a
stiff and strouting weariness of the whole body, stinking sieges, large and
liquide: lying of the pacient upon his back, heaviness of the head, beating of
the temples, rauing and idle speech after the fourth or seventh day, small
thyrst or none at all, a filthy tongue, urine at the beginning almost white,
afterward growing redder and confused: all the body over, specially upon the
back, breast, and arms, little red whelkes rising, not unlike to fleabites.

If the infection be in Choler, the diseased If in chole^.
are vexed with that unquietness which the Grecians term Lismos, feeling such
an extreme burning within them, that they always cry to be removed to some
colder place, although their outward parts are not hot at all: their face is
sometime pale, and sometime red, they thyrst much, their tongue is very dry,
they never sleep, their breath stinketh, they breath hardlye, for which cause
and by reason of their immoderate heat, they desire to draw in fresh air
continually: their sieges are choleric, thin, stinking, and fattie: and
sometime they make water very yealowe, watrishe, and thin.

When the infection has taken hold If in Fleagme.
on the rawer part of the blood, then the pacient sleeps continuallye, the
body is slothful, and the parts thereof weerie, the belching sower, soft and
flegmaticke, swellings do arise with other signs more, declaring the dominion
of fleame. And therefore tender and moist natures are sooner infected then old
men, and such as are given to labor, or that are of a cold and moist
temperament, and brought up with cold meats.

But when this pestilent corruption If in Mclancholie.
of the air has invaded the dregs of the blood called Melancholy, the
pacient will be very careful and heavy, and much more sorrowful then he was
wont, he becummeth distract, the pulse is small and deep, the urine like the
wine of Pomegranates, blackishe, and whatsoever sores or botches break out in
the body, they represent the color and complexion of their humor.

The. 7. Chap.
Hitherto we have entreated of ye signs, it follows now that we come to the
cure, which consists in two points, in preventing and dryuing away the
sickness. The pestilent air is avoided many ways. First, if we keep away
all occasions of the bringing of it to the place where we dwell, as we read
that Marcus Varro did at Corcira: for when he perceived how that there were
some sick in every house round about him, he shut his windows which opened
to the South, and he opened them that were to the North, and so preserved all
his family in good health: howbeit that which Varro did toward the South, I
think ought to be done also when the wind is East, Northeast, and West also:
for if the wise and dilligent Physician do well mark it, he shall perceive
that the plague incr^a^eth when those winds do blow. So likewise it is
necessary to change place, as from low places to go unto higher, when the
plague is engendered by corruption of the air: but if the wind bring the
plague out of one cuntreye into another, then were it kest to descend from a
high dwelling to a lower, where the ground is watrishe, and the air thick,
which will hardlye receive the impression of the supernall bodies. And when we
have chosen an house, then the pestilent air is to be corrected, by burning of
such things as either by secret or manifest quality are contrary to the
infection, as are the Trochisces which follow. Take Styrax calamite, Benioin,
of each one dram: red Roses, Lauender, Cypres, of each half a dram: with
Rosewater and Tragaga^t, make Trochisces, burn the^ in a chafingdishe of
coals, or else burn with them of the composition called Gallia, or Alipta
moscata, and such like.

It were very good also for this purpose to burn such woods and herbs as
yield a sweet savor, as Rosemary, Sage, Lauender, Baies, Ciprus wood, Juniper,
the wood and the barries, ye wood Aloes, Cinnamon and Cloves. Likewise the
sprincling of sweet waters about the chamber, amendeth the evil disposition
of the air, as the water of Lauender and Maierom, but these are most to be
used when the air is moist, cloudye, and cold: For the warm air more
speedely and redelye perceth into our bodies, and is soonest infected with the
qualitye of some other thing, as Auicen has noted in his first book, in the
Chapter of varietye of seasons: Wherefore provision must be made that it wax
not very hot, by sprincling of fair water and vinegar, rosevineger: by
setting up Wyllowe boughs, and by strawing the Chamber with water lyllies,
flagges, and such like.

The. 8. Chap.
BUt now it is not enough in this manner to have amended the air, but also the
principal parts must be strengthened, both with things received inward, and
applied outward, to the intent they may the more valiauntlye withstand the
pestilent air. And among those things to which the Grecians give name for
that they be hanged about us: I like especially of twain: the one is, if a
hole be made in a hasyll nut, and the kernel b^e pulled forth with a pin, and
the place filled up again with common quicksiluer, and hanged about the neck,
it preserves a man wonderfully from the pestilence. This Medicine I learned
above twelve years ago, of the Physician to the Right honorable the Lord
Vidam that now dead is. For at what time Henry the second, King of France,
lead his army into Germany, and at the siedge of the City of Ment^ he
preserved not only him self, but also his Surgeon which went to them that
had the plague, and dressed them: Of this Medicine Marsilius Ficinus speaks.

There is also another such medicine, The. 7. cha. of his book of the
Pestilence.
and it is Christialline, and red Arsnick, the effect whereof I learned at
Argentine and Basil, in the year of our Lord. 1564. at what time the plague
reigned almost over all Germany. But for as much as Georgius Agricola in his
third book, of the nature of things dug out of the ground, and after him
Theodosius Montuus have sufficiently disputed of this matter, I will only set
down the receite of the Medicine, which is after this manner: Take Arsnick
christalline and red, of each a like quantity, beat them into powder, whereof
with the white of an egg, or the Mucciladge of Tragagant, you shall make a
lozenge a finger thick, then fold it in a double piece of silk, and apply
it unto the region of the heart: but beware that the moist Arsnicke, exulcerate
not the skin, and therefore in the morning you must diligently wipe the place,
or at what time so ever else the pacient sweateth, for which cause it were good
to put a fair linen cloth between: The Arsnicke being The. 8 book chap of
the hardness of the Spleen.
applied, strengthens as well the heart as the Mylt, as Trallianus writes, but
it works not that effect of custom, as Theodosius says. Surely in this one
point God wonderfullye declares his providence, when he teaches us to apply
strong and deadlye poisons unto our commodity: as Galen shows in the
eleventh book of simple Medicines of the wine made of Uipers: and our men of
late time have applied the oil of Scorpions in the cure of the plague with so
good success, that only with the anointing of this oil they drive away
the evil qualitye of the pestilent air, by example of them which have
grievous ulcers in their feet. D. Ambrosius Pareus gives this counsel, that
they which will go visit the sick of the plague, should first make issues
in their arms and legs, because nature uses to purge out by those places
whatsoever venomous humor is in the whole body, and dryuing that thither
whatsoever gathers unto any principal part.

Moreover, an ointment made of Laserpitium, the fat of venomous Serpents, and
Uitrioll is much commended: or if of these be made a broad cake and folded in
sylke, and laid upon the heart and arteries. I have also used the Linament
which follows not only in the Pestilence, but also in the quiuering of the
heart, which is thus made: Take of the iuce of Cardiaca one ounce, of Camfire
half a dram, of Saffron one scruple, with as much wax as suffices, make
thereof an ointment, and therewith anoint the region of the heart: or make an
ointment of the iuce of Buglosse, Borage, and Saffron. There may also be one
made to the same effect of roses, violets, red Saunders, Cinnamom, Cloves,
Lauender Flowers, Orange pills, and the wood Agallochum, which is prepared in
manner following. Take of the three kinds of Sau^ders, Roses, Wormwood,
Agrimonie, of each half an ounce, beat them into powder, and boil them over
a soft fire an hour and an half, then strain the liquour, and wring it
hard through a linen cloth, then sees it again over the fire, until it
come to the thickness of Honey, then put thereto the iuce of Lettice,
smalledge, wild succorie, of each three drams, Camfyre a dram, and with a
little wax make thereof an ointment, and anoint therewith the region of the
Liver. After this order the ointments which are prepared, I better like of, not
only in the Pestilence, but also in other continual Fevers, then if the
pouders were put in whole, for else how could those thick and gross pouders
mingled with the iuces and oiles, do any good unto the place? Like wise there
may be made semblable oyntmentes for the heart, of the root of Lormentill,
Zedoarie, Roses, and such like. It is good also to drop into the ear, a two
or three drops of the oil of Sage, or Cloves, with a little Musk. I prepare
oils for that purpose after this manner: Take of Nutmegges one ounce, Cloves,
and Cinamom, of each half an ounce, dry Sage an ounce, sweet Almondes two
ounces, make them all into powder, and sprincle them with Aqua vitae, and
press it hard as you would do oil of Almondes: and use it as is before
declared: and with the same oil you may anoint your temples and nostrels. It
is good also to keep a piece of the rind of a Citron in the mouth, or
Cinamom, Zedoarie, Angelica, or such like. Our husbandmen in the Cuntreye smell
unto herb grace, it were not a miss neither to bear in a sponge to smell
unto, Cinamom water, rose vinegar, rose water, or this sweet ball, the
description whereof insueth: Take roses, Styrax calamite, Cloves, of each two
ounces, Arrace roots of Florence, three ounces, Musk two scruples, of these
make a sweet ball. Some stiepe Cloves in vinegar al night, and eat them in
the morning, and wash their face, arm holes, and privy parts with vinegar.
The Physicians of Germany, shave the root of the great cloat leaf, and
stiepe it in vinegar a night or more, the^ they roll it in Sugar, and give it
in the morning to prevent the plague. But I use to lay the same root to sooke
in white wine, or wine of wormwood, and in the morning give it to drink with
Sugar.

The. 9. Chap.
THose things which are received in at the mouth to prevent the sickness, are
partlye Medicines against poison and infection, and partlye purgative remedies,
for we hope that such purgatiues are only needful for this purpose, as do
cleanse the first region of the body, without moving the humors. For we must
take heed least by sharp and strong purgations we cause a laske, which were
very dangerous in this disease. For in a pestilent constitucion, the humors
be moved by the smallest occasion that may be, and forciblye do run down
into the belly: such purgatiues whereof we now speak, are Rhabard and Agarike
made in infusion in the decoction of such herbs as are natural, good against
this infection, adding thereto the Syrup made by infusion of Damask roses, of
Uiolets, of Succorye compound, and such other like, as in respect of the age,
custom, and temperament, may be prescribed by the skillful Physician.
Howbeit, for children I use Rhabarb thus prepared. Cut Rhabarb into small
slices, and moysten them with the vapor of white wine, then stiepe it with
Cinamom a day and a night in rose water, in Su^mer: but in Winter in white
Wine and rose water mingled together, and when the Rhabarb has lost his
color in the water, then dreane that water away and put fresh too, and thus
shall you do until the Rhabarb color the water no more: then take those
colored waters, and boil them to the one half over a good fire for
temperate heat: then put unto this liquour, Sugar or Honye, and boil it
again unto ye consistence of a Syrup perfectly boiled, and then put the
slices of Rhabarb into the sirupe: Of this sirupe you may minister two or
three sponefuls unto children of two or three year old, and to them that are
elder, you may give one slice of ye Rhabarb with the sirupe. With this
Medicine you shall not only preserve them from the plague, but also slaie and
drive forth the Worms that be in the guts. Or else, when you have thus
sliced your Rhabarb, mingle it with the sirupe of Uiolets, Succorie, or roses,
and while the substance of the Rhabarb is somewhat soft, sees the sirupe
again, and when it is cold put thereto Rhabarb again with Cinamom and cloves,
and minister four or five slices with two sponfuls of sirupe. And unto those
that are elder, but delicate, we use to prescribe in Winter pills of Rhabarb,
Aloes, Agarike, Seen, and Mirobalanes, according to the custom of their life,
and diversity of natures: and in Summer we give Potious made of the same, or
the like. The manner of making whereof is this: Take Rhabarb an ounce and a
half, Agarike one ounce, Seen cleansed four ounces, Cinamom one dram, Ginger
half a scruple, Anise and Fenell seeds of each two drams, beat them into a
gross powder, and sprincle it with Aqua vitae, afterward steep it in Borage
water, or fair common water: and when it is sufficientlye colored, then
strain it, then power the like water upon the dregs, and let it steep as
before, then strain it and wring it, and boil the strayned lycour over a soft
fire, until it come to the consiste^ce of Honey, then put Sugar thereto, and
keep it to your use: give of this three pills for half a dram, more or less
according to the age, strength, and temperament. I knew one in England,
Baptista Agnelli, who had spent all his life in the art of Distilling, he used
this Opiate in the time of Pestilence with very good success, whose
description follows: Take Agrimonie, Wormwood roman, of each two handfuls,
Anise half an ounce, Seen two ounces, boil them in common water, the space
of four hours, then strain the^ all stronglye, and unto the strayned licour
put an ounce of Sugar, of cleansed Cassia two ounces, make it after the manner
of an Opiate, whereof you may give half an ounce at a time, for it purges
gentlye, without troubling the humors. Some put Manna to the sirupe of Roses,
and so make an Opiate. But all writers commend the pills called Ruffi, or
Common, or of Aloes, Saffron, and Mirrhe, not only because they purge evil
humors, but because they resist putrefaction, strengthening the heart, Liver,
and other parts, and consume superfluous moistures, which br^^de great
occasion of this disease, as Book 4. ^en 1. cha. 4.
Auicen writes. But they which can not take purgations, they must often have
their bellies moved with a Glyster: or they in whom blood alone, or joined
with other humors, is found much abounding, would have some taken from them
after these above rehearsed euacuations, specially if they have been
accustomed to lettyng of blood, and have large veins, and be much given to
drynking of Wine, and eating of flesh.

The* 10. Chap.
THus when at sundry times the body has been gently purged, let the Pacient
take betimes in the morning fasting a dram of this Opiate following: Lake old
Triacle one dram, conserve of the flowers of Tunica, and rosemary^, of each
three drams, with the iuce of a Citron, make them up in the form of an Opiate.
Or thus: Take the roots of Angelica, Zedoarie. Tormentill, of each one ounce,
Cinamom two drams, the rind of a Citron a dram, bring these into powder, and
boil them in rose water, an hour and a half, then strain it hard, and boil
the strayned licour with Sugar sufficient unto the consistence of Honey, and
make it an Opiate, or make it an Clectuarye in lozenges. After the same order
you may make a very good Opiate of the iuce of green Juniper berries, with
Sugar, to coal the stomach, to expel the gravel out of the reins, and to
fortifye the principal parts. Or thus: Bruise the berryes and boil them in
common water to the third part, then boil the strayned licour again as I have
showed before. Of Bole, Zedoarie, Gentian, and Angelica may be made
trochiskes, with the iuce of Borage, Scabious, and Pimpernell. But those that
ensue I use more commonly, and they are more pleasant to be taken: Take ten
Citrons and cut them into many pieces, the tops of Borage an handful, good
white wine three pintes, still them in an earthen vessel, and there will drop
forth very clear water, soote, and pleasant to taste, take of this water two
ounces every morning fasting. Another: Take Aqua vitae three ounces, rosewater
an ounce and an halfe^, wherein lay a stiepe of Cinamom three drams, yealowe
Saunders one dram, strain it through an hairen strainer, and sweeten it with
conserve of roses, take one ounce thereof every morning either in a spone, or
upon a tossed of bread. Another: Take Tormentill, Bistort, Zedoary, Enelaca^pane,
of each one ounce, Devils bit, Scordium, Saucealone, wild Sorrel, Pimpernell,
of each half an handful, Borage and violet flowers, Taxus Barbatus, the tops
of Rue one gripefull, Citron seeds, and Carduus benedictus, ofech two drams,
Juniper berries three drams, Cloves, Nutmegs of each a dram and an half, plde
Triacle, an ounce and an half, good white wine, a pint and an half, distyll
them all in Balneo, and minister two ounces of this distylled water.

The most wicked and desperate varlets, whom the Magistrates of Lions put to
death for carreing about and increasing the plague, when they were led to
execution, confessed, that they preserved themselves from the Pestilence with
none other thing then a walnut, which they tosted or scorched a little against
the fire before they eat it.

Leonhardus Fuchsius told me once in his own house, that there was nothing
more wholesome against ye plague, then an Electuarie of Eggs, and that it was a
common thing among the Germans, both to prevent and to cure the plague, and
he said as much also of Angelica.

The. 11. Chap.
FOr as much as at the beginning of this disease, there is great plentye of
evil humors gathered into ye stomach, and other common passedges of the
body, which may easilye be discerned by the burning, and biting of the
stomach, unquenchable thyrst, lothing, vomyting of fleame, choler, or some
other humor: then must the cure be begun by clensing the bellye with a
suppositour, or common Olyster. Afterward the pacient may take a dram of mine
Electuarye, whose description is to be found in the ^yght Chapter, and two
or three hours after that, you must provoke vomit with Antimonie, whose
preparation you shall find discribed in the end of this treatise.

But to the intent that the pacient may vomit with more ease and less
trouble unto him, it were good for him to sup the broth of a Chick, an hour
or twain after he have received the vomit, and to do so as often as he
perceives him self moved to vomit. For the corrupt humors which the
Antimonie has drawn into the capacity of the stomach, will be without any
trouble cast forth with the breath. For vomiting upon an empty stomach is
painful. But they that have not Antimonie in aredines, let them take one or two
of the inner kernels of ye strange Indian Nut, which is as pleasant unto the
mouth, as the Filbeard or Walnut, but it provoke vomit very strongly, a
medicine truly not to be despised, for it needs no preparation, and may
always be at hand in areadines. The effect of this Medicine I learned at And
warpe, of an Italian Surgeo^, when I travailed that way out of England into
Germany. At the last Navigations out of Hispania noua, the Admiral of the
fleet brought great stoare of these into Normandy: the Tree whereon they grow,
as he told, is all the stem over full of sharp prickles like the hip tree,
and as big as our plum trees, full of boughs growing straight forth at the
top, whereof ye fruit grows like a Chestnut, wherein are contained four or
five nuts, blackishe, somewhat long, round, and like filbeards. These, when the
prickly husk gapeth with ripenes, many times fall down alone. But because no
man shall think that I father some glorious lie in sight of the world, upon
these rare Merchaundize, which are brought out of India, the steed and virtues
of this Nut may be supplied by fine kernels or seeds of the herb called
Palma Christi, or commonly Ricinum, for they purge the bellye, and there withal
provoke vomit, peradventure as well as Matthiolus his Antimonie does. But good
heed must be taken, least being delighted with ye sweetness of the meat,
there be too many eaten of them, for then they will cause a superpurgation: the
proof whereof I found of late in a certain noble man, who, I being not privy
thereof, devoured fifteen kernels, and with sieging and vomitting had almost
purged out his life. I my self a few years since being in England,
ministered two ounces of the herb Erisinum, with the waters of Buglosse,
Scabious, and Carduus benedictus to provoke vomit, with so good success, that
at one time the pacientes vomited, and drove out their sores. Some give the
distylled water of wild Sorrel, mingled with vinegar, and a little Uitrioll, to
provoke vomit. Take Bolearmoniack prepared, Cinamom, of each a dram and an
half, the root of Dittamnie, Tormentill, Pimpernell, Gentian, of each two
drams, the seeds of the Citron, and of Sorrel, of each a dram and an half, of
al kinds of Saunders, Zedoarie, Angelica, Scordium, shauinges of Iuorie, of
each one dram, and of the horn of a young heart, shaued near unto ye head,
half a dram, make thereof a powder with thrice so much Sugar. The quantitye
to be ministered is one dram, or four scruples in ye water of Buglosse,
Scabious, or in the sirupe of Limons. Above fifteen year ago, I knew a
Surgeon at the City of Roan, an old man, who was found and maintained by the
common charge of the City, to the intent he should go unto all the Citizens
y^ were sick in time of Pestilence: He used at the first assault of the
sickness to let them blood, as I will afterward declare, and afterward he gave
them prepared Calcanthum, as he termed it, to provoke them to vomit, with good
success. The same also used Antimonic, before that Matthiolus had set forth
his commentaries upon Dioscorides, and this is the manner of preparing the
Calcanthum: Take vitriol roman and dry it very diligently, then dissolve it
in water, and cleanse the water clearly from the residence, then Euaporate this
cleared water away, and you shall have your vitrioll in the bottom like salt,
which you may use with conserve of roses, of the flowers of rosemarye, or
Borage water, two scruples or one dram of y^ salt at a time: touching this
matter, seek more in Guainerius Fumanellus, and Amatus Lusitanus. In smaller
diseases, I have commonly used to give a vomit of the seed of Arrage, Radish,
Walwort, Broom, and the root of Assarabacca, and the diligent Readers may
seek for the like receites in the books of practicioners, always remembering
this, that in this diseasey, as strongest must be used, that the humorie may
not be stirred only, but expelled also. And when the pacient has made an end
of vomiting, he must be comforted with such things as nourish much and spedely,
as is the water of flesh, whose description follows: Cut a Pertridge, capon,
or any other kind of flesh into thin and broad slices, and sees the^ over the
fire with the powder of Diamargariton frigidum, conserve of Marygold flowers,
buglosse, and of rosemary flowers, until they be resolved into lycour, this
water shall you dreane from the grounds, and give it the pacient to drink. To
the same purpose may be made strengthening broathes, and suppinges of flesh,
pouned and wrong in a press, called collyces, and such like: then afterward
to amend the harm which the stomach has taken by the recourse of evil
humors unto it, it were very wholesome to minister some of the substance of a
Quince, with a little of a Citron condite, that by diligence we may restore
as much as the vomit has weakened.

The. 12. Chap.
THey which have no lyking to vomit at ye beginning of ye sickness, or when they
have done vomiting, let them, if it be possible, sweat abundantly. For those
medicines which provoke sweat do not only help to the driving forth of
botches, but also expel the very seed and ground of the pestilent
putrefaction with the thinnest part of the blood through the small passages of
the skin. The proof hereof is clear, if we take a president from ye cure of the
French pocks: for as no man will grant that they be perfectly healed, unless the
sores be cured by bringing the^ unto suppuratio^ by sundry and often times
sweating, or by any other means whereby the poisoned humor which possessed the
principal part be drawn forth: so likewise neither can the pestilent disease
or plague be remedied, unless ye nearest and cheifest cause, together with the
bumor whereon it feeds, are by nature voided into ye proper issue, or some
other convenient place. Now therefore must we do our best in describing the
most fit and sovereign medicines to provoke sweat. And among the residue that
are devised by the expert in the secrets of Philosophy, as principal are
commended the salt made of wormwood, and of Scabious, being such as being
ministered in very little quantity, do not only provoke sweat very abundantlye:
but also withstand this sickness mightily. And no marvel, since Hippocrates
said, that salt cures the iau^dice: For salt by cutting and making thin,
discharges the stopping of ye intrailes, and by ye virtue which it has to
dry, it resists putrifactio^, which many times is joined with the iaundice
and the pestilence. If these properties be common to the salt which we eat
with our meat, much more is it peculiar unto this kind of salt whereof I now
speak, which has in it a fiery quality of y^ thing, out of which it is drawn.
The making of ye salt is after Raymun. Lul in Clauicula.
this manner. Take wormwood roman, and scabious, and burn them to ashes, and
pour common fair water unto the^, and boil the^ half an hour and more,
then strain the water, and put fresh unto the ashes, and boil it as before,
which you shall do so often until in boiling ye water change neither taste,
nor color The^ cle^se these waters which you have kept, either through a
cloth, or by dreaning, and cause it to be euaporated away by a soft fire, and
you shall have the salt in the bottom and sides of ye vessel, whereof you shall
give x. grains in white wine, delaied with the water of Buglosse, conserve of
roses, or the water of Citrons before discribed. With this Medicine only many
were saved of the plague, in the year of our Lord. 1567. at what time it
reigned over all England and Germani. You may also after the same manner, and to
the same purpose, draw a salt out of Angelica, Zedoarie, Guaicu^, and such
like: But this much I advertise the Readers, ye unto sweating medicines they
put some thing that may help the part affected by natural inclination, as if
the grief be in the Liver, give the salt in the decoction of such herbs as
experience has taught do comfort the Liver, and the like discrecion is to be
used in the other parts. Jerome of Flanders a Surgeon, when he was once
heartned by ye plague that was at London, began boldly to go visit first his
friends, and afterward the common people of the Englishmen that were sick, to
the imitacion of them who having once escaped the danger of the Sea and war,
go unto the same again with better courage, hoping ye hey may escape harder
perils, as saufe they did before. And this was a cause to make them less
despair of recovery. He gave them ten or twelve grains of salt made of the
Ash tree, which he had of a friend, which he ministered unto them in the
co^serue of Borage, Rosemary flowers, Roses, or in ye water of Carduus
benedictus, or Scabious, and immediately their bodies ran all on a sweat, and
the sick were recured, either the malice of the disease being overcome or
driven forth into some voiding place, as he faithfully reported ye same unto
me, and other his friends.

These things have I not gathered out of the most vain trifles of Paracelsus,
as Andernacus a man very well learned, and Adamus a Bodestein can well
remember, but rather out of Geber, and Raymundus Lullius. For Geber says, that
of every In Claus^^ la.
thing may be made Lime, of Lime salt, of salt, water, or oil. And indeed if
you dissolve this salt in Aqua vitae, and let it putrifye five or six days in
Balneo, or Dungue: and afterward distyll it, you shall have an oil, whereof
three drops being mi(...) some convenient lycour, prouo(...)eat plentifully, as
I have oftentim(...)perimented in curing of the Qua(...) Ague, by the oils
drawn forth (...) salts of Germa^der, Ceterac, Polipo(...), or of the Ash
tree. But they that have no leisure to prepare their salt, let them use the
medicines following: Take Triacle three ounces, conserve of Buglosse, and of
the flowers of Rosemary, of each one ounce, Scabious, Devils bit, Pimpernell,
of each half an ha^dful, Ge^tian, Angelica, Zedoarie, Cinamom, of each two
drams, flowers of Chamomil, and Peneriall, of each two gripes, the seeds of
Caduus benedictus, a dram and an half, beat the roots and leaves into
powder, and with equal quantity of the water of Carduus benedictus and white
wine, distyl the^ in Balneo or ashes, and give three ounces thereof at a time,
Or boil Milium in common fair water, until it yield no more skum, then take
of this decoction three ounces, of good white wine an ounce and an half, mingle
them together, and let the pacient drink it warm, and it provoke sweat
abundantlye. This kind of remedy also we use in Fevers, distillacions, and
other infirmities w(...)ein we think it convenient to provoke ^weat: othersom
provoke sweat with (...)or seaue^ drops of the oil of vitrioll, and (...) with
the oil of Anise seed. But the most surest remedy is prepared of the
decoction of Guaicu^, the roots called Chynae, and Zarsa parilla, adding
thereto the sirupe called Acetositatis citri, and the Theriacal water, with
such like. I know a surgeo^ at Andwarp, who to prouok sweat, used to wrap his
pacie^ts in a sheet moistened with the decoction of Guaicum, the root of
Torme^till, Walwort, and the herb Bardana, wherein al he dissolved Sublimatum.
Others use to make a Suffumigation or smoke of Cinabar, Franke^sense and such
like, which we use ordinarely in curing the French pockes: but the use of our
Mercury water is more effectual, wherewith we use to bathe all the joints of the
body, to provoke sweat in the Plague, and in the French pocks, of which
medicines we will dispute more at large in another place. And some again make a
Suffumigacio^ of Frankensence, Cinabar, Antimonie, Cloves, and such like, which
through tynnen funnels and pipes, they (...)he sick man's bed, to cause him
(...)ut provided always, that the (...)ot the head.

(...)e. 13. Chap.
N(...)me unto y^ which I proposed (...)he third and last place, wherein it is
convenient to set down the particular cure of the Pestilence. Wherefore,
as soon as thou cu^mest to one whom you suspectest to be sick of the plague,
give him a dram of the Electuarie following: Take Angelica, Zedoary,
Tormentill, Gentian, of each an ounce, the seeds of Carduus benedictus, of
Citrons, of each two drams, beat the^ into powder, and boil them over a soft
fire the space of two or three hours, then strain them and wring them hard,
and boil the strained lycour with Sugar, unto the consistence of an Opiate, or
make it into an Electuarie. In the stead of this compositio^, take two drams
of the Opiate before described, with the dystilled water of Citrons: and in the
mean while, search diligently in what part of the body the infection lurketh,
which you may easily perceive by the agreement and concurse of signs, whereof
we have entreated before. Wherefore, if the infection be in the Liver
(...)pain, and pricking, and sti(...) be grine: immediately let the pa(...) in
the ancle veins, but if the b(...) not forth in sufficient quantitye or
(...)e for some other consideration it be not good to open those veins, the^
were it good to set cupping glasses unto ye place with scarification, and
before, or immediately after opening y^ vein, to move the belly with a
suppositour made of Honey, or ye common Glyster, and afterward set cupping
glasses to the grine where it begins to swel, and four fingers breadth
beneath the place affected, apply the leaves of Elleborus niger, which Pliny
calls Co^siligo, laid too playsterwise. And to draw the corruption forth
unto the voyding place, the root and leaves of Yarrowe, sta^ped with common
salt, and laid too after ye same manner, is very good to break the botch, as
the same varlets of whom we made mention before, declared at their death, as
Master Laigle, the flower of our City, a very well learned Physician, and a
man of good credit, affirmed unto me. For being demanded by the governor
how they saved the^ whom they had infected (...)heyr will? they aunswe(...)s
medicine only they used (...)e poiso^ which possessed ye (...)es, and so they
saved them (...)old not have to perish. The (...)hale of ye walnut with salt,
has the same effect, as also Brionie, the black vine, and the inner rind of
Viburnu^. While the Surgeon is busy about these matters, let him use also the
ointments before described for the Liver and the heart, or let him anoint the
region of the heart with oil made of ye kernels or ye flouers of Peaches, or
of rosemary, or S. John's wort. Or beat dried roses into very fine powder, and
boil it in rosewater an hour and an half, or sumwhat more, the^ strain it
hard, ye the finest part of ye powder which is dissolved by boyli, may pass
through the lynnen strayner. Then when it is strained, boil it again over a
soft fire, until it come to the consistence of honey, or an ointment, and
therewith anoint the region of the heart. This is the manner to draw the earth
(as they term it) out of simples, as I my self at other times have drawn the
like out of wormwood, Gauls, Pomegranate flowers, and such like, against hard
milte(...) bleeding of the Hemerodes, (...) long and stubborn diseases (...)
and unto the roses may be a(...) of Citrons, of Orenges, a(...)rs of Gentian,
especially in Burgondie, which is a place yt nourishes most rare and precious
simples. I use to put unto this ointment while it is boiling a few drops of
the iuce of Limons, yt by reason of the more lively heat, and pleasantnes of
the taste, it may be the more acceptable unto the sick person. If there appear
any swelling in the neck, or about the ears, or any other signs declare the
infection to be in the Brain, the forehead vein must be opened, or else the
small veins in the Nose, with Milfoile thrust into the nostrels, or with some
other pricking thing. The learned and expert Surgeons do open the outward vein
of the throat, with no fear or danger of to much confluxe of blood, as I my
self have also experime^ted in the continuing headache. The later practicioners
let blood in a small quantity out of Cephalica, othersome open the veins yt
are under the tongue, because, as the divine Hippocrates (...)ten, it is most
requisite to (...)lace unto the pain. And (...) very good reason, that it (...)
to apply cupping glass(...)ation upon the neck, back, (...) and arms, and
beneath the place affected must the things be applied which I described
erewhile. When the swelling rises under the arm, open the vein Basilica on
the same side, where ye swelling appears. And if it rise under both arms,
open the Basilica in the right arm, then make a little cut in the inner side
of the hand on the same side, right against the little finger, and then lay
unto the cut Scordium, or Sauce alone in the steed thereof, to draw forth the
Uenim at the peculiar voyding place: this medicen I learned of D. Pelleterius
Bishop of Monpelier when he was at Paris, fiftene or twenty year a go. D.
Hollerius a Physician of Paris, who sumtime was my master, used to apply live
Oysters to the same purpose. Now when the botch i^ swollen somewhat big, then
lay thereto an Oynion roasted in the embers with garlic, and barrowes grease, or
butter: Or make an Oynion hollow, and fill up the hole with old Triacle(...)
up, and roast it in the embe(...) Malowes, violets, cammo(...) and the fresh
flowers of (...) they be well boiled, pow(...) and strain the^ through an
hairen strainer, then put thereto the oil of S. John's woort, or of Camomill,
and make thereof a plaster. The last year all the Surgeons in England applied
plasters which they made of Crabbes before they were ripe: othersome cut a
Pomegranate into small pieces, and boil it in vinegar, and powne it, and
spread it upon a linen cloth, and lay it too, not to repel the large
recourse of the noisome humor, as some do write, but to draw rather: for it
is strange to see how by the laying too of this, the sore will suddenly
swell, and wax byg, but the plaster must touch ye whole places about the sore
also, y^ from thence it may draw moisture into the swelling kernel. Whatsoever
else belongs to the cure of ye pestilent ^ote^, the Readers may gather it
out of Hollerius book of the Pestilent fever, out of Ambrosius Par^us, and
others that have written more copiouslye of this argument.

depiction of furnace

THis is the form and representacion The form ^f the Forace.
of the Furnace, with his vessel, which notwithstanding, I thought good to
place apart, whereby their several figures might be the better perceived. The
vessel with the three necks must so be plac(...)nace, that ye two neck(...)
one direaly against an(...) may pass through th(...) furnace made on
eythe(...) the two ends may come (...) the furnace, and the third stick
^^rectly vpryght. Now when after this manner the vessel is placed within the
furnace, and covered with Bricks or Tyles, laid one upon another, so close that
the heat of the fire pass forth at no chinke, the door which you see in the
side may serve partlye to put in the fire, and partly also to kindle it, that
it go not out for want of air. The nethermost door is made to avoid the
ashes, and at the beginning of the work you shall make a great fire so long
continuing, until the earthen vessel be all red hot, which for the most part
wyil be in half an hour, or an hour at the most.

Then take one dram of crude Antimonie and cast it into the vessel at the neck
which sticks upright, and then cover it immediatlye with a stople of earth,
or glass, and forthwith the Antimonie will rise up too the two necks which
are at (...)e furnace, which in the top (...)hite, and beneath somewhat
(...)stay between casting in (...)me may be the more per(...)d. Anon cast in
again as much more crude Antimonie, and do so still as I have before declared
until you, see the two side necks half full of prepared Antimonie. Then
withdraw the fire, and when the vessel is cold, break it, and gather the
Antimonie away from the refuse which lies in the bottom, whereof there is no
use in Physic. And keep the red Antimonie unto your use, whereof I have
entreated in the. (...). Cha. And reserve the white unto other purposes,
especially against the impedimentes of the eyes, and other most grievous
diseases of the body, of which thing (God wylling) I mean hereafter in some
other place to discourse more at large.

FINIS.

