THE considerations OF DREXELIUS upon ETERNITY.

Translated by Ralph Winterton Fellow of Kings College in Cambr:

CAMBRIDGE Printed by Tho: Buck, and Roger Daniel.

Will: Marshall Sculpsit. 1636.

Are to be sold by Nic: Alsop at the Angel in Pope's Head alley.



THE CONSIDERATIONS OF DREXELIUS upon ETERNITY.

Translated by RALPH WINTERTON Fellow of Kings College in CAMBRIDGE 1632.



CAMBRIDGE: Printed by the Printers to the Universitie 1636.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and truly religious Esquire, Mr. Edw. Benlowes of
Brent-Hall in Essex R. W. wishes Internal, External, and Eternal
happiness.
IT was well answered by him, who being asked, What this life was, said thus,
It is nothing else but the Meditation of Death. If a man should ask me, What
Time is, I think I might fitly answer thus, It is nothing else but the
Meditation of Eternity. Our Life is but a Posting unto Death; and our Time, a
short days sail unto Eternity. In this Time of Life we are, as Pilgrims and
Strangers, traveling toward our celestial Country. We are as Sailers, bound
for the Haven of Eternity. But we must run through many troubles before we
can come to our journeys end: We must sail through salt and bitter waters, and
pass through the Gulf of Death, before we can come to Land. There is a Land
which is called The Land of the living; and there is a Land which is called The
Land of Horror and Despair: There is a twofold Eternity; either of the
Blessed, or of the Cursed: There is a twofold Life, after Death; either in
Eternal joys, or Eternal punishments. It is good therefore in this short
Life, to think upon that Life which never shall have end: It is good whilst we
are on the way to think upon our Journeys end: It is good in Time, whilst we
are sailing, to have an eye still upon our Compass, and think upon Eternity.
To think upon Eternity, is a Sovereign Preservative to keep us from falling
into Sin: To think upon Eternal joys, sweetens the salt and bitter waters
of Sorrows and Afflictions: To think upon Eternal punishments, makes us not to
set our hearts upon Temporal Delights and Pleasures. Heaven is even here on
Earth in part enjoyed, whilst we raise up our thoughts to meditate upon it:
And Hell may for ever be escaped, if by serious and frequent thoughts thereof,
here in this life, we descend into it. Such thoughts as these moved Drexelius
to write these CONSIDERATIONS, and me also to translate them. He wrote upon a
General subject; And every man may challenge a part in it. What he wrote, he
intended for a public benefit; And so did I in the translating of it. I hope
He and His shall find never the worse entertainment, because He is a Stranger,
and come from beyond seas. It is the honor of our Nation, to be kind and
courteous unto Strangers. He was commended unto me by a Traveller, a most
religious and learned Gentleman (Be not angry with me, Mr. Benlowes, if I say,
He was as like you as can be in every respect; For indeed he was) bred and
brought up in the Romish Religion, and sent beyond seas to be confirmed in it,
but yet brought home again by divine providence and restored to his Mother the
Church of England, for the Conversion, I hope, of many, singled out of all his
kindred to be a most zealous Protestant, born to good Fortunes, and yet not
given to Pleasures, wedded to his Books and Devotion, spending what some call
idle time in the best company for the edifying himself or others; counting
nothing good which he possesses but only that which he does good withal;
taking more care to lay out his money for the good of others, then others, in
laying up money for themselves. To conclude, A Gentleman of whom I may most
truly say, That his Conversation is in heaven, his Discourse on things above,
and his thoughts upon Eternity. Upon such a man's commendation as this, I could
not but take a liking to the party commended, and the more I grew acquainted
with him, the more I liked him. It is the counsel of Horace, Tu quem commendes
etiam atque etiam aspice: ne mox
Incutiant aliena tibi commissa pudorem.


Believe me, Mr. Benlowes, I have had such experience of this party, whom here
I commend unto you, that I dare confidently say, If you entertain him into your
service, you shall never repent you of it. Philip of Macedon appointed one
every Morning to salute him with a Memento of Mortality: Drexelius his office
shall be, if you please, To be your Remembrancer, and every Morning, Noon, and
Evening, to round you in the ear with a Memento of Eternity. But, I know,
That is so often in your thoughts, that you need not any to put you in
Remembrance of it. Neither yet do I intend here, though I have a fair occasion,
to run over the Catalogue of your Christian Virtues, specially that pair of
Christian twins, your Piety and Temperance, with your Charity and Bounty. For
the first, they that daily converse with you cannot but see how you converse
with them. The other pair go along with you wheresoever you go, and though you
desire to hide them, cannot be concealed: in special many poor Scholars,
godly and devout Ministers in the Universitie, and abroad, of several
Colleges, have had a feeling themselves of them, and cannot but make them
conspicuous nay palpable to others. These shall praise you in your absence: for
my part, I do not love to praise a man to his face. But if the living hold
their peace, the dead shall rise up and praise you, I mean those many and
excellent books together with other rare monuments purchased at a great price,
which without any solicitation at all, out of mere affection you bore to
Saint John's College in Cambridge, where you were sometimes a Student, you have
bestowed on their Library: Their Library, but the most magnificent work, and
Eternal Monument of the Mecoenas of our age, John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, the
true lover of learning, and Patron of Scholars. And now it appears, Mr.
Benlowes, that you have less need of Drexelius his service, then before. But
howsoever, I pray you, entertain him: Let him have but the honor to wear your
Cognizance: And both He and I will put it upon the file of Thankful
Remembrance, and register it for a singular act of your Beneficence. Pardon my
boldness in this* And command me in what liberal service you please.

Ralph Winterton.
From Kings Coll. June 1. 1632.
The Epistle to the Reader.
IF any man more curious in censuring what is done for a common good, rather
then studious himself to promote it, should question me for meddling in another
man's profession: I might answer him in his own kind by way of question, as
Menedemus in Terence answered Chremes finding fault with him, Tantumne abs re
tua est otii tibi, Aliena ut cures, eaque nihil quae ad te attinent? Have thou
so much leisure as to meddle with that, which nothing concerns thee?

But to satisfy thee (Courteous Reader) who intendest, I know, with the Be to
gather Honey out of this Garden of Eternity, and not Poison with the Spider: I
hold it fit to acquaint thee with the true occasion that moved me to translate
this Book. No Divine I am indeed, neither yet can I be if I would never so
fain: I would I were but worthy the name of a Physician! But howsoever, being
destinated by the statutes of my private College to the study of Physic, in
the first place I thought good to spend some time in Arithmetic, as being a
necessary instrument and help in my Profession: In which I made some
progress, passing from Numeration, Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication,
Division, Reduction, To the Golden Rule, or the Rule of Three, The Rule of
Falsehood, The Rules of Proportion, and the Rules of Society, and the rest. But
the knowledge of this cost me so dear, that I was forced to leave the study
of it: For many nights together I was constrained against my will to practice
Numeration oftener then I would, telling the Clock, and could take but little
rest. Whereupon I resolved with my self to leave the Arithmetic School, and so
I went unto the Physic and Music Schools, imploring at one and the same time
the help of Hippocrates and the Muses. For at that time I turned the first book
of Hippocrates his Aphorisms into Greek verses, hoping to procure rest by
Physic and the Music of Poetical Numbers; by which I found some rest indeed
(And therefore since I have well-nigh finished at spare hours the other six
books, which, if God permit, may ere long see light.) But though I found some
rest, yet I did not sleep so soundly as at other times. So I left the Temple of
Hippocrates and the Muses, and betook my self into the Sanctuary to learn of
David divine Arithmetic, which consists in the due numbering of the days of
this short life, by comparing them with the years of Eternity: And so I fell
upon translating this book of Eternity. And this I found by daily experience
to be the best Hypnoticon that ever I used; For it brought me to my rest better
then if I had taken Diacodion. Thus I found the old saying true, Where
Philosophy ends, there Physic begins; and where Physic ends, there Divinity
begins; which I interpret thus, (as I found it true by experience) When
Philosophy by Accident had done me harm, and Physic could do me little good,
I found perfect help in Divinity. And having found so much good by this book
my self, I could not be so envious as not impart it unto others for a
Sovereign Medicine, to procure quiet sleep. Neither is it good for that only,
but (Far unlike to other Medicines, which are only good for some one
disease, and falling into unskilful hands oftentime do more harm then good) It
is a Medicine fitting All Ages, Complexions, Conditions, Places, Parts,
Diseases Spiritual and Corporal whatsoever: It is a Medicine Preservative,
Curative, Restaurative: It is an Antidote against the poison of sin: It is
Dictamnum to drive out the fiery darts of Satan: It is Catholicon to purge out
all ill humors. It is better then Exhilarans Galeni, to cheer the Heart
oppressed with Melancholy: It is an Acopon for all weariness, an Anodynon for
all pains, a Panchreston Profitable for all things, or Allgood. It is Panacea,
Hearts-ease, All-heal. It is a rich Treasury for Englishmen, A storehouse for
the diseased, and The ready way to long life, even to blessed Eternity. Let no
man now challenge me for usurping another man's office, or trespassing upon
Divines; I cannot see but Divines and Physicians may well agree together: Both
are busied about curing of diseases either Spiritual or Corporal: And here is
a Medicine for both. Take it and use it, Christian Reader; And thou shall find
by thine own experience that it has all the virtues above mentioned. So I
commend thee to the Physician both of Body and Soul, and heartily desire thy
Temporal and Eternal Health and Welfare.

Ralph Winterton.
From Kings Coll. June 1. 1632.
Upon this Book of Eternity.
TO reach Eternity our thoughts first climb
On the successive steps and stairs of Time.
And, What is Time? It is by Poets called,
And by most Painters represented bald:
But Poets and the Painters are too bold.
For Time was never yet a Minute old:
Nor yet God Saturn-like does it devour
The issue which it breeds; For every hour
Were then a Murderer. But while we strain,
And all created natures for to gain
Time to their inch of Being; in the strife
They quite burn out the Taper of their life.
But what is Eternity? Good Reader look,
Not on my verses, but upon this Book:
Which I do wish (and yet no harm) may be
To all e'^elasting, Stationer but to thee.
Richard Williams.
LOok on the Glass of man's Mortality:
Behold the Mirror of Eternity.
This Book is both; Herein behold thy face;
It waxes old; thy Glass does run apace.
It is appointed all men once to die;
And after death succeeds Eternity.
This Life's no Life, which Time does comprehend
But that is true Life indeed, which knows no end*
This Book will teach thee so to live and die,
That thou may live unto Eternity.
Thomas Gouge.
THis Book's a Nautick Chard: which kept in Eye
Does point at the Haven of blessed Eternity.
(O blessed Haven!) At which if thou would land
Let not this Chard depart out of thine hand.
The Contents.
The first Consideration. What Eternity is. Chap. I. WHat men of former times
have thought of Eternity, and how they have represented it Page 4 Chap. II.
The secret sense and meaning of Scripture is unfolded Page 16 Chap. III. Why
the place of Eternity is called a Mansion Page 22
The second Consideration. In what things Nature represents Eternity Page 27
Chap. I. What things are Eternal in Hell Page 31 Chap. II. Why Hell is
Eternal Page 37 Chap. III. Other motives to the consideration of Eternity
drawn from Nature Page 42
The third Consideration. Wherein the old Romans principally placed their
Eternity Page 47 Chap. I. How far the Romans have gon^ astray from the true
way of Eternity 6^ Chap. II. A better way then the former which the Romans
followed, to Eternity Page 71 Chap. III. That the way of Eternity is
diligently and carefully to be sought after Page 85
The fourth Consideration. How holy David meditated upon Eternity, and how we
should imitate him Page 97 Chap. I. Diverse Admonitions to think upon Eternity
Page 103 Chap. II. That Eternity transcends all numbers of Arithmetic Page
106 Chap. III. What effect and fruit the consideration of Eternity brings
forth Page 114
The fifth Consideration. How others, even wicked men themselves have meditated
upon Eternity Page 123 Chap. I. The Comparisons of man's labors and the
Spiders one with another 13^ Chap. II. What is the best question in the world
Page 138 Chap. III. How God punishes here that he may spare hereafter. A
strange example Page 142
The sixth Consideration. How the holy Scripture in many places teaches us to
meditate upon Eternity Page 149 Chap. I. The Answer of the holy Fathers and
the Church about this Page 152 Chap. II. Clear testimonies of Divine Scripture
concerning Eternity Page 169 Chap. III. This life, in respect of that which is
to come, is but as a drop to the Ocean Page 176
The seventh Consideration. How Christians use to paint Eternity Page 190
Chap. I. Christ inviting Page 195 Chap. II. Adam Lamenting Page 197 Chap. III.
The Raven croking Page 202
The eighth Consideration. How Christians ought not only to look upon the
Emblems and Pictures of Eternity, but come home and look within themselves,
and seriously meditate upon the thing it self Page 225 Chap. I. Eternity does
not only cut off all comfort and ease, but even all hope also Page 232 Chap.
II. Eternity is a Sea and a three-headed Hydra: It is also a fountain of all
joy Page 237 Chap. III. How sweet and precious the taste of Eternity is Page
244
The ninth Consideration. Seven Conclusions about these Considerations of
Eternity 259. 265. 268. 272. 274. 280. 284. Chap. I. The Punishment of
Eternal Death Page 299 Chap. II. The reward of Eternal life Page 313 Chap.
III. The conclusion of all Page 331

The word of God most High, is the Fountain of wisdom, and her ways are
everlasting commandments: Ecc: ^.5.

The infant plays with Fate and Nature, the fool with ETERNITY but ye wise
man shall have dominion over the stars.



CONSIDERATIONS upon ETERNITY. The first Consideration. What Eternity is.
SImonides being asked Ci^^r^ lib. 1. de N^^ D^^r ^
by Hiero King of Sicilie, what God was, desired one day to consider upon it:
And after one day past, having not yet found it out, desired yet two days more
to consider further upon it: And after two days, he desired three: And to
conclude, at length he had no answer to return unto the King but this, That the
more he thought upon it, the more still he might: For the further he busied
himself in the search thereof, the further he was from finding it. The thing
that we are here now to consider upon, is Eternity: And the first question that
offers it self unto our consideration, is, What Eternity is. Lib. 5. de Cons.
Boethius says, that it is altogether and at once the entire and perfect
possession of a life that never shall have an end. And let no man take it ill,
if we say, that it cannot be known, and that the more we search into it, the
more we lose our selves in the search of it. For how can that be defined which
has no bounds, or limits? If any man urge us further, and desire us to shadow
it out at least by some, though obscure, description: Our answer is, That it
may easier be done by declaring what it is not, rather then what it In T^^^^.
is; so does Plato concerning God. What God is, says he, that I know not: what
he is not, that I know. So Augustine Bishop of Hippo in his sixty fourth Sermon
upon the words of our Lord, describes that true beatitude which is in heaven,
by removing from it the very thought of all evil. We may more easily find,
says he, what is not there, then what is. In heaven there is neither grief,
nor sorrow, nor p^nurie, nor defect, nor disease, nor death, nor any evil. So
may we say concerning Eternity. For whatsoever in this life we either see with
our eyes, or let in by our other outward senses, that is not Eternal. For the
things that are seen, says S. Paul, are temporal, 2. Cor. 4. 18.
but the things which are not seen, are Eternal. Hence every man may say, This
my joy, these my pleasures and delights, this treasure, this honor, this
stately building, this life of mine, all is Transitory, nothing Eternal. A
man can point at nothing which shall not perish and have an end. Indeed the
ignorant multitude use to speak after this manner, This structure is for
Eternity, this monument is everlasting: And the impatient man is wont to
complain that his pains are without end. But these Eternities are very short,
and a man may easily in words comprehend them: Say what thou can of the true
Eternity, thou must needs come far short of it: So says Augustine; Thou
say of Eternity (...) Psa^ 63.
whatsoever thou will: But therefore thou say whatsoever thou will, because
thou can not say all, say what thou will: But therefore thou must needs say
something, that still thou may have something to think which thou can not
say. Trismegistus says, That the soul is the In Aslepio.
Horizon of Time and Eternity: For, in that it is immortal, it is partaker of
Eternity: and, in that it is infused by God into the body, it is partaker of
Time. But before we proceed any further, for orders sake let us see what men of
former times, Romans, Grecians, Egyptians, and others have thought of
Eternity. For they acknowledged it for certain, and represented it diverse
ways.

CHAP. I. What men of former times have thought of Eternity, and how they have
represented it.
FIrst of all, they have represented Eternity by a Ring, or a Circle, which
has neither beginning nor ending, which is proper only to Gods Eternity.
Seeing therefore that God is Eternal, and his duration is properly called
Eternity, the Egyptians used to signify God by a Circle. And the Persians
thought they honored God most, when going up to the top of the highest tower,
they called him the Circle of heaven. And it was a custom amongst the Turks
(as Pierius teaches at large) to cry out every morning from an high tower, God
always was, and always will be; and then to salute their Mahomet. The
Saracens also used to call God a Circle. Mercurius Trismegistus, whom I named
before, the most memorable amongst Philosophers, (who wrote more books then any
mortal man beside, if we may believe Seleucus, and Meneceus) said, that God
was an intellectual sphere, whose center is every where, and circumference no
where: because Gods Majesty and immensitie are terminated no where. For this
cause the Ancients built unto their gods, Temples for figure round. So Numa
Pompilius is said to have consecrated to Vesta a round Temple at Rome. So
Augustus Caesar in the name of Agrippa dedicated to all the gods a round Temple,
and called it Pantheon. Hereupon Pythagoras, to show Gods Eternity, teached
his scholars to worship him, turning their bodies round about. And there was a
statute made by Numa, (as Brissonius witnesses) That they which were about to
worship God, should turn themselves round. Therefore God is, according to the
Ancients, a Circle, but a Circle without a Peripherie or circumference, whose
Center is every where: because God is the beginning and end of all things.
Whereupon Job most justly Job 6. 26.
cries out, Behold God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of
his years be searched out

Again, they have represented Eternity by a Sphere and a Globe. Therefore
Faustina the Empress had money stamped after this figure and superscription;
There was a Globe, on which the Empress sat stretching forth one hand, and
holding in the other a scepter with this inscription, ETERNITY. Hence it was
that many of the Ancients thought the world to be Eternal, because it was
Round: whom S. Basil answers very fitly, Let the world be a Circle; but the
beginning of the Circle, is the Center.

In the third place they have represented Eternity by a Seat: by which is
signified Eternal rest. The Nasamones, a certain people of Africa, for the
most part did not only breathe out their last, sitting upon a seat, but also
desired to be buried after that position, as having then attained to Eternity,
and a long cessation from all their labors: As in many places at this day
Kings and Emperors are found sitting in vaults under earth, in silence and
mournful majesty. And it was usual with the Romans to support with such
like the molten statues of their deceased Emperors, as having then the
fruition of Eternity. Some there are that thus reason with themselves
oftentimes: Behold! I have been a long time held and oppressed with cares and
labors: But now why do I not take some respite? why do I not make some pause?
why do I not rest from my labors? I have labored long enough: let others
labor as much as I have done; for my part I Will rest now, and take mine ease.
So they set up their seats, and promise unto themselves days of rest: But
(alas!) they are of no long continuance: They set up their seats, and embrace
their ease; but neither in due time nor place. Oh! how truly and devoutly does
that golden book of the imitation of Christ, give us a pull by the ear, in
these words, ^empis ^^b. 2. ^^p. 12
Dispose and order all things according to thine own will, and the lust of
thine own eyes, and yet thou shall never find, but thou shall always suffer
one thing or other, either willingly or by constraint, and so thou shall
always find a cross. The whole life of Christ was a Cross, and Martyrdom:
and do thou seek rest and pleasure? Therefore we must set up our seat in
heaven, and not here: for here amongst so many troubles it can never stand
quiet; and though all other things should spare it, yet death at length will
overturn it. There is no true rest to be hoped for, but that which is Eternal.
But if there be any rest in this life, this is it, For a man to commit himself,
and all that is his to the will of God, to put his whole trust and confidence
in him, and to account all other things beside, but vain. So are we taught in
Ecclesiasticus; Trust in God, and abide Ecclus. 11. 21.
in thy place. Without this rest of the soul all other things are mere
troubles, a mere sea of tempestuous waves, and the very presence of Hell. But I
return to the Ancients.

In the fourth place they have represented Eternity by the Sun and the Moon.
The Sun revives every day, although it seems every day to die, and to be
buried. It always rises again, although every night it sets. The Moon also
has her increase after every wane Catullus has pretty verses to this purpose:
In (...)*
The Sun does set; the Sun does rise again:
The day does close; the day does break again.
Once set our Sun, again it rises never:
Once close our day of life, it is night for ever.


In Hell there is Eternal night, but without sleep: There they sleep not,
because they slept here, where they should have watched: there they watch,
because here they slept in their sins; indeed not long, but longer they would
if they could, yea Eternally. But it is far otherwise with those that are in
heaven: For a perpetual light shall shine forth to the Saints, and Eternity
of time: there* is rest; there, is pleasure after long labors and watchings.

In the fifth place they have represented Eternity by the Basilisk. The
Basilisk is the most venomous of all creatures, and it alone of all others (as
Horus Niliacus says) cannot be killed by humane force; yea it is so virulent,
that it kills herbs with the very breath of it, that it puts to flight all
other creatures with the hissing of it, and that it makes all birds suddenly
silent, upon the first presence of it. AElianus reports that in the desert of
Africa a certain beast fell down being tired, and that the Serpents came
together, as it were to a feast, to devour the carcass, and that they presently
ran all away and hid themselves in the sand, upon the sight of the Basilisk.
Eternity, whether of joy or of torment, cannot be shortened or diminished,
much less taken away or avoided. Neither is it strange, if it affright all
that are in their right wits, with the very thought of it. Infinite are the
windings of this Basilisk; unmeasurable, and untwinable are the orbs and
circuits of it. Oh Dragon to be trembled at! Let us divert a little to our
selves. It comes to pass sometimes when a man descends into himself, and rips
up his conscience by confession, that he finds many Serpents nests, and whole
broods of vipers, and thereupon much marvelleth in himself, saying, Whence is
there so much venime in my breast? Whence are so many fat Snakes, so many
grievous and deadly sins? Whence is there so great an host of Lisards? whence
so many filthy and lustful cogitations? I am afraid my self at such a numerous
and pestilent brood. But marvel not; we shall easily show thee the cause
thereof. A moist and a rude place is very apt to breed Serpents. Lo then, there
is a double cause, The moisture of the place, and the negligence of them that
should look to it. So it is in the soul of man: If we spend all our care upon
our body, handling it delicately, feeding it daintily, pampering it with
feasts, and effeminating it with pleasures: it must needs be confessed that the
soul the inhabitant thereof has her dwelling in a moist place. Add hither
slothfulness, and neglect of divine duties: Let no care be had at all of
salvation; so the body be sound, and it goes well with it, let no regard be had
what happens to the soul; Let confession of sins be seldom made unto God,
and when it is, but in a negligent manner: What marvel then, if a multitude of
Serpents, and poisonous vermin breed there? But (O good Christian brother) Let
the Basilisk enter into thy Breast, that is, the cogitation of Eternity, and
thou shall presently perceive that these venomous beasts will soon vanish away.
Thou confessest that thy heart does abound with these Snakes: It is a sign
therefore thou seldom think upon Eternity. Amend therefore, and now at
length begin to think upon this with thy self, That which delights is but
Momentanie, but that which tormenteth is Eternal.

In the sixth place, they have represented Eternity after this manner. There is
a vast den, full of horror: round about which a Serpent winds it self, and in
the winding bites it self by the tail. At the right hand of the den stands a
Young man of a beautiful and pleasant countenance, holding in his right hand a
Bow and two arrows, and in his left hand an Harp: In the very entrance of the
den sits an Old man opposite, and having his eyes very intent upon his
Table Book; according as the celestial globe by its motion, or the young man
standing by, dictates unto him, so he writes. At the left hand of the den sits
a grave matron, gray headed, and having her eyes always busied. At the mouth
of the den there are four stairs, each higher then other: The first is of
Iron, the second of Brass, the third of Silver, and the fourth of Gold: On
these are little children running up and down and playing, and never fear the
danger of falling. This is the Picture: The meaning is this: The Den signifies
the incomprehensibility of Eternity: The Serpent that twines it self about it,
Time: The Young man, God; in whose hand is Heaven, Earth, and Hell. On Earth
and in Hell are the Arrows of the Lord fastened; but in Heaven there is nothing
but Joy and the sounding of the Harp. The Old man is Fate, or rather, That
which God has decreed from all Eternity: The Matron, Nature: The Stairs,
distinct Times and Ages: The Children running up and down the stairs, do
signify things created, especially Man, who is sporting in matters of
Salvation, and playing and jesting in the very entrance of Eternity. Alack!
Alack! O mortal men, we have played too long amidst these dangers: we are very
near unto Eternity, even in the very entrance of it, whilst we live: Let but
death lightly touch us, and we are presently swallowed up of Eternity. Death
need not use any great power, or fight long against us: we are thrown down
headlong in a moment, and tumble down these stairs into the Ocean of Eternity.
Bethink your selves well, you that play upon these stairs, and think upon any
thing rather then upon Eternity; It may be to day, or to morrow you may be
translated from Time to Eternity.

CHAP. II. The secret sense and meaning of Scripture is unfolded.
AFter the Chapter of the Type. and Picture of Eternity, the holy Scripture of
divine truth shall not unfitly follow. When Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon,
had cast the three Hebrew children into the fiery furnace for refusing to obey
his impious command, the flame is said to have ascended nine and forty cubits
above the furnace. A strange thing: But not without a Mystery. What? Did any
man accurately measure the height thereof? Did any man ascend and apply unto it
a rule, to take the just measure of it? was it just nine and forty cubits,
neither more nor less? Why not fifty? For we use to number thus, Twenty,
thirty, forty, fifty, though the number be somewhat more or less. Here in
this place there wants but one of fifty. Surely there is a Mystery in it, and
some secret meaning. The number of fifty was wont to signify the year of
Jubilee. But the flames in the fiery furnace of hell, although they rage both
against body and soul, and infinitely exceed all the torments of this life, yet
they shall never extend so far as the year of grace and Jubilee. In hell
there is no year of Jubilee, no pardon, no end of torments. Now, now is the
time of Jubilee, not every hundred or fifty years, but every hour, and every
moment. Now one part of an hour may obtain pardon here, which all Eternity
cannot hereafter. Now is the time, that in one little and short day we may have
more debts forgiven us, then in the fire of Hell in all years and times to
come hereafter.

Let us add hither another explication of divine Scripture: When the people of
God did pass over Jos. 3. 16.
Jordan, the waters which came down toward the sea of the plain (which is now
called the dead sea) failed, until there was none left. And in Ecclesiasticus
it is said, Eccl. 20. ^1.
There is that buyeth much for a little. These two testimonies of Scripture
Galfrid joyneth together, and thereupon discourses thus: If Eternal
bitterness be due unto thee, and thou may escape it by tasting of Temporal,
certainly thou have redeemed much for a little. I confess, It is a sea indeed
in which thou saylest, but yet a dead sea: And how much art thou bound to give
thanks unto God, who, whereas thou have deserved to be overwhelmed in the salt,
roaring, and unnavigable sea, has of his great mercy toward thee suffered
thee rather to sail in the dead sea, (O blessed change!) that so by the dead
sea thou may pass unto the land of the living! This writer compares all the
adversities of this life to the dead sea, and Eternal punishments to the salt,
and unnavigable sea. No man can escape both: He must needs sail in the one, or
in the other. What do thou, O man? (cries out S. Chrysostom) Art thou about
to ascend up to heaven, and do thou ask me whether there be any difficulties
by the way? Whatsoever we do, this dead sea we must pass over: we may, if we
will, arrive at the haven of Tranquillity, and Eternal happiness. The Eccl^^
1. 5.
word of God most high, is the fountain of wisdom, and her ways are
everlasting co^mandments. Through this dead sea there is no other way into the
region of the living, but the way of Gods commandments. We have a most clear
place of Scripture M^^. 19. 17.
for it: If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: This is the only
way to Eternity. If a man shall ask a Divine of our time C^^^elius a Lapide
this question, What is Eternity? His answer will be, It is a Circle running
back into it self, whose Center is Always, and Circumference No where, that
is, which never shall have end. What is Eternity? It is an Orb every way
round, and like it self, in which there is neither beginning nor end. What is
Eternity? It is a wheel, A wheel that turns, a wheel that turned Volvitur, and
volvitur in omne volubilis av^m.
ever:
A wheel that turns, and will leave turning never.


What is Eternity? It is a year continually wheeling about, which returns
again to the same point, from whence it began, and still wheels about again.
What is Eternity? It is an ever-running fountain, whither the waters after
many turnings flow back again, that they may always flow. What is Eternity?
It is an ever-living spring, from whence waters continually flow, either the
most sweet waters of Benediction and blessing, or the most bitter waters of
Malediction and cursing. What is Eternity? It is a Labyrinth which has
innumerable turnings and windings, which always leads them a round that enter
in, carrying them from turning to turning, and so losing them. What is
Eternity? It is a pit without bottom, whose turnings and revolutions are
endless. What is Eternity? It is a Spirall Line, but without beginning; which
has circles and windings one within another, but without ending. What is
Eternity? It is a Snake bowed back unto it self orbicularly, holding the tail
in the mouth, which in its end does again begin, and never cease to begin.
What is Eternity? It is a duration always present, it is one perpetual day,
which is not divided into that which is past, and that which is to come. What
is Eternity? It is an age of ages, as Dionysius says, never expiring, but
always like it self, without changing. What is Eternity? It is a beginning
without beginning, middle, or end. It is a beginning continuing, never ending,
always beginning: in which the blessed always begin a blessed life, and
always abound with new pleasures: in which the damned always dye, and after
all death and struggling with death, always begin again to die, and struggle
with death. As long as God shall be God, so long shall the blessed be blessed,
so long shall they reign and triumph: so long shall the damned also fry in
Hell, and yelling cry, We are tormented in this flame, being still to be
tormented and tortured for ever.

CHAP. III. Why the place of Eternity is called a Mansion.
JOHN, Patriarch of Alexandria, a very devout and godly man, was often wont to
go to visit the sick, and took with him for his companion Troilus a Bishop,
which had more care of his money, then of the sick. The Patriarch whispered him
in the ear and said, I pray thee, brother, let us help the friends of Christ:
whereupon Troilus like a crafty companion concealing the disease of his mind,
to wit, his covetousnes, bad his servant give to the poor, all the money which
at that time he had about him to buy other things withal. Not long after it
happened that he fell into a Fever which his covetousness had caused: whereof
the Patriarch of Alexandria hearing, and easily guessing at the cause of his
disease, went to visit him, and carried with him as much silver, as he had not
long before given to the sick: and after a little conference had with him, he
said thus, I did but jest with thee the other day, when I wished thee to bestow
something to the relief of the sick: and it was because my servant had no money
about him. But behold here in good earnest, I restore unto thee the money which
thou laidst out for my sake, and I thank thee for it. When Troilus saw the
money told, his fever began to leave him, and his heat to abate, and in every
part he found himself much better: whereupon finding himself gather strength,
he rose up to dinner, and sat down at Table. About noon tide when dinner was
ended, and the Table removed, he went to sleep, and sweetly took his ease, and
dreamed that he saw a very stately edifice, and in the frontispice thereof over
the gate, this inscription, Mansio AEterna and Requies Troili Episcopi: In
English thus, The Eternal Mansion and Resting Place of Bishop Troilus. He was
very much delighted with this dream. But not long after he had another vision
that troubled him. For there came one with a company of workmen, and gave them
a strict charge, saying, Take away that inscription, and put this in the place
thereof, Mansio AEterna and Requies Joannis Archiepiscopi Alexandriae, empta
libris triginta argenti: In English thus, The Eternal Mansion and
Resting Place of John Archbishop of Alexandria, which he bought for thirty
pounds. With this vision he was very much affrighted: but he made a very good
use of it. For presently, of an hard and covetous man, he became liberal and
charitable, especially to such as were in need. So much did the very dream of
an Eternal Mansion prevail with him.

But oh ye rather blessed mansions, and therefore blessed, because Eternal!
Oh! how exceedingly does Christ desire that we should loathe and forsake these
our tabernacles, and ruinous houses, and with earnest desire make haste unto
those Eternal Mansions! In Io^. 14 2.
my Fathers house, says he, are many mansions. No man is kept back from thence
but by himself. The place excludes no man: for it is exceeding large. Time
shuts out no man: for there is a Mansion, and that Mansion is Eternal.

A Prayer.
O Eternal, and merciful God, O Eternal Truth, O true Love, O beloved
Eternity; So cure our blindness, that by these present and short sorrows we
may be brought to know, and so escape the future, horrible, and Eternal
punishments. Direct us and teach us so to possess things perishing and
Temporal, that finally we lose not the things which are Eternal. Teach us so
to lament for our sins committed, that we may escape Eternal punishments.
Teach us so to behave our selves in the house of our pilgrimage, that we be not
shut out of the Eternal Mansions* Teach us so to make our progress in the
way, that at length we may be received into our Country.

The perpetual hills did bow, His ways are everlasting. Habac: 3.6.

The Salamander, the Basilisk, the Phoenix, the golden ring, the fiery mountain,
may here upon earth put us in mind of ETERNITY: but only blessed ETERNITY
can make us eternal in heaven.



THE SECOND CONSIDERATION upon ETERNITY. In what things Nature represents
Eternity.
THE Idolaters themselves therefore have acknowledged an Eternity, such as it
was, and have described it also by certain signs: For God has manifested it
unto them, Romans 1. 20.
so that they are without excuse. How much dearer therefore, and in what great
esteem ought the consideration thereof be amongst all Christians, to whom
Eternity is better represented, and in a more lively manner! Therefore thou
art Romans 2. 1.
inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art, that being often put in mind of
Eternity, do as often let it slip out of thy memory. Thou have often in
thy sight and before thine eyes, Rings and Circles, Spheres and Globes, Sun
and Moon: If thou look upon any of these, they will put thee in mind of
Eternity. Nature her self like a good mother has exposed them to public
view, that when we see them, or hear of them, we might be invited to meditate
upon Eternity.

Solinus reports that there is a stone in Arcadia called Asbestos, which being
once set on fire does continually burn: wherefore in times past they were wont
in Temples and sepulchers to make lamps of it: of which Saint Augustine Lib.
21. De ^ivit. cap. 5.
makes mention. I add that Pliny, Volaterranus, Dioscorides, and many others
tell strange wonders of a certain kind of Line, or Flax, which is called by
diverse names: For some call it Linum Asbestinum, others Carystium, others
Indicum, and others Linum vivum. This is not only not consumed by fire, but
also is purged and cleansed: wherefore the dead bodies of Kings heretofore,
when they were to be put into the fire and to be burned, used to be wrapped
about with a Linen cloth made thereof, to keep their ashes from confusion, and
to distinguish them from others. Of such Flax Nero had a Towel, which he
esteemed of more price then gold and precious stones. Behold! Nature her self
like a Mistress and Guide leads thee by the hand, and points thee to a
thing which the fire has no power to consume. So shall all the damned burn,
but never shall burn out: They shall always burn, but never be consumed: They
shall seek for death in the flames, but shall not find it. Therefore justly
does one cry out, Oh woe In H^rolog. sapien.
Eternal, that never shall have end! Oh end without end! Oh death more
grievous then all death, Always to dye and never to be quite dead! So says
divine Isaiah, Their Isai. 66. 24*
fire never shall be quenched; And the Angel in the Revelation, They Revel. 9.
6.
shall desire to dye: and death shall flee from them.

That the Salamander for a little time can endure, and live in the fire, beside
Aristotle, Pliny, Galen, AElian, Dioscorides, S. Augustine also himself
believed. This creature is very cold, and is generated of showers: The sun
and drought are death to it: Therefore, according to Pliny, it endures in the
flame like ice. Of the skin thereof lights are made for perpetual burning
lamps. God, who made the Salamander of Earth and Clay, has of his goodness
formed man, though of the same matter, yet of a more excellent and noble
nature. He has made him a little lower Psalm. 8. 5.
then the Angels. He has assigned unto him after this life the fellowship of
the same kingdom with Psalm. 49. 20
the Angels. But man being in honor had no understanding, and was compared
unto the beasts that perish. By his own malice he made himself such a
Salamander, that must always live, or always dye in Eternal flames. In those
fiery prisons of Hell all things are Eternal; but these six things especially.

CHAP. 1. What things are Eternal in Hell.
THe damned himself is Eternal, 1.
and dies not. No man can make an end of himself, or another. Rev. 9. 6.
They shall seek death, and shall not find it. Yea the very desire of death,
in as much as their desire cannot be satisfied, shall greatly increase their
torment.

The Prison it self is Eternal: It 2.
can never fall to ruin, it can never be broken down, it can never be dug
through. It is barred up with rocks and mountains: The locks and bars are so
firm and strong, that none can get out. If any of the damned should by Gods
permission before the day of judgment come out from thence, yet still he
should carry an Hell about him, and never be free from torment.

The fire there is Eternal. Christ 3.
himself in Matthew says as much Matthew. 25. 41.
expressly; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, or fire Eternal.
Do thou hear this word, Eternal? The anger of the Lord does kindle this
fire, and it shall never be put out. To this bears Isaiah witness, saying,
The (...). 30. 33 Isai. 66. 24 Rev. ^4. 11
breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it, it shall burn
night and day, and shall not be quenched, the smoke thereof shall ascend up for
ever and ever. Eternal punishment and Eternal life, are Relates, as S.
August. speaks; Lib. (...). De civ. cap. 23
and Relates are of like continuance: To say therefore, That Eternal life
shall be without end, and Eternal punishment shall have an end, is very
absurd. Who therefore will defer his conversion?

As the things mentioned before 4.
are Eternal, so is the Worm, and Conscience tormented with deep despair for
the life past. Their Isai. 66. 24
worm shall not die: So prophesies Isaiah. The Poets of old translated this
out of holy writ into their fables: For what is that Tityus of whom Virgil
feigneth, That a flying Vultur every day gnawes and tears his Liver, which is
every night again repaired and made up, that every day the Vultur may have more
prey to gnaw upon? What is the Vultur, but the Worm we speak of? And what is
his Liver, but the Conscience always gnawen and tormented?

To this Eternity of Hell belongs 5.
also the last sentence, and the last decree pronounced by Christ the Judge, A
decree (Alas!) irrevocable, immutable, Eternal. There is no Appealing from it;
If the sentence be once pronounced by the mouth of this Judge, it stands
irrevocable for all Eternity. In Hell there is no redemption, not any, no not
any; but Eternal desperation. The blood of Christ when it was newly poured out
on the mount of Golgotha, though of infinite efficacy for satisfaction, yet
reached not unto the demned. If the yoke of the Lord, says Saint Perna^^.
Bernard, be a yoke of Repentance, you think that in it self it is not sweet:
But this you must know, That it is most sweet, if it be compared with that fire
of which it is said, Depart from me ye cursed into Matthew. 25. 41
everlasting fire.

The Punishment or Pain of loss 6.
also, as they call it, is Eternal, being the privation of the sight of God
for ever, which together with all the other torments of the damned shall never
have end: because there can be no place for satisfaction. For although these
torments shall continue infinite millions of years, yet there shall not one
day, no nor one hour, no nor so much as a moment of rest and respite be
granted. There shall be vicissitude and variety of torments, but to their
greater pain and grief. Christ often foretold it by Matthew in plain words, The
children of the Matthew. ^. ^2.
kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness; There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth: weeping, for heat; and gnashing of teeth, for cold. How then
can man be so forgetful of himself and God? How can he so degenerate into a
beast? Yea rather how can he become like a rock or a stone, so senseless, as,
when he shall think upon the unsufferable and unutterable torments of Hell,
which never shall have end, then not to fear, and tremble, and say with
himself thus? I am for certain in the way to Eternity, and I know not how soon
I may come to my journeys end: I sit on the Stairs of Eternity, and every
little thrust is ready to plunge me into the bottomless pit. But if it seem so
grievous and intolerable for a man to lie, though but for one night, on a soft
feather-bed, and never sleep or close his eyes, but to sigh and groan for pain
in his head, or any other member, for the toothach or for the stone: If the
night seems long, and the day a great way off, and the sun to slack his coming:
And yet, as I said, he lies upon a good feather-bed, and if he will have but a
little patience, he may hope to find ease in the day, and help from the
Physician: Alack! Alack! How intolerable shall it be, to lie night and day in
the fire, for a thousand and a thousand, and again, I say, a thousand years!
How intolerable shall it be, there to watch, to hunger, to thirst, to burn, to
be tormented extremely in every part, and not to hope for any rest, or so much
as a drop of cold water; but to be always in despair, and so to fry and to be
tortured for infinite millions of ages, and to be so far from finding any
end, as never to be able to hope for any end! There, says Thomas, one De
Christ. imitat. lib. 1. (...). 24
hours punishment shall be more grievous, then an hundred years here in the
most bitter punishment that can be. There, is no rest, no consolation to the
damned. O Lord Psalm. 6. 1.
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. Psalm.
^5. 7.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. Unless thou will
have mercy, O God, I must needs perish.

CHAP. II. Why Hell is Eternal.
HEre arises a question which is worthy to be known of all men, How it can be,
that God who is good and merciful, and whose mercy is over all his works,
should notwithstanding punish even one mortal sin, committed, it may be, in
a moment, and in thought only; How he should punish such a sin, I say, for
all Eternity, and so punish it, that it shall deserve still always to be
punished, and though millions of years be passed, yet it shall never be said,
This sin has been sufficiently punished, it is enough, he has made
satisfaction for the wicked thought by which he has offended God.

What then? Has God for one sin, and that in thought only, decreed the
punishment of everlasting fire? What equality is there in this, For a
momentanie sin, to appoint an Eternal punishment? Psalm. 106. ^ 107. 1 118. 1
136. 1
Why does blessed David cry out? O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good,
and his mercy endures for ever. And why does he repeat it twenty seven times,
if God be so severe? To this S. Augustine, Gregory, Thomas Aquinas and others
answer, That in every mortal sin the offense of its own nature is infinite,
because it is an injury against the infinite majesty of God. Again, He that
dies guilty of a mortal sin without repentance, does as much as if he
should sin Eternally: For if he might live Eternally, he would sin
Eternally: He has not lost a will to sin, but life in which to sin, still
being ready to sin, if he might live still: So he does not cease to sin,
but does cease to live. Further it is to be considered, That a damned person
can never make satisfaction, though he should pay never so much: For being an
Enemy, and not in favor with God, his payment is not worthy acceptance;
seeing that he himself is not accepted with him: Neither indeed, to speak
truly, can he be said to pay any thing: because he does nothing, but suffers
only punishment, and that against his will. We will make the matter yet more
plain by a familiar example. Suppose a man should borrow of his neighbor a
thousand crowns, and for the use thereof make over the Rent of his house unto
him for ever: It may be in twenty years he may thus repay the sum of money
borrowed: But what then? Is he fully discharged of all the debt? Does there
remain nothing to be paid? The Principal remains still as due to be paid, as
if there had been nothing at all paid. For this is the nature of such lones,
That although the yearly use be paid, still the Principal remains entire, and
due to be paid. So it is with the damned: For although they should pay never so
much, yet they can never get out of debt. They are debtors still, and ever
shall be. The Isa^^* 31*
strong shall be as ^ow, and the maker of it as a spark, and they shall both
burn together, and none shall quench them. Suetonius reports of (...) 6.
Tiberius Caesar, that, being petitioned unto by a certain offende^ to hasten
his punishment, and to grant him a speedy dispatch, he made him this answer,
Nondum tecum in gratiam redii, Stay Sir, You and I are not yet friends. Christ
is a most just Judge, no Tyrant, no Tiberius: And yet, if one of the damned
after a thousand years burning in Hell, should beg and entreat for a speedy
death, he would answer after the same manner, Nondum tecum in gratiam redii,
Stay, You and I are not yet friends. If after a thousand years more, he should
ask the same thing, he should receive the same answer, Nondum tecum in gratiam
redii, Stay, You and I are not yet friends. If after an hundred thousand years
yet more, yea millions of years, he should ask again, again he should receive
the same answer, Nondum tecum in gratiam redii, Stay, You and I are not yet
friends. The time was, I offered to be thy friend; but thou would not: yea
thy father; but thou would not. I offered thee my grace a thousand and a
thousand times; but thou rejectedst it. This I knew right well, and I held my
peace and further expected forty, fifty, sixty years, to see if thou
would change thy mind, and course of life: But there followed no serious or
true repentance. Thou have set at naught all Prove. 1. 25.
my counsel, and would none of my reproos: Thou have hated instruction,
Psalm. 50. 17.
and have cast my words behind thee. Eat therefore the fruit of thine own
ways, and be filled Prove. 1. 26.
with thine own counsels. I will laugh at thy destruction for ever: neither
shall my justice after infinite ages give thee any answer but this, Nondum
tecum in gratiam redii, Stay, You and I are not yet friends. O God which art in
heaven! O sin which throwest men headlong into Hell, the Hell of torments,
and into the bottomless pit of Eternal pain! But Righteous Psalm. 119. 137.
art thou O Lord, and upright are thy judgments. Just and right it is, that he
which would not by repentance accept of mercy when it was offered, should by
punishment be tormented, and have justice without mercy, for ever.

CHAP. III. Other motives to the consideration of Eternity drawn from Nature.
BUt I return to the school of Nature to consider further upon Eternity. There
are found hot Baths in certain mountains and rocks, whose waters in running
make such a noise and murmuring, that the diseased persons that resort thither
for cure, if at their entrance into the Bath they do but imagine they hear
musical instruments and an Harmonious consort, they have their ears so dulled
with the continual noise thereof, that the Music which at first was sweet
unto them, becomes at length, by their imagination working upon it, very
loathsome, and a torment unto them: But if they imagine they hear a drum, or
any other loud sounding instrument, they at length grow almost mad with the
noise thereof daily molesting and troubling them. From hence also we are led,
as it were by the hand, to the consideration of Eternity. The weeping and
wailing, yelling and crying which is heard at the first entrance of Hells mouth
under those infernal mountains shall never cease, but shall torment the damned
without end, and be no whit mitigated by time and long sufferance. But on the
contrary, the blessed in heaven shall without weariness hear the Thrice Holy
sung, Holy, Holy, Holy; yea and the more they hear it, the more they shall be
delighted with the sound thereof. Christ in his conference with the woman of
Samaria makes often mention of Eternity, and life everlasting. Whosoever
drinks John 4. 14.
of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst: but the water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting
life. I would we did thirst with the woman of Samaria after those waters, and
earnestly pray for them! O Lord give John 4. 15.
me of this water, that I thirst not. Give me, O Christ, though but a drop of
this water, that is, some thirst and desire after Eternal life.

In the year, after the Nativity of our Lord, fourscore and one (as
Suetonius, Dion, and Plinius Secundus tell at large) on the first day of
November, about seven of the clock, at the Mountain Vesuvius in Campania there
was an horrible eruption of fire, before which there went an unusual drought,
and grievous earthquakes. There was also heard noise under earth, as if it had
been thunder: The sea roared and made a noise; the Heaven thundered as if
mountains had in conflict met together; great stones were seen to fall; the
air was filled with smoke and fire mixed together; the Sun did hide his head.
Whereupon it was thought by many that the world was almost at an end, and that
the last day was come wherein all should be consumed with fire: For there was
such abundance of ashes scattered up and down over land and sea, and in the
air, that there was much hurt done amongst men and cattle, and in the fields,
that fish and fowl were destroyed, that two cities, the name of the one was
Herculanum, and the name of the other Pompeii, were utterly ruined. These and
such other Caverns in the earth with Precipices, and fiery mountains always
flaming, but never going out, are lively examples given us by God, to put us in
mind of the fire in Hell, in which the bodies of the cursed shall be always
burning but never be burnt out. Concerning this you may read Tertu. Apoc. cap.
48 Minut. in Oct. Pacian De Poenitent. and confess.
Tertullian, Minutius, and Pacian. See, O man, how providently even Nature her
self does go before thee, and as it were lead thee by the hand to the
contemplation of Eternity.

To conclude, This Time of ours carries with it some sign and print of
Eternity. Nature fain would have us learn the thing signified by the sign,
and take a scantling of Eternity by the little module and measure of time. It
is the saying of S. Augustine, This In Sent sent. 2^0.
is the difference between things Temporal and Eternal: We love things
Temporal more before we have them, and esteem them not so much when we have
them: For the soul cannot be satisfied but with true and secure Eternity, and
joy which is Eternal and incorruptible. But things Eternal, when they are
actually possessed, are much more loved, then before when they were only
desired, and hoped for: For neither could Faith believe, nor Hope expect, so
much as Charity and Love shall find, when once we shall be admitted to
possession. Why then does not earth seem vile in our eyes, especially when we
must ere long forsake it? And why do we not with ardent desire lift up our eyes
to Heaven where we shall inherit a kingdom, and that Eternal?

Thou art weighed in the balance^ and art found wanting. Dan: 5.27

That man regards not ETERNITE who weighs his money more accurately then
his life



THE THIRD CONSIDERATION upon ETERNITY. Wherein the old Romans principally
placed their Eternity.
PLinius Secundus thought Epist. 2 ad Tacit.
those men happy, which either did things worthy to be wrote, or wrote things
worthy to be read; but those men of all most happy, which ^ould do both. So the
Romans thought they might three manner ^f ways eternize their fame, and
^ransmit their names unto posteri^. First they wrote many excellent things;
many excellent indeed, but not all, not all chaste, not all holy: They
committed to writing their own blemishes, their dishonest oves, and filthy
lusts; But this was no honest or Kings highway to Eternity. How many books
have dyed before their Authors, and according to Plato, have been like unto
the Gardens of Adonis, as soon dead as sprung up! They pleased not long which
quickly pleased. But suppose the books of all the Romans should outlive time,
and be always extant, and exposed to public view, yet they should not be able
to give life unto their Authors.

Again, the Romans did not only write, but also did many brave works worthy
to be recorded by the pens of eloquent and learned men, and these works were
of diverse kinds. They sought Eternity in many things, but found it in
nothing, as we are taught to believe. They were great (we do not deny it) in
civil and warlike affairs, at home and abroad: admirable for their skill in
Arts and Sciences: Magnificent and profuse in setting forth shows, and
bestowing gifts: wonderful even to astonishment for stately buildings, Tombs,
V^ults, Monuments, and Statues; as you may guess by these few particulars
which I will briefly run over. Augustus, in his own name, and at his own proper
charges, set forth Plays and Games four and twenty times, and at the charge
of the common Treasury three and twenty times: And never a one of those cost
him under two Millions and five hundred thousand Crowns; and this so great a
sum of money, I say, was all laid out upon one show. The very meanest and
cheapest that ever Augustus set forth, came to a Million, two hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns.

Nero gilded over the whole Theater, the Ornaments of the Tyring house and
com^^al implements he made all of gold; to these you may add square pieces of
wood or wooden Lots scattered amongst the people, which had for their
inscriptions, whole houses, fields, grounds, farms, slaves, servants, beasts,
great sums of silver, and many times jewels a great number: To whosoevers lot
fell any one of these, he presently received according to the inscription.

The same Nero for a Donative to a common soldier commanded to be told, two
hundred and fifty thousand crowns.

Agrippina Nero's mother caused the like sum of money to be laid upon a
Table, thereby secretly reprehending, and laboring to restrain her sons
profuseness. Whereupon Nero perceiving that he was touched, commanded another
sum to be added as great as the former, and said thus, Nesciebam me tamparum
dedisse, I forgot my self in giving so little.

The same Nero entertained at Rome for nine months together King Teridates,
and was every day at cost for him twenty thousand Crowns, which came in nine
months to five Millions and forty thousand Crowns. And at his departure, he
gave him for a Viaticum, or to spend by the way, two Millions and an half. What
should I tell you of their stately and magnificent buildings?

Caligula the Emperor made a bridge over an Arm of the Sea, three miles long.

There were Temples in Rome four hundred twenty four, most of them very
magnificent.

Domitian spent upon the sole gilding of the Capitol seven Millions.

On the stairs of the Amphitheatre which were made all of stone, there might
sit very conveniently fourscore and seven thousand spectatours; above, there
might stand round about twelve thousand; in all fourscore and nineteen
thousand.

Beside many others, there were twelve public Baths made by the Emperors,
where men might bathe gratis.

In the hot Baths of A^toninus there were of polished stone one thousand and
six hundred seats, and there might so many men bathe themselves very
conveniently.

In the Bath of Hetruscus, as Pliny says, all was of silver, The passages for
the water, the lips of the Bath, and the very floor it self. But I pass to
other things.

At Rome there were almost as many statues as men, of no worse matter then
silver and gold, beside infinite others of Brass, Marble, and Ivorse.

Domitian had one of Gold in the Capitol, of an hundred pound weight.

Commodus and Claudius had also statues of Gold, each of them being of a
thousand pound weight. Claudius had also in the place at Rome called Rostra
another of silver. Hereupon there was a certain Officer appointed, who was
called the Count of Rome, on whom there attended a great many soldiers
continually, to guard and look to the great number of statues.

The way which is called Appia will exercise a nimble footman five days in
running it over. It reaches in length from Rome to Capua; So broad, that two
coaches may meet, and never trouble one another; so solid and firm, as if it
were all of one stone, in no place loose or broken up. There were also more
ways like unto this. It is incredible what good Authors do write of their
Conduits and Aqueducts.

Claudius the Emperor bestowed about one, seven Millions of Gold, and an half,
and there were maintained six hundred men with the only keeping and looking to
the waters. These were great works indeed, but the Authors thereof in part
deserved reprehension for their immoderate profuseness. There was at Rome one
thing that surpassed their stately buildings, but as for name, to say no worse,
and to spare your ears, dishonorable and not fit to be named. They had
certain vaults under earth built with arches, you may call them the sinks of
the City (they called them Cloacas) running with water to carry away all the
filth out of the City. Of these there were so many, so large, and so long, that
you may well reckon them amongst the wonders of the world. I need not instance
in any more: these which I have named are sufficient. He that is any thing
conversant in Histories, or has heard of the great power and wealth of the
Romans in former ages, will easily believe my relation: if he will not believe
me, let him believe the testimony of Suctonius, Dion Cassius, Pliny, Livie,
and others that have wrote of the Roman monuments.

These things which I have reckoned up are very laudable in themselves. But
they governed their commonwealth so prudently, that in war for the most part
they were inconquerable, for Arts and Sciences excellent, for virtue
illustrious; in so much that Cyneas an Ambassador sent from Pyrrhus, a very
eloquent and intelligent man, when he had all in vain solicited the City to
make a league with his Lord and Master, which league could not stand with the
honor of the Romans, upon his return told the king, That he thought the City
to be a Temple; and all the Senators, Kings - Herein the Romans were highly
to be commended. But in this they were much overseen, (though otherwise very
prudent men) in placing their Eternity in such things, as neither could give
unto them, nor had in themselves Eternity. If the Romans had made choice of
S. Augustine for their guide in the way to Eternity, he would have showed them
a more certain and readier way. For what says he? We do not account those
August lib. 5. De ^ivit. Dei, cap. 2^*
Emperors happy which have reigned long, or which have often triumphed as
Conquerours over their enemies, or which have treasured up much wealth. These
things often happen to those that have no right or title to the kingdom which
is Eternal. Who then in S. Augustines opinion are to be accounted truly
happy? Hearken O ye Emperors, O ye Kings and Princes: You shall in S.
Augustines sense obtain true and Eternal happiness by the observation of
these Rules following.

First, the Rule of Justice. By 1.
ruling justly, and hating the very vizard, and painted face of Injustice.

Secondly, the Rule of Modesty. 2.
By not being pulled up by the vain applauses, acclamations, and titles of
honor, but by remembering your selves to be but men.

Thirdly, the Rule of the Fear 3.
and Love of God. By propagating by all means the true worship of God; by
subjecting all humane power to his divine Majesty; by serving him in fear and
love.

Fourthly, the Desire of Heaven. 4.
By setting your love and affection upon the Kingdom which is Eternal, where
one shall not envy another power.

Fifthly, the Rule of Facility, 5.
and readiness to forgive. By being swift to forgive, and slow to punish, but
when the glory of God and the necessity of the Commonwealth calls for it.

Sixthly, Mercy, and Liberality. 6.
By tempering the severitie of the laws by the oil of mercy, and the sweet
odor of beneficencie.

Seventhly, Continency. By not 7.
giving the reins to Luxury, but by bridling your appetites, and
concupiscences; and the more liberty you have, the less abusing it unto
licentiousness.

Eighthly, Moderation of Passions. 8.
By choosing rather to get the conquest over evil Passions, then by
domineering over Nations.

Ninthly, the study of Humility, 9.
and Prayer. By doing all these, not for vain glory, but for the glory of God,
and the attainment of Eternal felicity: And again, by never neglecting that
most noble sacrifice of Humility, and Prayer.

These Rules or Laws has Saint Augustine fixed upon the double gates of the
world, for a Glass sit for Princes to look into. But, O ye Romans, how far
have ye gone astray from the way that leads unto the Gates whereon these
laws are fixed! Not to speak of other things, You have in stead of one and the
only true God brought in innumerable others, to worship them which are no
Gods. For Rome seemed to make it a great matter of Religion, To refuse no
falsitie; and when she ruled almost over all nations, To serve and follow the
errors of all nations.

But to let these things pass also. How vain and ridiculous a thing is it for
them, to leave behind them all their Eternity in Parchments and Papers, in
Marble and other stone, in Theaters, and Pyramides, in Monuments and Tombs!
What is now become of their Eternity which was sometime carved in stone? The
same has happened unto Rome, which also befell Jerusalem. The Disciples pointing
at the buildings of the Temple at Jerusalem, said unto our Savior Christ,
Master, see what manner Matthew. 13. 1.
of stones, and what buildings are here. Whereupon Christ answered and said,
See ye all these buildings? Matthew. ^4. 2.
Verily I say unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down. So there is nothing Eternal in this world. And
where is now old Rome? If this question be demanded; the answer may be this,
Here it was. Where are they that built it? They are dead and gone. There is not
so much as their ashes left of them. And ere long we must all go the same way,
become like a shadow, return unto dust, and be resolved into nothing. Oh the
poor and mean condition of mortal men, even at the greatest! Oh the
instabilitie and frailty of the strongest men, even in the prime of all their
strength! For what is now become of all those things, or where are they? They
are quite vanished away: where is their money, which they heaped up beyond
belief? ' It Is scattered abroad. Where are their stately and lofty buildings?
They are not to be seen. Such are all things else, though to us they seem never
so great, nothing else but a mere shadow and a dream, if they be compared with
Eternity, and those things which are Eternal. The foundation on which the
whole fabric of vanishing glory is set up, is too weak, and mouldring, made
but of clay, Stone and Marble cannot be engraven with Characters and
inscriptions of Eternity. Well says Lactantius, The works of mortal men are
mortal. That there was a Babylon, a Troy, a Carthage, and a Rome, we believe:
But if we will believe no more then we see, there be scarce any relics or
ruinous parts of them remaining, to persuade us that there were such Cities. So
the seven wonders of the world, so Neroes golden palace, Diocletian's Hot
Baths, Antoninus his Baths, Severus his Septizonium, Julius his Colossus,
Pomper's Amphitheatre, have no foot-step or print of them remaining, no, scarce
upon record, or registered in books. And how far have all these come short of
Eternity!

CHAP. I. How far the Romans have gone astray from the true way of Eternity.
AT Nazareth, in a certain conclave called by the name of the blessed Virgin,
there is in one place mention made of a kingdom, Of which kingdom there shall
be no Luk^ 1. 33.
end. Such was not the kingdom of Solomon: for that lasted but four hundred
years, even to the Captivity of Babylon. Such was not the kingdom of the
Romans, neither of the Persians, nor yet of the Grecians. For where are now
those kingdoms, in former times most flourishing? where are those most ancient
Monarchies? How great was Nebuchadnezzar in Chaldea and Syria, and after him
Belshazzar? From them the Scepter was translated unto the Medes and Persians,
to Cyrus and Darius. Neither continued it there long. From thence it was
translated into Greece, to Alexander surnamed the Great, King of Macedon, for a
long time most victorious and fortunate: But as warlike valor decayed, so
fortune failed. And so the Scepter was translated into Italy to Julius Caesar,
and Octavius Augustus. What is become of all these Kings? where are they? But
thou, O Christian man, seek that kingdom, of which kingdom there shall be no
end. Numantia, Athens, Carthage, and Sparta, all are come to an end: They are
utterly perished. But as for the kingdom which is above, Of that there shall
be no end. The king that rules there is Eternal, and those that live in that
kingdom are Eternal. The Lord Exodus 15. 18
shall reign for ever and ever. On which words says Origin, Do Origin
thou think that the Lord shall reign for ever and ever? Yea he shall reign
for ever and ever, and beyond that too. Say what thou can, thou shall still
come short of the duration of his kingdom: The Prophet will still add
something: as for example, after For ever, yet more, and ever, or, Beyond that
too. And yet, says Isidore, though this Isidore.
kingdom be Eternal, though infinite, though every way blessed, though it be
promised to us, Not a word of that. For what man is there of a thousand that
spends the least part of a day in meditating upon that? that ever once makes
mention of that? that ever instructs his wife, his children, and his servants
concerning that? We prattle much of all other things; but as for heaven, there
is scarce any mention made of that, or if there be, surely it is very rare. In
setting forth the commendation of his own Country, every man is a
nimble-tongued Orator: But as for that which is our true Country indeed, we
blush and are almost ashamed, being too modest in commending that. For it is
come to pass in these days by the disuse of holy conference, that men think
themselves not witty or facete enough, unless they speak idle and unprofitable
words, and make foolish jests: nay that is not all, unless their cheeks swell,
and their lips run over with filthy and unsavourie speeches. Oh! this is to go
astray quite out of the way. But let our hearts and mouths be filled with the
praise and desire of things Eternal; let our thoughts and words always run
after them: we have no other way to true glory, but this; and there is no true
glory, but that which is Eternal.

The chief Priests and the Pharisees amongst the Jews, to overthrow Christ's
power (as they thought) and to eternize their politic Government, assembled
themselves together in council: and by their foolish wisdom (as it proved)
made decrees to their own hurt. Elegantly speaks S. Augustine August
of them, consulting and deliberating together in full Court; The chief
Priests, says he, and the Pharisees took counsel together, what they should
do for their own good, and yet they said not, Let us believe. The wicked and
ungodly men sought more how to hurt and to destroy, then how to provide for
their own security, that they might be saved. And yet they were in fear, and in
counsel: For they said, what do we? For this man does John 11. 47, 48.
many miracles. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and the
Romans shall come, and take away both our place and nation. They were afraid
to lose things Temporal, and never thought upon the life which is Fternall:
And so they lost both. Such is the vanity, and affected mockery of our foolish
cogitations. What are we? And what is all that we call ours? To day we flourish
like a flower, we are well spoken of, we please, and are in favor with men:
But (alas!) To morrow our flower will fade, we shall be ill spoken of, and out
of favor with God and man: man, whom hitherto we pleased; and God, whom we
never studied for to please. We neglect heaven, and keep not earth: We get not
the favor of God, and lose the worlds favor. And so we are most deplorately
miserable, and destitute on both sides. If death would but spare those that are
the happy ones of this world, it may be they might find here some glory; some
I say, such as it is; For there is none true but that which is in heaven, and
Eternal. But (alas!) Death spares no man; sees in the dark, and is not seen;
and watches his time when he may set upon us, when we think not of him. What
shall become of us? whither will he carry us, if here we have lived wickedly?
To the bar of Christ's judgment, and from thence to the pit of Hell: And from
thence there is no redemption. Nobility from thence sets no man free; Power
delivers no man. The applause of men formerly given, yields there no comfort.
Let us here seek the favor of God and his glory: That is the true glory, which
is got by the shunning of vain glory: And there is no true glory, but that
which is Eternal.

Solomon in the Proverbs describes Prove. 3. 13.
wisdom like a Queen attended by two waiting maids, Eternity, and Glory, the
first on the right hand, the second on the left. Glory is nothing worth, if
there be not joined with it Eternity; that which all we Christians do expect.
For here we have no continuing Heb. 13. 14 ^. Cor. 5. 1. Psalm. 112. 6.
City, but we seek one to come, Eternal in the heavens. The righteous shall
be in everlasting remembrance. To give an alms to a poor man, to moderate a
greedy appetite, to resist the enemy of chastity; These are works that
require not much pains, or time for the doing: And yet the remembrance of these
together with their reward shall be Eternal. What a small thing was it that
Mary Magdalene bestowed upon our Saviors feet! How quickly had she done it!
And yet it is made known throughout the whole Matthew. 26. 13.
world. Some others, it may be, would have admired other things in her, her
cherrie cheeks, her comely countenance, the pleasant flower of her youth, her
rare grace, her great riches, her affability and courtesy and such like.
These were not the things which Christ commended in her; but it was the office
which she performed unto his feet. The thing it self was not great: And yet it
was a means to procure for her Eternal glory, and a never-dying name. It shall
be preached throughout the whole world: This is the testimony of Christ. This
work of hers was not engraven in marble, nor cast in brass, nor promulged in
the market place, nor proclaimed with a Drum and a Trumpet: And yet it has
continued for a memorial of her to this day, and so shall for ever, and It
shall be preached throughout the whole world. If you consider the action it
self; Judas Iscariot the covetous Pursebearer found fault with it; Simon the
swelling and proud Pharisee condemned it: If the matter; it was but an
Ointment, at the most not worth above thirty small pieces of gold: If the
place; it was private: If the witnesses present; they were but few: If the
person; she was a woman, and one infamous: And yet for all these, It shall be
preached throughout the whole world. How many Emperors have advanced their
colors, displayed their victorious and triumphant Eagles, and set up their
standards in their enemies Camp! How many warlike Captains have led popular
Armies, and commanded them worthily! How many provident Governors have ruled
their people very wisely! How many Kings have erected rare monuments, and
statues, and built Castles and Cities! How many learned men have wasted their
brains in new inventions, and have like Chymicks distilled them into Receivers
of Paper! And to what end all this? To keep their names in continual
remembrance, and to be recorded amongst worthy and memorable men. And yet
notwithstanding they lodge in the bed of silence, and lie buried in the grave
of oblivion. But one good work that the righteous does, shall be had in
everlasting remembrance: Time and envy shall never deface and conceal it: The
wisest men, Captains, Prelates, and Kings themselves shall with reverence read
and hear it. It shall be preached throughout the whole world.

The only way then to immortality and true Eternity is, To live well and so
to die well. Go to now ye Romans, If ye will seek Eternity in Statues and
M^rble monuments: but you shall never find it there. I for my part will wish
rather with S. Hierom in the life of Paul the Eremit^; Oh remember, says he,
Hierom a sinner, who, if God had given him the choice, would have preferred the
poor cloak of Paul with his good works, before the Scarlet robes of kings with
their kingdoms. Let us Christians here whilst we have time make over our
riches, for fear lest we lose them, let us send them before us into another
world: Heaven stands open ready to receive them. We need not doubt of the safe
carriage; the carriers are very faithful and trusty; but they are the poor
and needy of this world. We make over unto them here by way of exchange a few
things of little value, 2. Cor. 4. 17.
being to receive in heaven an exceeding Eternal weight of glory. For so has
Christ promised upon the performance of his precept. I say unto you, Make to
your selves Luke 16. 9.
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive
you into everlasting habitations. But let us pass from the Romans unto others.

CHAP. II. A better way then the former which the Romans followed, to
Eternity.
Darius the king of the Persians, most notable for his slaughter, had in his
Army ten thousand Persians, which he therefore called immortal (as Caelius
Rhodiginus Cael. Rhodigin. lib. 8. cap. 2. and lib. 25. cap. 1.
interprets it) not because he thought they should never die (For where are
there any such?) but because as any of the number was diminished by sword or
sickness, it was presently made up; so that still there was neither more nor
less then ten thousand. Thus Darius framed unto himself a kind of
immortality and Eternity: But (alas!) it was a very short one; For within a
little space he and all his army utterly perished. The Presidents and Princes
assembled Dan. 6. ^.
together unto Darius, and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever.
Alas, how vain was this wish, and how short this Eternity! We live but seventy
or eighty years at the most: We are but in a dream, if we think to live here
for ever. Not without cause therefore Xerxes (when for the conquering and
subjugating Greece (as Herodotus reports) he carried with him out of Asia two
great armies both by sea and land, in number three and twenty hundred thousand,
seventeen thousand, and six hundred, beside others that attended upon
soldiers) upon a day taking his prospect from a Mountain, and beholding his
soldiers, fell a weeping: And being asked the reason why, He said it was,
because after a matter of fifty or sixty years, of so many hundred thousand
men so select and strong, scarce one should be found alive.

We may dream, and feign unto our selves I know not what Eternities: But in
the mean time we must needs die, and are as water 2. S^^^^ 14. 14.
spilt upon the ground.

Another and better type of Eternity was found out at Constantinople, in the
year of our Lord 459. The Church of Constantinople, in the time when Gennadius
was Bishop, was augmented by a new and noble foundation of a Monastery of
Acoemets dedicated to S. John Baptist. These Acoemets were so called for not
sleeping, because they were never all at once to sleep, but still to be
exercised in their course night and day in singing praises unto God. These
Acoemets were divided after this manner into three companies, so that when the
first company had made an end of singing divine praises, the second should
begin; and when the second had made an end, the third should begin. By means of
this godly institution the city had in some sort heaven within it self always
sounding with the praise of God; or at lest a type or representation of the
Eternity in heaven, where God shall be praised for all Eternity, with great
delight and cheerfulness, and without all weariness. Therefore has the
Psalmist good cause to cry Psalm. 34. 4.
out, Blessed are they which dwell in thy House, they will still be praising
thee. Then shall all the blessed say as Peter did upon the Matthew. ^7. 4. ^ern.
^er. ^. (...) Or^. S.
mountain, It is good for us to be here. For, as S. Bernard speaks, Eternity
is true riches without measure: but he adds this withal, It is not found
unless it be sought with perseverance. But how shall we so seek that we may
obtain it? Hear what the good Father says: By poverty, by meekness and by
tears, there is renewed in the soul the stamp and image of Eternity which
comprehends all times. First, poverty is the way to Eternity. Blessed are
the poor in spirit: for Ma^^^. 5. 3.
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Where poor men are despised and forsaken,
there is the heart and the money locked up together in the chest: Where money
is expended according to the rules of Avarice, there is no affect or love of
poverty, there is no desire or love of Eternity. Secondly, meekness: By
meekness we make our selves secure of things present, and have an assurance of
things to come. Blessed are the meek: Matthew. 5. 5.
for they shall inherit the earth. If any man ask, What shall we say of him
that is void of meekness and patience, that can scarce at any time speak a
mild word? What gains he by his implacable impatience? What does it profit him
to rage and fret with indignation, to make outcries and tumults, to show his
will to do mischief, though he cannot effect what he would; or, to conclude, to
salute no man civilly, as if he were an enemy to all humanity and
affability? What shall we say of such a man? If there be any such, he is sure
to suffer loss of goods or good name, or both: for, the riches which he has,
he possesses not, but keeps them like a dog, whose property is to bark at a
man, to fly upon him, and to bite him: As for his good name, if he have any,
he shall not augment it by the title of impatience: and as for heaven, he
loses that before he has taken possession of it. Thirdly, Tears. For, by
weeping and mourning we redeem the time past, we recover what we prodigally
spent by sinning. But this mourning and sorrow must not last for an hour
only, or for a day: for this is nothing else, but to do as he did, who at his
mothers death put on mourning clothes, forced for the present a few tears, and
so went along after the bear, and left her not till he saw her buried; but the
same day, or the next day after wiped away all tears from his eyes, changed
his weeping into laughing, cast off his mourning clothes and put on colors.
This is not to mourn in good earnest, to make an end of mourning so suddenly.
But this we do (alas!) too often. To day we make public confession of our
sins to God, and hear absolution; we repent us of our sins, and receive
the holy communion: and within a day after we sin again with delight, and
without fear, and oftentimes more grievously then before. We detest for the
present the wicked course of our life past; and we return again to the same
pass. We forswear the sins which we formerly committed; and again the same
day we commit the same. So with the same tongue we proclaim Christ innocent,
and crucify him afresh, as if we were the true brothers of Pontius Pilate, who
with one and the same mouth did both absolve him and condemn him, confessing
that he found no cause of death in him, Luk^ 23. 22^ 24.
and yet adjudging him to be crucified. We are very fickle and inconstant, but
in nothing more constant then in the repetition of a vicious course of life.
Alas! alas! we carry too much of the Moon, that is, inconstancy in our
breast. Sometimes we are so zealous and so holy, that we will not admit of a
cheerful countenance, for fear lest it should hinder our sanctity and
devotion: we look demurely, casting our eyes down to the ground, and knit the
brows as being angry with our selves, when we find in our selves the least
remissness or coldness in holy duties: But this sanctity and devotion does
never continue long. After a while we begin to hate even piety it self, and
the stream being turned, we turn again to our former riot and intemperance: and
we are as ready to dissolve the knot of friendship made betwixt God and us, as
at the first we were unwilling to have it knit. At length Piety attended with
sorrow and repentance presents her self again unto us, and puts to flight
lasciviousness, until the time comes that we begin to repent us of our
repentance. So we seldom continue long in any honest and godly course, for it
seems unto us too laborious: and at every light beck we row down the stream of
our former uncleanness. Such is the inconstancy of our life, that it presents
unto our minds all sorts of pleasures and vices. We make an outward show of
adoring virtue: but in heart and mind we fall down and worship vice, a most
laborious kind of service: This is not the way unto Eternity, unless it be
of punishment and torments which shall have no end.

Let us single out one Christian man of many, and such a one especially as is
most addicted to his pleasure; let us carry him along with us to the mouth of
a furnace red hot and flaming; and then let us begin to question him after this
manner; How much pleasure would thou ask, to continue burning in this furnace
for one day? He will answer to this undoubtedly, I would not be tormented in
these flames for one day, to gain the whole world, and all the pleasures in the
world. But let us propound another condition unto him, What reward would thou
ask, to endure this fire only for half a day? Propound what reward you will,
there is nothing so delicate, so precious, so dear unto me, which I would be
willing to buy at so dear a price, as these torments. But to try once more,
What reward and pleasure would thou ask, to go into this furnace, and to stay
there but one hour? His answer certainly will be this, Let the most covetous
and impudent man in the world ask what he can, that is not to be compared with
the unutterable and unsufferable scorchings and torments of this fire, though
they should last but for one hour. If these answers be good and agreeable to
right reason, How comes it to pass, O God, that for a little gain, and that
but vile, for deceitful honor, and that fugitive, for filthy pleasure, and
that not long, so many men so little regard Eternal punishment in Hell fire?
We cannot be persuaded with any reward, no though it be to gain a whole world,
to stay but for one hour in fire Temporal: And yet, if either gain at any
time invites us, or if honor smiles upon us, or pleasure allures us, we never
fear Hell and fire Eternal. But thou will say, I hope for better; God is
merciful, and his goodness will not suffer me to despair, or to be terrified
with the fear of evil to come. So indeed we are wont to speak: And the words in
themselves are not impious, if our works were pious. But for the most part our
works are such, that if we rightly consider them, we have little cause to hope
for mercy. It is a very dangerous and foolish part for a man to live in a
constant course of ungodliness, and to hope for Eternity amongst the blessed.
Alas! one sin is sufficient to condemn us. Know thou not what Christ has
threatened in the Gospel? whosoever shall say unto Matthew. ^. 22.
his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire. Know thou not what
Christ has forbidden? Whosoever looks upon a woman 28.
to l^st after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart.
Know thou not what Christ has premonished? Not Matthew. ^. 21.
every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but
he which does the will of my Father which is in heaven. Know thou not that
Christ s^all shut many out of the gate? He Matthew. 30. 37, ^8.
that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me: And he that
takes not his cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me. Know thou
not what Christ has openly and plainly said, and again repeated? Many Matthew.
^0. 16 and 22. ^4.
be called, but few chosen: Few indeed, yea very Few. Know thou not how
often Christ has exhorted to amendment of life? Except ye be converted, and
become Matthew. ^8. ^.
as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. If thy
hand or thy foot offend 8.
thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee: it is better for thee to enter
into life halt and maimed, rather then having two hands or two feet, to be cast
into everlasting fire. Except ye repent, ye shall all Luke 13. 3. 24.
likewise perish. And not long after, Strive to enter in at the strait gate:
for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Know
thou not, how expressly Saint Paul recites up all those things that hinder us
from entering into that blessed Eternity? The works of the flesh are manifest,
Gal. 5. 19, 20 21.
which are these, Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, and revellings, and such like: of
the which I tell you before, as I have told you in time past, that they which
do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Now if any man be guilty
to himself of any one of these sins here reckoned up, and is not so grieved
for it that he seeks by all means possible to avoid it for the time to come: He
may sing to himself, if he will, this vain Spero, I hope, and I hope; but this
man's hope is indeed none at all, but mere rashness and presumption. For a man
to adventure the danger of stripes and blows, is an evil that may be born. To
lose at play an hundred or a thousand Florens, is a great misfortune, but may
be endured. To lay his head at stake, and to bring his life in danger, is a bad
adventure: but at the worst it is but loss of life, and that loss is not of
all other the greatest. But to hazard the Eternal salvation both of body and
soul, by living at uncertainties, by hoping in words, and despairing in works,
nullifying hope by a wicked and ungodly life: This is the extremest of all
evils: This is the most grievous misfortune a man can fall into: This is most
pernicious rashness and boldness: This is extreme folly Psalm. ^0. 22
and madness. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

CHAP. III. That the way of Eternity is diligently and carefully to be sought
after.
LEt every Christian man therefore often ask himself, and others also, which
are in the place of God, this question, What shall I do that I may obtain
blessed Eternity, or Eternal blessedness? Am I in the right way that leads
unto Eternity? Something I do indeed, but it is but very little, and not worth
speaking of. I thirst and breathe after the joys which are immortal and
Eternal: But few are my works, cold and imperfect at the best, and altogether
unworthy of an Eternal reward. I think it long till I arrive at the haven: But
I am afraid of the troublesome waves and tempests by the way: When as yet
notwithstanding that is the safest and best way unto heaven, which is most
rough and narrow. This the very Truth it self of Gods mouth pronounces, and
Christ proclaims, saying, Enter Matthew. 7. 13.
ye in at the strait gate: For wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be (Alack! too many) that go in thereat:
Because strait 14.
is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be
(Alack! too few) that Luke 13. 24
find it. Again, Strive to enter in at the strait gate: For many (I say unto
you) will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Oh what a fearful word is
that, MANY! and that, FEW! How should it make us tremble! But we miserable men
deceive our selves, rashly promising unto our selves Eternity: And yet I
cannot tell whether we may be more truly said, to hope or to dream that we
shall be reckoned amongst those few before mentioned. I would to God now, even
now whilst it is the accepted time, and 2. Cor. 6. 2*
the day of salvation, we would have a diligent and an intent eye upon
Eternity, and reason thus with our selves! Alas! what is all this that I
suffer, or that I see others suffer? It is nothing if it be compared with
Eternity. What if I could reckon up as many labors and perils as Saint Paul
himself did undergo, as they are by him set down in his second Epistle to the
Corinthians, and the eleventh Chapter? If I should endure hunger 2. Cor. 1^. 2^
and thirst, enmities and injuries, sickness and poverty? Yea more, what if I
were stoned with Saint Paul, and beaten with rods? 25.
What if I suffered shipwreck? All these are nothing to punishments Eternal.
Therefore in all adversity I must thus think with my self, I shall see an end
Psalm. 119. 96.
of all.

The Prophet Dan^^l having reckoned up sundry calamities, at length adds
these words, Even Dan. 11. 35.
to the time of the end: because it is yet for a time appointed. Come hither,
Come hither all ye that are in affliction, in sorrow, need, sickness, or any
other calamity. Why do ye drown your selves in your own tears? why do ye make
your life bitter unto you with impatience and complaining? Here is comfort for
you, great comfort drawn from the time of that suffering. Are diverse calamities
upon you? Be not cast down: Have a good courage: They shall continue only for
a time. Do ye suffer contumely and reproach? are ye wearied with injuries? are
other troubles multiplied upon you? Cease to lament: All these shall last but
for a time; they shall not last for ever; your sighing shall have an end.

Tears may distill from your eyes for a time: But sighs and groans shall not
arise from your hearts for ever. The time is at hand, when you shall be
delivered from all grief, and be translated unto everlasting happiness. This
is most clear by that in Ecclesiasticus, Ecclus. ^* 23.
A patient man will ^ear for a time, and afterward joy shall spring up unto
him. But ye also, which think your selves the only happy men on earth, and the
darlings of the world, know thus much, and be not proud, neither lift up your
horn: All your seeming happiness (for it is no more at the best) has but
short and narrow bounds and limits, and is quickly passed over. Your triumphing
is but for a time: your golden dreams last but for a time: After a time, and
that not long, Death will command you to put off Fortunes painted vizard, and
stand amongst the crowd: Then shall ye truly appear so much the more unhappy,
by how much the more you seemed to your selves before, in your own foolish
imaginations, most happy. Therefore whether sorrow or joy, all is but for a
time in this world. It is Eternity alone which is not concluded within any
bounds of time. Whether therefore the body suffer or the mind; whether we lose
riches or honors; whether our Patience be exercised by sorrow or grief, cares
or any other afflictions, inward or outward, all is but painted and momentanie,
if we think upon Eternal punishments. For when fifty thousand years shall be
passed after the day of Judgment, there shall still remain fifty thousand
Millions of years; and when those likewise are passed, there shall still
remain more and more, and yet more Millions of years, and there shall never be
an end. But, who thinks upon these things? who weighs and considers them well
with himself? Sometimes we seem to have savor of things Eternal: But we are
tossed up and down with the motions and thoughts of things past, and things
future: our heart wavereth, and is full of vanity. Who will establish it, and
set it in a sure place, that it may stand awhile, and standing admire, and
admiring be ravished with the splendor of Eternity, which always stands, and
never passes away? Well did Myrogenes, August lib. 11. Conf. ^ap. 11
When Eustachius Archbishop of Jerusalem sent gifts unto him, He did very well,
I say, in refusing them, and saying, Do but one thing for me, Only pray for
me, that I may be delivered from Eternal torment. Neither was Tullie out Tull.
Tus. quaest. lib 3.
of the way when he said, No humane thing can seem great unto a wise man, who
has the knowledge of all Eternity, and of the magnitude of the whole world.
But Francis, the Author of the order of the Franciscans, has a saying far
better then that of Tullie; The pleasure that is here, says he, is but short:
but the punishment that shall be hereafter, is infinite: The labor that is
here, is but small: but the glory which shall be here after, is Eternal. Take
your choice. Many are called, few chosen, but all rewarded according to their
works.

Let us hasten our Repentance therefore whilst we have time: It is better,
says Guerricus, to be Guer^. Sermon. 4 de Purific.
purged by water then by fire, and it is far easier: Now is the time for
Repentance: Let our timely Repentance therefore prevent punishment. Whosoever
is afraid of the hoare frost, the snow shall f^ll upon him: He which fears
the lesser detriment, shall suffer a greater: He which will not undergo the
light burden of Repentance, shall be forced to undergo the most heavy burden
and most grievous punishments of Hell. Saint Gregory Greg.
has a saying to this purpose; Some, says he, whilst they are afraid of
Temporal punishments, run themselves upon Eternal punishments. Hither we may
add that of Pacian; Pacian
Remember, says he, that in Hell there is no place for Confession of sins,
no place for Repentance: for then it is too late to repent, and the time is
past: Make haste therefore whilst you are in the way. We are afraid of
Temporal fire, and the Executioners hands: But what are these to the claws of
tormenting Devils, and the Everlasting fire of Hell? The Counsel of S. Ambrose
to a lapsed Virgin fits well in this place. Ambr. cap. 8. ad virg. laps.


True Repentance, says he, ought not to be in word only, but in deed; and
this is true Repentance indeed, if thou set before thine eyes, from what
glory thou art fallen; and considerest with thy self, out of what book thy name
is blotted; and beleevest, that now thou art near unto utter darkness, where
there is weeping and gnashing of teeth without end. And when thou art certainly
persuaded that those things are true, as indeed they are, seeing that the soul
that sins is in danger of Hell fire, and there is no means after Baptism
left to escape, but only Repentance; Be content to suffer any labor, and to
undergo any affliction, to be freed from Eternal punishment. The diseases of
the body move the sick man to purge his body: Let the diseases of our souls
move us also to take the purgation of Repentance: let the desire of our
salvation move us: let the fear of Eternal death and Eternal torment move us:
let the hope of attaining Eternal life and Eternal glory move us: Let us
embrace that which purges the soul, and let us eschew that which polluteth it.
And nothing defiles the soul more then a filthy body. Faithful is this
counsel of Saint Ambrose, and worthy of us to be embraced.

O Christ Jesus, Grant unto us that we may so possess things transitory and
temporal, that finally we lose not the things which are Eternal: and give us
grace to walk in their steps, and to follow their good example, of whom S.
Augustine speaks; Many there August
are, says he, that willingly come under the yoke, and of proud and haughty
men become humble and lowly, desiring to be what before they despised, and
hating to be what before they were; passing by, like strangers, things present,
and making haste with greediness after things to come. They pant in their
running toward their Eternal country, preferring Abstinence before Fullness,
Watching before Sleep, and Poverty before Riches, accounting labor in the
conquest of vices to be but pleasure, loving their enemies, passing by
injuries, and all for the hope of an Eternal reward. And who then would not
suffer any extremity and labor* to purchase unto themselves an Eternal
reward?

I have considered the days of old the years of ancient times. Ps: 76. 5.

Thy ^^ows pass by me, the voice of thy THUNDER is round about me The arrows
of present punishments fly over my head; the voice of that horrible thunder, Go
Ye cursed into ETERNAL fire, is like a wheel that will always turn.



THE FOURTH CONSIDERATION upon ETERNITY. How holy David meditated upon
Eternity, and how we should imitate him.
THat God should punish the Apostate Angels and men condemned at the last day,
with Eternal punishments, this has seemed so strange to some and so
incredible, that Origin himself, a man otherwise of an admirable wit, and
excellent learning, very well skilled in Scripture, has been so bold as to
teach, That the Devils and the Damned after a certain time, when they shall be
sufficiently purged by the fire, from their sins, shall at length be restored
to grace. But S. Augustine and Lib. 21 De civitate Dei, cap. 23 etc.
others convince him and condemn him of this his error. Yet notwithstanding
this error has found in the world many favorers. Certain Heretics called
the Aniti have disseminated and scattered it throughout Spain, by diverse their
interpretations. Some thought that all the damned, others that Christians
only, others that Catholics only, others that those only that had been more
liberal then others in giving of alms, should be delivered at length out of
Hell. Though Saint Augustine has not refused these their errors, yet the Holy
writ has done it plainly and openly. Depart from me ye cursed into Matthew. ^5.
41 46.
everlasting fire: and again, And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. Here no Glosses or
Interpretations will serve their turn to defend their errors. Wherefore the
Divine Psalmist king David, though he delighted much in the consideration of
both times, that which was past, and that which was to come, yet he had an eye
more especially to that which was to come. Mine Psalm. 119. 148.
eyes, says he, prevent the night watches: and again in another place, Thou
hold mine eyes Psalm. 77. 4.
waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak. What was it, Blessed Prophet,
that thus broke thy sleep? What business had thou to do so early, before
daylight? What caused thee so to keep silence and to be troubled in mind?
Psalm. 77. 5.
Hear what he says: I have considered the days of old, and the years of
ancient times, and the years of Eternity I have had in my mind. Lo! This was
the thing that broke his sleep, when he compared the years that were past with
the years which were to come, and with Eternity. Neither did he thus in the
day only, but, I call 6.
to remembrance, says he, my song in the night: I communed with mine own
heart, and my spirit made diligent search. And what moved him to this nightly
exercise? Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more?
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? See how he fears and trembles at the very
consideration of Eternity, how he is afraid of Gods judgments, lest God
should punish him with Eternal punishment. And what is the end and effect of
this Meditation? And I said, This is mine infirmity: But I will remember, etc.
or, Now I will begin. So in an instant, at the very same minute, he became
better then he was, and delayed not, neither did he defer his Repentance and
put it off till worser years. But, says he, Now I will begin, now I will live
a more godly life then I have done: He says not, After such an hour, or after
such a day, But, Now, even now. I, will some man say, if I were as David was,
if I could meditate of Eternity as blessed David did, it may be then I would
readily and with alacrity say with David, Now I will begin: But I am so
entangled with daily cares, so hindered with worldly business, so distracted
into diverse parts one way or other, that I cannot. I live amongst men; I see
and hear much evil; I have no time or leisure once to have so good a thought
in mind as the thought of Eternity. When we meet together in company to make
merry, amidst our sports, and amongst our cups we never confer about such
grave points: our minds wander up and down about many things, and cannot then
fix themselves upon the consideration of Eternity. At our feasts and merry
meetings we take our cups, and please our selves in making jests: Thoughts of
Eternity are too severe, too sad and Melancholic to be entertained by us; we
banish such out of our company. We enquire, what news out of Italy, or
France, or Spain. That which you tell us of so often concerning Heaven and
Hell, is now old, and grown stale. We know it well enough already: what need
you repeat it so often, till we loath it? So by this means there is no place or
time left once to think upon Eternity. O Christian brother, it is true indeed
which thou say, I cannot deny it. But I could wish thou would be as ready
and forward to amend thy fault as to confess it. It is too clear and
manifest, we see it with our eyes, that there is little or no care in the world
of Eternity, although one thing or other every day still puts us in mind of
it.

The Book of the rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome at the consecration
of their Bishops does appoint these words to be recited, Annos AEternos in
mente habe; Keep still in mind the years of Eternity; or, Think upon
Eternity: For when the Pope new elect, in a solemn manner is carried along to
S. Peter's Church, there goes one before him, having in his hand burning flax,
and shaking it he repeateth thrice these words, Pater Sancte, sic transit
gloria mundi: Holy Father, so the glory of the world passes away. It were a
devout and godly practice, if we did every day at the beginning and end of all
our actions, say unto our selves these words, Annos AEternos in mente habe;
Think upon Eternity: But especially when we are tempted unto any sin, when
the Devil suggests and puts into our minds ill thoughts, and when our
Conscience is in danger of being wounded, O then Think upon Eternity.

CHAP. I. Diverse Admonitions to think upon Eternity.
PHilip king of Macedon appointed a certain noble young man to salute him
thrice every morning after this manner, Philippe, homo es: Remember, Philip,
Thou art but a man. That being put daily in mind of his mortality, he might
carry himself toward mortal men like a mortal, man. Much more ought every
good Christian man, and true member of the Catholic Church be a monitour unto
himself, and with due consideration thrice at the least every day say to
himself, Eternity, Eternity, Eternity! Why so? Set thine house in order
(says the Prophet to king Hezekiah) For ^sa^. ^8. 1.
thou shall die, and not live. There will come an evening for certain, after
which thou shall see no morning; or there will come a morning after which thou
shall see no evening. Have an especial care therefore in all thy actions that
thou woundest not thy Conscience: and trust not too far to those things that
perish, for fear lest thou thy self together with them do likewise perish,
and finally lose the things that are Eternal.

It is a custom in Germany, and not to be disliked, in the evening when a
Candle is first lighted, or brought into a room, To say, Deus det nobis lucem
AEternam, God grant unto us light Eternal: We shall do well to imitate the
Germans in this custom: or rather it is already in use, and has been long
ago in many parts of this kingdom to say, God grant us the light of heaven. It
is very good daily to put us in mind of Eternity.

There is likewise a kind of Eternity in Slaverie and Imprisonment, but
infamous and horrible. It is a cruel punishment and worse then death it self
in some men's judgment, to be condemned to perpetual imprisonment, or to be a
perpetual Gally-slave.

Those which are oppressed with sickness or other sorrows, do likewise imagine
with themselves, that even in their sufferings there is a kind of Eternity.
Whence it comes to pass that we often hear them utter such distempered
speeches as these, will this last always? Shall I still without end be nailed
fast to my bed? Shall I suffer these pains and sorrows perpetually? Shall I
always be thus vexed and tormented? Alack! these Eternities are but short, and
soon come to an end. But if it be so grievous to flesh and blood to endure
slaverie or imprisonment here on earth, though but for a moment (for our life
is no longer, according to David's measure, but a span, which is very short)
What care and diligence, and what circumspection ought we to use, that we be
no^ cast into the prison of Hell, and into the fathomlesse pit, where there is
slaverie and imprisonment, pain and torment, to be endured throughout all ages,
beyond all times, even to all Eternity!

CHAP. II. That Eternity transcends all numbers of Arithmetic.
THere is a very common and well known Arithmetic, which children are taught
when they first go to School; and this is it. Suppose there were a mountain of
very fine sand as big as the whole earth, or rather much bigger: Then suppose
that every year an Angel should take from this mountain one, and but one
grain of sand: How many thousand, and thousand, and again I say thousand; yea
how many hundred thousand; and yet more, how many thousand millions of years
must there needs pass, before it can be perceived that the mountain is grown
less, or any whit diminished! Let a man that is skillful in Arithmetic sit
down, and begin to cast, How many years must pass before the mountain, or
half the mountain be removed by the Angel. Certainly we cannot conceive that
ever he shall be able to cast up the Total number of the sand. But herein are
we mistaken; for although we cannot conceive it possible to be done, yet it may
be done. But Eternity exceeds this number of years beyond all comparison; it
is most certain: For between a thing finite and a thing infinite there is no
comparison, no proportion: Eternity has no limits, no terms, no bounds, none
at all. But suppose the damned should burn in Hell no longer, then till the
mountain by grain after grain, year after year, should by the Angel be quite
removed: yet what an incomprehensible number of years must first pass, before
they can expect to see the day of deliverance! But (alas!) there is no such day
to be expected; their torments shall have no end: After that incomprehensible
number of years, it shall be truly said, Now begins their Eternity, their
Eternity is not in any part expired, they are as far from the end of their
torments as they were at the beginning. After a thousand years, yea after a
hundred thousand years there shall not be an end or middle, or beginning of
Eternity: For the measure of Eternity is Always. The same Art of Arithmetic
about the business of Eternity, a late Divine teaches, in words somewhat
different, but in meaning all one with the former. I therefore add it, because
a man can never sufficiently think or speak of it. Consider, says he, what is
the Corn^lius de Lapi^^ in cap* 15. Exodus ver. 18
length of Eternity. How long shall God and his Saints reign? How long shall
the damned burn in Hell? For ever. How long is that? Imagine an hundred
thousand years. Alas! That is nothing in respect of Eternity. Imagine ten
hundred thousand years, yea so many ages? Yet that is nothing: Eternity is
still as long as it was. Imagine a thousand millions of years. And yet that is
nothing. Eternity is not a whit shortened. Imagine yet more,
1000000000000000000000000000000, a thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand,
thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand Millions of years. Imagine, I say, the
damned should burn in Hell so many years, and yet thou have not found the very
beginning of Eternity. Imagine once more so many millions of millions of
years as there are drops in the sea, and yet thou art not come to the
beginning of Eternity. Such for continuance is the Eternity of joy, into
which the blessed shall enter, and the Eternity of torments which the damned
shall suffer. O Jesus spare us, spare us O Jesus, O Jesus save us; Have mercy
upon us, O good Jesus, and suffer us not to be plunged headlong into the
bottomless pit, to be tormented with the damned for all Eternity.

But yet if God would but say unto the damned, Let the earth be covered with
most fine sand, and let the world be filled therewith, and let it be heaped up
so high as heaven, and then let an Angel come once in every thousand years,
and take one grain of sand out of this heap; When after so many thousand years
as there be grains of sand, the Angel shall have removed the whole heap, then
will I deliver you out of Hell: Oh how would the damned exult and rejoice, and
not think themselves damned! But (alas) after so many thousands of years,
there remain yet more, and more, and infinite more, to all Eternity, even for
ever and ever. This is that heavy weight that so presses the damned. Let every
one therefore that sins consider with himself, and again, I say, let him
consider, that unless he repent, he shall be pressed and groan under this
heavy weight of Eternity.

Guilielmus Peraldus Bishop of Lions, a very religious and learned man, has
another manner of reckoning, meditating upon the innumerable number of years,
throughout which the damned shall be tormented. If the damned, says he, should
every day distill from their eyes but one small tear, and those tears should
be added together day after day, they would at length far exceed the drops of
the Ocean: for they have their number and measure; and it is easy with God to
say, So many are the drops of the Ocean and no more. But the tears of the
damned exceed all number and measure. Alas! Alas! How little do we think upon
these things! How freely and wilfully do we sin, and make our selves guilty
of Eternal punishment, and that oftentimes for a very little short and filthy
pleasure!

Yet there remains one way more of casting up this numberless number of
years: Suppose there were a schedule of Parchment a span broad, but so long
that it would begirt and incircle the whole Globe of the earth: And suppose it
were written all over very close with figures of 9. from one end to another:
Who so skillful an Arithmetician, that can tell the number thereof? What
mountain so great, that consists of so many grains of dust or sand? What
Ocean so vast, that contains within it so many drops of water? And yet this
is nothing to Eternity; it stretches it self further then so; it knows no
bounds; it is extended beyond all measure. But how far is it extended? It is
extended infinitely and without end. If thy heart (O Christian man) be not
turned into a stone, it cannot but melt at the consideration of these things,
and the very thought of the bottomless pit and Eternal punishment will make
thee fear and tremble. If there be any sense in thee, here it will thew it
self. But, as I said before, too few think upon these things; and too many live
so secure of their salvation, as if there were no Heaven, no God, no Hell, no
Eternity. Every day they heap sin upon sin, as if they labored and
studied to make their last day to exceed the former, for the measure and number
of their sins: And so they pass unto Eternity sporting and playing, as if
they went to prison but for a few weeks or days. Such men as these, says
Saint Gregory, when they should be mourning for their sins, they are dancing
for their pleasure; and when they should be seriously meditating upon death,
they run laughing unto execution. This is blindness indeed, this is
oblivious madness. For this short life, which is but the shadow of Eternity,
we labor beyond all measure; but for the life which is Eternal and most
happy, we scarce take any pains at all: And yet the not obtaining of this life
is the incurring of Eternal death, which as it is a torment more grievous then
all the torments of this life, so in this it is most grievous, that there is no
rest or mitigation of pain, no not for one short hour in the infinite space of
all Eternity.

CHAP. III. What effect and fruit the consideration of Eternity brings forth.
ANd this is it that has made so many good Christians, and so many holy
Martyrs so prompt and ready to suffer any torments, and any kind of death,
that even in their greatest pains, when they lay wallowing in their own blood,
they were most stout and courageous, and with a constant look and cheerful
countenance insulted over their Tormentours: They had the years of Eternity
in mind. This is it that has made the world seem distasteful and unpleasant
unto many, insomuch that they have taken their leave of all pleasures, and
embraced and entertained a severe and strict course of life, giving themselves
wholly to reading, meditation, and prayer, and such holy duties, minding
heaven, and heavenly things. They had the years of Eternity in mind. The
thought of Eternity will make all things in this life seem easy and pleasant,
though to flesh and blood they seem most grievous and unpleasant. It makes all
labors seem light and very short. Prayer, study, watching, and such like holy
duties it commends unto us, and makes them seem amiable. It seasons and
sweetens hunger and thirst. It mitigates the sense of pinching poverty. It
makes all manner of crosses in this life not only tolerable, but also
grateful and comfortable. Whosoever has the years of Eternity in mind, and
imprints them within, deeper and deeper by daily meditation, shunneth no
labor, neither is daunted with any losses. Offer him a kingdom, offer him all
the delights and pleasures in the world; and he will not change his poor
estate and condition for them. Such a man as this is never complaining* he
endures all things, he submits himself to all. For thus he thinks with himself,
What a small thing is this or that, that or this, and of how short continuance!
I will therefore endure it patiently; it will not last always. It is but for
an hour, and that a very short one, that mine enemies here oppress me. Well,
go to ye detractours; bite me still, if ye will, ye envious; I will not run
from you, This is your hour and the power of darkness: But I expect the day
of the Lord, and the day of Eternity; and why should I afflict and torment my
self with sorrow and lamentation? All this life is but a death of one hour:
The victory is not difficult; but the triumph is Eternal. Why should I be
afraid of the raging waves of this troublesome world? I have sight of the haven
already. Now it rains and thunders upon the heads of the good and godly; but
the storm will shortly blow over. But upon his enemies God shall always rain
fire and brimstone, storm and tempest: this shall be their portion to drink.
And many of them that Daniel 12. 2.
sleep in the dust of the earth (so prophesies Daniel) shall awake; some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. In the old law
God commanded Moses, saying, Make thee Number. 10. 2.
two trumpets of silver, of an whole piece shall thou make them. If 4.
they blow but with one trumpet, then the Princes which are heads of the
thousands of Israel shall gather themselves unto thee. When 5.
ye blow an alarm, then the camp shall go forward. Unto these two trumpets we
may compare these two words, NOW and ALWAYS. This is the law of the world, NOW
let us be merry; now let us rejoice: now let us enjoy our goods, whilst we
have them: Come, let us now crown our selves with Roses, before they be
withered; now let us leave in every place the signs and footsteps of our joy.
They that attend only to the sound of this Trumpet, they that have ears to
hear nothing but this NOW, they live for the most part so, as if there were no
ALWAYS for to follow. Therefore they do not remove the camp; amidst their
pleasures they wilfully forget that they are here but Pilgrims and strangers:
whithersoever the wanton flesh inviteth them, they go with greediness: they
are busied altogether in heaping up riches and following pleasures; And the
sound of this NOW does so obtund and dull their ears, that they are deaf to
all good counsels and precepts; and they will not so much as lend an ear to
that ALWAYS which shall follow. But they which open their ears to hear, and
their hearts to understand, when the Church sounds both Trumpets (as it often
does) and thereupon seriously consider with themselves, and compare together
this short NOW with that infinite and everlasting ALWAYS, they will use no
delay, but presently remove the camp: they live here as Pilgrims and strangers;
they have their loins girt; they remember that they are in a journey; they send
their riches and pleasures before them into their Country which is above; they
choose rather to enjoy them ALWAYS in heaven, then NOW for a short time upon
earth. Certain it is, whosoever hears attentively, and minds seriously the
Alarm of these Trumpets, and thereupon compares together things present with
things future, and things transitory with things Eternal, He will presently
make himself ready to depart, he will prepare himself a place of burial, he
will lay out his winding sheet, he will send for his bear, and furnish himself
with all things necessary for his journey, remembering still in every place
that he is passing on the way to Eternity, and conferring with himself every
day after this manner, How shall I be able to give account unto God for all my
thoughts, words and deeds? and, When shall I give up my account? and, What
sentence will he pass upon me? NOW therefore will I die unto my self that I
may ALWAYS liv^ unto my self and unto God. Wel^ is it with that man, which
timel^ and daily thus thinks upon Eternity. Whatsoever we do, we ar^ passing
on our way, and we do no^ know how short it is, unto the gate which leads to
Eternity. At the last hour of our life death shall bring us unto this gate,
and compel us to enter. Let us therefore so live as if we were alwaye^
expecting death, that if it shall please God at any time to visit u^ with
sickness the forerunner o^ death, we may entertain it cheer* fully, and bear
it patiently, liftin^ up our eyes unto Christ hangin^ upon the Cross, the true
and perfec^ pattern of Patience, and when the time of our dissolution draws
near, praying thus; Lord Jesu stand by me and comfort me, Lord Jesu be present
with thy servant that puts his trust in thee, Lord Jesu make me partaker of
thy victory, Lord Jesu receive my spirit, and lead me through the darksome
valley and shadow of death, lead me and forsake me not until thou have
brought my soul into the land of the living, O thou most potent conqueror of
death, O thou which art my light, life and salvation.

Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may have ETERNAL life? Math:
19. 16.

It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God. The love of riches and of ETERNITY are
scarce resident in one heart.



THE FIFTH CONSIDERATION upon ETERNITY. How others, even wicked men
themselves, have meditated upon Eternity.
THe old history of the Fathers tells us of a religious man, that reading upon
the nineteenth Psalm came at length, having not thought of it, to these words,
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past, and
here stuck: For he could not conceive a reason, why a thousand years and one
day should be compared together. Whereupon they say there was a little bird
sent by God, which so ravished the man with her sweet singing, that though he
heard her sing a very great while together, yet he thought the time very short,
scarce a short hour long. The John 3. 8.
wind blows where it lists. Not good men only have with holy David
meditated upon Eternity, but even wicked men also, and those oftentimes
against their will.

Benedictus Renanus reports of a vain and ungodly fellow, a very Epicure and
mere worldling, which never used to fast or watch, one that could not endure
the want of any thing, but especially sleep. Upon a certain night, it seems,
this fellow could not sleep as he was wont, being much troubled with unusual
dreams: so he turned himself upon his bed from one side to another, and could
not by any means get any rest; then he wished it were day. But here the wind
of the Lord began to blow, though it were in a strange land: for good thoughts
were very rare in this man. Being weary with watching, and finding no ease or
rest a^ all, thus he began to think with himself; Would any be hired upon any
condition to lie thus two or three years together, in darkness, without the
company of friends, though his sickness were not very grievous? Would he be
content to want his sports and plays, so long? Would he be content to be bound
to his bed, though it were a feather-bed, or a bed of down, and never stir
abroad to see any sights or shows, or make merry with his friends? I think no
man would. And shall I alone amongst all men enjoy rest and pleasure by an
especial privilege, and have no sense of grief and sorrow? Surely no. Will I,
nill I, needs I must sometime or other lie down upon the bed of sickness,
unless I be suddenly taken away by death, which God forbid. ( This was a good
wind, these were good cogitations.) But what bed shall I have next, when death
shall thrust me out of this? My body must rot under earth: For this is the
condition of all men after death. But what shall become of my soul in another
world? Surely all men do not go to the same place after death. Do not some go
one way, and some another? Is there not an Hell as well as an Heaven? Woe and
alas! What kind of bed shall the damned find in Hell? How many years shall
they lie there? In what year after their first entrance shall the flames cease
and be put out? Assuredly Christ does not only in word threaten to cast the
wicked into everlasting fire, but will also cast them in indeed. This thing is
certain and very manifest. Therefore the damned shall burn in Hell for ever.
Therefore, a thousand, and a thousand, and again I say a thousand years will
not suffice to purge away the ^innes of this short life. Therefore they shall
never see the Sun any more, nor Heaven, nor God, being most miserable
Eternally and without end. With such thoughts as these this man became so
vigilant and watchful, and proceeded so far, that night and day he could not
be at rest, but Eternity did still run in his mind. Fain indeed he would
have shaken off the thoughts thereof, as gnawing worms; but he could not.
Therefore he followed sports and pastimes, went to merry meetings, sought out
companions like himself, and sat oftentimes so long at his cups, that he laid
his conscience asleep, and so seemed to take some rest: But when he came again
unto himself, his conscience being awakened did presently accuse him, and
suggest unto him afresh sorrowful thoughts of Eternity. Thus finding no rest,
he resolved at length to amend his manners, and to betake himself to a better
course of life. And thus he began to reason with himself, Miserable man that I
am, what do I here? I so enjoy the world, that indeed I enjoy it not; I suffer
many things I would not; I want many things which I fain would have; I serve
like a slave; but who will pay me my wages? I see well enough how the world
rewards those that love it, and do all their lives nothing else but serve it.
But suppose I had the fruition of all the delights and pleasures in the world
that my heart could wish: what certain^ie can I have, how long they shall last?
I am not certain whether I shall live till to morrow or no: Daily Funerals
sufficiently prove this. Oh Eternity, if thou were not! Oh Eternity, If thy
place be not in heaven, though it be on a soft down-bed, thou can not but be
bitter and unpleasant. It is true indeed, it is a hard matter to withdraw our
selves away from those things, whereunto we are accustomed, whether it be
feasting, or drinking, or company-keeping, or such like: But whilst we delay
and defer the time, death may prevent us, and take us away from all these.
Why then do thou delay? Why do thou not impose an honest and happy
necessity upon thy self? Why do thou not resolve thus presently with thy
self? Well, I will be another man then I have been, if it please God I live.
This life lasts not long; but Eternity endures for ever. I must walk now in a
new way; I am resolved upon it; And Now I begin, Where art thou blessed
Eternity? I am seeking for thee, I am traveling toward thee.

To conclude, he did as he said, he took his leave of the world, he changed the
course of his life, and so lived and died an honest and godly man.

Oh Eternity, How few are they that think thus seriously upon thee! But
certainly there are very few, scarce any, that weigh and consider well with
themselves, what thou art, and so continue and persist in that consideration.
We seek earnestly after all other things: only Eternity seems vile unto us,
and not worth the looking after. Our thoughts run after riches; and yet the
possession of them is very uncertain; we know not how soon they shall forsake
us, or we them* We are ambitious after honors: and yet they are slippery, and
soon slide away from us. We are in love with pleasures: and yet they have
sorrow and bitterness in their latter end. We desire rest: but it is of no
long continuance. We knit the knot of friendship with others: but it is such as
death shall quickly dissolve. We are never well but when we are conversing with
others: but our conversation is never in heaven, where it should be. We seek
for abundance: but it is there, where it will soon fail. But surely, if we did
more often and seriously think upon Eternity, we should not have such a
fervent desire after things of so short continuance. I call Saint Bernard to
witness, who says Bernard.
thus, He that longs after things Eternal, cannot but loath things
transitory.

There are that have often in their mouths I know not what Eternity, that
will promise and swear and make good resolutions of amendment, and say thus;
As long as I live, I will beware of such a place, or such a place, where I have
formerly been tempted to sin: I will never come near such a man, or such a
woman, or such a one that was my companion in evil, I will never come near him
as long as I live. As long as I live, I will never go to such and such
meetings, where there uses to be gluttony and drunkenness, dancing,
chambering and wantonness, and such like. It shall suffice me that I have been
there once, and again, and perhaps oftener; that I have done as the company did,
that I have sinned with such and such. These are good resolutions: In this I
commend thee, O man; Because sin is to be feared, thou do well in purposing
to avoid the occasion of sinning: and I could wish thou were as religious in
observing what thou have promised, as thou art ready to promise. But (alas!)
after a day or two, yea an hour or two, too forgetful of thy promise and good
resolution, thou do again the very same thing which lately thou did detest,
abhor and forswear. Therefore before thou make a vow or promise unto God,
it is good to use due consideration and foresight; and when thou have made a
vow or promise unto God, it is necessary to use aftercare and Christian
fortitude in performance. Thou must promise nothing rashly and unadvisedly unto
God: But what thou have promised thou must religiously and constantly keep and
observe. How severe God is in punishing such as break their vows and promises,
we are sufficiently taught by the woeful experience and lamentable example of
others.

CHAP. I. The comparison of man's labors and the spiders, one with another.
THere is another Eternity, and that the worst of all, which those men promise
to themselves, which will needs erect up unto themselves an heaven out of
heaven, and be blessed before they be dead. Wherefore hear the word Isal. 28.
14
of the Lord ye scornful men, says the Prophet Isaiah; Because ye 15.
have said, we have made a covenant with death, and with Hell we are at
agreement. O ye mad men! How vain, and none at all, is this your Eternity!
There is nothing permanent and perpetual in this prison. Elegantly does the
Kingly Prophet declare this; we spend our years, says he, as Psalm. 90. 9.
a tale that is told, etc. we spend our years in musing, like the Spider (for
so some read it) He could not have declared it better, and in fewer words. For
what are all our years but a continual musing, and wearisome exercise? All
the time of our life is consumed and wasted away with vain labors, many
sorrows, sundry fears, often suspicions, and innumerable troubles: Even as the
Spider spends her self in the weaving of her web. Our labors are continual,
linked one unto another; our sighs and groans continual, partly in the
pursuing of our profits and pleasures, and partly in the removing and eschewing
those things which we count evil. We do many things, we undertake many labors,
troublesome and grievous to be born, and mean while (alas! such is our folly)
we perceive not that we do but weave the Spiders web, taking a great deal of
pains, with little success, to no end or purpose, we spend our years in
musing like the Spider. It is a great deal of pains and care that the Spider
takes in weaving of her web, she runs much and often up and down, she fetches
a compass this way and that way, and returns often to the same point, she
spends her self in a multitude of sine-spun threeds, to make her self a round
cabinet; she exenterates her self, and works out her own bowels, to make an
artificial and curious piece of work, which when it is made, is apt to be
blown away with every puff of wind; she hangs it up aloft, she fastens it to
the roof of the house, she strengthens it with many a thread, wheeling often
round about, not sparing her own bowels, but spending them willingly upon her
work. And when she has done all this, spun her fine threeds, weaved them one
within another, wrought her self a fine Conopie, hanged it aloft, and thinks
all is sure; on a sudden in the twinkling of an eye, with a light sweep of a
beesome all falls to the ground, and so her labor perishes. But here is (...)
all; Poor Spider! she is either killed in her own web, or else she is taken in
her own snare, ^aled to death and trod under foot. Thus the silly Animal may be
truly said, either to weave her own winding sheet, or to make a snare to hang
her self. Just so do many men, like the Spider, waste and consume themselves,
to get preferment, to enjoy pleasures, to gather riches, to keep them, and to
increase them. In such projects they spend all their wit, and oftentimes the
healths of their bodies, running up and down, laboring and sweating, carking
and caring, wearying themselves, and weakening their bodies, even as the Spider
does by the spinning out of her own bowels. And when they have done all this,
they have but weaved the Spiders web to catch flies. Yea oftentimes they are
caught in their own nets, they are instruments of their own mischief: The days
of mirth which they promise unto themselves prove often times the days of
mo^^ning! That which they call their palace, becomes their burying place. So we
spend our ^eares in musing like the Spider, ^ say in musing, for the most part:
For we often purpose to do many things, and do them not. And what we do, most
an end were better undone. Those things which we pursue with such greediness,
for the most part fly from us; and those things which we contend for with such
earnestness, we seldom attain to: But suppose we did, (Alas!) they have no
perpetuity. So the covenant with death Isal. 28. 1^
shall be disanulled, and the agreement with hell shall not stand. We all
consume away and die: and, which is worst of all, we blindly rush headlong into
Eternity from whence there is no return.

Guerricus hearing these words read in the Church, out of the book of Genesis,
And all the days Genesis 5. ^.
that Adam lived, were nine hundred and thirty years: And he died. And all
the days of Seth 8.
were nine hundred and twelve years: And he died. And all 11.
the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: And he died. And all the
days of Methuselah 27.
were nine hundred sixty and nine years: And he died, etc. Hearing, I say,
these words read, the very conceit of death wrought so strongly upon him, and
made so deep an impression in his mind, that he retired himself from the
world, and gave himself wholly to his devotions, that so he might die the death
of the godly, and arrive more safely at the haven of Eternal felicity, which
is no where to be found in this world.

CHAP. II. What is the best question in the world.
SAint Matthew tells us of a Matthew. 19. 16
young man that came unto Christ, and propounded a question unto him. And Saint
Mark describes the manner of his coming to our Savior, and his good carriage:
Mark (...)* 17
For, says he, There came one running and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good
Master, what shall I do that I may inherit Eternal life? And our Saviors
answer was, Thou know the Commandments: 19. Matthew. 19. 17. Acts 16. 12, 27.
If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. At Philippi a City of
Macedonia, the keeper of the prison came trembling, and fell down before Paul
and Silas, and 29.
moved this question unto them, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? 30.
This was a very good question; A better and a more profitable could not be
moved. But, O good God, where is this question now in the world? The world is
full of other questions: but this is scarce any where to be heard. Most men do
now adays betray themselves by their own questions, and bring to light, and so
make others witnesses of their simplicity, or curiosity, or some such hidden
disease of mind. He which makes diligent search and inquiry where the best
wine is to be sold, does sufficiently declare what he loves best, and where his
chiefest care is. Another asks such questions as a modest man would blush to
hear: And this man shows that his heart is full, and that out of the abundance
thereof his mouth speaks. All men's mouths in all places are full of
questions such as these are: But it is a rare thing to hear one man ask
another this question, Do you think this is the way to heaven? It is a fault
common to every vicious man, but more proper to the libidinous and lustful,
the luxurious and riotous man, though he be plunged into the deep, and begins
to sink and to be overwhelmed, yet seldom or never to enter into a serious
consideration with himself, and with a sincere mind ask himself this question,
Shall I ever think to obtain Eternal felicity by this course of life? Is this
the way to heaven? But of all men those especially least think upon such
questions as these, those I say, that live a soft life, fare deliciously and
wallow in pleasures, that feel little or no sorrow and affliction, or if they
do at any time feel never so little, labor what they can to be senseless of
it. To suffer, they count the greatest of all evils. If it goes well with them,
they care not how it fares with others. If it be well with them for the
present, they take no care what shall follow after. They never once think upon
Eternity. This is their daily ditty, The heaven of heavens is the Lords, but
the earth he has given to the sons of men. They want neither strength of
body or mind, by which to escape the hands of men: But God has long hands, he
shall surely find them out; they must appear before him who is the judge of
all the world; they cannot escape his judgment; they shall surely suffer
Eternal punishments for their wickedness and their offenses. But if God in
his secret judgment casts away any man as a reprobate, and suffers him to
live after his own lust and pleasure, He gives him his portion of prosperity
and felicity in this life, he spares him here that he may punish him
hereafter. And if at any time he does any thing that is good, he presently
receives his reward. Of such unhappy-happy men the kingly Psalm. 73. 5.
Prophet says thus, They are not in trouble as other men: neither are they
plagued like other men. They go a whoring with their own inventions. Psalm. 106.
39.
And this is a most miserable state and condition of life, if there be any. For
whom God has predestined to bring into the way of Eternal happiness, he
spares him not here in this life, but scourges him daily. I might bring
infinite examples to prove this: I will name but one; but the like, I think,
has not been seen or heard of in many ages.

CHAP. III. How God punishes here, that he may spare hereafter. A strange
example, the like has scarce at any time been heard of.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand one hundred eighty five, Andronicus
Emperor of the East being overcome and taken prisoner by Isaac Angelo, had two
heavy iron-chains put about his neck, was laden with fetters and shackles, and
was most barbarously and despitefully used, and at length in this manner was
brought before the forenamed Isaac. Before whom complaining of his hard usage,
he was delivered over to the multitude to be abused at their pleasure. They
being set on fire with anger, thought it a fine thing to be revenged of their
enemy: And thus they used him. They buffetted him, they bastinadoed him, they
pulled him by the beard, they twitcht his hair from his head, they dashed out
his teeth, they dragged him in public, they made him a laughing stock, they
suffered women to beat him with their fists. Then they cut off his right hand,
and being thus maimed they thrust him into the dungeon of thieves and robbers,
without either meat or drink or any other thing that was necessary, or any one
to look after him. After a few days they put out one of his eyes, and being
thus shamefully mangled, having one eye put out, and one hand cut off, they put
upon him a very sorry short coat, shaved his head, set him upon a scabbed Camel
with his face toward the tail, put upon his head a Crown of Garlic, made him
hold in his hand the Camels tail in stead of a Scepter, and so they carried him
through the marketplace very leisurely with great pomp and triumph. And here
the most impudent, base, and vile amongst the people like savages after an
inhumane sort fell upon him, nothing at all considering that not past three
days before he was no less then an Emperor, crowned with a Royal Diadem,
commended, worshipped, honored, yea and adored of all men. Nothing at all
regarding their oath of Allegiance, They raged and were mad upon him, and their
rage and madness fitted every man with instruments of mischief against him.
Some struck him on the head with clubs, others filled his nostrils with dirt,
others squeezed sponges upon his face first soaked in the excrements of man and
beast, others run him into the sides with spits. Some threw stones, others
threw dirt at him: some called him mad dog, others called him fool and
blockhead. An impudent woman running out of a kitchen with a kettle of scalding
water in her hand, poured it upon his head as he passed by: There was none
which did not some mischief or other to him. At length they brought him to the
Theater to make him a laughing stock, took him down from the Camel, and hanged
him up by the heels between two pillars. Thus poor Emperor having suffered a
thousand indignities, yet bore them patiently, carrying himself like a man, and
a true Christian Champion. He was never heard all the while to lament, or cry
out of his hard fortune: For it had been to no purpose. He was all the while
casting up his account, which he was to make unto God, and begging pardon for
his sins. He was heard to say nothing but only this, and this he said often,
Domine miserere, Domine miserere, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy.

Unhappy Andronicus which was compelled to suffer such things! But happy in
this that thou did suffer them so patiently, as being the just reward of
sin!

When he was hanged up, one would have thought their malice should have ceased:
but they spared him not then, as long as he lived: For they rent his coat from
his body, and tossed him up and down with their hands, tearing him in pieces
with their nails. One more cruel then the rest run his sword through his belly
and guts as he was hanging. Two others, to try whose sword was sharpest,
thrust him through the back, leaning upon their swords with both their hands.
Here the most miserable unhappy Emperor with much ado lifted up his maimed
hand to his mouth, to suck out the blood, as some thought, from the fresh and
bleeding wound, and so ended his life miserably. After some few days he was
taken down from the gibbet, and thrown under one of the arches of the Theater
like a beast, till some that had more humanity in them then the rest, removed
him; But yet notwithstanding he was not suffered to be buried. Oh Andronicus!
Oh thou Emperor of the East! How much wast thou bound unto God, whose will it
was that for a few days thou should suffer such things, that thou might
not perish for ever! Thou wast miserable for a short time, that thou might
not be miserable for all Eternity. I make no doubt but thou had the years
of Eternity in mind, seeing that thou did suffer such things so constantly
and courageously.

Nicetas Choniates is mine Author, from whom I borrowed this lamentable
history; and he lived about the same time, when this happened.

Let us Christians keep always in mind the years of Eternity. So whatsoever
adversity or affliction happens, we shall more easily bear it. Every thing
is short, if we compare it with Eternity. For our ^. Cor. ^. 17.
light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding, and Eternal weight of glory. Hereupon S. Augustine cries out and
prays so August
earnestly, Domine, hic ure, hic seca, modo in aeternum parcas; Lord, sear me
here, lance me here, so thou sparest me hereafter. And Fulgentius, Fulgentius
though a most holy man, drawing near unto his death, threescore and ten days
before he died was often heard to cry out, Domine, da mihi modo patientiam, and
postea indulgentiam; Lord grant me patience here, and ease hereafter. These
were his words and prayers even to the last gasp. Certain it is, God spares
them least of all, whom he determines to take unto himself to dwell with him
throughout all Eternity.

THE SIXTH CONSIDERATION upon ETERNITY. How the Holy Scripture in many places
teaches us to meditate upon Eternity.
THe kingly Prophet speaking of the wicked, says that they walk on every side,
Psalm. 12. ^.
or in a circuit. This is their manner of life: They go from feast to feast,
from delights to delights, from wickedness to wickedness. This is their
Circuit. And when they think they have almost finished their Circuit of
wickedness, and gone over the round of their lust, they begin again, returning
still to their former course, till death steals upon them before they be aware.

The children of Job made this law amongst themselves, to feast one another
round, every one in his course. The good man their father observed and knew
very well, that this their feasting round could not be without sin: And
therefore he sent, and sanctified them, and rose Job 1. 5.
up early in the morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number
of them all. As therefore the wicked delight and rejoice in going the circuit
of their pleasure: So God shall appoint them a Circuit to go; but it shall be a
Circuit of torments, and that perpetual and Eternal. Blessed David foresaw
this likewise: For says he, Thine arrows went abroad: Psalm. 77. 17, 18.
The voice of thy thunder was heard in the heaven, or, round about. Famine,
War, Pestilence, Sorrows, Diseases, Calamities, Death it self, and all
adversities whatsoever happen before the first death, are the Arrows of the
Lord; but they fly over: they have wings, and they quickly fly from one to
another. But the voice of his thunder, the voice of his anger and fury shall
continually roar in the prison of Hell, and like a wheel run round without
wearing, for all Eternity. This wheel, as if it were filled with Gunpowder,
when it has once taken fire, shall burn for ever and ever. A fire is kindled
in Deuteronomy. 32. 22.
mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest Hell. There is also another
Circuit, and that likewise is Eternal: from unutterable cold to intolerable
heat, and from heat back again to cold. Drought and Job 24. 19
heat consume the snow-waters (so says Job:) and so does the grave those that
have sinned. S. Matthew signifies it more expressly by the gnashing of teeth
and weeping of Matthew 22. 1(...)
eyes. That we may more fully set out this horrible and incomprehensible wheel,
order requires that we show, how the Church agrees with the holy Scripture in
this, as the holy Fathers agree with the Church. We have here diverse good
admonitions from all these, which if we attend unto, we cannot easily let
Eternity slip out of our memory.

CHAP. 1. The Answers of the holy Fathers and the Church about this.
OF all the holy Fathers which have lived in diverse ages, we should do well to
hearken unto five especially, Augustine, Chrysostom, Gregory, Bernard,
Laurentius Justinianus.

The first question here (which yet may seem a vain and a foolish one) is,
Which is easier, and more tolerable, to suffer pain in the head, eyes, or
teeth; to be troubled with the stone; to be pained with the wind Colic, or
Iliaca Passio, or any other acute disease; neither to sleep night nor day, but
to be tormented continually without any respite for three days together. The
question now is, I say, Which is easier, whether to suffer the pains now
mentioned, or else to eat a piece of a fish, which is made bitter by the
breaking of the Gall. This may seem a very ridiculous and most idle question.
For, How much sweeter is it to eat such a whole fish, rather then suffer those
so grievous torments though but for one day! The bitterness of the fish will
not endanger a man's life, nor make him sick, but leave only a bitter taste in
the mouth, which is unpleasing to it. It is truly answered. And yet how many
thousands of men make choice rather of the former! For, How often does the
Preacher teach and exhort, cry out and speak plainly! Christian brethren,
consider well with your selves and look about you, The Eternal salvation of
your souls is in question: If you walk this way, you must assuredly look for
Eternal torments: Christ has showed you another way both by his life and
doctrine. Return therefore and repent, you have gone long enough astray: You
may if you will have entrance into heaven; if you be shut out, it is your own
fault: God is not wanting to those that are willing. It is true indeed, There
is some bitterness in using abstinence and fasting, in confessing of sins,
in keeping the body under, in setting a strict watch over thy senses, in
conquering ones self, in living chastely and continently. This is no easy task:
But let it be what it will, we must suffer it. Ought not Christ to have Luke
24. 26
suffered these things, and so to enter into his glory? Let not a little and
short labor terrify us: it is but for a few years, or it may be but a few
days, that we are to do and suffer valiantly: But our joy and rest shall be
Eternal. He overcomes all, whosoever overcomes and conquereth himself,
contains himself, and resists his evil and violent passions; and all this
for Christ, for heaven, for blessed Eternity. Christ after his resurrection
found his Disciples eating fish broyled upon the coals: To teach them how great
things they should afterward suffer; and that they were not to think of a soft
and easy life, but that they were to be stoned, whipped, crucified, have their
skin pulled over their ears; that this was the way to a joyful resurrection,
and to the participation and fellowship of Eternity with the blessed: that all
other things were small and of no worth in comparison of immortality, and that
blessedness, which yet eye has never seen. These things are often spoken of,
but they are little regarded. This fish bitter with the overflowing of the
gall, that is, worldly crosses and the sufferings of this life, is often set
before us: but it goes against our stomach, we cannot endure to taste of it.
Eternity is a thing we often hear of, we often read of, it is continually
preached unto us, and often repeated: but we either hear not, or believe not,
or regard not; or if we do for a time, the cares of the world soon put it out
of our minds, and we bury it in oblivion. But again, the Conscience often
plays the preacher, and recalls to our mind these wholesome lessons, is
instant, dehorts, reproves; but prevails nothing. All is in vain. For many are
so obstinate and perverse, that neither the Preacher nor their own Conscience
can work upon them. But some are so impudent, that they will set themselves in
opposition, and reply thus, Let it go well with us here, and we care not; we
neither know nor care what shall come hereafter, we are all for present profits
and pleasures: no man returns again from the dead; neither was it ever known
that any one came back again out of Hell: Come therefore, let us eat, drink and
be merry, let us enjoy our goods and take our pleasure. These are the
worldlings Ditties: But let S. Augustine determine this question; Melius est,
modica amaritudo in ^^gust
faucibus, quam AEternum tormentum in visceribus. Better it is, says he, to
suffer a little bitterness in the mouth, then Eternal torments in the inward
parts. It is far better to suffer for our offenses here in this world, then
in the world to come Far better is it for threescore years and ten
continually together here on earth, to be punished with most grievous
punishments, then to suffer the torments of Hell for one day, yea for one hour
hereafter. But let us hear what another of the Fathers says.

Saint Chrysostom propounds the Hom. 20. Ad Po^ An^i^^.
second question after this manner; Suppose one night in an hundred years a
man should have a sweet and pleasant dream, and be after punished an hundred
years for it, would he think such a dream were to be desired? And yet says
the Father, As a dream is to an hundred years, so is this present life to the
life to come, yea rather it is much less: And as a drop is to the main Ocean,
so are a thousand years unto Eternity. And in another place, What is there,
Hom. 28. in Epist. ad Hebr.
says he, to be compared unto Eternity? What are a thousand years in
comparison of infinite ages which are yet for to come? Are they not like unto
the least drop of a bucket compared unto a bottomless Well? Look for no end of
torments after this life, unless thou repentest before thou departest out of
this life: for after death there is no place of repentance, no shedding of
tears will profit thee, or do thee any good: Though a man in Hell should gnash
his teeth, and blare out his scorched tongue, he shall not obtain so much as a
drop of cold water. Grant then that a man should enjoy pleasures all his life
long, what is that to infinite ages which are yet for to come? Here in this
life all things good and bad have at length an end; but the punishments that
shall be suffered hereafter shall have no end. Set fire on the body here, and
the soul will soon depart: But after the resurrection, when the body shall be
from thenceforth immortal and incorruptible, the soul of the damned shall
always burn, and not consume in Hellfire. They shall rise again,
incorruptible indeed: But how? Not to receive a crown of incorruptible glory,
but to suffer Eternal torments. But let us hear what another of the Fathers
says.

Saint Gregory makes answer to Greg.
this common question, Will not drunkenness sooner steal upon a man in the
wine-cellar, standing by the hogshead, then in the Parlour sitting at the
table? The Spouse of Christ triumphs in the words of Solomon, He brought
Cant. 2. 4.
me to the banqueting house (or, as some read it, He brought me into his
wine-cellar) and his banner over me was love, or, He has set his banner of
love over me. Upon which words Saint Gregory discoursing, says thus, By the
wine-cellar what can we better or more fitly conceive, then the secret
contemplation of Eternity? For truly whosoever does seriously consider with
himself upon Eternity, and let this consideration sink deep into his mind, he
may truly rejoice, and triumph with the Spouse, saying, He has set his
banners of love over me: For he will keep better order in his love, loving
himself less, God more, and even his enemies also for Gods sake. But such is
the nature of this profound consideration, that it will presently make a man
drunk. Make him drunk? How? With the drunkenness of the best desires, such as
will lead him to amendment of life, carry him to his heavenly country, and
bring him at length to joys Eternal. It was cast in the Apostles teeth, that
they were drunk with wine: And so they were indeed; but it was with wine out of
this Cellar. Saint Gregory has many excellent considerations, and sayings
upon Eternity: amongst others he has this, which is a very short one and a
true one, Momentaneum quod delectat, AEternum quod cruciat: That which
delights is momentanie, but that which tormenteth is Eternal. Here I could
wish with Job, Oh that these Job. 9. 23, 4.
words were written! Oh that they were printed in a Book! That they were graven
with a pen of iron! These words, I say, That which delights is momentanie,
but that which tormenteth is Eternal. The Book in which this should be
written, is the heart of man; the pen of iron with which it should be written,
is serious meditation; the ink with which it should be written, is the blood of
Christ. And these words so imprinted and engraven in the breast, are then
especially to be called to mind, and to be often repeated, when pleasure
fawneth, when lust provokes, when luxury inviteth, when the flesh rebelleth,
and the spirit fails, when there is occasion of sin offered, and danger of
falling into sin. But let us hear what another of the Fathers says.

In the fourth place comes Saint Bernard: He shall answer to the question here
to be propounded. In the lives of men there is such difference, that almost now
so many men so many judgments concerning afflictions. There are found some so
grievously and continually afflicted, that they are ready to fall down under
the cross as being too heavy for them to bear. One is oppressed with
poverty, another is afflicted with sickness, another is overcharged with
secret debts, another is tormented with cares, another is grieved and vexed
with injuries and slanders: every man thinks that most grievous which in
present he suffers. And many times it comes to pass that such as are
faint-hearted and impatient, wish for death, run into the water, and make
haste to the halter, thinking thereby to find an end of all their griefs and
sorrows, whereas indeed that supposed end becomes to them but the beginning of
their sorrows, and such sorrows as never shall have end. But with the good and
godly it is not so: They patiently endure all, submitting themselves in all
things to Gods good will and pleasure. They neither desire to die quickly, nor
yet to live long. Is it Gods will they shall die? They also are willing. Will
he have them die quickly? They are willing to that also? Will he have them live
yet longer? They are not against that: What God wills, that they will; What
he wills not, neither will they. Beside these two kinds of men, there is a
third, and that is the greatest part of men, that desire to live long: And
there is almost no man so old but he hopes and desires to live yet another
year. These men are never heard to say, they have lived long enough. Death
makes too much haste with them, he comes to them too soon, yea and before his
time. Here now the question may be moved, Who live, or who shall live longer.
Saint Bernard in his seventeenth Sermon upon the ninety first Psalm, upon
these words, with long life will I satisfy him, breaks forth into this
admiration, What is so long as that which is Eternal? What is so long as that
which shall have no end? Life Eternal is the good end which we are all to aim
at, and this end is without end. And further he adds, That is the true day
indeed after which there follows no night, where there is Eternal verity, and
true Eternity, and therefore true and Eternal satietie. So then the question
may be determined thus, That those only shall live a long life truly so
called, whosoever shall never die, but always live in heaven; And again, That
those shall die a lingering death (alas! too lingering a death) whosoever shall
always die, but never live in Hell: for they shall live only there to be
tormented always. Let us hear but one more, and so conclude.

Laurentius Justinianus shall resolve the last question for us. There are,
says he, many things in this world which nature has so appropriated and
assigned to some one certain place, that they are not to be found in any other
place, unless it be in part. Of some flowers which grow in the newfound world
we have only the seed: Of some living creatures there are brought over unto us
only the skins. Now, Eternity is a thing so proper to another world, that
it is not to be found in this; only the seed thereof we may have even in this
world: And what are the seeds of Eternity? They are, says Laurentius,
Contempt of a man's self, The gift of Charity, and the taste of Christ's works.
To contemn others, is a tree that overspreadeth the whole world, whose wood is
fuel for the fire of Hell. To contemn himself is a very small seed, scarce
known in the world: Christ brought it down from heaven with him, who made
himself Phil. 2. 7.
of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and became
obedient, not to the 8.
Stable only, or the Manger, but even to mount Calvarie, unto death, even the
death of the Cross, unto the grave, yea even unto Hell. Wherefore God also 9.
has highly exalted him. Behold! this little seed is grown up and spread in
breadth, and is become the highest of all trees. The same Author speaking of
Charity, says thus, The measure of our glory and Eternal reward, shall be
according to the measure of our charity. For, To whom little is forgiven, Luke
7. 47.
the same loves little. He obtains less grace, whosoever has less
Charity: And where there is less grace, there also shall be less glory. So
then it is most true, The more thou love God, the more thou heapest up unto
thy self Eternal rewards. The whole Law is love, but it must be pure, chaste,
and holy. I have done with the second, which is Charity. I come to the third,
which is The taste of Christ's Works. It is a common and witty saying in the
Rhetoric Schools, He is to be thought a good proficient, who can relish
Tullies works: We may say as much in the School of Christianity, He has made
a good progress in Religion and virtue, who can relish Christ's Works, who
likes the taste of Christ's doctrine and example. But whosoever finds no taste
almost at all, no relish in the words and works of Christ; whosoever is not
moved, affected, and delighted with those things which belong unto the mind,
and Christian piety, to heaven and Eternal felicity; but on the contrary
finds much sweetness in eating, drinking, walking, laughing, jesting and
playing: The same man may ^ay with sorrow enough, too truly, How little seed
of Eternity have I within me, O my God! Or rather, I have none at all. For
when I descend into my self, I see manifestly what spirit is within me, and
whither my affection carries me. To spend whole nights in dancing, feasting,
revelling, quaffing, dicing, and carding, hearing foolish and idle tales,
reading impure Books, calling for, and laughing at amorous songs, playing the
good fellow, and doing as the company does, Oh this never offends me, this is
pleasing and delightful to me. But to hear of Christ and his life, to hear
of holy men that lived formerly, who were much given to watching, fasting, and
prayer, or to read of their lives, that makes no music in my ears, and this
is an eyesore unto me: I can neither hear nor see: I stop mine ears, and
close mine eyes for fear lest they should be offended. To hear a Sermon of an
hour long, it is death unto me, and therefore I seldom come to Church: or if
I do sometimes, I drive away the time, either sleeping or prating. There are
too many such men in the world: but of such it may be truly said, That they
have no taste or relish at all of the works of Christ. But now let us hear the
judgment of the Church concerning Eternity.

The memory of Eternity is so precious in the esteem of the Church, that
there is no Psalm, no Prayer, no Hymn but closes with it, Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; as it was in the beginning, is
now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. As it was in the beginning,
that is, Before all beginning, from all Eternity, without any beginning: is
now, and ever shall be, world without end, that is, Throughout all ages;
infinite, innumerable, incomprehensible ages; to all Eternity. But let us
leave the little rivers, and make haste to the fountain.

CHAP. II. Clear testimonies of Divine Scripture concerning Eternity.
I Will produce only three witnesses, a Prophet, an Apostle, and an Evangelist.

How many and how great are the sighs and groans of poor abject and despised
men! we may hear them every day. One or other every where is complaining, Woe
is me poor man, I have few or no friends at all; I am disrespected; I am
scorned, and trampled under foot almost by all. Have patience a little, O man,
suffer for a while; the day of comfort will rise at length, though it seem long
first. Remember Gods promise in the Prophecy of Baruch, Cast about thee a
double garment Baruch 5. 2.
of the righteousness which comes from God, and set a Diadem on thy head, of
the glory of the Everlasting.

Others there are that accuse Nature, complaining still that she has given too
long a life to ravens, and too short a great deal unto man. Hear thus much you
that are still complaining of the shortness of man's life, This life is short
indeed; But when this short and vain life shall end, there remains another life
which never shall have end. If ye will not believe me, yet believe S. Paul, For
2. ^er. 5. 1.
we know, says S. Paul, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, Eternal in
the heavens. What great loss is it then, if this earthly tabernacle of our
body be dissolved, when as we have a royal Palace prepared for us, which is
not subject to dissolution? To the testimony of the Prophet, and the Apostle,
let us add the testimony of the Evangelist Saint Matthew, in whose Gospel we
may read these words of our Savior, If thy Matthew. 18. 8.
hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee: It is
better for thee to enter into life halt, or maimed, rather then having two
hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire. And if 9.
thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: It is better for
thee to enter into life with one eye, rather then having two eyes to be cast
into hellfire. Oh fire! Oh hell! Oh Eternity! Time is nothing, if it be
compared with Eternity; shortness of life and so loss of time is no loss at
all, but great gain, if thereby we gain Eternity. Christ has promised it, and
Saint Matthew has recorded it, and sealed it in these words of our Savior,
Every one that has Matthew. 19. 29.
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit everlasting life. Is it not clear enough that this promise is of
blessed Eternity, when we have security given us of receiving an hundredfold
reward? Again, Christ according to the same Evangelist forewarning of the
latter judgment, three times makes mention of Eternity expressly in these
words, everlasting, Matthew. 25. 41. 46.
or, eternal fire, everlasting, or, eternal punishment, and life Eternal.

Seeing therefore the holy Fathers, the Church, and the sacred Scripture, do so
many ways propound unto us the serious consideration of Eternity; It is our
part and duty, as many of us as look for Eternal life in heaven, it is our
part and duty seriously to meditate thus with our selves every one: Oh my God!
How seldom have I heretofore thought upon Eternity! or if I have thought upon
it, in what a cold and negligent manner have I done it, notwithstanding every
day, yea every hour and minute I draw nearer and nearer unto Eternity! But
for the time to come, by the assistance of thy grace I will mind it more
carefully then heretofore I have done; and if at any time through thy bounty
riches shall increase, I will not set my heart upon them: though the world
should smile upon me, though I should want no temporal thing that my heart can
desire, though I should seem to flow in never so much abundance, yet will I
still remember Eternity. In the midst of my prosperity these shall be my
thoughts, But how long shall this last? will this fair weather never change?
Will this comfortable sun always shine upon me? Or if I should live in
prosperity all the days of my life, what shall it profit me after death?
After this sweet but short, pleasing but perilous, unhappy happiness, there
shall shortly follow Eternity, Eternity. But if the world goes ill with me,
if it frown upon me, if I meet with many crosses, troubles and affictions, if
misfortunes befall me, if they rush upon me like waves one in the neck of
another, if I be turmoiled and tossed up and down, then these shall be my daily
thoughts, Well, let the world have its course, I am content to bear it, Gods
will be done. Let the sea be troubled, let the waves thereof roar, let the
winds of afflictions blow, let the waters of sorrows rush upon me, let the
clouds of tentations threaten rain and thunder, let the darkness of grief and
heaviness compass me about, yea though the foundation of the world should
seem to shake, yet will I not be afraid. These storms will blow over, these
winds will be laid, these waves will fall, this tempest cannot last long, and
these clouds shall be dispelled. Whatsoever I suffer here, shall shortly have
an end, I shall not suffer Eternally. Come the worst that can come, death will
put an end to all my sorrows and miseries. But no storm to that storm of fire
and brimstone which the damned shall suffer in Hell, Eternally and without end.
All things here shall have an end, but the torments there shall have no end.
Whatsoever is not within the circle of Eternity, is short, swift, and
momentanie, it is but a shadow, but a dream, so says S. Chrysostom. It is but
a Modicum or a thing of nothing, a little, a very little, for a little while,
yea a very little while. Often does our Savior beat upon this, speaking to his
Disciples. All his own sufferings, yea his most bitter death upon the cross,
he calls but a little: All the sufferings, punishments, and violent deaths of
the Apostles, all but a little: And why should not I also think it but a
little, whatsoever here I suffer, though I should suffer it an hundred years
together? For yet a little while, Heb. 7* 27.
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. I will therefore
suffer patiently whatsoever can happen, and account one thing only necessary,
and that is, To do nothing against my Conscience, and displeasing unto God. For
all is safe and sure with him who is certain and sure of blessed Eternity.

CHAP. III. This life in respect of that which is to come is but as a Drop to
the Ocean, a little stone to the sand upon the Seashore, a Center to the
Circle, a Modicum, a little, a very little time, a Minute to Eternity. And
such are the sufferings of this life in respect of the joys that shall be
hereafter.
MOst true it is, Whatsoever labor or sorrow we suffer in this life, it is but
a Modicum, or for a little while. It is the saying of S. Augustine, This
Modicum or August
little while seems long unto us, because it is not yet all past and gone: But
when it shall come to an end, then shall we perceive and understand what a
little while this Modicum was. The wisest of men being to show the vanity and
shortness of this present life, though it should be lengthened to an hundred
years, which few men can reach unto, makes choice of the most minute things in
the world, whereby to express it, and set it forth by way of resemblance. For
thus we read expressly in Ecclesiasticus, The number of a man's Ecclus 18. 9.
days at the most are an hundred years. As a drop of water unto 10.
the sea, and a gravel-stone in comparison of the sand, so are a thousand
years to the days of Eternity. And why then do ye rejoice in this, ye
long-lived men, that you have lived an 100 years? All our years are, What are
they? They are as a drop of water unto the sea, and a gravel-stone in
comparison of the sand. And what is a little stone to those exceeding high
mountains of sand? And what is a small drop of water to the deep and
fathomlesse Sea? such are fifty, sixty, yea an hundred years (Hear this ye
old men) they are but a Modicum, a very little while, but a Minute of time,
indeed nothing at all to the days of Eternity. And yet foolish and miserable
men, we are overjoyed with this little stone, this small drop. Our life is
indeed a little stone, but no jewel, no precious stone; it is made of no
better matter then sand. Our life is a drop, but not of sweet and fresh water;
it is salt and brackish as the seawater is. For all his days are sorrows,
Ecclus 2. 23.
and his travel grief; yea his heart takes no rest in the night. So says the
Preacher. It is the counsel of S. Augustine, Recall to mind, says August
he, the years that are past, from Adam to this present day; run over all the
Scripture: It is but almost yesterday since he fell, and was thrust out of
Paradise. For where are those times that are past? Certainly, if thou had
lived all the time since Adam was thrust out of Paradise, even unto this
present, thou would perceive and confess that thy life was not long, which
is so soon fled away. For what is any man's life? Add as many years as thou will, imagine the longest old age: What is it? Is it not as a morning blast?
All this is most true. I pray you tell me, where is Adam now? where is Cain?
where is long-lived Methuselah? where is Noah? where is Sem? where is Eber?
where is most obedient Abraham? where is Jacob? where is Joseph? They are dead
and gone, their time is past; we may say of them, Vixerunt, fuerunt Troes, Once
they were, now they are not. Thus our life passes away; thus the glory of the
world passes away. O morning dew! O mere vanity! What is it that we so
desire here? what so long as to be hoped or wished for here? short it is, a
Modicum it is, it is vile and nothing worth, it is but a small point whatsoever
thine eye beholds here. It is a true saying of Gregory the great, The
longest Greg. magn.
measure of our life is but a point; or it is a short line that begins,
continues, and ends in a point. In 1. Cor. 15. 52.
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye all things shall have an end: I Psalm.
119. 69.
have seen an end of all perfection, but thy commandment is exceeding broad, so
says the Psalmist. Why then do we account any time long? For that which is
past, now is not; that which is to come, yet is not; and what is the present?
The glass is always running, and the clock never stands still: The hour
passes away by flying minutes. What is flown by, is past and gone: what is yet
behind, is still to come: But where is the time which we use to call long?
Bernard makes often mention of that most true and excellent saying of S. Hierom
(and, Reader, it is worth observing) No ^^ero^
labor ought to seem long unto us, no time long, in which we are seeking after
Eternal glory.

And yet, though the life of man be but very short in comparison of Eternity,
there is none of the damned that can justly accuse God for not granting him a
longer life. They must condemn themselves for not living better. There is no
inquisition in the grave (says Solomon) Eccli^ 41. 4.
whether thou have lived ten, or an hundred, or a thousand years.

In hell it is no time to complain of shortness of life. Every m^n has lived
long enough, if he has lived godly enough.

Here, Christian brother, I will deal more boldly and plainly with thee, and
lay the matter so open that thou shall see it clearly presented before thine
eyes. Thou say that thou do often think upon heaven, and that thou have an
earnest and longing desire after Eternity. Say thou so? I hear thee, but I
do not believe thee: neither would I have thee believe me if I should say so of
my self. For how can it be (O good Christian brother) how can it be that thou
or I should think so often and so seriously upon heaven, and have such a
longing desire (as we say we have) after Eternity, and yet be so lukewarm, yea
stone-cold in matters of religion; so slow and backward to that which is good,
so prone and forward to that which is evil, so ready and willing to all manner
of wantonness, so querulous and complaining, so slothful and negligent? Where
we should be angry, there are we too patient; and where we should be patient
and courageous, there are we too faint-hearted and pusillanimous. In the fire
of every light affliction, our patience melts and consumes away: nay we are
often cast down with a word, we are blown down with the breath of a man's mouth.
But never are we more impatient and desperate, then when our wills are crossed.
I might speak here of the hot Apostems of lust wherewith our hearts are often
inflamed, and swollen, and likewise of the devouring Cancer of Envy which often
eats into our breasts, and makes our flesh consume away: But I pass them by.
Notwithstanding what has been said, we good and godly men, as we profess our
selves, and would have other think us to be, too timourous where we should be
bold, and too bold where we should be timourous, glory in nothing more then in
this, That we have often in our minds, and hearty desires, the joys of
Eternity. Believe it, it is not credible that the thoughts of heaven and
Eternity should be so often in our minds as we speak of, and yet mean while
that we should live no better then we do. Did I say, It is not credible? Nay I
say it is impossible. And thus I shall declare it.

The Patriarch Jacob served his uncle Laban for his daughter Rachel seven
years, And they seemed Genesis 29. 2^.
to him but a few days, for the love that he had to her. Hear thou this
whosoever thou art that so complainest? Thou servest no impostour or deceiver
as Laban was, but God thy maker, and him that will surely keep his covenant and
promise. Thou servest not for a wife, but for the kingdom of heaven: not for
the beauty and sight of a wife, but for the beatificall vision and Eternal
sight of God: not for the delight and pleasure of a wife, but for celestial
and Eternal delights and pleasures. And yet does the trouble of one winters
day oftentimes so cast thee down, that suddenly all thy love toward God, and
thy desire after heaven begins to wax cold in thee. As Soon as the storm of
adversity begins, thou breakest forth into most bitter complaints, thou
call heaven and earth to witness, thou breathest nothing but revenge; yea
oftentimes, I believe, thou sparest not God himself, but call his justice
into question. At other times when pleasure with her fawning allurements has
once enticed thee, she does so bewitch thee, and take away thy memory, that
thou quite forgettest to serve God, and so runnest headlong into the Labyrinth
of sin, which has a fair entrance, at least seemingly, but leads thee the
next way to destruction. Is this the vigilance which thou so much talkest of?
Is this thy heroical fortitude, and love of God? How will thou serve God seven
years, as Jacob did Laban, when (alas!) thou can not endure the labor and
sorrow of one short day? O Simon, Simon, sleep thou? Could thou not Mark
14. 37
watch one hour with thy Lord and Master? But hear further concerning the
Patriarch Jacob. He being beguiled by his uncle Laban, who gave him blear-eyed
Leah in stead of beautiful Rachel, served him yet seven years more for his
daughter Rachel, whom he dearly loved: And no doubt but those seven years also
seemed unto him but as a few days, for the exceeding great love that he had
unto her. And it is very likely that oftentimes when he was weary at his work
he had an eye unto Rachels beauty, and said thus with himself, Surely for her
beauty she is worthy for whom I should suffer seven years hard service; and,
if need were, I would not stick to serve yet seven years more. Such was the
affection that he bore unto Rachel, that it made him scarce sensible of any
labor.

Hear thou this, thou which go for a Soldier of Christ? conceivest thou
this? understandest thou this? How then can thou still murmr against God?
Thou art bid to serve God for Gods sake, that so thou may at length enter
into Gods Eternal rest; Thou art exhorted to tolerance and patience here, that
so thou may be made partaker of immortality with the blessed hereafter: And
yet sleep thou O sluggard? Have thou not an ear to hear? Art thou still
complaining? Do but reckon up the years which thou have spent in the service
of God, and see whether thou have served God faithfully and painfully twenty
years, as Jacob did Laban. I am afraid thou will come short in thy reckoning:
Have thou served God so many months? I tell thee, I make a question of it.
Number the nights that thou have spent in watching and praying, recount the
days which thou have spent in holy exercises, and see if thou can truly say
unto God as Jacob did to Laban, In the day the drought consumed Genesis 31. 40.
me, and the frost by night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes. Thus 41.
have I been twenty years in thy house: I served thee fourteen years for thy
two daughters, and six years for thy cattle. Tell me, Christian man, have
thou served God thus twenty years? Thou know thy wages, if thou servest
God: Not Labans daughters nor flocks of sheep; God himself shall be the reward
of thy service: Thou shall be blessed both in soul and body; It shall be well
with thee on every side; Thou shall enjoy all manner of delights, great
delights without either lacking or loathing, and without end. Thou shall swim
in the bottomless Ocean of pleasures: And yet (behold!) thy hands are slack to
every good work; Thy feet are slow to go to Church; Thy heart consumes away
with envy, flames with anger and revenge, abounds with the vermin of filthy
thoughts, and is quite dead through slothfulness and impatience. Is this thy
serving of God? Is this the way, think thou, to heaven, to immortal life,
to Eternal blessedness? Surely it is not. Why do thou not rather as Jacob
did? when thou art weary with any labor which thou undergoest in the service
of God, when the world goes ill with thee, when adversity presses thee,
prosperity seduceth thee, and labors burden thee, lift up thine eyes to
heaven, behold Rachel, who is promised unto thee, and thus comfort up thy self,
Be not troubled, O my soul, Behold thy Rachel, thy Rachel which is in heaven,
fair Rachel, comely Rachel, Rachel that is all beautiful, not having any one
blemish about her! Behold heaven and the house of thy Eternal rest and
pleasure! Be content to suffer for a while, a little sorrow, and some pains:
For thou shall shortly be where thy Rachel is, and there thou shall be the more
joyful and blessed, by how much the more thou art here sorrowful and
afflicted: There shall thy rest be the more pleasant and joyful, by how much
the more thy life here is heavy and painful. Well then, be of good courage,
show Christian fortitude and patience. Eternity, blessed Eternity, is more
worth, infinitely more worth then all that we can do or suffer. If thus, O
Christian brother, thou would animate and encourage thy self, if with such
eyes thou would oftener look up to heaven, if with such affection thou
would daily think upon Eternity: Believe it, All thy days of service here
on earth, would seem but few, for the great love which thou would have unto
Eternity: Thou would count all labor easy, all troubles welcome, all
losses gain. This I will say, and therewith I will conclude, The more a man
thinks upon the Eternity of the world to come, the more care he will take
here, to lead a godly life in this present world.

Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth ETERNITY.

Adam lost ETERNITY, Christ regained it: to this the Angels invite us from
this the devils with draw us: have a care whether thou followest.



THE SEVENTH CONSIDERATION upon ETERNITY. How Christians use to paint
Eternity.
HE that is to go through an house in the dark, must go warily and leisurely,
step after step, and he must grope for the wall: If man's understanding will be
prying into Eternity, if he thinks here in this life to enter into it, he is
much deceived: The way is dark, and full of difficulties. He may hurt himself
by the way, but he shall never here attain unto it. The way thither is but
short indeed: but when a man is once in, there is no coming out again. And yet
though no mortal man can so conceive of Eternity, that he can certainly say
what it is, notwithstanding the infiniteness thereof is shadowed out by
certain pictures and resemblances, in such manner, that every man may have a
glimpse of it. Whatsoever we speak, or write concerning Eternity, howsoever we
set it out in colors; All is but a shadow, yea a shadow of shadows. No Orator
in the world can with all his Rhetoric sufficiently express it; No Limner,
with all his curious art and skill, can set it forth to the life. If all times
that ever were, and ever shall be, should be put together, they would
infinitely come short of Eternity: the Latitude thereof is not to be measured,
neither by hours, nor days, nor weeks, nor months, nor years, nor Lustra's,
nor Olympiads, nor Indictions, nor Jubilees, nor ages, nor Plato's years, nor
by the most slow motions of the Eighth sphere, though these were multiplied by
a thousand, or a million, or the greatest multiplier or Number numbering that
can be imagined. Neither can it be measured by any Number numbered, as by the
stars of heaven, the sands of the sea, the grass of the field, the drops of
the rivers, and such like. The number of Eternity is past finding out.

The Sailors use to sound the depth of the sea by a plummet and a line: Let us
also let down the plummet and line of our humble and reverent cogitations, to
sound the depth of Eternity, which yet is past finding out. But if we will go
by this Map, if we will sail by this chard, if we will view well this Picture,
we shall come much nearer finding it, then otherwise we should.

Chris^i as a child, taken as it were from the manger and the cradle, almost
quite naked, and without clothes, stands in the clouds: on ^is shoulders he
bears a cross: In the clouds there is this inscription, ^TERNITIE: Beneath
Christ's feet, down upon the earth there is the Sceleton of a man, or nothing
but the bones of a man without hair or skin, only he has a beard to be
known by: in his left hand he holds a piece of parchment, in which these words
are written, Momentaneum quod delect at, That Gregor
which delights is momentanie: In his right hand he holds up an Apple. Near
unto him there stands a Raven pecking a shelfish, with this subscription, Cras,
Cras, Tomorrow, Tomorrow. The Earth opens her mouth, and flames of fire break
forth, and tend aloft, in which these words are written, AEternum quod cruciat,
That which Gregor
tormenteth is Eternal. Christ coming down from the clouds Two adore with
bended knees of diverse sex, in the place of all mankind. Behind them there
is a running Houre-glasse, or a Dial measuring hours by the running of water,
called a Clepsydra; and a Book lying wide open: On one page there is written,
They spend their days J^^ 21. 1^*
in mirth, and in a moment go down to the grave. On the other page, Who shall
deliver me from Romans 7. 24.
the body of this death? Before them stand Two heavenly Angels, which embrace
them with their arms, and pointing at Christ bid them lift up their eyes unto
him. This is the Picture: The meaning follows.

CHAP. I. Christ inviting.
CHrist the Eternal son of the Eternal God came into this world, clad with
no other garment then we, that is, stark naked. The garment of immortality and
innocence we lost by Adams disobedience. And now (alas!) how miserably arrayed
do we come into this world! Christ together with us, yea for us suffers
punishment, and yet was not guilty of any sin. But what means this Cross
upon the shoulders of the Son of God? It is a bed on which he s^ept in death.
G^lgotha was his chamber; The thorns, his pillow; And the Cross, his bed.
Which many religious men of former times well considering with themselves, have
voluntarily and freely chosen to lie hard, and take little rest, that at the
day of resurrection they might rise joyfully to rest Eternal. Some, as we may
read, have made the earth their Mattresse; Sackcloth, their Sheet; and a
Stone, their Boulster. And many there are which do so still to this day. But I
leave them and return to Christ. He suffered death, even that most bitter and
Phil. 2. 8.
shameful death of the cross: To what end? That he might save us from death
Eternal. Die we must all of us; but our death is but short. In a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye the soul is snatched from the body, and this is all
that which we call Death. But it is not so with them in Hell: Their torments
far exceed all the sorrows and pangs of death, not only because they are
more grievous for their quality, but also because they are of longer
continuance beyond all comparison: For they are Eternal. So then their
torments are, always to be tormented; and their death, to die always. And
from this death has Christ the Son of God delivered us; the Child that we
see described walking amidst the clouds. Under his feet is a bare Sceleton, or
the bare bones of a man, which by all signs we may gather to be our forefather
Adams. Hearken ye children, and ye childrens children hearken unto the words of
your forefather Adam thus speaking unto you.

CHAP. II. Adam lamenting.
O My children, happy then indeed, if your forefather had known his own
happiness, but now miserable, and that even in this, because mine. By me were
you destroyed before you were begotten; by me were you damned before you were
brought forth. I fain would be as God, and by that means I am left scarce a
man. Before you could perish, you all perished in me. I my self do not know
whether you may better call me a Father, or a Tyrant and a murderer. I cannot
wonder or complain justly that you are so vicious and so sinful: for you
learnt it of me. I am sorry that you are so disobedient: but this you learnt
also of me. I was first disobedient unto God that made me. The Angels in heaven
blush and are ashamed to see your gluttony and intemperance: but this is your
fathers fault. Your pride has made you odious and detestable before God: but
this monster first conquered and triumphed over me, and so pride became more
proud then she was before. This is the inheritance you receive from me, nothing
else but an heap of miseries. God indeed of his free good will gave unto me by
a sure promise heaven for an inheritance, and intailed it upon you: But I have
undone you all, cut off the intail, and prodigally made away all for one bit. I
valued my wife and an apple more then you all, more then heaven, more then God.
A cursed and unhappy dinner, for which I deserved to sup in Hell many thousand
years after. I lived in Paradise, a garden full of all delight and pleasure
beyond imagination: God gave me the free use of all things therein; only the
fruit of one tree was forbidden me. I was Lord of all the creatures, I was wise
and beautiful, strong and lusty. I abounded with all manner of delights. The
air was then as temperate as could be desired; the clouds were clad in bright
blew; the heaven smiled upon us; the Sun did shine so pure that nothing could
be more. All things seemed to gratify us at our new marriage. Our eyes could
behold nothing but that which was flourishing and pleasing to them; Our ears
were continually filled with music, the birds those nimble Choristers of the
air ever warbling out their pleasant ditties. The earth of it self brought
forth odoriferous cinnamon and saffron. I was compassed about with pleasures on
every side. I lived free and remote from all care, sorrow, fear, labor,
sickness and death. I seemed to be a God upon earth. The Angels in heaven
rejoiced to see my happiness: there was none that did envy me but my self. But
because I obeyed not the voice of God, all these evils fell upon me. I was
driven out of Paradise, banished from the sight of God, and for shame I hid my
face. Labor, sorrow, mourning, fear, tears, calamities, a thousand miseries
seized upon me, and quite wearied me out; you feel it, as many as are of my
family: and that which seems to be the end of all temporal misery and
sorrow, is oftentimes the beginning of Eternal. O my children learn by your
own woeful experience, learn by your own loss and mine, learn I say to be wise
at length. I will give you but one lesson, and it is but in three words, which
you shall do well to learn by heart, and that is, To hate sin* Behold! Do you
not see a grievous flame breaking out hard by me? It has burnt ever since
sin first entered into the world, and shall never be put out. All other
punishments are but light, and shall shortly have an end: But the damned shall
be tormented in this flame for ever and ever. Now, if we will, we may escape
it. Heaven is set open to all; but there is no coming to it but by the way of
repentance, and the gate of the cross* He that walks in this way, and
enters in at this gate, may be certain of his salvation, and eternal joy in
the kingdom of heaven, where he shall have an everlasting habitation. This is
the counsel of Adam to his children, I say it is Adams counsel, Who falling
once did make his children all
Both guilty of his punishment and fail.


CHAP. III. The Raven croking.
Near unto the Sceleton of the Protoplast, or the bare bones of the first man
that God made, is the Ravens place in the picture, which makes very much for
the representation of Eternity to the life. It is a well known saying of Saint
Augustine, Cras, cras, that ^^g^st
is, To morrow, to morrow, is the voice of the Raven: Mourn therefore like a
Dove, and beat thy breast. The chiefest cause, that I conceive, why most men
lose their part and portion of blessed Eternity, is because they seek it not
To day, but defer the seeking of it till To morrow. For what is more frequent
or ordinary, then putting off repentance till To morrow, To morrow, which God
does know, we are uncertain whether we shall live to see or no: but that we may
not seem to put it off without some fair pretense, we make many fair promises
unto God.

I will To Morrow, that I will,
I will be sure to do it:
To Morrow comes, To Morrow goes;
And still thou art to do it.
Thus still repentance is deferred
From one day to another:
Until the day of Death is come,
And Judgment is the other.
But the day of promise is so long a coming, that the day of death often
prevents it, and we are suddenly snatched away, and swallowed up of Eternity,
and so plunged into the gulf, miserable men that we are, into the gulf of
everlasting horror and despair. This is it that undoes many, says Saint
Augustine, whilst they cry, Cras, Cras, To morrow, To morrow, the gate is
suddenly shut against them: Therefore the son of Sirach often calls upon us
to this purpose, Make Ecclu^ 5. ^.
no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: For
suddenly shall the wrath of God come forth, and in thy security thou shall be
destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance. It was truly said of Seneca
that Roman Philosopher, A great part of Seneca
our life we spend in doing ill; the greatest part, in doing nothing; but all
in doing another thing rather then what we should. Not unlike to Archimedes,
who, when Syracuse was taken, was sitting secure at home, and drawing circles
with his compass, in the dust. For do we not see most men, when the Eternal
salvation of their souls is in question, handling their dust, and stretching
themselves to their furthest compass, set upon the tenter-hooks as it were,
and distracted with law suits, money matters, worldly business, and labors
that shall nothing profit them at the last? Eternity is a thing they never
once think of, or else very seldom, and then but slightly for a snatch and
away, as dogs are said to lap at Nilus. Martha, Luke 10. 41
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is
needful, and that is, Beatitude, or blessedness, not that on earth which such
as it is, is yet but short; but that in heaven, which is Eternal.

Before we take any business in hand, we commonly examine it at this well
known rule, saying, Is it worth my pains? Shall I get my bread by it? Should
not a Christian man rather in the beginning of every work, sit down and say
with himself, Shall I gain heaven by it? Will it any thing further me in the
way to blessed Eternity? We do not love to trouble our heads with such
Quaere's as these, we put off the hearing of them till another time: we do
adjourn it from one time to another, and another, and still another. And at the
last day of Term, we will grant a hearing. Foolish men! when at last we are not
able to labor, then we first begin to think of labor. When we must needs
depart out of this world, then we begin to think upon another world. When we
can live no longer here, then we begin to think of the life to come hereafter.
When the houre-glasse of our short time is run out, then we begin to think of
Eternity. When there is no time left for repentance, then presently we will
repent. When the gate is shut, then we knock. But this is the fault of all
sinners in general, still to defer their Repentance from day to day. Every
sinner is ready to say, (says Saint Augustine) I cannot now, I will another
August
time. Alas! Alas! If another time, why not now?

Dionysius King of Sicilie disrobing Dionys.
Apollo of his cloth of gold, said thus, Nec aestati nec hyemi vestis haec
convenit, It is a wear neither fit for winter nor Summer. In Summer it is too
heavy, and in Winter it is too cold. So do many (says Saint Ambrose) play with
God, and deceive their own souls. They say, Let a young man live according to
the fashion of the world; Let him drink and dance; let him go to the Horserace,
and to the Wrestlers; let him go a coursing in the fields with his companions.
It is for old men to stay at home, and not to stir abroad, unless it be to
Church. This is too melancholic a life for a young man. But when they grow
old, what do they then? Then are they old and sickly, weak and feeble; you must
not look for these things of them at that age; their strength will not permit;
it is not with them as formerly it has been; you must give them leave to take
their ease; let them have a care of their health: This is all they have to do.
Thus we let the Summer and Winter of our age pass away, and never once think
of the Eternal Spring. But let us remember our selves, and as we Gal. 6. 1*
have opportunity let us do good. But let not our song be any more, with the
black Raven, Cras, Cras, Tomorrow, Tomorrow, and so let Today, and Tomorrow,
and the next, and so our whole life pass away, and Eternity overtake us
before we are aware. Tomorrow is not, Today only is ours. So says Saint
James, Go to now, ye that James 4. 13.
say, Today, or tomorrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a
year, and buy and sell, and get gain: whereas ye know not what shall be on the
morrow. For what is our life? It is even a vapor that appears for a little
time, and then vanishes away. It was a very good answer that Messodamus gave
one, inviting him to a feast the next day, (as it is reported by Guido
Bituricensis) My Messodamus.
friend, says he, why do thou invite me against Tomorrow? I durst not for
these many years, secure my self that I should live one day; for I have
expected death every hour. No man is sufficiently armed against death, unless
he be always prepared to entertain it. What is it else but rashness and
folly, folly and madness, and indeed mere contempt of Eternity, for a man to
lie down in ease upon a featherbed, to sleep secure snorting and snoring, and
to lodge an enemy, a deadly enemy, all the while, sin in his very bosom?
Sudden deaths are very common and ordinary amongst us. How many have we heard
of, that went to bed well over night for ought any man could tell, and were
found dead in the morning! I will not say carried away out of their beds, and
cast into Hellfire; whether it be so or no God knows. Have we not seen and
known some that have been suddenly struck, fallen sick and died in the space of
an hour? Within an hour? yea less then an hour, sound and sick, quick and
dead. And yet do we (rash and foolish men!) procrastinate it from day to day
(that is nothing) from year to year do we defer our Repentance, and the
amendment of our lives, and death mean time unexpected seiseth upon us, and
delivers us up unto Eternity. Saint Augustine, correcting in himself such
lingering and dangerous delay, such lentitude and backwardness of mind and
will to repent, said thus, I felt and found August
how I was held entangled, and I ^ttered such lamentable complaints as these,
Quamdiu, quamdiu Cras ^ Cras, quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis meae? How
long shall I defer, and still cry Tomorrow, Tomorrow? Why do I not now begin,
even this very present hour? why do I not break off my sinful course, and
begin to live better? Thus I spoke and fell a weeping for very contrition of
heart.

Antonie the Great (as Sain: Hierom witnesses) when he used exhortations to
the people to stir them up to godliness and virtue, was wont to wish them
always to keep in mind, and often meditate upon that saying of the Apostle,
Sol non occidat super iracundia^ vestram, Let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath. And this prohibition he did not restrain to wrath only, but made it
general, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, hatred, malice, envy,
lust or any other sin, lest it depart from you as a witness again you.

John Patriarch of Alexandri had a certain controversy with on Nicetas a chief
man of that city The matter was to be tried at law. John was for the poor,
Nicetas for his money. But for peace sake there was a private meeting and
hearing appointed, to see if they could come to some composition and agreement.
They met, they fell to words, they were hot at it, a great deal of choler and
stomach was shown on both parts, neither would yield a jot, neither would
depart an inch from his right. A great conflict there was between them, many
hours spent to little purpose: they were further off from agreement at length
then before: for neither would yield to conditions propounded by either: well;
it grew late, they departed more offended and displeased one with another then
before, and so left the suit pendent. Nicetas thought it a hard case to part
with his money, and the Patriarch seemed to be in the right, and to stand out
in the cause of God and the poor. But yet when Nicetas was gone, the good
Bishop weighed the matter better with himself, and condemned himself for his
pertinacie, and though he was in a good cause and knew it also, yet said, Can I
think that God will be well pleased with this implacable wrath, and wilful
stubbornnes^e? The night draws on: And shall I suffer the sun to go down upon
my wrath? That is impious, and not according to the counsel of the Apostle. So
the good Prelate could not be at rest till he had sent unto Nicetas: For he out
of hand sent messengers of good esteem, and gave them this charge, that they
should say no more to him but only this, Domine, Sol ad occas^m est, that is,
Sir, The sun is going down. Upon the hearing of which message there was such
a sudden alteration wrought in Nicetas, that his high stomac^ came down
presently, he began to melt, his eyes did stand fu^ swollen with tears, and he
ha^ much ado to keep them in. Ou^ of doors he ran presently after the
messengers (for he made haste to speak with the Patriarch) an^ coming to him in
humble manner saluted him thus, Holy Father, I will be ruled by you in this or
in any other matter. Whereupon the Patriarch made him very welcome: So they
embraced each other very lovingly and became good friends. Great surely was the
virtue, and speedy was the operation of these few words, The sun is going
down: For presently upon the hearing thereof a peace was concluded betwixt
them, which was sought for before with multitude of words, but could not be
effected. So do thou, whosoever thou art that know thy self guilty of any
grievous sin, if not before, toward the evening at least call to mind those
operative words, The Sun is going down. For what know thou whether thou
shall rise again with the Sun or no? And if thou die in the night without
Repentance, it is a question in which Eternity thou shall have thy part,
whether of the blessed, or of the cursed. Wherefore do what thou have to do
quickly, The Sun is going down. But have a care it go not down upon thy lust
or luxury, envy or blasphemy, detraction or theft, or upon any other
grievous sin unrepented of. Good God! what a thing is this? If there be but a
stain in a garment, a spot in the face, a blot in a cap, we presently use some
means to take it out, or wash it off. Are these such eyesores to us, and yet
are we so blind within, that we cannot see our manifold corruptions and
pollutions? or do we see and suffer them? can we suffer them and not be
troubled at them? are we troubled, and yet seek no means to expiate and purge
them out? When we are polluted at any time with the stain of sin, we should
labor presently to take it out: The sooner it is done, the better and the
easier it is. Therefore says Saint Ambrose, We ought to be careful Ambros
to repent: but that is not all; Our repentance must be also speedy, for fear
lest the heavenly husbandman in the Gospel, that planted a fig tree in his
vineyard, come and seek for fruit, and finding none say unto the dresser of his
vineyard, Cut it down. If the sentence be once past, there is no avoiding the
fatal blow: Down it must. If therefore we find our selves once wounded with
sin, let us look for help in time. The brute beasts which have no
understanding will teach us so much providence. The Hearts of Candie or Creet,
as soon as they are struck, run presently to their Dictamnum or Dittanie; The
swallows, to cure the blindness of their young ones eyes, fly to fetch their
Chelidonium or Celandine; The Dog, when he is sick, makes haste to his Grass
to give him a vomit; The Toad fighting with the Spider, as soon as she feels her
self begin to swell, crawls to her Plantain, and so is recovered. These by a
natural instinct know their own proper medicines, and upon all occasions
presently make recourse unto them. But we poor miserable men, more
unreasonable and without understanding then the beasts, are wounded every day,
and that many times deadly, and yet notwithstanding we seek for no medicine to
cure our spiritual diseases. We use the same diet we were wont to do, we talk
as freely and merrily as ever we did, we go to bed at our accustomed hour, and
sleep according to our old compass. But Repentance is the Physic that goes
against our stomachs, Contrition cuts us to the heart, Confession seems bitter
in our mouths: we choose rather to continue sick, then so be cured. This is
our miserable condition: so foolish are we, and void of understanding, either
not knowing, or at least not embracing that which would make for our Eternal
good.

If we would give ear unto the counsel of the heavenly Angels, which seem in
the Picture according to their description, to give direction unto us, and are
indeed appointed by God as ministering spirits for our good: if we would, I say,
give ear unto their counsel, then certainly we would neither suffer our eyes
to sleep nor our eyelids to slumber, neither the temples of our heads to take
any rest, until our peace and reconciliation were made with God. They put us
still in mind that our day is almost spent, that the night draws on, that our
glass is near running out, that death is at hand, and after death comes
judgment: But we securely walk on in our old way; Let the day spend, let the
night draw on, let the glass run out; Come death, follow judgment, We are
not troubled at it, we care not, we regard not, no warning of the Angels will
serve our turn. We sweetly sleep, and never dream of this.


Unhappy man whosoever thou art! -- Potes hoc sub cas^ ducere somnos?
And can thou sleep in such a case as this?


Can thou go to bed, with a Conscience thus laden with sin? Can thou take
any rest when thou lie in danger of Eternal death? Can thou lodge in the
same bed with the brother of Death, and entertain sleep into thy bosom? I can,
I tell thee, that I can, and find no harm at all by it. Be not too confident:
That may happen in the space of one hour, which has not happened in a
thousand. Thou art not past danger: For consider with thy self how long thou
have to live: There is no great distance betwixt thy soul and death, hell and
Eternity. It is gone in a breath. Thou may most truly say every hour, I am
within one degree of death, within one foot, yea within one inch. Death need
not spend all his quiver upon thee: One Arrow, the head of one Arrow shall
wound thee to the heart, and make such a large orifice that blood and spirits
and life and all shall suddenly run out together. Either thou live in a
malignant and corrupt air, or else thou art troubled with distillations
falling down from thy head upon the lungs, or else there is some obstruction in
the veins or in the liver, or else the vital spirits are suffocated, or else
the pulsation of the Arteries is intercepted, or else the Animal spirits run
back to their head, and there are either frozen to death, or else drowned: One
way or other thou postest to the end of thy short race; and presently thou art
but a dead man, carried away to Eternity in the turning of an hand, before
thou could imagine, or think upon it. There are a thousand ways to bring a
man to his end; I do not speak of lingering deaths before which there goes some
warning, but of sudden deaths that summon us, arrest us, and carry us away all
in a moment. He dies suddenly that dies unpreparedly. Death is not sudden if it
be foreseen and always expected. That Is sudden death which was unpremeditate:
and unpremeditate death is the worst of all deaths: And from such sudden death
good Lord deliver us. It is good counsel for every one, let him be of what age
he will, for no age is privileged more then another; death has a general
commission which extends to all places, persons, ages, there is none exempt: It
is good counsel then I say for every one at all times, and in all places, and
in all companies to expect death, and to think every day, yea every hour to be
his last: Then let him die, when please God, he shall not die suddenly. How
many men have we heard of, whose light has suddenly been put out, and life
taken away either by a fall, or the halter, or poison, or sword, or fire, or
water, or Lions paws, or Bores tusks, or Horse heels, and a thousand more
ways then these! As many senses as we have (That number is nothing) As many
parts and members as we have (And yet that is nothing) As many pores as there
be in all the parts of our body put together, So many windows are there for
death to creep in at, to steal upon us, and suddenly cut our throats. Thou wast
born (says Saint Augustine) August
That is sure: For thou shall surely die. And in this that thy death is
certain, the day also of thy death is uncertain. None of us knows how near he
draws unto his end. I know not, says Job, Job 32.
how long I shall live, and how soon my Maker may take me away, or (as our
translation has it) I know not to give slattering titles: in so doing my Maker
would soon take me away. In the midst of our life we are near unto death: For
we always carry it in our bosom: And who can tell whether he shall live till
the Evening or no? This murderer and man-stealer (for so I call Death) has a
thousand ways to hurt us, as by thunder and lightning, storms and tempest,
fire and water, etc. Instruments of mischief he has of all sorts; as Gunnes,
Bows, Arrows, Slings, Spears, Darts, Swords, and what not? We need not be
beholding to former ages for examples of sudden deaths: Alack! we have too many
in our own days. Have not we our selves known many that laying themselves down
to sleep, have fallen into such a dead sleep, that they are not to be awaked
again till they shall hear the sound of the trumpet at the last day? Death
does not always send his Heralds and Summoners before to tell us of his
coming; but often steals upon us unexpected, and as he finds us so he takes
us, whether Matthew. ^5. 13.
prepared or unprepared. Watch therefore: For ye know neither the day nor the
hour. There is a kind of Repentance indeed in Hell; but neither is it true,
neither will it profit any thing at all: For it is joined with everlasting and
tormenting horror and despair. Now, now is the acceptable Hebr. ^. 13.
time of Repentance, Now whilst it is called to day. Bring forth Matthew. ^. 8.
therefore fruits meet for Repentance. The Night comes when John ^. 4.
no man can work. Work therefore while it is day. The Day, says Origin, is the
time of this life: ^rigen
which may seem long unto us, but indeed is very short if it be compared with
Eternity. And after this short day of this present life, there follows the day
of Eternity, which is infinite long, and has no night to come after it. O
man, whosoever thou art, think upon these things: but thou especially whosoever
find thy self guilty of any grievous sin. Repent and amend, Remember
Eternity, and think upon the day of Death. It is uncertain in what place Death
will expect thee: Do thou therefore expect Death in every place. As the Lord
shall find thee, when he calls for thee, so shall he also pass sentence upon
thee.

Whatsoever thou take in hand remember the end, and thou shall never do
amiss. Ecclus: 7. 36.

To think upon ETERNITY, and not to amendons manners, is to bid heaven
farewell, and to join hands with hell.



THE EIGHTH CONSIDERATION upon ETERNITY. How Christians ought not only to
look upon the Emblems and Pictures of Eternity, but come home and look within
themselves, and seriously meditate upon the thing it self.
ORder requires now, that leaving the Psalmist, and the rest, who have
described unto us Eternity, we should descend into our selves, keep at home,
and stay within. He is a great way from home, from himself and from his own
salvation, whosoever has an eye to that only which is Transitory, and
forgets that which is Eternal.

The Lawyers know well enough that a man will not let go his right and title,
though it be but in a matter of three halfpence, if it be a perpetuity, and to
be yearly paid for ever. Yea it is thought a great rent if a man be bound to
pay though but three farthings yearly to his landlord, as long as the world
endures. In such esteem are perpetuities, though in things little worth, though
but three Pepper-corns. If thou art so sollicitous and eager in pursuing thy
right of three halfpence; how comes it to pass, O man, that thou art so
negligent and careless in seeking after the inheritance of an Eternal
kingdom, which may be had at a few years purchase? Thou fallest out with thy
brother for three halfpence, thou go to law with him, thou make it a long
suit: In the mean time thou suffer others to carry away the inheritance of
the kingdom of heaven. What is the reason? Is it so little worth? is it not
worth looking after? It seems, thou think so; or else thou would labor
for it more then thou do. Thou art much cumbred about other things, thou
think all pains little enough; thou art never weary of seeking after them:
But as for Eternity, that thou think to be a great way off, and therefore
thou art scarce ever at leisure so much as once to think upon it; or, if thou
art any time at leisure, then thou have no mind to it. Oh! it is a grievous
thing, and very wearisome to be always looking after that which yet is not
here ever thoroughly to be looked into. Who would trouble his head, and weary his
mind about it? We are all for the present: Give us present possession; that is
the thing we desire, that is the thing we delight in; there is some content in
that.

See our folly and want of discretion! What blindness is this, or rather is it
not madness, to look for certainty where none is, and where it is, never to
look for it? In a business concerning our temporal and uncertain riches, we
love to be certain, we will have good security, which yet at the best is very
uncertain: But concerning Eternal and certain riches, we make our selves so
certain, that we look for no assurance; we are so secure, that we look for no
security, which yet, if we would, we might have as good as could be desired.
Does any man lend money without a bill, or a bond, or a pledge? Every man has
this presently in his mouth, I love to be certain; I desire good security; I
will go safely to work; I will not put the matter to hazard. Things present and
certain, when we hold the balance, always weigh down things future and
uncertain. Better, say we, (as the proverb goes) is one bird in the hand then
two in the bush. And, I had rather see a Wren in the cage, then an Eagle in the
clouds. We are of Plautus his mind, we carry our eyes in our hands, and
believe no more then we see. What fond and foolish men are we, that seek for
certainty of such things as are most uncertain, which deceive us most when we
make our selves most sure of them, which make themselves wings and fly away,
whilst we think we have them fast enough in our hands! But, be it known unto
all Christian people, what assurance and security Christ the King of heaven
will give; what assurance, I say, of Eternal life Christ will give unto all
those that will enter bond for performance of covenants: If thou Matthew* 19. 17*
wilt enter into life, keep the Commandments. St vis ad vitam ingredi, serva
mandata. The condition of this obligation is such, that if thou keep the
Commandments, thou shall enter into life, life Eternal: But if thou breakest
the Commandments, in as much as thou breakest them, then this obligation shall
be void, and of none effect. For whosoever breaks one of these Commandments,
and deferreth his repentance, and does not the same hour wherein he has
sinned, seek reconciliation and peace with God, whom he has offended, he is in
danger to lose himself, and all that he has, and manifestly hazardeth the
Eternal salvation both of soul and body. There is but three fingers breadth,
or rather but an inch between him and death. For he has within himself the
matter of a thousand diseases, and causes of death: And yet rash and foolish
man he persisteth and continues still without fear or wit in the state of
damnation; in which state if it should please God to take him away suddenly, he
is in danger to perish everlastingly. Is it not a bold and foolish part for a
man to adventure all that he has at a cast, and hazard the loss of Eternal
riches when he may easily keep them?

If a man should suffer in Hell but so many torments, as he has lived hours,
or but so many torments as he has committed sins all his life, this might
seem somewhat the more tolerable. If it were so, that in Hell there were any
end of torments after the expiration of any certain number of years, men would
make no end of sinning all the days of their life; The enemies of God would
increase every day more and more: For albeit they know that the torments in
Hell are so many in number, that they cannot be numbered; so long for
continuance, that they cannot be measured; so grievous for quality, that they
cannot be endured but with such infinite pain, that every minute of an hour
shall seem a whole year: Notwithstanding all this, men are nothing deterred
from sin, but walk on boldly, or rather run headlong to their own
destruction.

If all the torments that can be inflicted or imagined, should be heaped
together upon the head of a man for an hundred years together, they would not
come near the punishments of Hell for one year, no not for a day, nor yet an
hour. All the punishments that Thieves, Robbers, Murderers, and such
Malefactors suffer, though grievous for the time, yet they are quickly ended;
in three or four days they are over, or in the compass of a week at most:
But the torments of the damned are not for a year, or an age, but for ever.
God shall ever punish them, because he can never punish them enough, though he
punish them to all Eternity.

CHAP. I. Eternity does not only cut off all comfort and ease, but even all
hope also.
IN this life we have Hope for our comforter in all calamities and distresses,
which has a sovereign virtue to mitigate and assuage all pains and sorrows.
And God of his great mercy for the most part in all adversities still leaves a
man some Hope of help and succor. The sick man as long as he lives, ^e still
lives in Hope: as long as here is life, there is Hope. But after this life
ended there remains ^o the damned no more any Hope of comfort. Hope the last
comforter of all takes her flight, and Eternal desperation seizes upon them.
The Prophet Daniel speaks of an Angel coming down from heaven, and saying,
Hew the tree Dan. 4* 23.
down and destroy it, Cut off her ^^oughs, shake off her leaves, and scatter
her fruit abroad, yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth. Upon
which words says S. Ambrose, The leaves and the fruit are shaken off, but the
root is preserved; that is, Delights here are taken from us, and punishments
are inflicted upon us, but yet Hope is not taken away from us. Behold! The root
is preserved, Hope is left behind. In Hell it has no rooting. Behold the day
comes, cries the Prophet Malachie, Mat* 4. 1.
that shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them
neither root nor branch. And Job lamenting, cries out, I Job 19. 10.
am gone, and my Hope has he removed like a tree. The Hope, or, The
expectation of the wicked shall Prove. 10. 28.
perish: So says Solomon. Therefore whilst there is time and place for Hope,
let us have Hope; but let us Hope for such things as we ought. All humane
things are vain and uncertain; The Heathen Poet tells us so much in these
verses, Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo,
Et subito casu quae valuere ruunt.
All humane things hang by a slender thread.
What stands most strong is quickly ruined.


We must not therefore place our Hope, trust, and confidence in such things. S.
Bernard shows us a ^e^^ard.
better way in these words, Faith says, God has prepared for the faithful,
great and unconceiveable good things: And Hope says, He has reserved them and
laid them up for me: And Charity says in the third place, I make, haste, and
think it long till I come to them. True Hope, as Saint Gregory af^^meth, Greg.
raises up the mind to the ^^ought of Eternity, and takes ^^ay the sense of
all outward cros^^s and troubles True Hope makes ^^to understand that all
worldly ^^ings are vain, but a Modicum, ^^t for a moment: But oh that mo^^ent
on which all Eternity does ^epend! The day of death, and the ^^ure of the
extreme and last ago^ie is properly that moment, and ^^t precious jewel, for
buying whereof the wise merchant sells ^^l that he has. But few know ^^e
worth of this jewel. About Eternal salvation, says S. Hierom, Hierom
every man is negligent. But what is the reason that men are so negligent in a
thing of such great moment? Poor men! we are troubled with weak and ill eyes.
We ^e well enough near at hand, but ^e can scarce perceive any thing ^farre
off. I do not speak of such as ^e come to man's estate, or such as ^re grown
old. Boys and girls when they are new taken from their cradle, before they
have all their teeth come forth, learn the first elements of vices, they smutch
their fingers presently with the soil of covetousness; and after a while they
have an unsatiable desire after getting riches, they learn to make good markets
for themselves; if they meet with a good penieworth, they presently lay hold
upon it; their hand is presently in the purse, either laying out for gain, or
receiving in gain; they know how to make the best use and advantage of their
money; they get an insight into the mysteries of diverse trades, they will be
talking of merchandise, they will learn good judgment of wines, they will tell
you what fashion and cut is in use beyond seas: Juvenal the Poet in his Satyrs
gave these a lash long ago, This old wives teach boys in their infancy,
And girls do learn before their A B C.
Hence is the rise
Of every vice.


Hence comes our gross igno^^nce, and forgetfulness of things Eternal.
Young and old, all do ^^ervalue their money: but as for heaven and Eternity,
they know ^ot, neither will they understand ^he true worth of them. But let ^s
proceed.

CHAP. II. Eternity is a Sea, and a threeheaded Hydra: but it is also a
Fountain of all joy.
I Would fain ask thee, O Christian man whosoever thou art that hear Sermons
often, but seldom, it may be, with attention and devotion; thee especially
fain would I ask one question. Suppose thou should take in hand to lade out
all the water in the sea, into a small river near adjoining, which runs
back again into the sea continually, as fast as it is cast out. Suppose thou
should use no other l^dle but a very small spoon to cast it out withal. Now
tell me, How long do thou think thou should be in draining of the sea? Or
again, Suppose thou should draw it out with a bucket as big as an hogshead,
and as fast as thou drawest, pour it out into another channel: Answer me, In
how many years do thou think thou should be able to draw the sea dry? To
sit scorching and frying in the flames of Hellfire so many years, I know thou will say, were a grievous and wicked torment. And yet the damned would think it
well with them, if it were so: they would like the condition well, and not
think the time long, so that they had any assurance, that at length their
torments should have an end, and not extend to all Eternity.

We read in Heathenish Authors of old time, a thing more strange then tiue,
of a certain Hydra, or Snake, (which as they feigned) had three heads, and
as soon as one was cut off, had two shoot up in the place thereof. But if this
Hydra be any where to be found, ^t is in Hell; where there is a ^hree fold
Eternity, which like the Hydra stretches out her long neck with three heads,
that is, The pain ^f loss, the pain of sense, and the worm of conscience that
never dies. What miserable and improvident men are we, that having but ^ short
journey to go, but full of dangers all the way, go on notwithstanding so
merrily and sportingly, as if we were walking all the while through a Paradise,
or a most pleasant garden, free from all fear of enemies, and in the end of our
walk presently to be received and admitted as citizens into our heavenly
Country, a place of all security! For can we be ignorant? if we be, it is our
own fault. But we cannot be ignorant that at length we shall come to the two
gates of Eternity, the one of the blessed, the other of the damned: And enter
we must at one of them; that is certain: at which God knows; it is according as
we shall behave and carry our selves by the way.

Laurentius Justinianus wondering Laur. Justin.
at the merry madness of such travelers, breaks forth into this exclamation,
Oh the lamentable condition of mortal men, which go on exulting all the way,
whilst they are but exiles, or banished men from their own country! Let us
not settle our minds upon any vain joys, and fond toys by the way, whilst
we are traveling toward our country; but let us so run our race, that at
the end thereof we may obtain admittance in at the gate which is the entrance
to Eternal blessedness. God has indeed created us rather unto joys and
pleasures then unto labors and sorrows, but we are much mistaken both of the
time and place: It is not here, it shall be hereafter. Joys are prepared in
heaven; but none but the good and faithful servants shall enter into them. And
by what means may a man obtain entrance? Know thou not what Christ said? The
kingdom of heaven Matthew. 11. 12.
suffers violence: and the violent take it by sorce. Think now ^hus with thy
self, Am I this vio^ent man? Is this the violence here ^poken of, To eat, to
drink, to rise ^p to play, to lie down to take my ease? It is not, certainly.
Fight we must; but it must be the good ^ight, like Christian Champions; Run we
must, but so that we may obtain; Strive we must, but to enter in at the strait
gate: Labor we must, and offer violence to the kingdom of heaven; but it must
be in due time and place, Now whilst we have time; here, whilst we are on the
way, whilst we have life and strength, that when we come to the point of
death, and so pass the Horizon of this world, and depart into another, never
to return back again; when we shall be translated from time to Eternity; then
at the last we may have joy for our life past, and hope for that which is to
come. Let us labor therefore, let us labor, I say, and offer violence to our
selves, fighting against our own froward wills and affections: so shall we
obtain by the mercy of God everlasting rest for short labor, and Eternal
glory for a few days travel.

True and solid joy is not here to be found in vain delights and pleasures, but
in heaven where there is joy and pleasure for evermore. God prepared a gourd,
and made Jonah 4. 5.
it come over Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him
from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd. And what is all the
pleasure, or rather vanity of this present world? Is it not like Jonahs gourd
flourishing for a time, and yielding a comfortable shadow? Rich men have their
gourd also, that is, their riches, under the shadow whereof they rejoice with
exceeding great joy. Drunkards and gluttons have their gourds also, that is,
great tables and delicious fare, under the shadow whereof they are merry and
joyful. Voluptuous men also have their gourds too, that is, their unlawful
pleasures, under the shadow whereof they lie down and sport themselves. But
(Al^s!) sorrow follows after such joy, and suddenly overtakes it; Their mirth
^s soon turned into mourning; And their delights and pleasures end ^n gall and
bitterness. For what became of Jonahs gourd? God Jonah 4. 7.
prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it ^mote the gourd
that it withered. Now tell me Jonah, where is thy gourd? What is become of it?
Where is now thy exceeding great joy? They are both gone together: Thy gourd is
withered, and thy joy is ended. Such are our vain delights and pleasures, such
is our joy, rather shadows of things then any thing indeed, they pass away
suddenly, and become like Jonahs gourd that soon withered. The joy of this
world is but for a moment, but the joy of the life to come is for all Eternity.

CHAP. III. Here is declared by a most memorable example, How sweet and
precious the taste of Eternity is.
THis knew Theodorus very well, one born of Christian Parents, and as it seems
he learned it betimes, when for years he was but a youth, but an old man for
judgment and discretion. For on a great Festival day kept throughout all
Egypt, there being a great feast at his fathers house, and many invited
thereunto, when some were eating and drinking, others laughing and playing, and
others sporting and dancing, he amidst all these ^ollities retired himself to
his inward closet, finding himself wounded to the heart, but with a chaste
arrow. For thus he began to expostulate with himself, Unhappy Theodore! What
would it profit thee, if thou should gain the whole world? Many things thou
have indeed; but can thou tell how long thou shall enjoy them? Thou live in
abundance now, thou may feast it and make merry, thou may laugh and be fat,
thou may rejoice and skip for joy: But art thou sure how long this ^^all
last? I should like it well, if (...) would last always. But what shall I do?
Shall I for the enjoying of these short and transitory pleasures and delights,
deprive my self of those joys which are Eternal? Tell me Theodore, is this
according to Christian Religion, to frame unto our selves an heaven here on
earth, and think to pass from delights to delights, from Temporal to
Eternal? Either I am much deceived, or else Christ showed unto us another way
unto the kingdom of heaven, and that is through many tribulations. Therefore
have no more to do with worldly vanities, but prefer Eternal joys before
Temporal. Thus he said, and fell a weeping: So then he retired himself into a
withdrawing room, and there prostrating himself upon the earth, he prayed after
this manner, Eternal God, my heart is naked and open before thee: I send up my
sighs as humble Orators and Petitioners unto thee; I know not what to ask, nor
how. Only this one thing I beg at thy hands, that thou will not suffer me to
die an Eternal death. Lord thou know that I love thee, and that I desire to
be with thee, that I may sing Eternal praises unto thee. Lord have mercy upon
me. Whilst he was thus praying, in comes his mother on a sudden, and presently
perceives by the redness and moistness of his eyes that he had been a
weeping, and thereupon she says, My Son what is the matter with thee? Why
weepest thou? Why mournest thou? Why keep thou out of sight to day? Why do
thou not come to the table? The rest are all there: Thy company is desired:
Come away. But Theodore answered and said, I pray you good mother have me
excused: I find my self somewhat ill at stomach, I pray you do not urge me to
eat or drink against my stomach. So with a fair and colorable pretense he sent
away his mother. Then being alone he conferred with God and himself about
Eternity, and strictly examined all the course of his life, saying unto
himself, What am I? or, What have I been? How has it been with me heretofore?
or, How shall it be with me here after, if I lose my part and fellowship in the
kingdom of heaven, and blessed Eternity? There are diverse ways to heaven:
Some go one way, some another: It is no matter which way we go, so we come
thither. But because all ways are not alike, neither are all natures alike,
every man ought to choose that way which is most convenient. There is a short
way and a long, a safe way and a dangerous: If then I be afraid to go a long
and dangerous way, there is a shorter and a safer, which if I shall choose,
without all doubt I shall have the Angels for my companions and comforters, and
they will rejoice with me. But my friends will grieve at it: at the first, it
may be; but after a while they will also rejoice. Well Theodore, defer a
while, but not too long, and do not yield too much. I hope I shall one day grow
a strong man, and then I shall be better able to deal with mine enemies; for I
shall find those that are strong: But what if they be easy, flattering,
fawning, and such as will even weep for me? The truth is, I am most afraid of
such. But pluck up a good heart man, and though by nature thou art flexible,
and easily moved, yet pray unto Christ, and he will make thee strong and
immovable. But what if thy mother falls a weeping, beseeches thee with her
tears trickling down her cheeks? What if she hangs about thy neck, and desires
thee to spare thy self? What if she shows thee her breasts which gave thee
suck? Will not all these move thee? Here remember what Saint Hierom says,
Notwithstanding Hierom
all these importunities, run with speed unto the Standard of Christ's Cross:
It is a virtue and praiseworthy to be cruel in such a case as this. It is the
portion and inheritance of thy mother the Church to stand under the Cross of
Christ: So did Mary the mother of Christ: and so must thou, if thou will have
God thy Father in heaven, and the Church thy mother on earth: And so thou will
do, if thou be a true Son and no bastard. But must I do it now in my
youth, in the very flower of mine age? That Is hard. So it is indeed to flesh
and blood. But experience teaches it, that God is not well pleased with late
service: for late services are seldom good. Therefore they do well that begin
to serve God betimes, that seek him early, and that remember him in the dares
of their youth, and learn to submit their tender necks unto the yoke of Christ.
But I have been brought up tenderly, I have been fed with d^^nties: and shall I
now enter upon a strict and rigid course of life, and bid adieu to all my
pleasures? Shall I be able to endure it? I hope I shall. But, How long? For a
year or two? That Is not enough: I must go further, and continue to the end,
even as long as I live. Therefore weigh and consider the matter well with thy
self, before thou resolvest; and either never begin, or else continue to the
end. I will by Gods assistance; for I hope he will not leave me alone to strive
with these difficulties, which of my self I shall not be able to overcome. But
it is a hard matter to strive against custom. I have hitherto lived like a
Noble man and a Freeman: and shall I now live like a poor man, and a slave?
or, if I do, How long shall I live so? If I put on the poor man's person, and
act in the Theater of this world, when shall I put it often? At the end of the
last Act. And how far is it thither? As long as it is to the last breath. Thy
part is not ended, till thou art to depart out of this life. If thou once
come forth in the poor man's dress, there is no putting it off again: Thou
must not once think of thy silks, fattens, and velvets; Purple and fine linen
thou must not wear, until thou be clothed with the robe of immortality
and glory. Theodore, what think thou? shall thou be able to hold out to the
last Act? I will strive what I can, and comfort my self by the example of other
good Actours that have gone before me. And whom should I choose rather to
follow and imitate, then Christ the Son of God, who voluntarily became poor,
and made himself of no reputation, humbling himself above measure, to do and
suffer like a servant, being Lord of all? And shall not I do and suffer any
thing after his example? Shall not I take up the Cross and follow him? Am I
better then he? Why should I be afraid to follow, when I have such a Leader?
For who is it? Who bids me follow him? It is the voice of man, that I hear;
but it is the will of God, whom I ought to obey, because he commands. But this
is too high a point of Philosophy, for a man to forsake his riches, and to
embrace poverty. And, what will thou do Theodore? Resolve with thy self what
to do.

Why do I thus long doubt and dispute within my self? Why do I wave^ thus
between hope and fear? Have I not the example of my Lord before mine eyes? Did
not he suffer many things not to be uttered? Was not he nailed to the Cross
and despitefully used? He forsook his heavenly treasures, and came poor into
this world. His birth and death shows it. At his birth he wanted a cradle: in
his life he had not where to hide his head: and at his death he had not
wherewithal to cover his body. Naked came he into this world, and naked he
went out. How was it with him in life? He was fain to slay from one place to
another. He was often wearied with travel, scorched with heat, and dry for
thirst. He was as indefatigable in doing, as he was patient in suffering; and
both in an high degree. Was ever any one so well bent to poverty, so patient in
labors, and so gentle and mild when he was reproached? And should I be
ashamed of such a Leader? Should I blush to be called one of his followers?
Shall not I be content to be such as my Lord and Savior will have me to be? I
am ready for love of him to suffer hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, poverty,
and such like. I am willing for his sake to be bound, burnt, and cut in pieces.
These sufferings are but short, they cannot continue long. But the joys or
torments of Eternity are long indeed: for they shall never have end. Therefore
farewell all the world, and the things that are in it, I care not for you, I
regard you not; Farewell, I say. But welcome Eternity whenever thou come;
Thou art the only thing that I seek after, my soul longs after thee, there
is nothing that I desire in comparison of thee.

With the heat of such cogitations his soul was so set on fire, that it was
inflamed with the love of Eternity, which the blessed shall enjoy in heaven.
Therefore he resolved to take leave of his parents, to forsake his riches, and
bid adieu to his delights for ever. He did not resolve hastily, but continued
in his resolution constantly. He was not soon hot, and soon cold: He was not
altered all on the sudden: He did not pass from one extreme to another: He did
not strive for the highest pitch at the first, but rose up by degrees, and
became one of Pachomius his Scholars. You have heard the Prologue; But there
follows no Tragedy after it: For, contrary to the law of a Tragedy, we have
a sorrowful beginning, but a joyful ending. He came forth with a Lachrymae,
but went off with a Plaudite: At his Intrat there was weeping for grief, but at
his Exit there was clapping of hands for joy. Thus you have heard the life and
death of Theodorus, whose soul fed as it were upon thoughts of Eternity, and
was delighted therewith as with marrow and fatness. He was not of the worlds
mind, which counts Eternity but a fable; but refused not himself to become
a fable and a byword in the world, being persuaded fully of a blessed
Eternity, and earnestly desiring and thirsting to have a part in it.

Christian brethren, shall I speak a free word but a true? or, not I, but
Theodorus? Most men live so, as if there were no such thing as Eternity, as if
it were but a mere fable, and feigned thing. But what do I tell you of
Theodorus? Will you hear what Saint Peter says? 2. (...)* 3. 10.
The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall r^el^ with
servent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
Seeing 11.
then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of men ought we to
be in all holy conversation and godliness? But where are these men now adays
by whose holy conversation and godliness a man may judge that they believe
Saint Peter that the day of the Lord is coming, and that Eternity shall follow
after? But if you will not believe Saint Peter, hear what truth it self says,
Wide is the gate and broad is the Matthew. 7. 13.
way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.
Certainly men would not go in at the broad gate of destruction, if they did
think they should come out no more, if they did once dream of Eternity. But,
as I said before, most men make Eternity but a feigned thing, a witty
invention to keep men in aw, and a good honest fable. And yet, how many are apt
to say, We believe that there is a blessed Eternity after this life, we hope
to have part in it, we have a desire and longing after it. But (alas!) How
little is their faith! how vain is their hope! How cold is their desire!
Present pleasures, money in the hand, the allurements of the flesh steal away
the hearts of many, and by little and little make the desire and love of
Eternity grow quite cold in them, as if they had drowned and buried it in the
grave of oblivion. We hear it often read and preached, Thus says the Lord,
This is the commandment of the Lord: And as often as we hear it, we still
neglect it. Say the Lord what he will, command what he will, our Jerem. 18. 12.
old way pleases us best, We will walk after our own devices, and we will
every one do the imagination of his evil heart. Therefore 13.
thus says the Lord, Ask ye now amongst the heathen, who has heard such
horrible things? Had the people which knew no God, but known these secrets of
Eternity, certainly they never would have contemned and neglected them. Go to
now, O ye sons of men, Because I have called and ye refused, Prove. 1. 24.
I have stretched out my hands, and no man regarded; I will also laugh at your
calamity, I 26.
will mock when your fear comes: when your fear comes as desolation, 27.
and your destruction comes as a whirlwinde, when distress and anguish comes
upon you, when Eternity shall suddenly overtake you. If Death seize upon you
in this miserable state and condition, there is then no hope of mercy: The gate
is presently shut, there is no opening of it: The sentence of condemnation is
past, there is no repealing of it, Depart ye Matthew. 2^. 41.
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Watch therefore, good Christians, watch I say: The Judge stands at the gate.
That may happen in a minute, that you may be sorry for, for all Eternity.
Antonie the great in a certain Sermon, which he made to his people, spoke thus
unto them, Dearly beloved brethren, in matters of this life we have a care to
make good bargains, we will be sure to have a penyworth for a penny. I lay out,
for instance, so much money, and I have the worth of it in wares; I give so
many crowns, and I have so many bushells of wheat; So many pounds, and I have
so many quarters of Malt. But we are not so wise in heavenly matters, we will
not give things Temporal in exchange for things Eternal. Eternal life is a
thing not worth looking after, we much undervalue it, we will scarce give any
thing for it, we will not take any pains or labor to obtain it. And yet what
is our labor, suppose the greatest we can undergo? If it be compared unto life
Eternal the reward of it, it will not amount to so much as one halfpeny in
respect and reference to a Million of Gold. For what says the Psalmist* The
daves Psalm. ^0. 10.
of our life are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they
be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow. But suppose a
man should live an hundred years, to speak with the most, and all that while
serve God zealously and faithfully, were it not time well spent to gain
Eternity? were not the labor well bestowed to purchase a kingdom? I do not
mean a kingdom to continue for an hundred years only, but throughout all
ages; not an earthly kingdom, but the kingdom of heaven. Therefore Christian
brethren be not puffed up with vain glory, be not ambitious after worldly
honor, be not wearied out with well doing, be not cast down with afflictions,
do not sink under the burden of the Cross, but bear it patiently and
cheerfully, rejoicing Romans 5. 3.
with the Apostles, that you are counted worthy to suffer: For I reckon, Romans
8. 18.
says S. Paul, that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Let no man when he has
forsaken the world, think that he has forsaken any great matter. For what is
earth in comparison of heaven? It is but as a Center to the Circle, a Minute to
Eternity, a Drop to the Sea, and a Grain of dust to the Dry land. What are
our riches? Fading, and uncertain movables. We are soon taken from them, or
they from us. Though with much ado we keep them as long as we live, yet whether
we will or no, we must part with them when we die: we cannot carry them to our
graves. Why do we not then make a virtue of a necessity? why do we not
willingly part with them whilst they are ours, seeing that shortly we must
part with them whether we will or not, when death attacheth us for a debt due
to Nature, and then they can be no longer ours? Why do we not lay them out like
good Merchants for the Margarite or precious pearl of Eternal life? Thus
sweetly goes on Athanasius: But I must leave him and draw to a conclusion.

Pachomius was wont, whenever he felt any unlawful thoughts or desires arise
in his mind, to drive them away with the remembrance of Eternity: and if at
any time he perceived them to rebel again, he still repelled them, by
meditating seriously upon Eternity, the Eternal punishments of the damned,
the torments without end, the fire that never goes out, and the worm that never
dies. And here I will conclude this consideration with the exhortation of the
same Pachomius; Before all Pachom
things, says he, let us every day think upon the last day; Let us m^ time
remember Eternity; Let us every minute we have to live, so live as if we lived
in fear of everlasting torments, that so by the mercy of God in Jesus Christ we
may for ever escape them.

(...) him be glory both now and (...) ever Amen 2 Pet: 3. ^8.

Because man shall go to his ETERNAL habitation, Ecclius: Alas? how unlike are
the houses of ETERNITY? One of them we must inhabit: we must either for ever
rejoice in heaven, or for ever burn in hell.



THE NINTH CONSIDERATION upon ETERNITY.
The first Conclusion.
NO man living is able in word to express, or in thought conceive, the
infinite space of Eternity. Between a true man and a painted man, true fire
and painted fire, there is a great deal of difference: and yet these are in
some kind one like unto another. But between our common fire and the fire of
Hell, between the sorrows of this life, and the pains of Hell, there is no
comparison, no proportion at all. For this life and the sorrows of this life
are measured by space of Time; but the life to come, and the sorrows thereof
cannot be measured by any thing but only Eternity, which also is without
measure. This does our Savior most elegantly express in the Gospel of S. John
by the Parable of the Vine-branch, If a man abide not in John 15. 6.
me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and
cast them into the fire, and they are burned. In these words is Eternity
briefly and plainly described: for mark the words well, they run not in the
future, He shall be cast forth, and shall wither, and men shall gather them,
and shall cast them into the fire, and they shall be burned: I say they run
not in the future, but all in the present tense, He is cast forth and withered,
and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. They are
burned. This is the state and condition of the damned, They are burned, that
is, always burning. When a thousand years are past and gone, As it was in the
beginning, so it is still, They are burned: And when a thousand and a thousand
more yet are gone, As it was, so it is, They are burned. And if after certain
millions of years the question be asked, What is now the state and condition
of the damned? What do they? What suffer they? How fares it with them? There
can be no other answer made but this, They are burned, still burning,
continually, inutterably, Eternally, from one age to another, even for ever and
ever. Upon this place excellently says Saint Augustine, One of these August.
two must needs be the condition of the vine-branch, either it must abide in
the vine, or else be cast into the fire: if not in the vine, then certainly in
the fire. But that it may not be cast into the fire, let it still abide in the
vine.

The Second Conclusion.
IF those men which do still continue in their sins, did but know how near
they are unto Eternity, and everlasting torments; if they did consider well
with themselves, how that God in a moment, in a breath, in the twinkling of an
eye (as we speak) may suddenly take them away in their sins, and deliver them
up unto death; Then surely, if they had it, they would give all Spain, all the
treasures of Asia, all the gold of India, yea all the world to obtain but one
hour to confess their sins, to repent them of the same, and to ask God
pardon and forgiveness: They would not, certainly they would not still hug and
embrace their sins, they would not every day multiply them as they do, they
would not lodge them every night in their bosom, and lie snorting in them. For
what is a Matthew. ^6. 26
man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Though
thou losest every thing else in the world, yet, O man, have a care to keep thy
soul. It were needless here to reckon up a Catalogue of the Martyrs of Christ
in all ages. There are whole books of them in great volumes: they are recorded
to all posterity, and their names shall be had in everlasting remembrance. But
the greatest honor that we can do them is to follow their good example, to
learn of them Christian fortitude and magnanimity, to fear God more then man,
God Matthew* 10. 28.
which is able to destroy both body and soul in Hell, rather then man which can
only kill the body, but is not able to kill the soul; to love God more then
all the world; to be willing to part with all for Christ; to lay down our lives
for Christ; to lose all to save our souls, and gain Eternity. I will conclude
here with that excellent exhortation of Saint Augustine, August
What then shall we do, brethren? What? What else but whilst we have time,
amend our lives; where we have done amiss, do so no more; become new men?
That, what is threatened and shall certainly come upon wicked and ungodly men,
may not fall upon us; not because we shall not be, but because we shall not be
like unto them. Whatsoever is written in the Scripture, is written for our
learning, it is the voice of God. Observe and make good use of what you read:
Whatsoever we suffer in this life is but the gentle rod of our most merciful
father, who corrects us here, as his dear children, that we be not tormented
with the damned hereafter. Why then do the light afflictions of this life seem
so grievous unto us? Why do we even tremble, and quake for fear, when we do but
hear of them? The most grievous sufferings of this life, if we judge aright of
them, in comparison of everlasting fire, are very small, yea indeed none at all.

The Third Conclusion.
AMongst Christians, God knows, there are a great many, that either believe
there is neither Heaven nor Hell, or else if they did truly believe it, would
certainly live otherwise then they do. As concerning such men, the question may
be very fitly asked, when the Luke 18. 8.
Son of man comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? Some there are that
would fain be thought to be true believers; They confess it indeed with their
mouths, but dissemble with their double hearts: If their words may be
believed, they may go for true believers; but if their lives be examined, they
may be thought to be no better then Insidels. They never think upon Eternity,
or very seldom; and when they do, they do but think upon it, and there is all;
it is gone in a thought, they never weigh well with themselves what it is, they
never seriously meditate upon it, they never rouse their understanding to be
intent upon it, they never bend their wills and affections to seek after it,
they never imprint it in their deep cogitations, that so they may remember it.
They scarce begin to think upon it, but their minds are presently somewhere
else, their thoughts go a wandering, their imagination is working upon somewhat
else: And if at any time some sparks of devotion and godly desires arise in
their hearts, they are presently quenched and choked with cares of this world,
with multitude of business, with profits or pleasures, and such like. And thus
miserable men they stop their ears and close their eyes, and without fear or
understanding they run hudwinkt in the way that leads to Eternal death. It
is observed by the holy Fathers of the Glutton in the Gospel, that he never
lifted up his eyes till he was in torments: All his life long they were shut
against the poor, and against all godliness: He opened them not till he was
in Hell, when it was too late. And it is no marvel that so many men run
blindfold to the house of slaughter, and Eternal sorrow: For the way is very
broad and pleasant, smooth and plain, a man can hardly go out of it, there is
no fear of losing himself till he comes to the end thereof. Then he shall
perceive that all the while he was traveling, he was quite out of the right
way: then I say when there is no returning back again. Many would like this way
well, if there were no end thereof: For though it rids merrily, it ends
miserably; and therefore they do wisely, that leave the great rode, and travel
on in the rough way; that choose rather to go through briers and thorns unto an
Eternal Paradise, then through a pleasant Paradise to an Eternal prison; that
resolve with themselves to break through all difficulties, counting it better
to go on weeping and mourning in the narrow way of salvation, rather then
laughing and rejoicing in the broad way of destruction. Most true it is which
Job speaks, As Job 7. 9.
the cloud is consumed, and vanishes away: so he that goes down to the grave,
shall come up no more: He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his
place know him any more.

The Fourth Conclusion.
WHosoever uses to descend into a deep and serious consideration of Eternity,
he will be so far from living licentiously and wantonly, that you shall
hardly ever see him laughing heartily. It has been observed of as many as have
been raised from the dead, and turned again unto life, that they were scarce
ever seen to laugh at all. In particular it has been observed of Lazarus of
Bethanie, whom Christ loved. He and they, as many as have been raised from the
dead might truly say with the Preacher, I said of laughter, It is Eccles. ^. 2.
mad: and of mirth, what does it? Not without cause in this does Cyrill of
Alexandria confess himself to be fearful; For he says thus, I am afraid of
Hell and the punishments thereof, because they have no end: I am afraid of the
devouring worm, because it never dies. Oh that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 32. 2* 9.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!
Whosoever is not bettered by the consideration of Eternity (I dare boldly say,
and think I may say it truly) either he has no faith at all, or if he has
any faith, he has no heart at all, or at the best it is but an heart that is
dead and without all sense. It was the witty saying of a learned man, That
marriage was a short and a sweet song, but that it had a long and a doleful
close: So we may most truly say of all the pleasures that we take in sin,
That it is a short and a merry song, but it ends in mourning and lamentation,
or rather, It is a song short for Tune, and sweet for Tune as long as it
^asteth: for it runs much upon Quavers and Semiquavers of (...) and
Jubilation. But the Time suddenly changes, and the Tune is alt^red: for there
follows without any rest the Larges and Longs of sorrow and lamentation: which
cannot be measured by (...). For the torments of (...) Eternal. Oh Eternity,
Eternity, Eternity.

The Fifth Conclusion.
Whenever we speak of Eternity, we speak always with the least, but we can
never speak too much of it. Whatsoever is said comes short of it. No words can
utter it, no figures number it, no time can measure it. For Eternity is of
this nature, take from it what you will, it is still the same. It is neither
increased by addition, nor diminished by subtraction. Suppose there were
subtracted from it so many years as there are stars in the firmament, drops
in the sea, sands on the shore, leaves on the trees, grass in the field, mo^es
in the Sun, dust on the earth: What remains? As much as there was, before the
subtraction. Suppose there were so many years added to it: What then is the
Result? The same that it was, before the addition. The total sum is neither
more, nor less, then what it was, that is, Eternity.

As long as God is, so long shall the damned be tormented. This we have
shadowed out before by some similitudes and resemblances; unto which we will
add one more out of Bonaventure. If one of the damned, says he, should weep
after this manner, That he should let fall but one tear in an hundred years,
and those tears should be kept together so many hundred years till they would
equal the drops of the sea: Alas! Alas! (Not to speak of the sea) How many
millions of years must needs pass before they can make one little river! or
if they should at length make a whole sea of water; yet even then it might
truly be said, Now Eternity begins. And if he should weep again after the
same manner till he made another sea; yet then also it might be said again, as
truly as before, Now Eternity begins: and so on forwards for ever. Let no
man once doubt of the truth hereof; for between that which is finite and that
which is infinite there is no proportion. But this seems wonderful and strange
unto us, because our imagination cannot conceive it: It cannot reach unto that
which is so far remote; It cannot penetrate into that which is infinite, for
that is impenetrable. And this is the reason that our understanding is so
hardly drawn to the consideration of Eternity: because it blusneth in a sort,
and is ashamed, or else for indignation cannot endure to tire it self in the
search of that which cannot be found out. But let us put away this foolish and
shameful modesty, and let us force our understanding to the due and serious
contemplation of Eternity, and let it be our daily exercise to be still
meditating upon such similitudes as may in some sort shadow it out, and
represent it unto us: And so shall we never do amiss. Say what we can, think
what we will, imagine so many millions of millions of years as it is possible
for the mind of man to conceive, we shall still come short of the measure and
length of Eternity. The years of Eternity are more, far more, yea
infinitely more. This is certain, and without all controversy.

The Prophet Daniel signifies the incomprehensible dimension and length of
Eternity in these words, They that be wi^e shall Dan 12. 3.
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness as the stars for ever and ever. Mark these words, For ever and
ever. As if he should have said, No words are sufficient to express the nature
of Eternity. It is for ever and ever: Here is all that I can say of it: Though
more might be said in respect of its own nature, yet I am not able to say more.
Observe his A^xesis, or his augmentation of it by multiplication; For ever,
that is, for Eternity: but he thinks that not sufficient, and therefore he
doubles it, and ever. And yet in the Latin it is expressed more fully, in
these words, In perpetuas AEternitates, To perpetual Eternities: Mark here, he
says not In AEternitatem, To Eternity, barely in the Singular number; but In
AEternitates, To Eternities, in the plural, as if one were not enough: neither
does he rest here, indefinitely, saying To Eternities, nor yet does he add any
finite term, because none can express it, but an Infinite, Perpetuas,
Perpetual; In perpetuas AEternitates, To Perpetual or Infinite Eternities.
Now if one Eternity is without end, what are two? what are ten? what are an
hundred? what are infinite? If we should multiply the great year or years a
thousand times, it would not amount to the least fraction of the numberless
number of Eternity. They say that the eighth celestial Orb or Sphere is moved
wonderful leisurely beyond all comparison: For though it be daily wheeled
about by the rapid motion of the Primum Mobile, yet it finisheth not its own
proper circuit but once in thirty six thousand years, and this ^pace of time
they call The great ^eare, or Platoes year. But compare this with Eternity,
and it will appear to be but a moment, ^ut an instant, but a minute, indeed
nothing at all. It is a true ^aying of Boethius, That an instant or point of
time, and ten thousand years, compared together, keep better proportion, then
ten thousand years and Eternity. But hear what Saint John says, little
children, it is the last time, 1. John 2. 18.
or, the last hour. And this he said one thousand six hundred years ago. It
is most true therefore what Saint Augustine says, August
Whatsoever has an end, that thing is but short. Eternity is a word
consisting but of four Syllables, but it is a thing without end. Therefore set
thy love upon Eternity. Let Christ be thy end, and thou shall reign with
Christ without end.

The Sixth Conclusion.
IT is not to be believed that any man that has but the least smack of true
Religion, can be so far carried away by his impotent and unruly passions (if
he be not as bad as a beast ruled merely by sense, and serving only his
sensual appetite: For the wicked and ungodly man even then when he is almost
swallowed up in the deep pit, whereinto his sins have plunged him headlong,
even then, I say, does but laugh at it, regards it not, is not a jot troubled
at it) It is not to be believed, I say, that any man that has any Religion at
all in him, can be so far carried away by his headstrong and unbridled
passions, but, if he will spend a part of an hour every day in meditating upon
Eternity, yea if he will but once in a week seriously think upon it, he will
mend his manners, he will change the course of his life to better, he will
certainly become a new man: Of a proud man, he will become humble and lowly; of
an angry man, he will become mild and gentle; of an unclean man, he will
become chaste and continent; of a drunken man, he will become sober and
temperate. He will put on, not the outward but the inward habit of a true
religious and godly man. He will become such a one, not in clothes and outward
expression, but in heart and inward affection. Neither will he rashly and
unadvisedly, slightly and negligently, upon a spurt all at once on the sudden
pass from one extreme to another: (such alterations are not good, neither will
they continue long) But he will again and again weigh the matter well with
himself, he will consider well upon it, he will fasten his serious thoughts
upon it, he will often revolve in mind Eternity, Eternity, Eternity, that
shall never have end, end never, never end; which shall last throughout
innumerable, incomprehensible, infinite ages. This will he do with
consideration and attention, and often ruminate upon it, as beasts chew the
cud. Meat, though never so good and wholesome, if it be not chewed in the
teeth, prepared in the mouth, digested in the stomach, turned into blood, and
distributed by the veins into all the parts of the body, turns to poison rather
then to nourishment, begets all manner of diseases, is retained perhaps some
time in the body, but does more harm then good, were a great deal better out
then in Even so the thoughts of death, judgment, Heaven and Hell are good and
wholesome, godly and holy, but none more then the thought of Eternity, which
may worthily be called the Quintessence. But as it is with meat, not the taking
of it merely into the mouth, but the good digesting of it in the stomach, the
turning of it into good blood in the liver, and the distributing of it into all
the parts by the veins, nourishes the body: So it is with these precious
thoughts of Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell and Eternity: Not the bare thinking
upon them, but serious thinking upon them with our selves, setting apart all
cares and worldly distractions, the pondering of them well in our hearts, and
the often ruminating upon them, this is it that ^eedeth and nourishes the
soul. If this be not done, the rest is to little purpose: without this even the
reading of the holy Scripture is fruitless, the hearing of the word preached
is unprofitable. Many hear Sermons often, read the Scripture over and over
again, and yet are little bettered by it, because they do not meditate upon
what they have both read and heard. When they hear, what comes in at one ear,
goes out at the other: When they read, the eye is no sooner off from the book,
but what was read is soon slipped out of memory. Before they can practice what
they have heard or read, they have quite forgotten what they should do.
Therefore if we will read or hear with profit, we must spend some time in
meditating and pondering with our selves what we have read and heard. This
lesson we may learn of the blessed Virgin the mother of our Lord. But Mary Luke
2. 19.
kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.

The Seventh Conclusion.
FEw or none believe, or else do not well understand and weigh with themselves
these words of Christ, Enter ye in at the strait Matthew. 7. 13.
gate; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction,
and many there be which go in thereat: Because strait is the 14.
gate and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that
find it. This again our Savior repeats by the mouth of Saint Luke, Strive to
enter in at the Luke 13. 21.
strait gate: For many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able. Whosoever laughs at August
this faith, and therefore will not believe, because he does not see; when that
shall come to pass, which he did not believe, he shall ^lush and be
confounded, he shall be confounded and separated from the blessed, he shall be
separated from the blessed and have his portion with the damned.

Hieronymus Platus reports of a certain woman, that hearing Bertoldus a
powerful man in the pulpit inveigh very vehemently and bitterly against a
sin, that she knew her self guilty of, fell down dead in the Church; and
after a while by the blessing of God upon the prayers of the Congregation
coming again unto her self, related unto them what she had seen in this trance,
saying thus, Me thought I stood before Gods tribunal, and threescore thousand
souls more with me, called together from all the parts of the world, to receive
their final sentence: And they were all condemned, and adjudged to Eternal
torments, but only three. Oh! what a fearful thing was this! I should hardly
believe this woman's relation, but that I believe Christ's asseveration in the
Gospel, Wide is the gate and broad Matthew. 7. 13.
is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat:
And again, Strait is 14.
the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it. It may seem strange to flesh and blood that God the Father of mercies
should pass the sentence of condemnation upon so many, I do not say threescore
thousand, but threescore thousand thousand: And what man would believe it, were
he not persuaded of the truth thereof, upon the consideration of the sovereign
and infinite majesty of God which is offended, the inutterable malice of sin
which is committed, and many evident testimonies of Scripture by which it is
plainly proved? Job trembles at it, saying, A land of Job ^0. 22
darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death, without any
order, and where the light is as darkness, or according to the Latin, Where
there is no order and where everlasting horror dwells. Saint Matthew affirms
as much in the words of our Savior, Depart Matthew. 25. 41
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Let us consider these things well
with our selves, and whilst we have time let us wash away our sins with the
tears of repentance, for fear lest God suddenly snatch us away, and give us
our portion to drink with hypocrites in the bottomless pit of Hell, where
there is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth, where the worm never dies,
and the fire never goes out, from whence there is no redemption, no redemption,
I say, and again I say, no redemption; No, not any comfort at all, not so much
as a little drop of cold water. If the godly themselves, who are in the state
of grace, and in the favor of God, whose minds and wills be good, if they, I
say, could sufficiently conceive from what grievous torments they shall be
delivered at the day of judgment, and into what unutterable and unconceiveable
joys they shall enter, without doubt they would use no delay, they would not
let an hour pass, but out of hand they would take their leave of all
vanities, forsake the world, and leave the dead to look after the dead: But as
for themselves, they would be daily and hourly well employed about their
Masters business, always studying to please God, ever lauding and praising
him for his goodness and mercy toward them, in blessing them in part here in
this world, and giving them an assured promise of everlasting blessedness in
the world to come, for delivering them from the torments of Hell, and giving
them entrance into the joys of heaven. It is the saying of Saint Gregory, The
evils of this present Greg.
life seem the more hard unto us, the less we think upon the good which shall
follow hereafter; And because we consider not the exceeding great rewards which
are laid up for us, therefore we count the afflictions of this world grievous
to be born: whereas if we did lift up our minds, and raise our thoughts to the
contemplation of those things which are Eternal, and not subject to any
change; if we would have an eye unto them and set our hearts upon them, we
would certainly count the sufferings of this life, and whatsoever has an end,
to be as nothing; and again, joy in tribulation is a song in the night: For
although we are outwardly afflicted with the sense of sorrows Temporal, yet we
are inwardly comforted with the hope of joys Sternall.

Much after the same manner reasons S. Augustine: If thou would August
but attend, says he, unto what thou shall hereafter receive, thou would
count all the sufferings of this present life to be but light, and altogether
unworthy of the glory which shall be revealed. For brethren (To speak of the
worth of things) For Eternal rest a man should be content to undergo Eternal
labor, and for Eternal joy willingly suffer Eternal sorrow: But if the
labor and sorrow were Eternal, when should a man come to rest and joy
Eternal? Therefore upon necessity thy tribulation must be but Temporal, that
so at length thou may receive a reward which shall be Eternal. For hang up
the scales, and put Eternity in one, and a thousand years in the other: what
do I say, a thousand years? yea ten thousand, yea an hundred thousand, and yet
more, a thousand thousand, they are all too light to weight with Eternity;
there is no comparison between them. And yet further, to make them more light,
As they are but Temporal, so likewise they are but short and of no
continuance, they last but for a few winter days when they are at the
shortest, or rather but for one day and that a short one, the day of this life
which is soon past, and they are gone. Though a man therefore should suffer all
his life long even to the last breath, though he should suffer, I say, labors,
griefs, sorrows, imprisonment, scourges, hunger, thirst all his life long, even
to the last breath, yet his sufferings are but short, because his life is but
short. For the days of our Genesis 47. ^*
pilgrimage are but few, though evil, as Jacob told Pharaoh. And Man that is
born of a woman is of few days: though, as Job Job 14. 1.
complains, full of trouble. And Behold, says David, thou have Psalm. 39. 5.
made my days as an hand-breadth (And that is but a short measure, and yet he
goes further) and mine age is as nothing before thee. And as our life is short,
so is our Affliction 2 Cor. 4.
light, but it works for us a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of
glory: when this short life and light labor is ended, we shall inherit
everlasting life, an Eternal kingdom, and felicity without end: we shall be
made equal to the Angels, ^^irs of God, Romans 8^ 17.
and joint heirs with Christ. Oh! For how little labor how great a reward! And
again Augustine in another place, The thoughts of God are very deep. Where is
the thought of God? and what is his purpose? He lets the reins loose for the
present, but afterward^ he will draw them in. Do not rejoice and sport thy
self, like the fish in the water, which having got the bait in her mouth
plays up and down, but being struck with the hook in the jaws may be pulled
up at the fishers pleasure. The time which seems long unto thee is indeed but
short, very short. For what is the life of man compared with Eternity?
Would thou be patient and long-suffering? Consider Gods Eternity: Do
thou only consider thine own days, which are but few and short, and do
thou think that in them all things shall be fulfilled? That the wicked should
be condemned and the godly crowned? Would thou have all these things
fulfilled in thy few and short days? God shall fulfill them in his own time.
God is Eternal, God is patient and long-suffering* And thou say, But I
cannot be patient and long-suffering, because I am not Eternal. But thou
may be if thou will: For do but join thy heart to Gods Eternity, and thou
shall be Eternal with him. If thou be a good Christian, and well instructed
in the fear of the Lord, thou will certainly conclude, God has reserved all
unto his own judgment. The good and godly men are troubled and afflicted; For
God chastises them as his own children. But the wicked and ungodly men come
into no such trouble and affliction: For God casts them off, and condemns
them as aliens. A certain man has two sons; He chastises the one, and
lets the other go without any chastisement: The one, if he goes never so
little awry, is presently buffe^ed, whipped and scourged; the other, let him do
never so ill, he never hears of it, he is not so much as once rebuked for it.
What is the reason? He that is punished, is the fathers heir; and he that goes
unpunished, is disinherited. For, what should the father do? He sees there is
no hope of him, and that he is past grace, and therefore he lets him alone to
do what he lists. But yet notwithstanding the son which is ever and anon
punished for the least offense, will be ready to bemone and deplore his own
case, and count his brother happy which goes unpunished. He will, I say,
unless God has given him a wise and understanding heart, to know what makes
for his own good. He will be apt to say in his heart, My brother follows all
ill courses, takes his pleasure, wastes his means, does what seems good in
his own eyes, is ever breaking my fathers commandments, and has never an ill
word for it. But the case is otherwise with me: If I be but out of sight never
so little while, if I go but to the next door, if I do but step aside, stir
but a foot, but an inch beyond my bounds, presently I am called in question,
Sirrah where have you been? there is no hope of pardon, I am sure to smart for
it. This is my case. And I say, Thou art in a far better case then thy
brother; and if thou be not a fool, thou will think so too: For in that thou
art corrected, it is a sign that thou art best beloved. If thou think only
upon thy present state, it cannot but seem grievous unto thee: But if thou have
an eye to the inheritance which is reserved for thee, again it cannot but seem
joyous unto thee. For the assurance of thy future reward will quite take away
the sense of the present smart.

Hither may be added out of the same holy Father that which follows, as the
sum of all that hitherto has been said. How great and wonderful is the
mercy of God! He says not, Labor thou for ten hundred thousand years
together; nor yet, one thousand years; nor yet, five hundred years. But what?
Labor whilst thou live: it is but for a few years; after that thou shall
have rest, such rest as shall have no end. Consider this well with thy self,
Thou art enjoined to labor but for a few years, and amidst thy labor art not
without some joy, not a day passes in which thou may not receive comfort and
consolation. But rejoice not thou after the manner of the world, but as the
Apostle exhorts, Rejoice in the Phil. ^. 4.
Lord always: and again I say, Rejoice; Rejoice in Christ, Rejoice in his
word, Rejoice in his law. For it is true which the Apostle says, Our light
affliction, which is ^. Cor. 4. 17.
but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of
glory. Consider what a small price thou art to give, but the husk of an Akorn,
for everlasting treasures: The husk of thy short labor for rest Eternal. Have
thou joy for a time? Do not trust too much to it. Art thou sad and sorrowful
for a time? Do not despair of joy and comfort. Neither let prosperity puff
thee up, nor adversity cast thee down. God has promised unto thee Eternal
life: Therefore contemn Temporal felicity. He has threatened Eternal fire:
Therefore contemn all Temporal sorrows.

To conclude then with the same divine author, Let us therefore be in love
with Eternal life; and thereby we shall come to know, how much we ought to
labor for the obtaining of it: For we see that those men which are lovers of
this present life, which is but temporal, and shall shortly have an end,
labor with might and main to preserve and prolong it as long as they can. And
yet they cannot escape death: For that at one time or other will seize upon
them. All that they can hope for, is but to put it off for a little time. When
death approaches, then every one is laboring and seeking to hide himself,
ready to give, and part with any thing that he has to redeem his life. He
sends for the Physician, he will be ruled by him in any thing, he will take any
thing at his hands, he will suffer any thing, purging, bleeding, cupping,
scarifying, and what not? You see what charge a man will be at, and what pains
he will voluntarily endure, to live here though but for a short time: And yet
he will scarce be at any charge, or take any pains, after this life ended to
live for ever. Brethren, it should not be so. If there be such laboring and
watching, such sending and going, such running and riding, such spending and
praying, such doing and suffering, to live here a while longer: What should we
not willingly do and suffer, to live for ever? And if they be accounted wise,
which labor by all means they can to put off death a while longer, being loath
to lose a few days: What fools are they which live so, that finally they lose
the day of Eternity!

Think upon these things well with your selves O mortal men, and foresee the
day of Eternity, whether of joy or of torment, before it comes. For although
all other things pass away, yet Eternity still remains, and shall never pass
away.

CHAP. I. The Punishment of Eternal death.
THe Messenians had a certain prison or dungeon under earth void of air and
light, and full of Hellish horror: which as it was a most dismal place, so
had it also a glorious title; for it was called the Treasure-house. This prison
or dungeon had no doors at all to it, only one mouth, at which the prisoners
were let down by a rope, and so it was stopped up again with a great stone.
Into this Treasure-house was Philopoemen that great Emperor of Greece cast,
and there by poison he ended his life. God also has his Treasure-house under
earth, if I may so speak: But, I pray you, what a one is it? It is of most
wicked and ungodly, desperate and damned men.

Actiolinus a Tyrant of Padua (as Jovius reports) had many prisons so infamous
for all kind of miseries and torments, that whosoever were cast thereinto
counted their life misery, and their death happiness. Death might come in
there without knocking, he was so welcome unto them, and so long looked for. For
this was their hard usage, They were laden with irons, starved with hunger,
poisoned with stench, eaten up with vermin, and so in a most miserable manner
they lived, and died at length a long and a lingering death. There every one was
judged most miserable but he that was dead, and could feel no misery. Whilst
they lived it was a punishment worse then death, to have their habitation
amongst the dead. For the dead bodies lay on heaps rotting amongst the living
in such manner that it might be truly said there, That the dead killed the
living.

But the very worst of these prisons is a Paradise, and a most pleasant place,
if it be compared with the infernal prison of Hell. Whatsoever misery was
suffered in Actiolinus his prison, in this regard it was tolerable, because it
was of no long continuance, being to last no longer then a short life, and
quite vanishing away at the hour of death. But the Treasure-house of the
damned, which is Gods prison, is void of all comfort: The torments thereof are
intolerable, because they are Eternal: Death cannot enter in there, neither
can those that are entered get out again: But they shall be tormented for
evermore. For evermore? What a fearful thing is this! They shall be tormented
for evermore. It was a most true saying of Cassiodorus, As no mortal man can
apprehend or understand what the Eternal reward is, so neither can any man
conceive or imagine what that Eternal torment is.

The Persians had a prison into which a man might enter easily, but being once
in, could get out no more; or if he did, yet very hardly. And therefore it was
called Lethe, or Oblivion. It is an easy matter to descend down into Hell; but
to ascend up again it is altogether impossible. Was ever any heard to return
from Hell? This prison of Hell is not without just cause called Lethe, or
Oblivion. For God is so unmindefull of the damned, that he will never remember
them to have mercy upon them. Hell is called the Land of Oblivion or
Forgetfulness, and that for two reasons (as a godly and learned Writer
observes) First, Because, says he, they remember God no more for their good,
neither have they any memory at all of things past, but such as does afflict
and torment them. All their pomp and glory, pleasures and delights are quite
forgotten, or else not remembered without grief and sorrow. Secondly, To those
that are in this horrid Region, and lake of fire, God has forgotten to be
gracious, and merciful, neither will he send his Angels at any time to
minister unto them the least comfort: If once in, there is no coming out again.
For what said Abraham unto the rich Glutton frying in Hell, and desiring him to
send Lazarus to cool his tongue Luke 16. 26.
with a drop of water? Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that
they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass to us,
that would come from thence. Oh gulf full of horror and despair! Oh Eternity
of torments, the very thought whereof is able to make a stout man quake and
tremble! The wicked and ungodly men dig their own graves, and dwell therein for
evermore: But what manner of graves do they dig? They dig as deep as Hell,
where the rich Glutton was buried, from whence he lifted up his eyes in
torments, and Luke 16. 23*
saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, to his greater torment. Oh
what a terrible deep is this! Oh what a fearful grave is this! Who lies here?
He that suffered Lazarus to lie at his gate, having no compassion on him. How
is it with him now? He lodges in flames of fire in stead of his soft bed: he
is scalded with thirst, and his sweet cups are taken from his mouth; his table
is removed, and he has no other food but fire and brimstone; He is not now
dancing and exulting for joy, but gnashing his teeth for hellish desperation.
They that are shut up in prison here in this world, have hope for their
comfort; it may be they shall be delivered, and redeemed out of prison: But
from Hell there is no deliverance, no redemption, no not so much as any hope at
all, but Eternal desperation.

It is a short, but a terrible Sermon that God preaches by the Prophet Ezekiel
in these words, Say to the sorrest of the South, Ezekiel. 20. 47
Hear the word of the Lord, Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall
devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: The flaming flame shall
not be quenched. How many tall Cedars, how many wicked and ungodly men flourish
and wax green in this life for prosperous success in all outward things, and
yet are dry and withered for want of virtue! Hear this therefore every green
and yet dry and withered tree. I will kindle a fire, says the Lord, and the
flaming flame shall not be quenched. In Hell, whither you make such great
haste, there are no Holy Days, no Festivals, no set times in which the fire
shall cease burning. There is Eternal grief, Eternal death, Eternal sorrow
without the mixture of the least comfort. Night and day there is no rest, no
sleep at all, but continual watching and waking for grief and anguish, and
intolerable torments in everlasting fire. There shall you always have your
being, that you may always be tormented: there shall you always live, that
you may always die. If you will not believe me, believe Saint Augustine, whose
words are these, The ungodly, says he, shall live August
in torments: but they which live in torments shall desire, if it were
possible, that their life were ended. But death hears them not, there is none
to take away their life: Their life shall never end, because their torments
shall never end. But what says the Scripture? The Scripture does not so much
as call it life. For life is a name of comfort: but what comfort can there be
imagined in tortures and torments, frying and broyling in everlasting fire? But
what does the Scripture call it? The second death, that is, a death which
follows after the first and natural death which is common to all men. But how
can the second death be called a death, seeing that he that has part therein
never dies? We may better indeed express what it is not, rather then what it
is. As it cannot properly be called a death, so it may be truly said that it
is no life: And as concerning them that have part therein, as they cannot
properly be said ever to die, so again it may be most truly said that they
never live. For so to live, that a man shall always live in sorrows and
torments, is not to live. Therefore that life is no life: But the only life
indeed is, that life which is blessed; and that life only is blessed, which is
Eternal. Again, we have another place in the same Father to this purpose: If
the soul lives in Eternal August.
torments, tormented with the unclean spirits; This is rather to be called
Eternal death, then Eternal life. For there is no greater or worse death,
then that death which never dies.

Saint Gregory also gives the like testimony. In Hell, says he, Gregor.
there shall be death without death, end without end, because death ever
lives, and the end ever begins: there death shall never die. Oh death, how
much sweeter were thou, if thou would take away life, and not compel those
to live, who would fain die! But so it is: the number of the years in Hell are
without number. It pasleth the skill of the best A^^thmetician to find out the
number thereof. God himself knows no end thereof. After a thousand thousand
millions of years past, there are still as many more to come; and when those
also are past, there are yet as many more to come; and still they are as far
from the last as they were at the first. It is now above five thousand years
since Cain that slew his brother Abel, was cast into the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone: and yet the number of the years throughout which still he
is to be tormented, is as great still as it was the first day of his torment;
and after certain millions of years, the years of his torments for their
number shall be nothing diminished: It shall be all one as if he were cast into
the fire but this present hour. And though the rich Glutton mentioned in the
Gospel, be tormented two thousand years together, yet still he does burn, and
shall burn for ever; neither shall he obtain so much as a little drop of water,
though he use never so much entreaty, not so much as a little drop of water to
cool his inflamed tongue.

These things we often hear of, and when we hear them, we do but laugh at
them. Certainly we count it but a light matter to burn in Eternal fire. Here a
man might well ask the question, where are your tears, O mortal men, ye that
are given so much to laughing? This is our condition: A small loss, if it be
but a matter of three halfpence, will wring great store of tears from us: But
as for an infinite and irrecoverable loss, that we can brook easily, we can
digest that with laughter. When we are cited to appear at the bar of an
earthly Judge, then we quake and tremble: But as we are going to Gods
Tribunal, (for every day we rid some of our way, we walk on step after step,
will we, nill we; and yet as we are going) we sport by the way. When we go to
sea, we are afraid of shipwreck: But without either fear or wit we lanch into
the deep sea of Eternity, and make but a laughing matter of it.

It is the wish of Saint Bernard, Oh that men were wise! that they were wise!
Oh that they were wise! What then, holy Bernard? Oh, then would the image of
Eternity begin to be reformed in them. Then would they order things present
wisely, judge of things past understandingly, and foresee things to come
providently.

Here we have Saint Paul's command to the Ephesians, and not his wish only, for
his words run in the Imperative Mood, and not in the Optative, Brethren, see
that ye Ephesians. 5. 15.
walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, Redeeming the time, 16.
because the days are evil. The great business of our salvation ought
circumspectly, diligently and carefully to be regarded of us. It is the most
foolish thing in the world for a man having but little time allotted him, to
spend it prodigally in vain delights, whereas he should like a thrifty merchant
employ it rather for his best advantage, to purchase a portion in blessed
Eternity. If we think to gain heaven by sporting, playing, and idling, we are
much deceived. To be telling of tales, or giving ea^e unto them when they are
told; to be given to our ease, and spend our time in idleness; to be calling
for our cups, and sit so long at them till we cannot stand, This is not to
redeem the time. But this is truly to redeem the time, To give our selves to
labor and study, prayer and meditation; not for a spurt and away, but to hold
on in this course constantly unto the end; This, I say, is truly to redeem the
time. It is the counsel of Saint Augustine, to steal some time from our
worldly business. Will any man sue thee August*
at the common law? Be content, says he, to lose something, that thou may be
at leisure to serve God, and not follow suits: for that which thou losest, is
the gaining of time. For as thou give thy ^oney and buyest bread; so be
content to lose thy money, that thou may buy rest, and opportunity to serve
God: for this is indeed truly to redeem the time.

So ought we to spare for no cost, but willingly part with any thing to gain an
opportunity of doing good, seeing that the days are evil. The days of this
life are full Anselm
of sorrows, griefs, dangers, and tentations which ever and anon take from us
the opportunity of doing good; So says Anselm. But if we let slip the
opportunity of doing good when it is offered, and let our days consume away
in mere purposes of amendment of life, without bringing them to good effect:
From thenceforth it is in vain to look for any opportunity of doing good; we
shall not obtain one minute of time; our loss is altogether irrecoverable. Our
life, says Nazianzen, is like ^az.
a Mart, or a Fair: When the day appointed is once over, there is no more
buying any commodities. If then we will buy any thing, we must do it quickly,
whilst the Fair lasts: We must live godly, whilst we have time to live: We
must serve God, whilst we are strong and able. The Preacher often beats upon
this, whatsoever Eccles. 9. 10.
thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might. The Apostle often spurs us on to
lay hold upon opportunity, and make good use of our Gal. 6. 10.
time. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good to all men: For, now
it is high time to Romans 13. 1^*
awake out of sleep. Thou sleep, says Saint Ambrose, but thy time sleeps
not, it runs apace, yea it flies with wings. Happy he, happy they that
think upon these things, to do thereafter; that live so, as at the point of
death they will desire to have lived; to do such things as they will rejoice to
have done when they are translated to Eternity. A light neglect now will prove
an Eternal loss. Whatsoever we think, speak, or do, once thought, spoke, or
done, it is Eternal, it abides for ever.

CHAP. II. The reward of Eternal life.
THe life in heaven is life indeed, and the most perfect and absolute life of
all others, in that it is animal, in that it is humane, in that it is
angelical, yea in that it is divine. There lives the Memory, by the perfect
remembrance of all things that are past: There lives the Understanding, by the
knowledge and vision of God: There lives the Will, and enjoys all manner of
good, without fear of losing it. In like manner lives there the Appetite, both
that which is called Concupiscible, and that which is called Irascible. There
live all the Senses, and are filled with delights. There is heard no sighing,
no lamentation, no grief or sorrow, nor so much as the least sign thereof.
There is the most sincere and pure song of joy, without the mixture of the
least drop of the gall of bitterness and sorrow. Let the eyes be silent, they
never saw the like; let the ears be silent, they never heard the like; let thy
heart be silent, it could never conceive the like to this life. This life
includes within it self all pleasures, riches, honors, and all the delights
of all lives, senses, and faculties. S. Augustine August de Civitat^ Dei, Cap.
30
as it were set on fire with the servent desire of this life, breaks forth
into these words, How great happiness shall be there, where there is the
presence of no evil, and the absence of no good? where we shall be continually
praising God, who is all in all? Blessed Psalm. 84 4.
are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee. All the
faculties of our souls, and members of our bodies being made incorruptible,
shall be ever setting forth the praise of God. There shall be true glory and
praise indeed, where neither he that does give praise and glory can be
deceived, nor he to whom it is given can be flattered. There shall be true
honor indeed, which shall be denied to none that is worthy, nor bestowed upon
any that is unworthy, yea which none that is unworthy shall desire or seek
after; where none that is unworthy shall be permitted to abide. There he which
is the giver of virtue, shall be the reward thereof: for he has promised
himself; and what could he promise greater and better then himself? The Prophet
Jeremie is witness of this his promise, in these words, I will be their God,
Jerem. 31. 33.
and they shall be my people. I will be unto them whatsoever with honesty can
be desired, I will be unto them life, and health, and food, and plenty, and
glory, and honor, and peace, and every good thing: For this is the meaning of
these words, God shall be all in all; He shall be the end of all our desires.
And one great good there is to be found in that blessed City of God, which is
not elsewhere to be found, and that is this, That no inferior there shall envy
his Superior, but they shall be like members of the natural body compacted
together in a friendly and peaceable manner, where the finger desires not to
be the eye, no^ the foot the head, but every member is content with his own
place. And a little after says the same Father, There shall we keep an
Eternal Sabbath of rest, and there shall we taste and see how sweet August de
civitate Dei.
the Lord is, we shall be filled with his goodness, when he shall be all in
all. O God my God! Thou art Love and Charity, Truth and Verity, true
Eternity, and Eternal Felicity.

Another speaks unto this life, by way of Apostrophe, after this manner, In
thee there is no corruption, Author libr. de spir. and anima.
nor defect, nor old age, nor anger; but perpetual peace, and solemn glory,
and everlasting joy, and continual solemnity. There is joy and exultation,
there is an Eternal spring. There is always the flower and grace of youth and
perfect health. Non est in t^ Heri nec Hesternum;
Sed est idem Hodiernum:
Tibi salus, tibi vita,
Tibi pax est infinita:
Tibi Deus omnia.


That is, Yesterday was with thee never;
But to day is present ever:
Thou have peace that ever lasts,
Health and life that never wastes:
God is all in all.


Glorious things are spoken of Psalm. ^7. 3.
thee, O City of God. In thee have their habitation all those that rejoice: In
thee there is no fear; in thee no sorrow. All desires are turned to joys.
Whatsoever a man can wish for, is present with thee: Whatsoever can be desired,
is in thee in abundance. They shall be Psalm. 36. 8.
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou shall make them
drink of the river of thy pleasures. For with thee is the 9.
fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light, when we shall see thee in
thy self, and thee in us, and our selves in thee, living in everlasting
felicity, and enjoying the beatificall vision of thee for ever.

And though this felicity be everlasting; yet a man may obtain it in a short
time, and with little labor. I have compassion on the Mark ^. 2.
multitude, says our Savior, because they have now been with me three days,
and have nothing to eat. Sweet Savior, do thou count it such a matter for us
to abide with thee three days, and eat nothing? And why, sweet Jesus, do
thou not rather tell us of the days of Eternity, and the everlasting joys
wherewith we shall be abundantly satisfied in the kingdom of heaven? God
takes notice of the least service that we perform, and it is precious in his
sight: He tells the very hairs of our heads; and much more then will he tell
the drops of blood that are spilt for his sake, and put them up in the bottle
of his remembrance.

We may therefore very well cry out with Saint Hierom, Oh! How Hierom
great a blessedness is this, To receive great things for small, and Eternal
things for Temporal; and further to have the Lord our debtour! But thou will
be ready to say, It goes hard to be in sufferings every day; and though all
other things might easily be endured, yet death is terrible. Christian brother,
I am ashamed to hear thee say so: it is foolishly spoken, and like a child.
Know thou not thus much? I know that I ascend to descend, flourish to
wither, am young to grow old, live to die, and die to live blessed Eternally.
Trust therefore in the Lord for Isai. 26. 4.
ever: For in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

Again S. Augustine comes unto my mind, who upon the words of our Lord says
thus, Our Lord and Savior concluded with these words, saying, These shall go
away Matthew. 25. 46
into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life Eternal. It is life
Eternal that is here promised. Because men love to live here upon earth,
therefore life is promised unto them: And because they are much afraid to die,
therefore life Eternal is promised unto them. What would thou have? Life?
Well, thou shall have it. What art thou afraid of? Is it Death? Well, thou
shall not suffer it. But they which shall be tormented in Hell* fire, shall
have a desire to die; and death shall fly from them. To live long therefore,
is no great matter; yea more, To live always, is no great matter; but To live
blessed, that is a thing to be desired, that is a great matter indeed.

Therefore thou shall live in heaven, and shall never die; There shall thou
live blessed for evermore: for neither shall thou suffer any evil, neither
shall thou be in fear of suffering; for there, it is impossible to suffer any
evil. There shall thou possess whatsoever thou can desire; and what thou
possessest, thou shall desire still to possess. Thou can not be cast out of
possession: And this shall satisfy thee. It was there, that David did expect
to have his thirst quenched, and his hunger satisfied. In thy presence is
fullness of joy, at Psalm. 16. 11*
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore: and again, My soul Psalm. 141.
6*
thirsts after thee: and yet again, As for me, I will behold thy face Psalm.
17. 1^*
in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.
This is a new and a strange voice for a King: He has his table well furnished
with all kinds of dishes; and yet as if he were hunger-starved he hopes to be
filled at another table: His own bread and his own wine would not serve his
turn, to appease his hunger, or to quench his thirst. There was other bread
that he had a mind to, and other liquour that he so thirsted after, the bread
of heaven, and the water of life. For what is the plenty and abundance of all
the Kings of the earth? It is nothing else but mere want. And what is the
dainty fare at their great tables? It is but like the beggars pitcher, if it
be compared with the fatness of Gods house, and his heavenly table. Come eat
and drink, and be filled my beloved, shall the King of heaven say. This feast
of mine shall never be ended; there shall come no sorrow after it: As it is To
day, so shall it be For ever and ever. Neither can Saint Augustine here contain
himself: but he breaks forth again into this exclamation, Oh life of lives
surpassing all life! Oh everlasting life! Oh life blessed for ever? where there
is joy without sorrow, rest without labor, riches without loss, health
without sickness (there is no such matter in this life) abundance without
defect, life without death, perpetuity without corruptibilitie, beatitude
without calamity; where all good things are in perfect charity, where all
knowledge is in all things, and through all things, where the Majesty of God
is seen in presence, where the mind of the beholders is filled with the bread
of life: They always behold Gods presence, and still they desire to behold it;
they desire to behold it, and yet without anxietie; they are satisfied with it,
and yet without satietie.

And that thou may understand and know, good Christian brother, that this
superexcellent glory, these celestial riches, this heavenly kingdom is to be
bought, hear what the same Saint Augustine says; I have to sell, says God, I
have to sell; come and buy it. Lord what is it that thou have to sell? I have
rest: Come and buy it. What is the price of it? The price is labor. And how
much labor is Eternal rest worth? If thou will speak the truth and judge
aright, Eternal rest is worth Eternal labor. It is true indeed; but do not
fear: For God is merciful. For should thy labor be Eternal, thou should
never attain to rest Eternal: But that thou may attain at length to rest
Eternal, therefore thy labor shall not be Eternal; not but that it is worth
so much, but that thou may at length get the possession of it. Indeed it is
worth the price, though it be labor Eternal; But that it may be purchased and
possessed, it is necessary that the price thereof be but labor Temporal.
Therefore Christian brethren, let us rouse up our selves, and stir up one
another with this exhortation of Saint Augustine which here follows.

Let us set before our eyes the August.
life which is Eternal, and let us well consider the nature of it, which we
shall come the better to understand, by removing from it whatsoever we account
troublesome in this life. For it is easier to find what it is not, rather then
what it is. And yet it is set to sale. Thou may buy it, if thou will* Thou
shall not need to be much troubled or turmoiled about it, for the greatness of
the price. The price is whatsoever thou have, and no more. Never examine what
thou have, but consider what thou art. It is worth thy buying, though thou
give thy self for it. Give thy self, and thou shall have it. What? Art thou
to seek thy self? Art thou to buy thy self? Behold, such as thou art, if thou
can be content to give thy self, thou shall have it. But thou will be ready
to say it may be, Alack! I am a wicked man; And such a man perhaps will not be
received for good payment: If thou be not already good, do but give thy
self, and by so doing thou shall become good, and go for current. Do but make a
faithful promise to give thy self; and this shall make thee good: And being
made good thou art a price of thy self good enough: And thou shall have, as I
said, not only health, safety, life, and such like as shall have an end; but
also thou shall be freed from many miseries: Thou shall neither be wearied nor
stand in need of rest, thou shall neither hunger nor thirst, neither increase
nor decrease, neither grow young nor wax old, because there is no being born
there; For there is full growth and stature, and the entire and perfect number
of years. There is no number like unto it: For as it has no need of being
augmented, so is there no fear of being diminished: Behold what excellent
things are spoken of it! And yet I cannot come near telling thee what it is,
or what good things are treasured up in it: For, as it is written, Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man. And how
should my mouth be able to utter what the heart of man is not able to conceive?

And because we have gone along through S. Augustines books as it were through
so many pleasant gardens, and are now brought at length to the Celestial
Paradise, Let us seal and confirm what hitherto has been spoken, by the
testimony of the same Father. If we were every day, says he, to suffer all
torments, yea the torments of Hell it self, and that for a long time together,
to the end that we might behold Christ in his glory, and have communion and
fellowship with the Saints: were it not worth our pains and sufferings? Who
would not suffer any sorrow, to be made partaker of so much good, and so great
glory? Let the Devils then lie in wait for me, let them assault with
tentations; let my body be brought down with fasting, let my flesh be kept
under with pressure; let me be wearied with labors, let my moisture be dried
up with watching; let one man clamor against me, let another disquiet me; let
me be bowed together with cold, let me be set on fire with heat; let my
conscience murmr, let my head ache, let my breast be inflamed, let my stomach
be troubled with ventosities, let my countenance wax pale and bleak, let me be
full of infirmities; let my life consume away with grief, and my years with
mourning; let rottenness enter into my bones, and let it spring up like a
fountain under my feet; Let all these miseries come upon me, so that I may have
rest and consolation in the day of tribulation, and ascend up unto the people
of the Lord. For, What shall be the glory of the just, and how great shall the
joy of the Saints be, when every face shall shine as the Sun! When the Lord
shall begin to reckon up his people in their distinct orders, in his Fathers
kingdom; and when he shall render unto every man according to his works, the
rewards which he has promised, that is Heavenly for Earthly, and Eternal for
Temporal.

Think therefore upon the days of old, and call to mind the years which are
yet for to come. Think upon Eternity, O man, think upon Eternity; Think upon
the Eternity of Torment, and the Eternity of Joy, which is to follow after
this short life ended, and I dare warrant thee, thou will never complain of any
adversity, thou will never let slip out of thy mouth such a word as this, This
is too grievous, or, This is intolerable, or, This is too hard: Thou will, I
dare say, count all things easy and tolerable whatsoever can happen in this
life, and thou will never be better pleased then when thou art most afflicted.

It is reported by John Moschus of one Olympius, an old man of singular
patience, who lived cloystered up in a Monastery near unto Jordan, that he
had his mind so bent and fixed continually upon Eternity, that he had scarce
any sense or feeling at all of any temporal sorrow or misery. For (as he goes
on with his story) Upon a time, as it happened, a certain religious man turned
out of his way to visit him, and finding him in a dark Cell, a place, as he
thought, inhabitable by reason of heat and swarms of gnats and other flies, not
without much admiration spoke thus unto him, And can thou, Olympius, endure
to live in such a close room, so exceeding hot, and so much pressed with gnats
and swarms of flies? But what did Olympius answer? And do thou wonder at
this? I tell thee, my son, all these are but light matters; I count them
tolerable, that so I may escape Eternal torments, which are intolerable. I can
endure to be stung by gnats, that so I may not feel the sting of Conscience,
and the gnawing of the worm that never dies. This heat which thou so
complainest of I can suffer easily, when I think upon the Eternal fire of
Hell, which is unsufferable. These troubles, if I may so call them, are but
short, and shall have an end* But the torments in Hell are without end.
Whereupon said the other, Certainly, Olympius, thou art led by the spirit of
wisdom and truth; so wisely and truly have thou answered. I would there were
more of thy mind, that would think thus seriously upon these things! Then
certainly there would be more then there are now adays, that would after thy
example patiently suffer and endure all things.

CHAP. III. The Conclusion of all.
ZEuxis the most famous for his skill amongst all the ancient Painters that we
have heard of, was observed to be very slow at his work, and to let no piece of
his go abroad into the world to be seen of men, till he had turned it over and
over, this side and that side, again and again, to see if he could spy any
fault in it: And being upon a time asked the reason why he was so curious, why
so long in drawing his lines, and so slow in the use of his pencill, he made
this answer, I am long a doing whatsoever I take in hand, because what I paint,
I paint for Eternity. And thus stands the case with all, we paint also for
Eternity. Whatsoever we do, it so belongs unto Eternity, that a man may
truly say of it thus, I write, I read, I sing, I pray, I labor, whatsoever I
do, whatsoever I say, whatsoever I think, all is For Eternity. Now if this be
the nature of our thoughts, words and deeds, if they shall remain For all
Eternity, we had need have a care what we think, speak or do; it concerns us
to look about us, to mind our business, not to go negligently and sleepily
about our work, not to let any thing go out of our hands rude and imperfect,
but to polish and perfect it with all the care, skill and industry that we can
use. We paint with Zeuxis For Eternity. When we have done our works, they are
presently transmitted to Eternity, to be viewed by a most judicious and
all-seeing eye, that no fault can escape; and being viewed and censured they
are to be committed either to be Eternally punished or Eternally rewarded. What
I have said before I here say again, because it cannot be said too often,
though I should say it a thousand times; Whatsoever we think, speak, or do,
once thought, spoke, or done, it is Eternal, it abides for ever.

Will you hear what S. Gregory Greg.
says? In all our actions we must use great care and circumspection, we must
well weigh and consider with our selves what it is that we take in hand, and to
what end we do it, that our minds be not set upon any thing that is Temporal,
but upon those things which are Eternal. Therefore in all thy actions labor
to be perfect. Pray for Eternity, study for Eternity, suffer for Eternity,
contend for Eternity, labor for Eternity. So live to God, that thou may
live with God; So live on Earth, that thou may live in Heaven; So live for
Eternity, that thou may live to Eternity.

Hear also what S. Bernard says, Bernard.
Our works do not pass away as soon as they are done (as they may seem to do)
but as seeds sown in time they rise up to all Eternity. The foolish man which
has no understanding will wonder to see such a plentiful increase rise up of
such little seeds, be it good or be it evil, according to the nature of the
seed which is sown. But he that is wise will ponder these things, and count no
sin little: For he has an eye still not to that which is present, but to
that which is to come; not to that which is sown, but to that which is reaped;
not to that which is done in time, but to that which remains to all Eternity.

Oh the dangerous and miserable madness of the sons of Adam! God created us
unto the possession of infinite and Eternal goods: And why are we carried then
with the whole bent of our affections to those things which are flitting and
vanishing? God made us heirs of Heaven and Eternal possessions: And why do we
so miserably entangle our selves in our vanities, and run headlong to
destruction? Let us be wise in time, let us look well to our steps, let us make
speed on the way of Eternity: Let us so live that we may live to Eternity.
The way thither is short and narrow, but the Term thereof is very large.

But O miserable and foolish men that we are! We fain would obtain Eternal
life; but we are loath to tread in the way that leads to it: we fain would be
there; but we will not take pains to go thither. Every man desires to be
blessed. There is no man, says Saint Augustine, August
of what condition or degree soever he be, but has a desire after that life
which is blessed for ever: Therefore that life is the common haven at which all
men desire to arrive; but all men know not how to steer their course aright:
It is a thing which all men without controversy would fain possess; but how
to compass it, what course to take, which way to go, that is the point they
cannot agree upon. We may seek it long enough upon earth; and it is a question,
whether we shall ever find it or no: Not that I condemn the seeking of it,
but the not seeking it in the right place. One is of opinion that the Soldiers
life is most blessed: but another denies that, and says, The life of the
Husbandman is most blessed: And again, this another denies, and says that the
Lawyers life is most blessed; and he gives his reason for it: For the Lawyer is
worshipped by the people, and is much sought unto, he is ever taking of fees
and pleading causes.

And again, this another denies, and says, The Judges life is most blessed:
For he has power of hearing causes and deciding them. And yet again, another
denies this, and says, The Merchants life is most blessed: For he sees diverse
countries, learns many fashions, gathers together much wealth. You see, dearly
beloved, in so many several kinds of lives there is not any one to be found
that will please all. But the life blessed for ever, that is it which pleases
all.

Blessedness therefore is not to be expected here, but is to be sought for
elsewhere, and never to be found out but by a good and godly death. Ungodly men
themselves desire to die the death of the godly, but they will not live the
life of the godly: For to die well is the way to felicity; but to live well is
matter of labor: And yet that is not to be obtained without this. Eternity
depends upon death: and there is no dying well, without living well. Choose
which thou will, life or death. If thou live well, thou can not but die
well; and it shall be well with thee for ever: If thou live not well, thou
can not hope to die well; but it will be ill with thee for ever.

Not many years ago a man of a good house, having more wit in his head, then
religion in his heart, being asked what he thought of the strict lives of the
religious, and the loose lives of the licentious, which he esteemed best,
answered thus, I could wish to live like the licentious, but to die like the
religious. Some wit there might be in his answer, but I am sure there was
little religion in it. He had spoke like a Christian man, if he had said thus,
I desire to live the life of the religious, that my end may be like his. Balaam
could say, Let me die the death of the N^m. 23. 10
righteous, and let my last end be like his. But he had said a great deal
better, if he had said thus, Let me live the life of the righteous, that I may
die the death of the righteous, and that my last end may be like his. For
whosoever lives the life of the godly, shall be sure to die the death of the
godly: And whosoever lives the life of the ungodly, shall be sure to die the
death of the ungodly; once he shall die, but that once shall be always, and
that always for ever and ever.

A certain Soldier being called in question by Lam^chus a Centurion, for some
misdemeanour or other committed in the camp, earnestly desired pardon for that
once, and promised never to offend in the like kind again: But the Centurion
made him this answer, In bello, bone vir, non licebit bis peccare; Oh Sir, know
you thus much, There is no offending in war twice. But in death (alas!) there
is no offending once: There is no hope of pardon. Once dead, and always dead.
He that dies once ill, is damned for ever. There is no returning again to life,
to amend what was done amiss. There is no appealing from the sentence of
condemnation, if it be once passed. As death leaves a man, so judgment finds
him; and as judgment leaves him, so Eternity finds him.

It is the saying of Iphicrates, That it is a shame for an Emperor at any time
to say with the fool, Non putaram, I did not think it: But it is a greater
shame for a Christian man to say, Non putaram, I did not think there had been
such a difference between a chaste life and a voluptuous life. I did not think
that Eternity was to follow after this life. I did not think that I should
have died so suddenly. Alas! Alas! How sleepily do we go about the business of
Eternity! whereas the nature of this mortal life of ours is such, that we
cannot be certain at any time that we shall live for any time, no not so much
as for one minute: when as we know for certain that we must depart from hence,
and yet are most uncertain at what hour we shall depart; and when that hour
shall come, then also we shall seem not so much to have lived, as to have
posted unto death in a moment. Here we are but as sojourners in a strange land,
and not as citizens in our own country; we are but Tenants at will, and not
Freeholders: Will we, nill we, we must depart. For here have we no Hebr. 13. 14
continuing City, but we seek one to come.

The holy Prophet Baruch asks Baruch ^. 1^.
this question, Where are the Princes of the heathen become, and such as ruled
the beasts upon the earth, that hoorded up silver 17.
and gold, and made no end of their getting? Do they retain and keep their
kingdoms and their glory still? Not so: For thus says the Prophet answering
his own question, They are vanished and gone 19
down to the grave, and others are come up in their steads. They are vanished,
says the Prophet; For they were but sojourners and no citizens: they are gone,
and others are come up in their steads: their houses are let out to others, and
they are cast out themselves, and gone down to the grave. But if the question
be asked again, Where are the Princes of heaven, whose dwelling is above the
seventh Sphere, where are they? It may be answered likewise that They are also
vanished, and others are come in their steads; but they are translated to the
kingdom of heaven, there to abide for ever, without all fear of being
dispossessed.

Let us crown our selves with Visd. ^. 8.
Rose buds, sing those men of most loose and deplorate lives. Why with Rose
buds? Because the beauty and smell of them is gone in one day, and they are
withered: and such fading crowns do best become those which shall shortly
perish. But as for the Blessed, it is not so with them, but they are crowned
with jewels and precious stones whose beauty never fades. The woman
mentioned in the Revelation had upon her head a crown, not of Rose buds of the
garden, nor of jewels of the sea, but of the Stars of heaven. As then the
heavenly orbs are incorruptible, so likewise they that inhabit them are
incorruptible, they are not subject to any change, they are immortal. The
righteous ^^sd. ^5.
live for evermore. All worldly things are transitory, but heavenly things are
everlasting. Here are we wearied with labor, but there shall we be refreshed
with Eternal rest. Why do we seek for rest before our labor is ended? We are
yet upon the Stage; Therefore we must act our parts: We have to deal with
potent enemies; Therefore we must be always prepared to fight: We are still in
our race; Therefore we must hold out to the last. Let us then so act our parts,
that the Angels may rejoice to be Spectatours; let us so fight, that we may
win the Crown; let us so run, that we may obtain.

Well says S. Gregory, If we Greg^
well consider with our selves what and how great things are promised unto us
in heaven, all things on earth will seem vile unto us: For what tongue can
sufficiently express, or what heart conceive, how great the joys be in that
City which is above? Where we shall bear a part in the heavenly Quire with
Angels evermore lauding and praising God; where we shall be in Gods presence,
and see him face to face; where we shall behold light incomprehensible; where
we shall be in no fear of death; where we shall have the privilege of heavenly
Saints and Citizens, to be for ever incorruptible. Me thinks I find my mind
inflamed and set on fire whilst I am speaking of these joys; and me thinks it
should set on fire all that hear it. Me thinks it should so work upon us all,
that even now we should most earnestly and ardently desire to be there, where
we hope to be for ever hereafter. But thus much we must know, That there is no
coming there without much labor. It is not I, but Paul the Preacher that says
it, A man is not crowned except Tim. ^5.
he strive lawfully. Let then the greatness of the reward encourage us, and
prick us forward, and let not the labor and pains, the short labor and the
little pains hinder us, or keep us back. We must go on, and we must go on with
perseverance: we must not so much consider the roughness of the way, as the
blessed Eternity which is the end thereof. And this, the same holy Father
declares most excellently, saying, This is a special badge and cognizance of
the elect, that they know how to carry themselves in the way of this present
life in such manner, that by the certainty of hope they are assured that they
have attained unto a great pitch, in as much as they see all transitory things
far beneath them, and for the love of Eternity trample all sublunarie things
under their feet. And this is it which the Lord speaks by the mouth of his
holy Prophet, saying unto every soul that follows him, I will lift thee up
above the high places of the earth. For as for losses, reproaches, poverty,
disgrace and such like, these are, as I may so call them, the lower places of
the earth, which the lovers of this world, as they walk through the plain of
the broad way, do not love to come near, but keep off as far as is possible.
But as for gain and profit, the fawning and flattering of inferiors, abundance
of riches, honors, and places of dignity, these are the high places of the
earth, which whosoever is worldly minded, and has settled his affections on
things here below, he, I say, esteems highly; because to him they seem great:
But whosoever is heavenly minded, and has settled his affections on things
above, he, I say, esteems them not; because to him they seem what they are,
that is, vile and base. For as it is with a man going up an high mountain,
still the higher he goes, the lower he sees the earth beneath him: So is it
with him whose conversation is in heaven, The higher he mounts from the earth
with the wings of pious cogitations, the farther he flies from the earth with
the wing of his affections. He knows that all the glory of this world is
nothing, and therefore his thoughts and affections are altogether upon another
world. This is the man that is lifted up above the high places of the earth.

You have heard what S. Gregory says: It will not be amiss in the next place
to hear likewise what Saint Augustine says. What is that? It is a lesson
worth our learning. That which we must lose, August
says he, one time or other upon necessity, it is wisdom to distribute
abroad in time, that we may purchase thereby the reward of Eternity. Moses
lived long indeed, he lived in health; but at length Deuteronomy. 34. 5.
he died: Methuselah lived longer then he; but it follows, And he Genesis 5. 27.
died. This is, or shall be every man's Epitaph, Et mortuus est, And he died.
For we must needs die, 2. Sam. 14. 14.
and are as water spilt on the ground. But the soul is immortal, it is
Eternal, it shall live for ever, either in Eternal glory, or else in Eternal
torments. Here our lot is cast, in which Eternity we shall have part, and
there is no revoking it. Oh blessed Eternity, oh Eternal blessedness! How
comes it to pass, that seldom or never we think upon thee; or, if we do at
any time, we do it but upon the by? How comes it to pass, that we do not
labor more for thee, that we do not seek for thee, that we are not sollicitous
for thee. O Lord God open thou our eyes, that we may see and know what
Eternity is, both that of glory, and that other of torment, and how infinite
both; how blessed the one, and how miserable the other. Thou have created us
unto thee, Thou have created us unto Eternity; For thou art Eternity. Thou
would have us be partakers of thy Eternity; Lord let it be according to thy
will. Thou have said it; Lord let it be according to thy word. Thou have
promised; Lord make good thy promise, Make us partakers of thy Eternity. Grant
that we may spend the short moment of time granted unto us here in this life,
Grant, we beseech thee, that we may spend it in such a religious and godly
manner, as men that labor for Eternity, contend for Eternity, suffer for
Eternity. To this end cause thy ministers often to call upon us to think still
upon Eternity; make us call one upon another in every place to think upon
Eternity, that so by thy mercy we may reign with thee, O Eternity; and as
many, as it is possible, may be kept from perishing everlastingly. Hear this
ye Christians all, hear it ye Pagans, hear it ye Kings and Princes, hear it
ye Germans, hear it ye French, hear it ye English, yea let all the world
hear it. There can be no sufficient security, where there is danger of losing
Eternity.

Oh long, Oh profound, Oh bottomless, Oh Eternal Eternity! Blessed are they
O Lord, that dwell Psalm. 84. 4.
in thy house: they shall be still praising thee. They shall praise thee
throughout infinite myriads of ages.

Moses being near unto his death, commending unto God in his prayers his
people Israel, and blessing them, thus took his leave of the tribe of Asher and
said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let Deuteronomy. 33. 24
him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil. Thy 25.
shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy strength be.
There is none like unto the God of 26.
Jesurun, who rides upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the
sky. The Eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms.
Thus God stretches forth the arms of his power throughout heaven infinitely:
and by his arms all the world, all time, and all things in the world are
directed, guided, and governed. So God from the beginning, yea from the
Eternity of his predestination, has carried in his breast all the godly, and
does protect them daily and hourly, and as it were embraces them with his
arms. Ascend therefore, O my soul, and have no more to do with earth and clay.
Stretch forth thy self, and ascend up unto him that rides upon the heavens,
ascend up unto thy God, whose dwelling is in the highest mountains, those
mountains of Eternity: There shall thou sit in safety, and behold the earth
beneath: and so shall thou plainly perceive how little and of none esteem all
things are here below, which now either solicit thee with love, or terrify
thee with fear; thou shall plainly perceive what a small thing it is,
whatsoever is contained within the Center of the world, that little globe, or
point of earth; thou shall plainly perceive how that all things created are
vain, weak, short, vile, yea vanity it self, yea rather mere nothing in
respect of God and of Eternity. Therefore seek thou after the only true and
sovereign good, and regard not other things. Trust in God, rely on him, open
thy heart wide to entertain him; tread under the feet of thy affections
whatsoever is under the Sun and Moon, whatsoever allureth thee with smiles,
or terrifieth thee with frowns; think upon Eternity, and always keep in mind
that excellent saying of Saint Hierome, No labor must seem hard, no time must
seem long, all the while we are seeking after Eternal glory.

It is reported by Saint Hierome, that there was upon a time a certain Camel
haunted by an evil spirit, which being brought before Hilarion a devout and
godly man, began to rage in such a strange and terrible manner, as if it would
presently have devoured him: But the holy man nothing afraid spoke thus unto
the evil spirit, Do not think to fright me, thou evil spirit, although that
thou have got a Camel on thy back; it is all one to me, whether thou come in
a Camels skin or in a Foxes skin: And presently the fierce Camel fell down
before him, and became very tame and gentle, to the great laughter of all those
that stood by. Such are all flatteries, fawnings, allurements, and tentations
of this world; such are all fears, frowns, frights and terrors. What do thou
hope for? what do thou fear? what do thou love? He that rides upon the
Heavens is thy helper; he shall embrace thee with his everlasting arms. With
those arms of his, he is able to fetter all thine enemies whether they fawn or
frown upon thee, he is able at a beck to squeeze them in pieces like so many
flies, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Does the pleasure then
of lust, or gluttony, or intemperance solicit thee? That is nothing: Be not
moved at it, pass it by, regard it not; think rather upon the pleasures which
are Eternal. Art thou terrified with threats, oppressed with sorrows, passed
by with contempt, afflicted with sickness, tired out with poverty? All these
are a matter of nothing. The more violent these are, the shorter while they
will last: Despise them, lift up thine eyes unto the hills from whence comes
thy help, look up to heaven, Think upon Eternity. There shall no evil happen
unto the Prove. 12. 21.
just. Si fractus illabatur orbis, Horat. Carm. lib. 3. Od. 3.

Impavidum ferient ruinae.
The just man shall not be afraid,
Though heaven fall upon his head.


Therefore the just man is never sorrowful: no tribulation does ever assault
him. But, Are not the tribulations of the just many? Yea* but yet they make
nothing of them. That only they count evil, which is Eternal, which
separateth a man from God, as sin does, and Eternal death which is the wages
of sin. The Preacher of the Gentiles bids us Look not at the things ^. Cor.
^. 18.
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. Why so? For* says he,
The things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
Eternal. The things which are not seen, the things which are Eternal, those
are the things which are great indeed, whether they be good, or whether they be
evil.

But whilst we look only at the things which are seen, and seldom or never
at the things which are not seen, what do we make of our selves but great and
foolish boys? great, but yet foolish; at the best, but boys. If the ice fall
out of our hands, we presently fall a crying, and yet that is such a thing that
we cannot hold long: We are frighted at shadows, and dream of great matters: We
spend our selves on such things as not only shall shortly pass away for
certain, but are already passing away: For it is not said, The figure, or The
fashion 1. Cor. 7. 31.
of this world shall pass away, In the Future: But, The fashion of this world
passes away, In the Present. It is passing away already. As all the goods
which we enjoy here, are but transitory; So all the evils which we suffer
here, are but transitory; they cannot continue long. Those things which are
not seen, and those only have a permanent state; they know no end, they have
no term, they are not subject to any change, they are firm, they are
immovable, they are Eternal. I repeat it again, what I said a little before;
for it deserves to be repeated a thousand and a thousand times; No labor must
seem hard, Hierom
no time must seem long, all the while we are seeking after Eternal glory.

Symphorianus a Christian young man after that he was almost scourged to death,
as he was dragged to execution at Augustodunum, met his mother upon the way;
But how? Not tearing the hair from her head, or rending her clothes, or laying
open her breasts, or making grievous lamentation as the manner of foolish women
is to do: But carrying her self like an Heroical and Christian Lady. For she
cried out and called unto her son and said, Son, my son I say, remember
life Eternal, look up to heaven, lift up thine eyes to him that reigns
there. Life is not taken from thee, but is exchanged for a better. At which
words of his mother the young man was so exceedingly animated, that he went
willingly to execution, and cheerfully like a stout champion laid down his head
upon the block, and exposed his throat to the fatal ax.

Hear this, O Christians all, and remember your selves. This is the case of
every man living; We are on our way to death; we go not so fast, it may be, as
Symphorianus ^id; but yet we are all going, and we have not far to go. The
noble armies of Martyrs which are gone before us, they call unto us from
heaven, and say as the Christian and courageous mother said unto her son as
he was going to execution, Remember life Eternal, look up to heaven, and lift
up your eyes to him that reigns there. Carry thy self therefore like a
Symphorian, whosoever professest thy self to be a Christian. Do not hang back,
be not loath to go, withdraw not thy neck from the yoke, nor thy shoulders from
the cross; be not afraid to suffer for Christ, be not afraid to die for
Christ, be not afraid to eat fire, or to devour the sword for the name of
Christ. Here show thy self a man, take good courage, pull up a good heart. And
when thou art at any time tempted, when thou art grieved, when thou art made
sorrowful, when thou art vexed, when thou art despised, when thou art made a
laughing stock, when thou art disgraced, when thou art spoiled of thy goods,
when it is with thee as it was with Job upon the dunghill, or, if it can be,
worse: then call to mind Symphorian, and a thousand more stout Christians such
as he was, and learn of them Christian courage and magnanimity, and boldly and
freely break forth into these words, and repeat them often; Whatsoever I suffer
here, it is but a Modicum, it is but short. Farewell then all the world, and
all the things that are therein: And welcome to me, Thou art welcome Eternity.

Of Eternity there is no. FINIS.

