THE SECRETARY OF LADIES. OR, A new collection of Letters and Answers, composed
by Modern Ladies and Gentlewomen, Collected by Mounsieur Du BOSQVE. Translated
out of French by I. H.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, for William Hope, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Unicorn in Cornehill near the Royal Exchange. 1638.

TO MY LADY the Countess of DORSET, Governesse to the DVKE of YORK.
Madam,
YOur pardon, if it be presumption, my self but newly admitted, to prefer
others to your service. It Is a sin I could not be drawn to commit, but to
avoid a greater. So I conceive each Casuist ranks the breach of vows: which
would be my obliquity, should I offer at any other Altar these first fruits
of my poor endeavors. The French Collector (so he s^iles himself) presents
these Letters to the world with a French familiar confidence: Ra^ing them
sufficiently accomplished to merit entertainment. His courage cannot cure my
fear, knowing they must pass the censure (at least if you daigne them a view)
of one (then he conceits his work) far more accomplished: and not being
ignorant, that this English habit, made by a stranger to the tongue, more to
the Courtly dress, may much blemish their native beauty: My comfort is without
wrack of reputation, they may want some of their original ornaments; but
could I hope your approbation to trifles hardly worth your eye, I durst be
bold, this would procure them more grace, than they have lost by their
Translator. But, Madam, it is too much, I dare not beg it; my most ambitious
prayer shall be, regarding my unworthy sacrifice, you would vouchsafe not to
disdaigne i^. Reserve your acceptance for more deserving strains; your praise
for those that more directly tend to ki^dle flame of piety: Your not r^j^cting
those will prove a sufficient pasport, and help them travel the British
world without affront, or enemy: where I am confident there does not breath
such a schismaticke to civility, that, in so trivial a point, will not wave
his opinion, to one that governes his hopes. In which belief I devote these
papers to the fate you please decree them. My only intent in exposing them
was, to give some testimony of a thankful heart: If I have mist the way, it
cannot be denied I had a will to find it; and mist nothing but fit means to
inform the world that I am,

Madam, Your most humble, and devoted servant, Jerome Hainhofer, Patritius
Augustanus.

The Authors Dedication TO MADAM DE PISIEVX.
Madam,
I Should peradventure have made some difficulty to offer you any book but
this, fearing to demand an unjust protection, or to make you a present unworthy
of your self: But th^se Ladies which I tender you are so accomplished. I could
not cherish the least fear to produce them, without sinning against their
merit, and the judgment you know to make in things of value. Nevertheless how
perfect soever they be, they acknowledge a necessity of your approbation to
appear in the world: And, that if this good fail them, all their fair
dresses, and ornaments can gain them a reputation but imperfect. Behold them
then in posture to do the homage they owe you, and to learn from your mouth
what credit they may hope from others. Behold the wonders of our age, which
come to reverence the rare qualities that France admires in you: And to consult
the oracle which must declare their good, or bad fortune. Confident they are to
disp lease none, if they be but so happy to please you, and that by the
general esteem you are in, your judgment shall be the rule to all others.
Receive them Madam, as creatures whom the report of your name and virtue has
acquired, And that will not show themselves abroad with your pass: Refuse not
your favor to these fair unknown, which enter not into the world, but to
vindicate the honor of dames, and to make it appear that Letters are not the
peculiar heritage of one sex; and that men are out, when they va^t themselves
sole Monarchs in the Empire of the sciences. For my self, Madam, who do but
lend a hand to their enterprise, I confess I am ravished to see them fall into
your arms, and that besides the luster of their own beauty, they shall borrow
that of yours, to render them pleasing as your self, to all that have eyes,
and reason. I cannot cease to commend their choice, seeing it must be imagined,
Noble as you are, you will be taken with their courage: and while they travail
in a design so glorious, I assure my self you will second their endeavors,
And that your countenance, approbation, and spirit, shall bring them more than
half their victory, and triumph, Thus hopes

Madam, Your most humble, and most obedient servant, Du Bosque.

An advertisement to the Reader, by a friend of the Collector.
BE not astonished to see this Collection come out in print, he that has taken
the pains, to make it had reason to think that after you had read the letters
of so many ingenious men, you would take it well to see these offers of women.
There is no color to say it will becomes their sex: for i^ it be not amiss
that they are able to m^ke a complement, you must not think it strange that
they can write one. It Is the principal subject of these Letters, which are not
confused nor shufled together, as many others which the vulgar esteem good.
They are not treatises, nor orations; they are no deep discourses wherein
there is nothing smells of a Letter, but Sir your servant. But it is not
needfull^ to witness these good, that I make others appe^re ill. I will only
say that if the^e be any who cannot yet consent that Gentlewomen should write,
I assure my self this book will convert them* where they shall (...) so many
things of worth, they shall (...) ^ompeld to renounce their ignoranc^ (...)
^nvy, for by one of these names I (...) call the cause of their error, which I
would farther oppose if these Ladies had need of my Apology, but they defend
themselves better by neglect, than those (...) deserve. And I will content my
self to say, that if this age has seen many that write with approbation of
all the world upon the most important matters Religion, and morality, we need
not make it such a marvel that they can endite good letters, seeing they can
make good books. But it is time to finish this advertisement; and I vow I am
to blame to detain the reader from the book it self, where he shall receive
much more satisfaction, than I am able to promise.

THE SECRETARY of LADIES.
The first Letter.
She prays her to return to Pari^, and bring her in dislike with the Country.

MAdam, provided you have a just opinion of your own merit, you cannot fail
in that you o^ght to have of our grief: Remember your self only of the
pleasure your presence brings us, to comprehend what your absence takes from
us; and you will easily aver that the loss of so great a good is no less
worthy of our tears, than the possession of our joy. Those that have the
knowledge of your rare qualities, cannot be ignorant of our complaints: they
may judge the effects by their cause. Consider next, if there be any among us,
that do not make vows for your return, since it must restore alacrity to all
your acquaintance. And to tell you of our fear as well as our desire, would it
not be a wonderful change, if you should accustom your self to live among
Barbarians, and being capable of the best company, confine to perpetual
solitude, Remember, it is two months since we have lost you; and if this term
seem long to us at Paris, it cannot be short to you in the Country. But this
is not enough: weigh in your mind that these two months you have not seen
this fair City, whereof the sole remembrance is sufficient to render other
places undelightfull. I think you do not so much love the deserts, that
though our happiness consist in your return, we should have no ground to
hope it: After all this if you have lost the desire to come back to Paris, it
is because you have lost your memory, for not to affect a return, you must
wholly forget that you have been there. Finally, never was promise better
kept, than that we made you, not to take collations in our walks: Your fair
Duchess is so exact in the point, she would make a conscience in the hottest
season to drink fountain water; she has no mind to quench her thirst,
being afraid to be refresht: Albeit she might less incommodate herself
without breaking promise, she dares not so much as think of it without
scruple. To be entirely fai^hfull to you, she will admit neither
interpretation, nor dispensation. Hasten then your return, and if you have yet
any feeling of pity, show it to so many that do petition you. Write so much
as you please, your letters may assuage our evil, but never cure it; our
sadness is measured by your absence. Nevertheless, we can assure you, that if
it diminish our delight, it does not our affection: especially that which I
have to be

Madam, Your most humble, etc.

The first Answer.
She Answers, that besides the loss of their conversation, she is vexed with
that of the Country: and that she will never make vow of solitude while she can
hope the honor of their company.

MAdam, I must begin my Letter where you end yours, to assure you that I have
too great an opinion of your good will to think it can diminish in my absence.
I believe that my return will not augment your friendship, but your joy: And
that it will render you more contented, not more affectionate: do not imagine I
speak this out of the good opinion I have of my self, but for that I conceive
of your constancy; if I should judge your desire by my merit, I should have
little cause to lament you: And if you had no other apprehension of me, than I
have of my self, you should be without regret, as I am without vanity, I must
then, that I may believe you, surveigh my self by another measure: and ought
to think that if indeed you have any grief, it is because I want the blessing
of your company and not you mine; your charity doubtless gives you this
feeling, and did I take it otherwise, I should declare no less presumption,
than you do courtesy; say what you please I am far more worthy, than you,
but it is of compassion* and wish in that we are separated the cause of our
sorrow were but equal. The advantage lies on your side in being at Paris,
where the greatest discontent may find diversion, and the sickest soul expect
some remedy: I on the contrary, am in a wild Country, where all familiarity is
a punishment. I am deprived of yours, and tired with theirs who are
impertinent, and importune. I have a double cause of pain, the privation of a
great good, and the sufferance of a great ill. You cannot be so unhappy at
Paris, where I left you in company good enough to make you forget mine: mean
while, that I meet with none here, which make me not sigh for yours. Be it so
then, that when you think on me it be not without grief, this cannot equal
what I suffer for so many excellent Dames, I alone loose many, and all you but
one alone. I ought to reckon the causes of my sorrow so many as you are most
accomplished Ladies: or rather so many as are the lovely qualities which each
of you possesses. Now if we measure the greatness of displeasure by that of
the object, judge how much I suffer, by what I have lost, And you will grant
that I have reason to seek my consolation where you are. Is there then any
appearance to fear that I should enure my self to the Country, or to think
that I can forget you. Never imagine I mean to make a vow of solitude, while I
dare hope the honor of your company. I entertain my self but too much with
this good fortune, whereof having at present lost the possession, I think it
would be advantageous to have also lost the memory. Nevertheless, oblivion is
a remedy too injurious: I have too much courage to consent to buy my content at
the price of ingratitude; I had rather be unfortunate than faulty, I beseech
you believe it, and continue your prayers for my return. It must needs be,
that either you are not in the state of grace, or that your petitions are
unjust, seeing they obtain so small success. I could wish that fasting, and
abstinence from your walks might remedy this; And that you should be deprived
of every pleasure, that I might the sooner obtain that of your company, which
I desive to possess with as much passion, as I have to be all my life,

Madam, Your most devoted, etc.

The II. Letter.
She entertaines her with a certain stupide fellow, who is no otherwise happy,
but in being ignorant.

MAdam, I must needs entertain you with this fellow of whom you write unto me.
I wish he might be content, I think he has no reason so to be: he is not
happy but because he is ignorant, nor has he a quiet soul, but because it
is insensible. It is no great marvel that he is without disturbance, seeing
he is without knowledge. It Is not to be counted a miracle, if those that are
blind do not ^eare lightning; If they trembl^ not like others, they are not
therein the more happy: On the contrary I suppose they would have a good sight,
yea on condition to have it sometimes dazzled. You will tell me I have read the
book you esteem so much, and that my Letter bewraies it: well, think what you
please, I believe there is no more danger to borrow a good thing from a book
we like, than to gather fruit from a tree of our own: We do not read them
merely for pleasure, but partly for use. But to return to our man; I protest
I desire not such a good fortune; I love better the restlessenesse of your
Spirit, than the tranquillity of his, I speak of those noble cares which
knowledge brings forth; and of that moderate fear which serves but to awake
the soul, and not to trouble it. The happiness of these people whereof you
write unto me, is like to that of men asleep, their spirit is quiet, because
it is not capable of disturbance. I must make you laugh as I conclude this
Letter at a comparison, which perhaps you will judge a little too high for me.
It seems that men may be set safe from the blows of misfortune, as from
those of thunder, by being very high, or very low; but in both these, albeit,
the safety be equal, the glory is not. I had rather escape a tempest being on
the mount Olympus, then in a cave. And to talk like your book (the only one
that can make me guilty of theft.) I would rather choose to be above, then
below affliction, and be thereof uncapeable by reason, rather then stupidity. I
conclude this then, beseeching you to speak no more of that matter, and not to
plead against your own Interest, in quitting that of great Spirits. You have
thereof too great a share to renounce. And if I defend them, I do but praise a
good which you possess, and I desire. I wish as many good terms to express
my thoughts upon this subject, as I have desires to serve you, and to witness
on all occasions how much I am,

Madam, Your most affectionate, etc.

The second answer.
She endeavors to prove that those that have the least spirit, have also the
least molestation.

MAdam, write what you list for great spirits, it seems to me they have more
glory, then happiness. And that it is difficult to have great splendour and
little care. It is true they are much esteemed which outshine others:
Notwithstanding I think that with all this advantage, they may be compared to
the bush in holy Scripture, which had much brightness, but yet was full of
thorns. There are indeed many sharp points under these glorious rays: There
are many cares which knowledge increases, rather then cures. Let us speak
freely, and not suffer our selves be charmed by this same fair appearance. As
those that have a fever would willingly be less sensible that they might be
less tormented, so I believe the miserable would wish their knowledge
diminished, for to diminish their affliction. In this we may speak of spirits,
as of the senses, the most delicate do soonest feel. Physic likewise, and
Philosophy do in the same manner heal the unfortunate and the diseased. The
one stupifies the sense, without which there is no sorrow: the other endeavors
to withdraw the attention, without which there is no sadness, whence you may
learn that the most ignorant are the least unfortunate. I deny not but there
are some which lift them selves above misery, and do surmount it; but I think
these are very rare: I see few that do resemble you. And to tell you who they
are, which put themselves to most pain, I believe they are neither the great
nor the little, but only the indifferent. Me thinks disquiet forms it self
in the soul, as clouds do in the Air: The Sun sometimes draws up vapors,
which afterward it can hardly disperse; and these middling Spirits precipitate
themselves into those cares, from which they can never get free, whiles great
spirits overcome discontent, and the lesser know it not, the middle sort are
entangled therein. So Christianity, reprobates the Lukewarm, from hope of
Salvation, and morality rejects them in point of civil felicity. These then
are they which have cause to complain. And whose understanding seems to me
unlucky, since it only serves to lead them into many Labyrinthes, but not to
conduct the^ out. Have I not then reason to think that those which have less
spirit, have less pain? If there be so few which vanquish affliction, is it
not sufficient that I follow the path most beaten, and content my self by
ignorance to be below evil, not being able by Judgment to lift my self above
it. Since the felicity of the lowest wits is true, I care not tho it be less
glorious then that of great sages. If it be not as noble, sure I am it is no
less pure, no less real. I speak in this my wishes, not my being, for albeit
I am without wit, I am not without perturbation. I suffer the misfortune of
those who have but little knowledge, and am deprived of their advantage, you
know it well enough, and I doubt not but if you endure my dispo^ition, it is for
my affections sake, and the desire which I have to be,

Madam, Your perfect servant.

The third Letter.
She complains that men do sometimes fall in love with those that deserve it
least, and that the deformed are very often more happy then the fair.

MAdam there is no need go into Afric, to arrive at a Country of Monsters,
our own produces but too many to seek elsewhere objects of wonder. In fine
this young man has married the old woman, It Is a choice worthy of shame for
himself, of envy for many, of admiration for all, we are young, and it is to
us a strange thing to see that in our days, she has found a fortune so
prodigious, in the decline of hers, And that any should fall in love with her,
Albeit she wants the three goods, which are thereof the ordinary cause, for
she is neither fair, nor rich, nor young. I do not doubt but she has
experience, sure I am she has age enough to get it: but I cannot cease to
admire that any man could fancy her with all her knowledge. If she deserved to
be sought unto, it was like some Sibil, I mean to be consulted, not beloved, I
think she is more fit to teach, then to please, and more worthy to have
Scholars then Suitors, what will they say of Lidian? will it not seem that he
had more charity then love, and that he took her not, but out of mere pity
to succor oldage. If strangers find them together, they will take her for his
mother, not his wife. I do not yet tell you all, I protest I cannot. Nature
gave her nothing amiable, which old age could take from her. Time cannot ravish
away those goods she never possessed. All it could do, is only to make her
more aged, not more ill favored. She is rather an old deformity then, woman.
It might well deprive her of strength, but not of beauty. It has touched
nothing but her hair, and by this she is a gainer, since of red it is become
white, I speak nothing but truth, although I write in choler. But I ought so
to proceed, and there is no appearance of reason to approve, that the deformed
should be sued to, and the fair slighted. Must they which want all merit,
enjoy so much good fortune, and our Belinde be forsaken? I know well the
custom is ancient, and that this disorder has been begun before our age. It
is no news that fortune should be sparing of her favors where nature has been
prodigal of hers, but this imports not much nor does it lessen my despite.
The examples I have read in story affect me not so much as that of Belinde.
Albeit, we know that death is inevitable, we omit not to lament our friends
departed. And tho we be certain of this truth, that it is a fate ordinary to
persons most deserving, It ceases not to be irke some to us. This is the cause
of my distemper: and I think there is none that has a thought contrary to
mine, if he know the merit as well as the misfortune of fair Belinde. You know
the affection which I bear her, and I wish some means to testify unto you,
That which I have to remain,

Madam, Your most obedient, etc.

The third Answer.
She shows that this Marriage will be more happy then is thought. And sends
her a parallel to the news she had received.

MAdam I find the choice of Lydian as worthy of praise, as you depaint it full
of blame. You ought not to be so spightfull to him, nor envious to her he
loves. To desire Belinde should be happy. It is not needful Bumante be not so.
You may wish good to the one without harm to the other. By your discourse it
should seem Fortune has not wherewith to please both, and that she can give
nothing to the old which she takes not from the young. You will change your
opinion, If you consider what is necessary for Lydian. He has need of a
governesse as well as of a wife: and seeing they are both obliged to enjoy
their goods in common, their marriage shall have of all sorts. He has for her,
riches, and beauty, she has for him wisdom, and age. He looks upon that in
her, which least perishes in all others, I mean the qualities of the soul,
rather then those of the face. It often happens that time effacing the fair
feature, effaces from our souls affection bred by beauty. It Is there that he is
exempted from inconstancy, and shall never be subject to repent. But in what
humor did you write this Letter: you say that Numante is imperfect without
touching the good she injoyes. Has she not Prudence, and Virtue? And without
these two qualities, what will all the rest avail us? I should like an Angel
better under a visage something deformed, then a devil with all the beauty of
the world. Her conversation is pleasing, and profitable, he will become an
honest man in her company; and if others cease to be Mistresses after their
marriage, this shall then begin, see the advantage he shall get, and then
judge if you have reason to find fault with the Wife, or blame the Husband.
But I must return you like for like in matter of news: and make you see by
these, that we also are in a Country of Monsters. We have a Woman in our
County, whom all the world esteems lovely: And which nevertheless is far
gone in affection to a certain man, without any cause imaginable, more then
Lydian can pretend for Numante. Hardly has he a face like others, and I think
were he found among a company of Apes he would be taken for a brother: consider
well all his p^rts, it is impossible to find any which merit patience, so much
does he want those which may procure Love; mean time he is happy, albeit he
deserve it not; but it is time to finish this, which is enough to show you, how
many have cause to complain of fortune, and I especially, since she has
always been so contrary to me, that till this present I could never find any
good occasion to serve you, or to express how much I am

Madam Your most affectionate, etc.

The fourth Letter.
Being derided by some for saying to a greater personage then her self I Love
you: she labors to prove that this form of speech is good.

MAdam, I am not afraid to write unto you again that I love you; and those
that accuse me of ignorance, because I use this word, can never clear
themselves, they know no more the laws of Philosophy, than those of civility,
the word Love expresses respect, better than that of fear. And I know not why
men take it ill, since God himself is contented with it, when he says that we
should adore him, he says also that we should Love him. I say more he
contents not himself to permit, but he commands it. It Is strange to see how
far the vanity of man extends: which is not satisfied with the same terms
that God would have us employ, to express the respect we owe him. Are we
equal unto him, if we say we Love him? or have men reason to demand more of
one another than God himself demands of them? but leave we these divine
arguments, there are enough humane, fear may well be without Love, but Love
never without fear; slaves may fear and yet not Love, but children cannot
Love, and not fear: It Is shallow to say that the word Love imports equality;
children are not so great as their Parents, albeit they Love them. The least
may Love the greatest, for men may Love God. I think also that this manner of
speech does not displease you: since you like to be beloved, you should not
loath to heart it; finally do not believe that I honor you the less for
saying I Love you. This fashion of expression, shows the excess of my
affection, not of my boldness. I love you then, and am more than any person of
the world,

Madam, Your honourer,

The fourth Answer.
She prooves that we may not say to greater persons we Love them, but we
Honor them.

MAdam, I saw your Letter in the hands of Celinde, who has commanded me to
answer it: otherwise I had hardly been able to resolve upon it. I do love my
opinions so well that I would maintain them with dispute. I abandon them
freely to every assailant, and find more relish in peace, than glory. If I
could overcome you I should like better it should be by my respects, than my
reasons, this victory should be more agreeable to my duty, and my humor. If I
thought to displease you, I would desire your Cousin to dispense me the labor:
and should assuredly believe my obedience blameable. I would not endanger the
loss of your friendship to defend a word or a syllable. I am not so blind to
violate the laws of civility to maintain those of Grammar. I could likewise
tell you that you should not put your self in choler against one that has no
intent to disquiet you: and which had never blamed this form of speech, if she
had thought you would have undertaken to defend it, but since in your letter
you have touched so near the quick, as to make my opinion pass forridiculous,
suffer me in a few words to make it appear reasonable. It seems to me then
that speaking to those above us; its better to say we honor them, than to say
only we love them. I think it would make the Court laugh heartily, if one
should say to the Queen in a Complement, Madam I love you. It may be this
would pass in another Country, or in another age: but seeing we ought to
accommodate our language to those that live with us, there is no reason to
reigle our civility by that of Pharamond or of China. I am not much taken with
Proverbes, excepting those of Solomon, but yet I must tell you I like that
which counsels to live, as few do, but to speak with the most, we ought not
to do as others, but to speak like them: our actions we must conform to
reason, but our words to custom. It Is a vanity to play the Philosopher upon
every name, to see if it do well express the nature of the thing, we ought in
this rather to follow use than argument, but I am content to employ both the
one and the other to clear our difficulty; as for use it is plain enough on my
side, and now let us see if reason be contrary. Is it not true that we ought
to entertain great persons with discourse witnessing our submission. And I
leave you to think if this word employing reverence, be not fitter for this
than that of love, or friendship, since when a Nobleman says I love you: A
vassal cannot reply as much without treating him like an equal, what
difference should there then be between the Complements of the high and the
low, and wherein should the Language of Authority be distinguished from that of
obedience? that which they say for fathers, may be said for all others on whom
we depend. Love does never ascend which shows not only that Children do not
return as much love as they receive from their Parents; but also that they
ought not to say they love them, but when Parents promise affection, Children
must offer obedience; this Complement must not remount to the spring, not that
we are not obliged to love them, but our love in this place must express it
self by the mouth of fear. And whereas you say that God commands we love him,
and a word which pleases him should not displease men: I will answer only,
that in the same place he commands also that we adore him, and that he
requires fear as well as love; or I may cite one Law for another. If God will
that we love him, he wills also that we honor our Parents. It seems to me
there is great difference between the honor we owe to him, and that we render
unto men; he requires our consciences, and demands rather the motions of the
heart, then the words of the mouth: he has no need of any man, but we have
need one of another, he craves the service of the heart, and men want that of
the hand* he desires not our actions, except, because they proceed from love;
and men often times seek not affection, but only for the profitable effects
which it produces, say what you list we draw more service from slaves, which
fear without love, then from those which love without fear Love does often
aspire to equality, but fear does always contain within respect. Men
therefore are to seek that which is most assured, whilst God loves nothing in
us, but that which is most noble. This is the reason that speaking to those of
higher degree then our selves, it is better to say we honor them, then, we love
them; this Complement does more please, and the term of respect does better
express our dependence than that of love or friendship. I could pursue this
matter, and bring many other reasons to maintain my cause, but it suffices me
to show that it is not so ridiculous as you describe it. I need not so many
proofs, it is enough that I have custom on my side, since our language, and
civility, do absolutely depend thereupon, but to finish this Letter, I must
make you a complement according to reason, and not according to your humor,
and while you say to others that you love them, I assure you that I honor you.
Never change your fashion of speech: I am well content that you love me only,
and shall therefore respect you in the quality.

Madam Of your most humble, etc.

The fifth Letter.
She professes how timorous she is to displease her, adjoining that if she
write seldom she fears to be deemed unthankefull; if often, importune.

MAdam, the desire I have to please you, is so tied to the fear of all
success, that I perceive my self always obliged to beg your pardon, be it
that you hear much news or very little from me. If I write rarely to you, I
fear to be ungrateful, if frequently, troublesome. Nevertheless, if I must
needs be guilty, I should hope a more easy remission of the first then second
crime. I believe you will sooner excuse a want of power then of will. It is
true that the desire depends upon our liberty, but the effect commonly upon
Fortune, you know it well enough; and therefore the consideration of your
goodness ministers me more assurance, then my own defects doubt. I freely
confess my inability, to write good Letters; but I think it is more acceptable
to have an affection to do you service, then eloquence to offer it. And what
imports it in this occasion, to violate the Laws of Rhetorique, provided we
observe those of friendship. I had rather pass faithful, then able. It
troubles me little tho your opinion be bad of my judgment, so it be good of my
affection, and the desire I have to be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The fifth Answer.
She replies, that she does ill to distrust acceptance whether she write, or
not.

MAdam, it must needs be, that you have an ill opinion of my humor, seeing
you are so much afraid not to be able to satisfy it. Albeit it should be
cross to all others, I would endeavor to render it conformable to yours. In
this my inclination strayes not from my duty; and pardon me if I tell you, you
know me not, since you fear me. If you were well acquainted with the opinion
I have of your merit, you could not fail in that you ought to have of my
observance. I can assure you that all the thoughts of my soul are so submisse
to those of yours, that it is impossible but you should content me. If you write
often, I take it for an effect of your courtesy. If rarely, I attribute your
silence to your employments and affairs. Moreover, you cannot be unthankefull
to a person that never obliged you, nor troublesome to her which adores all
that you approve, you have too much courage to want will, and too much power,
not to produce the effects may witness it, but why do you handle me in this
sort by your Letter? you thank me for a good turn which I make you but
desire, and you have not yet received. And you write to me with so much
civility, that you make me in case not to be able to return just thanks for
yours, and then you say further, that you want not only occasions to gratify
me, but words to show the desire you have to do it. Think what you list,
certainly I see none that can express themselves with a better grace: and if
you be not satisfied with your own discourses, and writings, believe it, your
opinion is singular. For my self, I find them so agreeable that besides the
content I have to understand by your Letters that you love me, I find my
self all joy, reading the sweet language you employ to assure me thereof. I
want an equal pen to praise yours, and therefore content my self to aver
the excellence, without endeavoring to describe it: I apprehend the goodness
of it, but cannot express it. Judge then if your fear be reasonable; since
mine is only this, not to receive news from you so frequently, as I wish, and
not to give you evidence enough how much I am

Madam, Your most etc.

The sixth Letter.
She acknowledges that it is sufficient to suffer her Letters, without doing
her the honor to desire them.

MAdam, I received no less astonishment then joy, when I learn^d by yours,
that you desire mine. I thought your sufferance honor enough, could not aspire
to be requested. You tell me that to make you happy I need do no more but
write. If it be so, I shall so overlade you with number, that you shall soon
have cause to complain your felicity, insupportable. It shall not be long ere
you forbid me that you now command. If there be as you say no more to do to
dispell sickness, you need henceforth never distrust the loss of health, but
take heed the remedy be not more troublesome then the disease. I know well
enough what I ought think of it: if I should believe it, I should be no less
simple, then you covetous. I acknowledge no less kindness in your letters then
in your entertainment, but however, it shall not trouble me to write unto
you, since you command it, provided that you promise me an answer, I shall be
glad to send bad Letters to gain good; but if in mine you cannot find
vivacity enough to content you, I hope at least that you shall observe a great
affection to serve you, and to be all my life

Madam, Your, etc.

The sixth Answer.
She assures her that she cannot hear from her too often.

MAdam, I know not why you say the care I have to hear from you, does no l^sse
astonish, then content you. This desire in no wise deserves your admiration,
seeing it is long since that I have made you understand it: nor your joy, since
it can procure you naught but trouble, you should not marvel, if I demand some
witness of your remembrance: It cannot be, but you have forgotten the request
I made you, when I was at Paris, and I acknowledge that you have yet need be
solicited, to do a favor that you have promised. Not able to enjoy your
entertainment, you must not wonder, if I demand your Letters; And if seeing my
self depri^ed of so great a good, I have recourse to the only remedy of my
loss It Is a favor so great, that the possession, in stead of quenching,
increases the desire. Finally let it not trouble you to restifie your
friendship, and seek no more proofs for one that is wholl persuaded. However
I could say in your behalf, that you should not be simple to believe it, nor I
over covetous to affirm it; for it is a truth, which is enough to free you from
error, me from flattery. I delight to speak of what you wish, and I owe you; I
have neither praise enough for your merit, nor thanks enough for your
courtesy, nor can I ever satisfy the one, or the other, but by the extreme
desire I have to be

Madam, Your, etc.

The seventh Letter.
She says that the society of the Country is insupportable, and that she
less fears their contempt, then their importunity.

MAdam, I can no more, I am at point to lose my reputation, or my health,
whether I suffer these troublesome clownes, or tell them the distaste their
ignorance merits. It seems my Castle is like the Palace of Apollidon, where a
world was still seen enter, and go out by troops, my resolution is set, I
had rather it were a Desert, then a Court. I wish that they who have no
qualities requisite for society, had at least an inclination to solitude, but
their humor imports me nothing, I had rather satisfy my own, then the
civilities of the Country; to what end should I give them contentment at my
own cost, and live always in constraint to acquire the reputation of being
courteous? I see no recompense for the pains I should take: and whatever
happen, I will no longer play so troublesome a part. The comparison is not
amiss, since to please them I disease my self no less, then those on a
Theater to content the spectators, who strain themselves both in voice and
gesture: I must renounce this confusion, and reading, or dreaming pass the
time. I know there be ^ad boo^es, but it is an easier matter to shift a bad
Auther t^en bad company Books do not importune us against our will, how
dangerous soeverthey be, they are unmoving enemies, which cannot come at us, if
we seek not them. If they vex us, we may cast them away, or tear them (if we
list) they cannot complain; it is not so with these petty Sirs, which never
cease prating, it is not so easy to make them silent as to shut a Book. I
think it bett^r not to see them at all, then to seek occasions to suffer them.
I am resolved what to invent for fashions sake to keep them off: I will make it
be noised abroad that I am sick. and and so I shall quickly be, if I suffer
them continue their visits, it is better I suppose to seem, then to be so:
better to deceive then anger them; to oblige them to lament, then to complain
of me, but whatever happen, if my device succeed not, I like their neglect
better then their officiousnes: and had rather put them in a humor of railing,
then complement. The greatest ill I fear, is their company: and I shall
always have more patience for the effects of their hatred, then for those of
their good will, see my resolution: which it it seem to you unreasonable, give
me the means to vanquish it, and you shall quickly perceive, that I have not
yet any design contrary to that of obeying you, and testifying by all means
possible that I am perfectly

Madam Your, etc.

The seventh Answer.
She counsels her to strain her self a little, to suffer company less
agreeable, and that she betray no contempt, for fear of receiving it.

MAdam, never complain of the Country you are in: if there be affection
without civility, here is civility without affection. I should rather choose a
freedom somewhat rude, then dissimulation with all the sweetness of the
world. As there is no paint can make me love deformity; so there is no
supplenes, nor cunning can make me suffer scorn. Change then your resolution,
if you have taken that not to be seen. It Is better to receive displeasing
complements, then expose your self to public displeasure. Remember your
self, that if we must seek the approbation of few, we must fly the
detraction of all, we owe our opinions to truth, our countenance to opinion,
for their fashion of living, or discourse, you may laugh at them in your
sleeve, provided outwardly you seem to approve them. I beseech you consider
that the subject of your choler would serve for recreation to many others; who
would go to seek in the Country that which you there think insupportable,
without doubt you will be thought of a bad humor, if you cannot with patience
suffer those that offer you their service. If they tender not their duty with a
good grace, take their affection, and make sport at their ceremonies accept
their purpose, and laugh at their discourse, otherwise you will pass for
unthankeful, and uncivil, know you not also that Christianity binds us to
support the weakness of our neighbors? and since they love you, you ought to
tolerate them, both by reason, and religion. Charity obliges you thereto as
well as Pleasure. It is no small matter to gain the affections of people; and
therefore we should be careful to leave a good smell where we come. This is
my advice, and since you do me the honor to demand it, I hope it shall not
prove distastefull, but you will take it for a testimony of the affection I
have to be

Madam Your, etc.

The eight Letter.
She complains of the disorders at Paris, and prefers the dive^sions of the
Country to those of the Court.

MAdam, for the news I receive of the change of states and Provinces, I can
return you none but that of the fall of leaves, and change of seasons, I mean
for great matters, I can only send you little. Think not for all this I
complain of the place where I am, if the remembrance of your company occasions
me some grief, that of your distractions lends me no envy, when I consider
you in the disorders at Paris, I cannot but lament you: Perhaps you do as much
for me, and esteem my condition more worthy of pity then yours, but I assure
my self you would change your opinion, had you tarryed some while in the
country; you should find that the Country life has pleasures more solid, then
that of the Court, and that nature there gives us true contentments, whiles
Fortune elsewhere makes us but taste those that are imaginary, it happens often
that the happiest at Court, resemble those that run after an enchanted Hare,
they see always what to hope for, seldom whereof to rejoice; this is not to
be happy, but to be abused. Insomuch that taking away the error of Courtiers,
you take from them all their delights. Those which show them the truth of their
misery, do them no less hurt, then if they awakt them from a pleasing dream.
But it is not you that need be entertained with this discourse; I know well
enough you have no thoughts but very reasonable: And if you stay at Court, it is
not because you find much sweetness there; but because you are enured to
suffer the troubles, and incommodities that are inseparable, when you call me
back to Paris, tell me not that it is to enjoy the allurements there to be
found, to make me return, it is enough to know that you are there, but for
your company, which renders every place delectable, I could say that the
Conntrey is the object of my desire, Paris of my patience. I stay in the one by
inclination, in the other by constraint, this is as much as I can say of it.
And now I thank you for all the particularities that you have taught me,
whereof the exchange will still be after the old fashion: I mean instead of
good deeds, you get from me nothing but bare words, and a very simple
assurance, but very true, that I am

Madam Your, etc.

The eight Answer.
She replies that the recreations of the country are not more solid, but more
gross, not more innocent, but more rude.

MAdam, be not so violent against the delights of Paris, they are more worthy
of your desire, then your contempt, you are in the wrong to rail against those
pleasures, no less innocent then real. And I can hardly believe that you
speak in good earnest: but rather to show the goodness of your wit, then the
truth of your opinion. It Is then to your letter, not your intent I answer. I
esteem you too capeable to give, and take delight in company, to think you
have made a vow of solitude, and that this design would prove contrary to your
own humor, as well as our wishes. I should think it strange that you should
fall in love with the Country, after you have thereof restified so much
horror, you say that the recreations there found are more solid: I should
rather say they are more dull. Your pleasures are not more innocent, but more
salvage. It must needs be that you have no memory, since you have no sorrow;
but whatsoever you say, I think it be not so: and that there is not so much
constancy in your spirit, as in your letter. What find you out of Paris that
can so much enchant you? you mean the chanting of birds; and do you more
esteem the note of a Nightingall, than those of our musicians? do you love a
bagpipe better than a lute? you see the flocks, you see the shepherdesses
run, you go a hunting, all this may be called country pleasure, and after
all this you have nothing, but we have here the same. We see flowers, and eat
fruits as well as you: you have the only advantage to see them gathered, or
rather the disadvantage. I like the comparison of those who say, that if the
world be a great body, country villages make the hands, the feet, the nails,
and the hair; and that the Cities are like the stomach, which receives all,
and possesses those goods which others provide for it. Finally, I know not how
you can say, you are in a place of true pleasures, when you are among the
miserable. Change then your opinion, and come back to Paris, where all the
world desites you, but more than all the rest of the world,

Madam, Your, etc.

The ninth Letter.
She complains of the inconstancy of a certain man, and says it is ordinary
to those of his sex.

MAdam, at length my prophecies are accomplished, and what I foresaw is come to
pass. The man is yet alive, and his affection which ought to live always,
dead for ever. So many oaths as he made of constancy serve but to increase
his crime; as if he had not been guilty enough to own the quality of
unconstant, except he added that of perjured. These chances have not surprised
me, since I always expected them from the very birth of his friendship; and
the years he has worn out in a will to serve me, have wrought me to no
other belief. I know well that lightness to their sex is like death to all
the world, which arrives to some sooner, to others later, but with a little
difference of time is inevitable to all. How could he, being but a man do a
miracle, and remain constant? I should have judged it impossible, if I had
hoped it. The unavoydable necessity which carries all of his sex to change,
forbids me to reply, or to reproach. This is not the design obliges me to
write: but rather to make him know that being unable to change humor, I have
not lost the esteem I made of his love. My thoughts of him have always been
reasonable, conformd to civility, and virtue, and being able to conserve them
without fault, I shall keep them the rest of my life, but if I preserve so
good an opinion of those who have lost affection, judge how much I shall
respect those which love me as your self: and if I am not like to remain
constant in the purpose I have to serve you, and to be whilst I live,

Madam, Your, etc.

The ninth Answer.
She shows that inconstancy is no more natural to men then women, and
reprehends her overcredulous humor.

MAdam, it is no great glory to be such a Prophet as you: it is easy to judge
that men may change: they are no more immovable then immortal. Their designs
are capeable of alteration, as well as their life: but what say you in this,
that men cannot say of women? Albeit, either Sex may invent for their
advantage, I believe that inconstancy is no less common to both, then death it
self. I cannot comprehend, how our resolutions should be less light, nor why
the opinions of the weaker sex should be more strong. I speak only for truth,
not against you nor my self. I know that there are some more constant then
many men: but that which I can say of some particulars without flattery, I
cannot say of the general without error. I do not offend the constant, to
maintain that some are not, how much this is more rare, so much it is more
laudable, that virtue is mos^ glorious to the practice of which we are least
disposed. Many have no less pain to be constant, amidst so many occasions to
lose it, then to carry a torch lighted, when the wind from every corner offers
to blow it out, but I will no longer entertain you with this subject, I
content my self to say, that we ought not to reproach all men in general, bnt
only some particulars with inconstancy, he of whom you complain is of this
number, and there is no colorable reason, that finding one culpable, we should
judge so of all the rest, your complaint is a little unjust, and I find by
reading your Letter, that an angry woman hardly keeps moderation, in venting
of her choler: it seems to me notwithstanding, that you have had leisure to
dispose you to patience: and since you always had some suspicion, the event
should not surprise you, your foresight should diminish your admiration, and
your grief, would you know more clearly my intention. If you had any
conjecture of his natural malady, you should have interrupted the tragedy, if
I had foreseen his design, I had prevented him by a generous contempt, not
entertained him with sufferance. I had remedyed the ill I knew, not taken
pleasure to receive offers of service, which I suspected, I see well enough how
you are abused; you had some doubt of his lightness, but no assurance,
otherwise I should judge you more worthy to be jeered then pittyed. Finally you
will needs play the constant, for those that mean nothing less. It seems by
your letter that you do yet hold him in some esteem, but I know not what
merit, you find in a person that does not acknowledge yours. nor can I imagine
him guilty of wit that has slighted his own good fortune, or able to make a
handsome choice, that has once quitted you. I suppose how it goes? you are, it
may be, of the humor of many, who have the misfortune to be inclined to those
who have neither affection, nor desert, and who are passionate for them that
are neither amorous nor amiable. I wish I be deceived, and that my prophecies
be always false, when they are not to your advantage, they may notwithstanding
prove so to you, if you fly the evil I foretell, and if you give no more
opportunity to have your goodness abused by those that know your facility. I
speak according to my heart, as well as according to my duty, and I think you
will take nothing ill of what I write, seeing all the liberty I use proceeds
but from the extreme desire I have to be,

Madam Your, etc.

The X. Letter.
She tells what the vulgar thinks of brave spirits.

MAdam, I protest, I shall hardly content you, and albeit all the world
discourses of brave spirits, it seems to me nevertheless, that they agree not
in their description. I will tell you nothing of my opinion but that of others:
and will rather assure you what they say of them, then what they are in effect,
do not then abuse your self touching my purpose; I have no other, but to
write to you some of the absurdities which they attribute to them, and not to
combat them by reason. And I think to set them down, is enough to confute
them, and to show their extravagancy, sufficient to bring the^ in hatred. I
will tell you then, that one of their principal maxims is to condemn all,
they cannot comprehend: as if their opinion ought to be the rule of our
actions, and nothing were reasonable, but what is thereto conformable: by their
sayings, the virtue which wise men follow, is b^ them accounted, but a Chimera.
Religion overthrowes their sense, and with an ignorance and impiety without
parallel, they find not only what to reform in the providence of men, but
also in that of God himself; in so much that there is nothing divine, nor
humane, wherein they find no blemish. I leave you to judge, if it be so, how
much this sect should be abhord by those that have soul or conscience.
Nevertheless, it is a misfortune that the novelty of this (with some dexterity,
they observe to establish it) gains the belief of ma^y, who admire, if they
do follow them. These brave spirits say, that they are bent against none, but
bad opinions, and that their chief aim is to restore reason, and virtue to
their ancient force. Howbeit, they are accused to oppose both the one, and the
other, to the end they may the better establish licentiousness, and vice. I
could say more but I would have my words as innocent as my thoughts. And also I
fear to describe them rather according to the error of the world, then
according to the truth of their being. let us leave then what they say of their
conscience, to speak of that they see in their countenance, let us quit their
actions, to entertain our selves with their looks. If they have not faults
enough to condemn them, at least they have marks visible enough to make them
be known. They have certain deportments, whereby when they would demonstrate
the force, they show but to much the feebleness of their souls. If their life
fright you, their countenance makes you laugh; and if they be Atheists in
heart, they are Buffons in conversation. You shall see some of these fellows
retire from the company, the ha^ pulled down in their eyes, the band out of
order, and bigger then ordinary, striking with their feet against the ground.
Instead of being ashamed of themselves they perke up and down every where, and
do not only make private places the witnesses of their folly, but also the
public, as the ^ourt, the Exchange, the Walks, with all their studied
postures they would pass for great persons, never thinking that their apish
tricks, do better resemble madmen, then sages. Nevertheless, they take them
for signs of a brave spirit, and would have their stupidity, pass for vigor,
their coldness for prudence. They call their silence an effect of that divine
ravishment, which is the mother of beauteous thoughts, thus they name their
defects, and would have their sottishness pass for sagenesse. This dazzles
but the vulgar, and catches those only which love novelty better then reason.
But let us pass on. They offend not only in the belief they hold of
themselves, but in that they have of others, they seem displeased, and are
distasted even with the best things. Although any speak excellent well in their
company, they give, or deny their approbation by a nod, or a smile. These are
the judges of our discourse, and our actions. Rarely do they give a perfect
praise: they find that solid spirits are gross, polished, light, or ignorant.
If any good word escape them, as it may happen sometimes by chance, it is strange
to hear with what accent they pronounce it. But we have spoken enough of them;
that which they do to acquire the esteem of the world loses it, they would
pass for wise, and are thought extravagant. Never sect was less followed th^n
theirs: and I think they are alone in their opinion, when they think well of
themselves. This is what I have to write touching the judgment many make of
brave spirits. I pray you believe this Letter is none of the least witnesses of
my complacency, since not being used to speak of what I know not, I have
notwithstanding broken my purpose, to obey you without reserve, and to testify
the absolute power which you have

Madam, Over Your, etc.

The X. Answer.
She defends great spirits provided they be not impious.

MAdam, having well read your Letter, I am much astonished, that a person like
you in reputation for a noble spirit, would blame those that resemble you,
giving no other reason, save that their opinions are not conformable to the
vulgar. Certainly, if I were to make their apology, I would begin their
praise, where you begin their accusation. Ought we not to esteem their worth,
if they had rather do well, then do like others? They know that imitation
should have ei^s to see if the example be good, or evil; and that it is not
enough to make the blind walk with assurance, that they have guides, if they
know not also that these guides know to conduct them, they have reason to
believe, that it is better ta^e the right way, with a few wise, then wander
with a multitude offooles. And to say, that if they be reasonable, it is not
after the common manner, and that they are but Ieer'd: I answer They do no
more in this then has been done to all the ancient sages, has not philosophy
it self appeared ridiculous to the eyes of many? and have we not always seen,
that people are no less incensed, when you reverse some sottish custom, then
if you had beat down all their Altars, and robbed them of their I dols!
Besides the cause of this hate is easy to be found: It is because the middle
spirits cannot suffer what is above them: and being unable to raise themselves,
they think it glory enough to endeavou^ the downfall of others. We love
resemblance, because we love our selves. It is not misery alone, but ignorance
also that seeks comfort in company, and you know that spirits, no more then
the eyes, can suffer brightness, when themselves are feeble. I confess that
if they be wicked, it is reason they be hated: and if they be enemies to
religion, I protest, that I am not only averse from their sect, but also
afraid of it. If we could love spirit without goodness, we must needs love
the devils: seeing they have much more of it then all the Libertines of the
time, but if you except this, I am not resolved to hate them, because others
do not love them. I must see whether they be innocent or guilty, that I may
not abuse my love nor hate, whereof are they accused? It Is said they oppose
ceremony, and endeavor to banish it from commerce. In this sure they are not
much in the wrong, since oftentimes it is but a Mountebank that sets a falsehood,
for a truth. If they have nothing to do, but with her, I am of their side,
what is there often more troublesome, then that we call Complement? To what end
so many offers of service which we never mean to perform. To what serve all
those studied phrases, but enter abuse each other? and what color for it, to
use the same discourse to every impertinent fellow, and to our honest friends
to speak plainly, our civility has too much dawbing; and is but a comaedian:
she speaks the language of the stage, and plays a fained part, and say what
they list, we are obliged to those which would take away the plaster of
dissimulation, and restore freedom to society, candor to commerce. They will
tell me, that following the humor of great spirits, we should speak with no
less Sophistry, though fewer words: I answer, that if there be no less
craft, there would be less disprofit, and if there be no more reality, at
least there would be less trouble, we should be no more non plusd with these
Complement. flingers, conversation should be more free, less importune. I know
it is opposite to the humor of many, to speak after any other mood: but what
imports the number of those that are in error? we must not give over combatting
this monster, because it has many heads. As we may condemn superstition
without offense to piety: we may also oppose unreasonable ceremony, without
engaging true civility; yon will say to me, perhaps, that if the inventers of
these fashions of speech, and living, were in the wrong; those that follow them
are in the right; that it is dangerous to reverse an established custom; and
that it is often harder to turn the course, then that of a river. I confess it
difficult but you shall grant me, that it is more noble to undertake it, and
more glorious to go through with it. If none had been so hardy to change
untoward fashions, we should yet be appareld like those Ladies, painted in the
Galleries at the Louuer: we should yet wear great sleeves, and fardingals, Let
us speak of the customs in carriage, and clothing, as of that of speech: and
let us banish, if we can, from conversation a thousand petty toys, no less
tedious, then superfluous, chiefly let us not take it ill, that some endeavor
it. Let us march cheerfully in the way that others have plained for us. If we
have not courage enough to do this, let us leave the war to others, and be
content our selves to enjoy the frui^es of victory. Although I would not
enterprise to force this enemy out of the world, notwithstanding, I wish him
expeld. I know we have need of civility; but since it depends on our own
judgment, we err if we make it not less irke some. And seeing we touched
matter of apparel, which these great Spirits desire not so over orderly, do
not you find it strange, to see many like puppets, habiliate themselves, as if
they went to make a show upon the Theater: This is enough to put Preachers in
choler, and Philosophers into a laughter. But let us not forget that which
makes brave spirits most odious: they say they do sometimes dream, instead of
discourse in company and that this is aneffect of contempt, or ignorance: that
in this they cannot be defended, seeing they are either unable to talk as they
should, or jealous not to be understood. Certainly it is for these two reasons
that I would commend them: for if they cannot speak have they not reason to
hold their peace? If they can, but cannot be understood, why should they
display their excellent conceptions before sots that know not the price, take
their silence how you will, it is very reasonable, since holding their peace,
they show at least, that if they have some defect, they have not that to show
it, and if they have some good qualities, they look for competent Judges,
whose esteem is worth meriting, say what they will, when our company is
neither fit to discourse, nor able to apprehend, we must have recourse to
fancy, seeing there is no satisfaction to be expected in speech, or attention.
All that remains to speak of, is their apish looks, which I will not defend,
if they be extravagant: I will only say that if this be bad in them, we must
not therefore cease to praise that which is good, we do not leave the use of
Moone-light, for any spots we find in her body: nor do we fear to gather
flowers, though they dwell in the neighborhood of thorns. Finally let them
baw^e as long as they will against brave Spirits, I cannot resolve my self to
find fault with those persons against whom nothing can be said, but that their
entertainements are less strained, their habits less neat, their opinions
less popular.

The XI. Letter.
She rejoices that she is reconciled with her, and confesses freely the
torment she endured, during their coldness.

MAdam, I am angry that you have prevented me in repairing our old
correspondence, there is notwithstanding some justice in it: for since you have
been the first to break it, it was fit you should be to restablish it. But if I
have not begun, I beseech you believe, it was not want of affection, but
hardiness. It seemed to me, that I had no right to demand a favor done me by
courtesy, and taken away by Justice. It Is thus I speak of the honor of your
favor, assuring you that I cannot deserve it, that you may have the more
obligation upon me when I possess it. I will nevertheless say freely, that
if there be nothing in me worth your friendship, I think there is nothing that
merits your hate. I have imperfection, but no malice. I may be the object of
your compassion, but not of your choler. See in what fashion, I fear to loose
your love since yet I justify my self, as if I had not already received
remission, being only unfortunate, I beg your pardon, as if I were guilty,
which I shall never be in what concerns you, and provided you fall not into
error, I fear not to fall into disgrace. It behooves me to retake my courage
with my good fortune, and having been mute so long, that I tell you the pain
as well as the cause of my silence. I cannot say how much evil I have endured,
during my belief that you wished me no good. I will make a free confession of
my thoughts. How angry soever I have bin, my affection has not been blotted
out of my soul; it was but a copy of my countenance. I thought my honor lost,
if I had not seemed offended. Never was vengeance like to that which animated
me against you: I floted betwixt desire, and fear to do you harm, and to
speak more clearly, I never ceased to love you, but only to express it. And
so much did it want, that my affection was diminished, that on the contrary, It
was like a secret fire not quenched, but only covered; and which became the
more violent, when it had less liberty to appear. And I will make you see on
all occasions, that for what is past, I have never been less then I am

Madam Your, etc.

The XI. Answer.
She shows her her error to be angry upon false roports, and advises her not
to believe too lightly.

MAdam I am very glad that you have not ceased to love me, but only to tell me
so. Notwithstanding I pray you believe that to make me happy, it is not enough
to do me this favor, I must also believe that I possess it, without which as
I should have reason to doubt of it, so also to be ill satisfied, we are not
rich in those goods which we believe not to enjoy: nor may we be called
contented for a felicity to us unknown, tell me not the error, you were in,
took not away your affection, but only in appearance not in truth: for if the
opinion of being offended, was enough to vex you what ought I to be, that
believed my self innocent? I received the greatest injury, since you judged it
possible, I should offer it, you could not be in choler, except you were in
error, but I had ground for it, because you had none. I owe you but a
purgation, but you owe me a satisfaction, you received wrong, but from my
shadow, but I from your self Judge in this case what I might have done: and
nevertheless I sought to you always with the same affection: there was
nothing alterd in me, but the ordinary alacrity, which I showed, when we were
better agreed. Your countenance was changed by misprision, mine by affliction.
I complained of you, instead of condemning you: and the extremity of my
friendship carried me to the point, to offer you the pardon you ought to seek.
I labored to vanquish you by submission, rather then by reason, and to
tostifie the excess of my love, before I showed you the right of my cause. See
how far the fear to lose your alliance has carried me; and put your self
no more in danger, to lose a good friend for a bad opinion. I beseech you
esteem more my affection, then your oversight, and believe when you shall be
sick again of the same disease, I have no more to do, but undeceive you to
make you whole. Its no great matter I ask of you, if to instruct you, be to
satisfy. Remember that you have never been so cruel, as when you have been so
credulous, do not imagine but that there are slanderers: and when you hear
ill of me, instead of thinking my actions so, can you not consider they may be
false reports? Is there not as much reason to believe me innocent, as them
true? And what, must I to conserve your friendship, put all liers to death and
to eloigne you from error, banish all seducers? If it were so, your affection
would not be assured: it is better find a remedy more certain for me, more
glorious for you. Chase away credulity, and I Will quit my fear. your friendship
will be stable, provided your belief be not too light. We need not disarme
those that assail us, when we have bucklers to to defend their blows. Let the
Serpents keep their poison, provided, we be provided wherewith to heal
their sting. If we cannot take malice from our enemies, we can at least stop
our ears against detraction. And to contemn them, is defense enough, this is
what I humbly beg, or I must tremble without ceasing, or be assured of the
integrity of all that talk with you; that I may be so, of the opinion you
should conceive of my friendship. True, it is you comfort me a little, when
you assure that it was not without constrant, you showed coldness. I am half
satisfied to know that when you put me to pain, it was not without the first
taste, but I shall be yet more glad to see you corrected then punished: and
desire no other satisfaction, then to find you free of error. Abuse your
self no more, and think it not generosity to be pettish against a person,
that knows not how to give you ground for it. If there be not as much courage
in vengeance, as in pardon, yea when one is offended; how shall we call the
feeling that transports you, upon the bare opinion of an injury? Think of it
well for the future, and imagine the price I set upon your friendship, by the
care I have taken to preserve it, when you betrayed an indifferency for mine. And
after this I believe you will not doubt how deeply I am,

Madam Your, etc.

The XII. Letter.
She shows that they are to blame, who blame those that st^ddy, and write.

MAdam, I have read her Letter, who takes it ill that women should study. But
it seems to me that her fair fancies savor nothing of the ignorance she
commends: and that she appears knowing, by blaming those that are. They say
we cannot oppose eloquence, without the help of eloquence: we may say the
same of knowledge, which cannot be assaulted but with her own weapons. Thus
she does when she contemnes this divine quality: since there is not one of her
words, which shows not, she possesses it, do not imagine that I mean to make
an Apology for the knowing, to do it I must be so: and as knowledge cannot be
set upon, but by those that have it, so must the same advantage be had to
defend it, you know well enough that I pretend it not, and if I speak for it,
it is rather to witness the force of my affection, than that of my spirit. At
least I am not of so bad a humor as many others, which contemn a good
quality, because themselves want it. Moreover I cannot suffer the injury they
do our sex, to think we cannot be innocent, except we be ignorant. It is a
great disposition to do good, but to know how it must be done: and if
knowledge be capeable of presumption, ignorance is not free of error. ^s it not
better to contemn ill, then not to know it; and to va^quish ones enemies, then
not to see them? in this the fable and Philosophy speak in the same fashion:
Pallas was not so vicious as Venus, and the Poets that feign the goddess of
love without modesty, have fained her also without knowledge. I assure my self
you will laugh when you read this, where I cite passages, as if I would show
my reading. It Is zeal transports me to defend a cause, wherein it seems to me
your self have interest. I vafue the learned, and wish my self to be so, if
but, to resemble you, and to testify with more dexterity how much I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XII. Answer.
She speaks her opinion against the knowing.

MAdam, would you have me answer freely to your Letter, and tell you roundly my
opinion: I allow a woman so far knowing, till she come to writing, and making
of books, but when she sets upon this, she is in danger often times, not to gain
the reputation of being eloquent, without losing that of being modest. It is a
great misfortune when one affects to become eminent in what ever it be, one
becomes so often in another fashion then she expects, or should desire. I wish
that more would think of it, that they might moderate the desire of knowledge,
which men study for necessity, women for glory. I do not say then that they
are unceapable of arts, or that they cannot penetrate all their secrets, but
they ought not seek a wisdom contrary to that of their sex, nor possess
virtues out of fashion, since renown depends not on our own opinion, we must
seek it in the opinion of others, perhaps if many Ladies of quality should
undertake to write, they would make the custom be received: otherwise those
that begin, are more in danger to be mocked, then followed. Their design is
like to that of those captains which cast themselves into the midst of enemies
to encourage others to fight; and then remain ruined, without any succor
unfollowed of any, and to say that ignorance is easily seduced, and that it is
as capable of error, as knowledge of vanity; certainly this cannot be
affirmed, but of the most stupid, and the most gross, how ignorant soever a
woman be, she always knows ill enough, to do it, if she will. Nature opens
her eyes, but too much for the enjoyment of many things, which reason forbids.
The most simple have knowledge enough of vice, and virtue, to merit glory in
flying the one, and practicing the other, but let us leave the virtue of
knowing persons, to speak of their conversation. You know how trouble some it
is. It seems that science does no less harm to the souls of many then
painting does their faces, this corrupts the natural color, and that
enfeebles com^ mon sense, they rave, when they think to discourse, they become
all memory, and take pains to amasse much goods, which they know not how to
manage. It Is pity to see how sometimes they be bemired, they are but shreds
they get; they speak nothing naturally, without which the richest discourses
are irke some. I know well there are some knowing women, which being withal
fair, or rich do always find approvers: but mean while that flattery
praises them in private, truth does often condemn them in public.

The XIII. Letter.
She affirms that the Gentleman commended to her merits the title of a good
friend, and promises to assist him in his affairs.

MAdam, the Gallant you commend to me, seems so worthy of the title you give
him; and it is with so much justice you call him a good friend that in my opinion
he must invent some other word, more significant than this friendship, to
express his own, knowing him as I do, you need not petition me for him; it
had been enough only to have given me advertisement, since he can so well
express his affection to those that need it, I shall endeavor to let him see
how much I desire his affairs should prosper. I will take as much pains, as in
my own, and more care, for besides the displeasure I should have not to be
fortunate in his behalf, I should likewise suffer the misfortune, not to
content you, that you may hope for all effects that lie in my power, judge
only that three puissant reasons oblige me to serve him: his own merit, the
justice of his cause, and the force of your recommendation, which would make me
undertake a mere impossibility to show, in doing him some small service, what
I would do for you, if I could find any favorable occasion, to witness how
much I am,

Madam Your, etc.

The XIII. Answer.
She replies that albeit the affair recommended to her, should uot succeed,
the obligation for her pains could never be the less.

MAdam, I am not ignorant that you love the person I commended to you, and that
to gratify him it were enough to let you know that he has need of your
favor, but if it be sufficient for your friendship to be advertised, it is not
too much for my duty to beseech you, as I do. If prayers be superfluous,
because of the good you wish him, they seem to me necessary, because that I
demand it. I cannot make them too humble, if I consider your condition, nor too
affectionate, if I regard his merit. The desire I have to see his matters
prosper, obliges me to employ all my power of recommendation. If he be worthy
the quality of a good friend for all others, I think he will esteem that of
your servant for most honorable. I undertake not to complement for him, since
he has no need of my help; and that I have not in my power too many thanks
to tender you, for which I have cause whatever become of this affair. After
you have taken all the pain you can, to give us content, suppose it should not
succeed, we shall not cease to be extremely obliged to you, we ought not to
crave that of you, which depends upon chance; but we shall always thank you
for the favor which depends on yourcare, when we shall be deprived of that
which depends upon fortune. After Physicians have don what they can to cure us,
we cease not to be bound to them, albeit their potions prove unprofitable, we
must consider that events are not in our own power: there is nothing but the
means, and the conduct which is our own but what need we fear while we have
reason to hope? there is no likelihood that our right should remain unknown,
and your pains unsuccesfull, I cannot believe it, and am confident, that the
end of this business shall give me new cause to serve you and to be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XIIII. Letter.
She says that the greatest persons esteem themselves happy to carry her
Letters, because of her that receives them.

MAdam, albeit I write often, I think you are not much troubled with the
reading of my letters, and that the greatest part stay by the way. I am
resolved to serve my self of all occasions, to prove if any one shall be
less unfortunate then the rest. And that I may speed, I will also employ all
sorts of persons, and not regard if they be Knights of the holy Ghost, or
Marshals of France, provided, I may use them to carry my tidings. The trouble
they shall have from me, shall be repaired in the satisfaction to see you: And
of what quality soever my messengers be, they cannot think themselves vilified
when they know the merit of her whom they oblige. I demand not your assent to
this, since humility forbids you profess, what truth publishes to all the
world. I only entreat that you suffer it from me, and that you receive it not
amiss, if after so much pain I take, and give to send you mine, I have some
hope to receive yours. This is that I beg of you, and to believe that my
greatest contentment is to be able to give you testimonies of my affection. It
is true, they are but feeble: but in this I shall be more obliged, if I can
express a great friendship by little proofs: and by my small services make
you see a desire so great as that to be,

Madam Your etc.

The XIV. Answer.
She says that if persons of quality bring her letters, it is because of the
sender, not the receiver.

MAdam, I know not if I receive all the Letters you write me. But I can assure
you I always receive less then I desire. I wish you such perfect health, that
I cannot too often receive the news, and if you have been ill, and I not know
of it, I should be extremely displeased, for having been contented when you
were not. I beseech you believe it: and to oblige me in this, employ, as you do
all sorts of messengers, of what condition soever they be. When they deliver
me your Letters, they all assure me that they are rightglad to obey you, and I
should not much wonder at their quality, though it were yet greater. I think
they esteem it little in respect of the service you deserve, and they desire
to perform. I measure their desire by their duty, and I believe that having
eyes, and soul, they have likewise that sense, and respect due to such a one
as your self. I conceive they would not take such pains to bring me letters,
if it were another sent them. They regard her that writes, not her that
receives. They oblige me, but serve you. You have reason to forbear demanding
my assent, when you say the contrary, since you know well that duty bids me
deny it, my refuse is just, because your prayer is not. And if civility binds
you to gainesay, at lest let truth make you believe it. It Is a humility of a
high strain, whereof your Letter is full. You are not content to attribute to
others the services done only to your self: but you tell me likewise, that
all the proofs of your friendship are feeble. If you think so, it is rather
for the good you wish me, then what I merit. You consider less what I am
worth, then what I need. Finally, entreat me not to suffer the importunity of
your Letters: there is nothing but this form of speech, which I cannot suffer.
You are the object of my consolation, not my patience: entertain me no more
with this word of respect, and remember rather the quality of my friendship,
then of my fortune. I wish that this might serve in any thing, to testify the
other, give me only occasions to show you the truth of it, and you shall know
in what manner I desire to meet those, by which I may be able to make you see
how I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XV. Letter.
She tells her that one of her friends intends to become religious, and that she
is resolved to follow her.

MAdam, I must tell you news, no less unpleasing to your self then me.
Mistress Lucinde speaks no more, but of religion, and the cloisters: all her
entertainment is the contempt of the world, and she reads nothing but
introductions to a devout life. There is nothing to change but her habit, her
face, and her soul are done already. She carries her eyes like those that
wear the veil: not a look of hers but preaches penitence. I know not what
her opinion is, but it should not be very reasonable. If she thought it
impossible to finish her salvation, but in the cloisters. It may be also done
in the world: and as a pearl in the bottom of the Sea, is not debarred the
dew that forms it: so though we be at Court, and in company, our soul is as
capable of grace. Truly to forsake the world, we need but retire our
thoughts, and our desires. Our better part may be in Heaven, whiles our grosser
part remains in earth. Though we sometimes see the stars in the bottom of
the water, they cease not to be fixed to their spheres. It is but their shadow
here below, really they are in heaven. It Is so with the just, whose conversation
is among the Saints, albeit he live among the profane. But not to dissemble,
will you that I tell you the change, which hers causes in my soul. If she
quit not the design she has to forsake the world, I shall mine to tarry
there. I took indeed some delight therein, but since it was for love of her,
she shall carry away the effect with the cause, I must wholly follow her to be
content, you will tell me perhaps, this is not to renounce the world, but to
seek the world where it is not, that it is an effect of friendship, not
devotion: and that to run after her into the cloisters, is not to seek God,
but Lucinde. It imports nothing, it may be having begun to be religious by
complacency, I shall be so by affection; God will touch me more powerfully. A
tempest may sometim^s cast us upon a country, where afterward we freely chose
to inhabit. A beginning full of constraint, may afterward be followed by a
progress full of liberty. And what ever come on it, follow her I will. This is
my inviolable purpose, and that to be all my life,

Madam Your, etc.

The XV. Answer.
She replies that this new^s does less astonish, then rejoice her, and that
she will make on to quit the world.

MAdam, you are deceived if you think your Letter has surprised me; it
brings me less astonishment then joy. The good news is double which I learn,
the change of Lucinde and your own. As far as I conceive your friendship would
carry you along with her, as well else where, as to a cloister. Your resolution
is good, you need only change the cause, doing that for the love of God,
which you intend to do for the creature. But I bring you news which perhaps
you look not for, If you be two, I promise you to make the third. It is not
new to me to have a great distaste of vanities: I had not stayed so long to
abandon them, but for the great grief I had to lose your company. Now, by Gods
grace, all the cords are broken; and I perceive nothing that hinders the effect
of my resolution, after that you have made. Never change it, what ever be said
to you. Suffer your self to be carried out of a place where there is neither
felicity nor virtue. So I speak of the world, where pleasures are imaginary,
misfortunes real, but grant there be some solid goods, they are always small
in respect of those in heaven. If we believe as we should, the joys of
eternity, there would be many more that would contemn those of the present.
Believe me, and you will avow, that I say, cannot come, but from one that
honors you infinitely, and which is in good earnest,

Madam Your, etc.

The XVI. Letter.
She complains of the ignorance of the Country, and says that they cannot
judge of good books.

MAdam, there was company with us, when we received the curious book you sent.
I wish you had been here, to observe the opinions of the Country, they are
either gross, or false. To praise an excellent piece, they content themselves
to say, it is very trim. There was a dame you know, that would esteem no other
book, but the Quadrams of Hibrac. Another made no bones to beg that we
received, without giving her self the patience to stay till we had looked upon
it. It Is notwithstanding the first time that ever we saw her; And judge what we
ought to fear, or hope from such an acquaintance, we must use our selves to
this manner of life, since here it is most common. Think into what country you
have sent honest F. to make lessons of morality. Count it not strange if they
give him not the approbation he deserves, and if he be no better received in
this Country, then those that preach the Gospel among Turks. At least you
ought to be assured, that there are two w^ll make a special esteem of him:
we will learn him by heart, my sister, and my self. And we shall find
memory enough to retain him. If we have not judgment enough to understand
him, for my part I find him so full of choice things, that not to know all,
were to injure the author. That which I find there extraordinary, is that in
reading, we meet alacrity with instruction, whereas others do but make us sad.
Insomuch that this advantage is gotten, not only to become more knowing, but
more content. This book corrects the humor, as well as instructs the soul.
And we have either of us given it a name: my sister calls it her school, and I,
my consolation. There is but one misfortune, which is that we cannot agree, to
read it one after the other, we would have it without ceasing, at the same
time, both together. The meaning is we beg another; and I hope you will excuse
our importunity since it proceeds from the esteem we make of an Author, which
you commend so much my eager desire would seem perhaps importune if it
proceeded not from that which I have to approve all that pleases you, and to be
in all things,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XVI. Answer.
She replies that even at Paris it self, there are not many which judge
soundly, of good books, and praises the Author of that she sent.

MAdam, it is nothing strange if in the Country they do not esteem good books
as they should: we have not indeed many here which can Judge of them soundly.
There is no body that praises not that you received; and I can assure you, that
never was approbation so general, as that is given it. I speak of that of the
better sort, which speak without passion, and without interest. There are some
people found, which not being able to know good things, or to suffer their
brightness, strain themselves to make them ill, but they have gained nothing,
but repentance, to have their ignorance, and malice publickely appear, they
have been constrained to change their discourse, albeit, perhaps they have not
diminished their envy. But whatever they utter of it, or would persuade
indifferent men, it is profitable to all sorts of humors, and persons. The
learned do there find content, and the ignorant instruction. Nevertheless I
advertise you of one thing, that whatever esteem you make of this book, you
ought to prepare a special one for him that made it, you desire to see him,
and I assure my self, you will be no less satisfied with his entertainment,
then the reading of his writings. You shall observe nothing in his visage, nor
his discourse, which smells of that, we call an Author. And you shall not find
in him that ^aturall or affected dullness of many, which dream in the best
company, and give no other reason of their silence, but that they compose.
These are fitter for a closet, then society, they cannot express themselves,
but by the pen. He, you shall see, is not of this humor: he speaks yet better
then he writes, and gives the lie to those, who maintain that the same
temperament cannot be proper to both. There is no less force in his discourse
then judgment in his writings. And above all you may mark in both an
extraordinary facility. I speak not of that vicious eafinesse which proceeds
from lightness orindiscretion. I know well that the earth does easily produce
superfluous things, and that of her self she bears thorns, and thistles
enough. I praise that excellent facility which comes from the strength of
spirit, when a man is master of the subject he handles, and good words are
joined with rich thoughts. I will use a sacred example to explain a profane
matter. If holy Scripture says of the covetous that they are the men of
riches, instead of saying that it is the riches of men; we may say of certain
Brokers, that they are the men of science, not that they have the science of
men, the one, and the other be the slaves of their wealth, and know not how to
distribute it with reason. The Author you shall see is in no wise of this
number, let him speak or write, he expresses himself with an advantage
extraordinary, try him and you will affirm without doubt, as well as many
others that know him, that readiness, and strength of Spirit, are in him both
equal. He is prompt without being light, solid, with out being dull. I will
say no more of him, and indeed, it would always be less then he deserves,
and I believe, however more then he desires. In effect it is a modesty without
parallel, but his own. Never have I heard him speak of his works, or of
himself with the least appearance of vanity, you shall judge of him then, when
I shall have the honor to present him to you, and that I shall assure you from
my own mouth, how that I am,

Madam Your, etc.

The XVII. Letter.
She thanks her for her approbation, and complains that her Letters are too
short.

MAdam, I intend never to present my self there where you have spoken of me,
nor put my self in danger to spoil my reputation, by my presence. You delight
to speak to my advantage, and to give me excessive praises: you will get no
blame by this, you shall acquire the reputation of one that obliges, if you
loose that of speaking truth, my Letter should end here, if I measured him by
the length of yours I have been no longer reading the contents then the
superscription. Never fear that yours should be trouble some to me: make them
as long as you please, I shall always esteem them too short. I speak
according to the measure of my affection, not of my merit. Since I have nothing
worthy of your good will, I cannot receive so small testimonies thereof, that I
be not for them extremely obliged, and that they give me not sufficient cause
to be all my life,

Madam Your, etc.

The XVIII. Letter.
She assures her that she has always been melancholy since her departure and
that she shall never be merry till her return.

MAdam, I beseech you believe that losing you, at the same time I lost my good
fortune: and that the day I parted from Paris, was the last of my life, since
which time I have scarce had leisure to breathe: and if I have spoken, it was
only to complain. After the persecutions of the Country people, sickness
challenged me the combat; as if the torments of the soul, caused by your
absence, were not sufficient to overcome me. I must needs confess to you the
error I lived in, in times past, as well as my displeasure at the present. I
thought the country would yield charms to drive away my heaviness; and that
the conversation of the Dames of Burgundy, and Forests would make me forget
those I left at Paris, but I have been fairly deceived. My disease follows
me every where, with so great a displeasure at what I see, that I can find
nothing that contents me. It may be, if I thought less on you, I should be
more happy. The remembrance of your entertainment renders me that of others
unpleasant. and I may say the remembrance of a past good, is to me a present
misfortune. In the distaste I am in, whilst I possess you not, the most able
people here, seem not to me to have common sense. Judge then how unhappy I am,
seeing I am in a Country where she that has the best stomach, can hardly find
victuals, where of she would be willing to eat. We must not seek for
superfluities, where necessaries are scarce to be found, so far are we from
procuring ought for pleasure, we can hardly meet with enough to satisfy
nature. This is the cause of my misfortune, which afflicts me so much the more,
as I know it perfectly, above all when I think that at your departure, you
promised your self somewhat from our province, but it is so unfruitful that
in a whole age it produces not so much as one good thought, much less a good
Letter, you will accuse me of little affection to my Country, since I do
thus aver her imperfections; but I had rather confess them to ^ne that has
the goodness to dissemble them, then to sacrifice her defects to the pittiles
public. I had rather tell a particular person that she is barren, then let
the world see she can produce naught but monsters. however, I assure you she
furnishes me with no better reasons to defend her, and I should esteem her
far more fertile then I say, if she could afford me any occasion to show
you how I am heartily,

Madam Your, etc.

The XVIII Answer.
She thanks her for her praises and remembrance, and wishes her yet less
contentment then she has in the Country, that she may come and take it at
Paris.

MAdam, after the complaints you make in your Letter, I must either yield no
faith to your words, or some compassion to your misfortune I doubt not but you
wish for Paris, but I cannot believe that you put the loss of my company in
the rank of afflictions. I have too good an opinion of your spirit, too bad of
my own, to think you write of me. Your error would be as excessive, as my good
fortune should you speak of me according to your opinion. And to answer this
according to mine, I assure you that reading your letter, I am not so much
astonished at the extraordinary testimonies of your friendship, as at those of
your approbation, and esteem. This would occasion me some vanity, if, to
humble me, I did not consider, it is your affection speaks, not your opinion,
or, to use better terms, your judgment has been corrupted by your will. I
know those, that do me the honor to know me, find freedom, and simplicity
enough to merit some part of their favor: but I know likewise there are not
good qualities enough in my soul, to deserve so many praises. Judge then how
far I ought to think my self your obliged, since you are not content to wish
me well, and do me good above my worth, but that moreover you take the pains
to speak every where a thousand fold beyond my expectation. If I must pity
you, it shall be more for the ill you suffer in the country, then for the good
you left at Paris. I speak of what concerns my self, for I doubt not but you
have there seen rarities enough, to sad you in all your voyages, but to change
discourse I will end this letter in another fashion then I began. If at first I
promised you pity, it seems to me at present I ought to refuse it, be as
melancholy as you list, I wish you more. I shall be very glad that you never
find sweetenes in the place where you be able to lessen the sorrow you suffer
for Paris, and that you have cause to be displeased at the country, to the end
you may be constraned to return hither for your contentment, as well as ours. I
swear to you that after I had read your excellent Letter; I mist there, but
onething, which is, that you give me no assurance of your return. I should
answer you to other matters, but I am constrained to remit this till another
occasion. The messenger hastes me to close this, and affords me no more time,
but to assure you that I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XIX. Letter.
She complains thrt she has not heard from her so often as she expected, and
says that all her boldness proceeds from affection.

MAdam, if I had hoped less of your affection, I should have received too much
of your courtesy: but I am so much your servant that I find you owe me more,
not having written me but one Letter in three months absence. It is not as
you promised me, when I had the honor to bid you farewell. I had parted from
you with less satisfaction, but for the assurance you gave, to send me more
frequent tidings. I speak boldly: but you may without much pain, put me in
state to write you thanks, rather then imputations, which will be, when I shall
receive the effects of my expectation, and your promise. I mean, when you
shall no longer be covetous of your Letters. It must needs be that either you
have an ill opinion of me, or that you believe my grief less then it is,
since you contribute so little to my consolation, in so great a loss as that
of your conversation. If you think there are other remedies for this besides
your Letters, you are in an error; if you think them the sole remedy, you are
without pity. blame my presumption as long as you list, it is certainly true,
that when I consider the affection I bear you, it seems to me, I cannot too
much presume the effects of yours. You delight to gratify me, but I protest,
you shall never do me so much good, as I wish you, but if you desire to know
the cause of such extraordinary boldness, as mine, not being able to return you
ought, but wishes for effects; I beseech you believe, there is no other then
the great affection I have to serve you, and to be,

Madam Your, etc.

The XIX. Answer.
She answers that she is in the wrong, t^ to call her covetous of her Letters,
since to serve her, she would be prodigal of blood, and life.

MAdam, it must needs be that you have but a weak opinion of my friendship, if
you think that I seek not occasions to witness the truth of it. If you judge
I neglect the means to write to you, you offend against my affection: if you
believe I have none, you do not complain but blame me. True it is, our will
depends on our selves; but often times the effects we employ to show it, depend
on fortune. Any misseadventure, or chance may arrest my Letters by the way: and
if it be in my liberty to write to you, it is not always in my power to cause
my Letters be delivered. You vex your self against me without reason, and
give me cause to be in choler, since you have none, how should I be covetous
of my letters, that would not be so of my life, and my blood. I beseech you
believe this, or the judgment you make of me, will give me liberty to make
the same of you. And when I receive no Letters from you, I shall be able to
think, you want not occasion, but memory. If you had a true feeling of my
friendship, you would not judge so ill of my remembrance. I never thought you
could have deemed so sinisterly of my humor. So while you call me covetous of
Letters, I style you prodigal of reproaches I do not accuse your boldness, but
your error. I suffer your freedom, albe it I condemn your choler. Handle me
more sweetly another time, and whatever happen, never entertain an opinion
contrary to the resolution I have made to serve you, and to be all my life,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XX. Letter.
She styles her her goddess, prays her to pierce into her heart, and see the
affection she cannot express.

MAdam, though I pray you to think of me, yet, I assure you, I have more need
of your judgment, then memory to keep any part in your favor, because your
memory represents things, but as they appear, but your judgment can discover
them as they are, do not content your self to be able to gain hearts, but
get the way to enter into them, and see there the affection you produce, be not
like the sun, whose heat goes farther then his light and produces gold, and
metals in the earth, where notwithstanding the brightness of his rays, did
never pierce, you will say this is a gallant language, and that my friendship
speaks like love, but what should bar it the same discourse, that has the same
excess? It knows no difference, but by the end, not by the vigor: take it
not ill then, if I entreat your aid to discover the violence of my affection:
and since I title you my goddess, I beseech you show some effect of this fair
name, regarding my heart more then my hands, my intention, then my sacrifice.
Certainly I should be the most unfortunate of the world, should you judge my
friendship by my works or my words. I have neither power, nor eloquence, but
had I the one, and the other, both in a perfect degree, I should not yet be
able to show you as I ought, the desire enflames me to serve you, and to be,

Madam Your, etc.

The XX. Answer.
She says that she has more love then knowledge, and that after the effects
of her friendship, she does ill to employ words.

MAdam, I do not think those who have given you their approbation, can deny
you their remembrance. The excellency that is in you begets at the same time
desire to conserve, as well as acquire your favor. I have but one grief, it is,
not to have soul enough to judge the perfections of yours. They say we must
measure love by knowledge, and nevertheless, albeit I believe not to know you
perfectly, I cannot imagine that any can love you better, but were it so, It
would sad me much, to have no more judgment, that I might have more affection.
I think I am quite contrary to that you say of the Sun, my hea^e outgoes my
light, my love, my knowledge. Call me no more your goddess, if you will not
have me call you my idolatresse, you err to tender so much honor to her that
merits so little. Strain not for words to show you love me, your deeds have
made me know it; I shall never see better by the brightness of a Torch, then
that of the Sun it self. So I compare deeds, and words which do not equally
express friendship, it is of the last notwithstanding I must serve my self, not
having power enough to show you otherwise how much I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXI. Letter.
She makes a scruple to write, fearing that if her Letters please her, she
should be less impatient to return.

MAdam, whatever commandment you make me to write, I protest, I feel a
repugnancy to obey. I fear if I give yon any content in absence, lest I slow
that which I hope by your return. I have heard you say, that you find
unparaleld delights, reading my Letters, which albeit, I do not wholly
believe, I cannot cease to fear. I imagine with my self, that if there you
take so much pleasure, you will have the less impatience to see me. And I
doubt, least thinking to diminish your grief I augment my own. I would not
willingly contribute any thing to make my absence less unsupportable: yours is
to me so, that I cannot enough lament it. And I can tell you, that if your
Letters please me, they diminish my sorrow. without diminishing the desire I
have to enjoy you. Rather they augment it; and the contentment I take to read
them, making me think on that of your company, increases the desire I have to
possess it. If ever I have the good luck, I will make my self inseparable,
that I may no more be obliged as at present, to write to you that which I would
more willingly protest, with my tongue, that I am perfectly

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXI. Answer.
She answers that the Letters she receives, augments her joy, without
decreasing the desire to see her.

MAdam, albeit without ceasing I demand news from you, if you write to me,
because I desire it, this is not to obey, but oblige me, not an effect of your
duty, but only of your courtesy, however never fear that this should hinder
me to wish your return, since the entertainment distant friends do give, and
take by Letters, is but a picture of that between persons present: you should
imagine that though your Letters did yet give me greater content, they would
not hinder me to desire that of your presence, to speak truth, A Letter is but
a copy, which makes us curious of the original, a table which augments the
desire to see the person represented. This is the effect of yours; and I can
assure you, that if those you write me be delightful, there is nothing so
true, as that augmenting my joy, they augment the passion I have to be near
you, and to find occasions to testify in what manner I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXII. Letter.
She tells her that nothing can keep her from writing; no, not the fever it
self, though violent.

MAdam, imagine the desire I have to receive your Letters by the care I take to
send you mine, having a fit of the fever to suffer, and seeing the Post ready
to part, I resolved my self, spite of my disease, to write to you, you need
not demand if my hand shaked, it is not with fear, but with a shivering cold. In
this estate I have not been careful to write you a long letter, because the
Post presses me on the one side, the fever on the other. I must therefore
finish, and put of what I have to tell you, till another time. I am threatened
my pain will be more violent, but it matters not I shall endure it patiently,
since it is a labor too praise worthy, which I undergo, to take occasion to
testify to you, how I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXII. Answer.
She fears least for receiving a small satisfaction, she lose a greater, and
that having forced her self to write she increase her d^sease.

MAdam, I have not received the joy I expected, by the return of this Bearer,
learning your indisposition by the Letter you did me the honor to write me. I
fear least the pains you have taken augment your disease, and that being
willing to give me this satisfaction, you deprive me not of a greater then I
can have elsewhere. It is certainly true that the two most happy news I can
receive, are that you love me, and are well. And that I fear most in the
world, is the alteration of your health, or friendship, the least suspicion of
the one, or other, would make me^ hate my life. I protest never was Letter so
dear unto me, as that you sent maugre your fit: but yet I like better you
should take care of your health, then writing. Albeit your tidings extremely
re^oyce me, I love your life, better then your letters, I beseech you believe
it, and employ me in all you please, as,

Madam Your, etc.

The XXIII. Letter.
She recommends to him the cause of her friend.

SIr, if I had as much ability to serve you, as occasion to trouble you, you
should easily judge I value not my own interests in respect of yours. But I
must in this acco^modate my self rather to the condition of ^y fortune, then
my disposition: and if you have no proofs of my thankfulness, you shall at
least of my confidence, past examples do make me more and more hardy for the
future, and instead, that the continuation of your favors ought to oblige me
to a modesty, less audacious, I find they give me more liberty. So it is,
Sir, that I have once more need of the accustomed testimonies of your good
will: but to beg with more dexterity, I will join your own interest with
mine, and convince you by your own charity, as well as by the favor you have
promised me. I assure my self, that the virtue you practice with so much
praise, and the justice you exercise with so much integrity, will easily
obtain of you, all I shall demand in behalf of this bearer. He is no less
worthy your compassion, then his adversaries your chastisement: I know you will
do in this business all that justice requires, but besides this. I most humbly
beseech you to add yet for my sake, that sweetness wherewith you are wont to
receive all those, I recommend to you, and that obliging quality, which
interesses you in all that I affect. The obligation I shall bear you in this
respect shall hold the place of one of your most special favors; and I shall
remember it all my life, as well as the promise I have made to remain,

Sir, Your, etc.

The XXIV. Letter.
She writes to her, that her sadness i^ extreme during her absence.

MAdam, I take no care how to express the grief I suffer by your absence, for
it were to aspire to an impossibility; and as I cannot spea^e my contentment
when I have the honor to see you, so can I not testify the displeasure I
feel, when I am deprived of so great a good fortune, my grief is as mute as
my joy. I wish you could see it; you should judge my affection by my sorrow,
since the one is the cause of the other, and both are extreme. In this case I
have no other comfort, but that I receive by reading your Letters. If I had no
memory, I should be the most unfortunate of the world. And that which more
afflicts me is, that I have no more opportunity, to receive the assurances of
your friendship, but only to send you those of my duty, and the desire I have
to be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXIV. Answer.
She answers that she has not merit enough to cause joy in the possessing, or
sorrow in the losing.

MAdam, your letter makes me more ashamed, then my absence, you melancholy. I
have more cause to blush at your praises, then you to be sad at my separation.
I cannot believe you, without mistaking my self, for another; and to credit
your words, I must renounce the knowledge of my self. That which you have of
me is very different from your discourse, or at least from truth. I doubt not
but you feel some sorrow; but I care not to measure it by my merit. I have too
little to equal the favor I possess: and I should be no less ignorant, then
unthankefull, if I should not avow, that you have much more affection to me,
then I good qualities to deserve it. If I have any one that makes me so hardy
to beg the continuation, it is only this simplicity you love in me, and which
renders you my defects the more suppo^table. It Is the only advantage I have to
think you love me, and that you permit me to call my self,

Madam Your, etc.

The XXV. Letter.
She desires to enter into a Monastery, and prays her to aid her therein.

MAdam, I must needs confess you my error, I fear that you forget me: I
believe you wish me well, but I know not, if you think on doing it; and in the
number of great affairs, which take up your thoughts, I fear you dream not
on any so small as mine. I have more need to solicit your memory, then your
will, and am more in pain for your ^emembrance, then your affection, but that
I may touch you where you are most sensible, ^he pleasure you shall do me, may
be called an effect of your charity, as well as of your friend^hip, I perceive well
the endea^ours of my calling: but I cannot follow it perfectly without ^our
favor. I have yet need ^f humane things, to arrive at ^ivine: and albeit I be
near a ^onasticke life, as the cripple ^^ the poole, I want some bo^y to cast
me in, upon this occasion. Without which I shall but languish in my desires,
and remain always in a place, where long since I fastened no more hopes. I
call the world so, which I should quit with grief, because I leave you there,
did I not consider that one day by Gods grace, we shall enjoy a longer
conversation, then that is promised here below. In which I place all my
expectation: and since it is the greatest good of all, I content my self to
wish it you, to show the true affection I have to serve you, and to be,

Madam Your, etc.

The XXV. Answer,
She prays her to employ her with more ^^^^^^ence, approves her design to
enter into that course, and offers her aid.

Mistress, if you think I have forgotten you, never was faith so faulty as
yours. It is an injury to both, seeing you must have a bad opinion of my
friendship, or I not that I ought to have of your merit. Judge the consequence,
for to want memory, I must want knowledge. We cannot in this separate
ingratitude from ignorance. And to examine all things well, I understand not
how I can wish you good, without remembering to do it. this should be rather a
sick desire, then mine; I have too much affection, to remain unmooveable: and
I can assure you that occasions shall rather be wanting to my will, then my will
to occasions. This would be a thought very vnprofitable^ to our friends, if we
should remember them always, except at those times they have need of us. Be
then less fearful, and if you will that I assure my self of your affection,
doubt not of mine. I think on you, and you have no need to solicit my
memory, more then my affection, the first is an effect of the last. True
friendship is always attended with remembrance, and those which can forget:
were never truly in love, when we fix upon a worthy object, we resemble the
covetous, who have no less care to conserve then heap up treasure. Insomuch
that to believe, I entertain my self with you, is to believe I love and yet
however you consent to the last, you tell me you doubt the first. In this I
know not how to make your faith, and your fear friends. Be for the future more
bold to employ me, and think that if ever I want memory, I must be very sick,
the alteration, should be in my temperament, not my friendship. If any disease
should take away this faculty of my soul, which only renders me happy in your
absence; I assure you, I would always have your picture before my eyes. I
would employ this remedy every moment, and refresh your Idea at the table. But
I hope I shall have no need of this, to entertain my self without ceasing,
with a person that had no defect; if she had not this to employ me with
ceremony. Its enough to know that our friends want us, to gain our assistance:
we must not be entreated when it is sufficient to be advertised. I have then
reason to complain of you; and it seems to me that you have an opinion scarce
good enough of my friendship, since you beg the effects with so little
confidence. I am very unhappy not yet to have given you cause enough to rely on
me, and to use me with more assurance. Remember your self only that if I seek
occasions to serve you, you should not fear to give them, my interests are
tied to yours; and I shall be no less obliged when you present me the means
to do you a good turn, then if I had received one. All that troubles me in
this, is that I cannot benefit you, but by depriving my self of your company.
But it is better my inclination dispose it self to yours, and that humane
things give place to divine. I love you so, that I have more regard to what you
gain, then that I lose. Insomuch that since you desire this holy solitude, you
shall no longer stay here, but with repugnancy, follow the voice that calls you,
and hearken not to that which laments you, or yet speak to you of the world, I
approve your desire, and offer you all the help I can bring. It is in this
occasion only, that I will bid you farewell, without daring to complain, and
without expressing other grief, then for that I cannot follow you. I wish I
had the liberty so to do: and I would not only offer you the favor, but the
company,

Mistress, Of Your, etc.

The XXVI. Letter.
She desires her to believe, that if she write not, it is want of opportunity not
will.

MAdam, never fear that I forget you, my soul may sooner be without thoughts,
then my thoughts without you, but albeit I employ the better part of my time,
to entertain my self about you, I cannot find any favorable enough to write
to you. It seems that fortune is jealous that I bestow all my contemplation
upon you; and that not being able to divert me, at least she hinders me to
testify you the truth by my Letters. I most humbly beseech you to believe it,
and to lament me, rather then accuse me, It is occasion I want, not will. I am
more worthy of your compassion, then your anger. Cease not then to send me your
news, albeit, you can but rarely receive mine, my silence is no effect of
oblivion, but misfortune handle me like a prisoner, on whom we bestow visits,
without hope to receive any. If I had more liberty, you should have more
proofs of my affection. If you do but a little remember the past, you cannot
doubt it, and during all my silence, I am no less then I have been, though I
cannot protest it you so often,

Madam Your, etc.

The XXVI. Answer.
She answers that she can easily hope the honor of her remembrance, since
she possesses that of her affection, and that she is assured of her friendship
whatever happen.

MAdam, I agree to yours: and since you will have it so, I believe that you
pass some part of your time, to entertain your self with our friendship, I
can easily believe the favor of your remembrance, since you deny me not that
of your love. We do more oblige persons by affection, then memory, we may
think indeed on troublesome things, but love only delightful, since I have
some part in your good grace, I believe you will give me some in your memory.
After a great favor, I may well expect a little one. And if my imperfections
cannot hinder you to love me, they shall never hinder you to remember me. This
is my faith, and my consolation. I am none of those who are always in alarm,
when people fail of what they owe, or what themselves desire. I do not regard
if you write to me or not, I believe that you fail not to serve your self of
all occasions, whereby I may receive any assurance, I fear more the change of
your health, then of your friendship: and wish you were no more subject to
sickness, then inconstancy. And when I desire you more liberty, It is for your
own satisfaction, and that I might receive more frequent testimonies of your
affection. Albeit I should, this would not augment the belief I have, but
only the pleasure I take to understand it. Your Letters render me more
content, but not more constant, nor more then I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXVII. Letter.
She complains of her distance, that she cannot hope for news: that she can
neither remember her without grief, nor forget her without ingratitude.

MAdam, since for the future, I dare scarce hope to have news from you, I must
at least send you mine, that you may have compassion on me, and not render my
evil extreme by oblivion. It Is that I fear, if your promises did not give me
that courage, which my want of merit entirely takes away. Excuse me if I write
thus unto you, since the sovereign remedy of my solitude, is to think that
you have promised to love me. I hardly know my self, when I consider that
which not long since I possessed. I speak thus according to your measure, and
not according to my own; since it is but eight days for you; but a whole age
for me; see to what I am reduced; I can neither forget you without crime, nor
think of you without grief. I must be either faulty, or unhappy. You have too
much merit, to let me be able to forget you, and I too little to imagine you
think on me. Insomuch that I can neither hope without temerity, nor cure my
self without ingratitude: but my Letter must be confused like my thoughts. I
tell you once more, that I know not where I am, when I think on your
conversation. It hinders me to taste any sweetness in all others. And
therefore quickly to reapproach you, I intend to give such order to my
affairs that in few days I shall see an end. I shall ever hold them happy
enough, provided they be short, and albeit there were crowns to hope for, I
would freely quit the pretension, if I must be long deprived of your company,
or constrained farther to defer my return. There is nothing so true as this,
and you ought no more doubt of it, then of the affection I have to be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXVII. Answer.
She replies that if she have not confidence enough, she has not a just
opinion of her friendship, and that she has neither power enough to serve her,
nor merit to be worthy of her choice.

MAdam, I know not why you have so much desire to hope for my news: it is
less difficult for me to send, then profitable for you to receive. You
entreat me in this to do a thing, whereof I had a purpose to beg your
permission. I am much more happy, then I believed. I thought my letters
troublesome to you, and you tell me they are necessary. I know not how it goes,
but assure your self, you shall not fail being happy, if your felicity depend
on me. You shall never be poor of those goods which I can heap upon you. You
must hope^ i^ with more assurance, otherwise your fear will produce that of
some alteration in your friendship. If you be without confidence, you must
needs believe me without affection, seeing we ought to expect all of that
person which has power, and will, to do us the good to which we aspire; can
you believe that I have neither the one nor the other, either to send you
tidings, or to serve you in what ever it be? For the tediousnes you suffer in
my absence, I conjecture it is not small, no more then the affection you bear
me: but I cannot imagine that it is like mine. As I give place to you in merit,
you should give place to me in displeasure, when we are separated one from
the other. If we ought to measure the greatness of the loss by that of the
cause, It is easy to judge my grief extreme; mean while that yours cannot
be great, no more then her merit, which is the cause of it. I know not why you
tell me that you cannot hope without being rash, nor cure your self, without
being unthankefull, It must either be that I had more perfections to oblige you
to remembrance: or you more obligation to have some ground of thankfulness; I
have received no advantage from nature, or fortrne, or if they have obliged me
in ought, it is that the first has given me a disposition to honor you, the
other has given me occasions to know you. Judge then if you ought to handle as
you do a person that is in case rather to seek your^ favors, then do you
any. And has no other advantage but this, that she can perfectly honor you.
If you be confused, it must needs be for some other grief, then that of my
loss, And if the remembrance of my conversation, renders all others
unagreeable, it is because it troubles you, and puts you into a bad humor. This
is that which the ^^nowledge of my defects ought to persuade me, whiles that of
your goodness shall make me believe what ever you will to my advantage. It is
time to finish this letter. Put an end to yonr affairs, if you desire an end
of my unquiet, It will last til your return, which cannot be so soon as all
the world desires, and among others,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXVIII. Letter.
She promises to publish every where the effects of her courtesy.

MAdam, as one of your greatest pleasures is to oblige your friends, so one of
the greatest I have is to speak of those I have received. I would be no less
generous, to publish your favors, then you to do them. I proclaim them every
where, so loudly, that there is no body which does not instantly judge, the
resent I have of them, and the extreme grief I take, not to be able to
testify you the truth of it, no more then the affection I have to be all my
life,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXVIII. Answer.
She replies that instead of deeds, she can only have good intentions, and
desires.

MY dear sister, how much would you deem your self bound to me for effects,
seeing you believe your self, so much only for desires? truly you must needs
have power to pierce into the affections, as well as to gain them, to thank me
in this manner. I am very glad you have this particular gift, to judge the
intention, without help of ordinary appearances which may show it. I should
hardly be able to show you mine, by my works: and I rejoice you know that by
prophecy, which I should be able to demonstrate by experience, without doubt,
you had less regard to the service you have received from me, then to ^he will
I have to serve you. It is great enough to content those, which can come to
know it, like you; and I think it might oblige my friends to do me good, if
they should consider what I desire them, it is this which obliges you to do me
so many civilities; and which renders me confused, when I think that I have
yet done nothing, which may evidence to you as I would, in what fashion I am,

My Sister, Your, etc.

The XXIX. Letter.
She comforts her touching the death of M. and shows that tears are
unprofitable for those, that have lost life, dangerous for those that yet
possesses it.

MAdam, to see how melancholy you be, one would think you no more regard your
life, then as a thing in which you have no interest. Since you lament those
have lost it, why do you put your own in danger? how comes it to pass, you
have not as much fear for your self, as sadness for others? tell me not
that there are accidents in which tears, and grief are a just effect of duty.
Surely there is more of custom, then reason: and I cannot comprehend why our
friends should take pleasure to see that we do our selves an evil, from
whence they can draw no advantage. So I call that of our excessive sorrow, for
since we believe them content in the other world, if we weep for them in
this, our tears are injurious: if it be for our selves, they are mercenary:
and for what ever it be, they are superfluous, but if a wise man ought not to
have unprofitable passions, how shall he have any so dangerous? Pardon me, if
I tell you freely, that if you diminish not your grief, I shall the belief I
had of your spirit, what difference is there between you, and one that
wilfully precipitates himself, only you kill more cruelly, then ever any did
we accuse of their own death, take heed least to show too much pity to
others, you show too little to your self. Remember what you were wont to say
touching the death of Lucretia: you thought men could not justify her murder.
And what did she to her body, you do not to your soul? do you think that
one is less homicide that kills himself in five days, then in an hour? do
not that with voluntary grief, she did with her own hand. And what is it to
purpose, if the weapons we use to take away life, be visible or not? if the
shortest death be sweetest, judge what is that, you cause your self by a
sadness too affected? I know well the loss of our friends does touch us, I
would not remove the sense, but the error: and if we must give any thing to
nature, we must yet give more to reason, but I correct my self, it is not so
much nature that makes us to weep excessiuely, as opinion, since there is no
time wherein noble spirits should not aspire to felicity, what show of reason is
there, that to gain the glory of loving well, a man should rack, and torment
himself. True it is that passions there are, whereof we forbid but the
excess: but for sorrow, we should take away the very use it self: and not
serve our selves of it, but for repentance. In all things else, it is
superfluous, and indeed perilous. I do notwithstanding much admire, if she
be often Mistress of our soul, since no body does resist her: I say more,
since we detain her spite of those, that offer remedy. Call to mind that
she is unprofitable to the dead, dangerous to the living: and may take life
from those that have it, not restore it, to those have lost it: she pushes
into the grave, but never draws back any. And to behold these lamentable
effects, take only your glass, you may guess the ill it does your soul, by
that it does your face. Never did sorrow do so much mischief as yours, seeing
it ruins at once two of the fairest things in the world, your disposition, and
your beauty; judge now if we have cause to complain, and if your melancholy
ought not to be a just cause of ours, think on this, and consider how many you
make weep, whilst you lament but one. You see what I might write, and yet
account not my letter necessary. I speak rather to your memory, then your
judgment, and this is not to instruct, but call to mind those lessons you give
to others, and would be at present useful to your self. I must now say to
your soul, as to sick Physicians, that she heal her self. But I fear
least it be spoken as unprofitably to you, as them, for if the sickness of the
body takes away knowledge, much more that of the soul. Neve^rthelesse I will
hope better, and believe you will not always take pleasure to hug an ill,
whereof you may heal your self. At least I think you will interrupt a little
your tears, if you open your eyes to consider her that prays you, it is

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXX. Letter.
She rejoices at the news of her returns, and professes no less feeling for
her then her own sister.

MAdam, to judge with what con^entment I learnt the news of your return, you
need but think with what passion I desired it. Chorinde shall witness it,
and I believe that she will not boast, to have shed more tears, or made more
prayers then I, during your absence. Let her say what she will, if she be
nearer to you by reason of blood, I am, then her, by inclination; the one is
as well a link of nature as the other, this is it you should consider, if you
will not make me as unhappy, as I am affectionate in what concerns you. Let
her esteem that quality of sister, I rather love that of my Mistress. I am very
glad to be less o^kin, and more distanced in blood, to be more near by our
alliance. I rejoice that nature obliges you to have more friendship for her,
that there may remain more love for me. I have spoken enough of my affection,
let us now speak of the grief it produces. Verily, if I had not learnd the
news of your return, my misfortune could no longer linger the possession of
this good, without advancing the end of my life. If you again make such
voyages, I will make my will, before I bid you farewell, and, ceasing to see
you, will practice the same ceremonies, ^hey do in ceasing to live. I ^ssure
you of it, and this is no esse true, then the affection which I have to be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXX. Answer.
She assures her of her remembrance, and her return.

MAdam, the only consolation I have amongst a thousand occasions of
sufferance, which present themselves but too much in the Country where I am,
is the hope I have to see you. And if you ask me of my entertainment, I
assure you the best, and most ordinary I have, is the remembrance of yours. It Is
this which serves me for a counter poison, after that of many troublesome
guests, whom one cannot put off, without making them enemies, nor s^e without
enduring a thousand incommodities. You will say, perhaps, I not oblige you much
to think on you at present. And that if the company here were a little less
insupportable, I would never dream of yours. I assure you, there is nothing so
sweet in the world can make me forget it, and that I have no less sorrow when
I am deprived of it, then joy when I possess it. It is to this happiness I
aspire with extreme passion, and do all I can to set forward my return. I
hope it shall be no less cheerful, then my departure was pensive. You shall
be the first to see the effects, as you are to receive the menaces. I say the
menaces, not the promises, since all my visits are more worthy your fear, then
your hope. It may be you are of another opinion: but if this were not mine, I
should yet less merit, then I do the honor of your favor, and the quality,

Madam, Of Your, etc.

The XXXI. Letter.
She professes that the course displeases her, and that she cannot imagine
what delight may therein be found.

MAdam, I am in despair that my opinion is not conformable to yours: and that
the same thing is the object of your pleasure, my anger. I speak of the course
which you call the fairest hour of the day, and I the most troublesome. This is
my opinion which yet I love not, because yours is contrary, give me reasons to
combat it; there is nothing I desire so much, as to learn those which make you
love it, that I may renounce those which make me hate it. I much fear not to
be persuaded: and albeit your spirit be very powerful over others, least mine
in this occasion, oppose her aversion to your eloquence. I say an aversion, not
blind, like that of many others, who content themselves to say, they are not
inclined to such a thing, and will not open their eyes to see the truth they
know not. I do not shut mine, rather I strain my self to find some reasons
to make it pleasing. I pry into every corner, without discovering any thing
fair, or agreeable. We go there to see, or to be seen: and for that matter,
I have neither vanity enough, nor curiosity, we turn, we behold, we salute
three things in my judgment unprofitable enough, or enough trouble some I will
not say dangerous, especially speaking to a person that knows how to preserve
her selfein a greater contagion, and which runs no other peril in this
adventure then that of being importuned. It Is to you then an innocent diversion,
albeit, it may be, it be not so to many others, but suppose it be to all: have
we not many better, wherein there is more pleasure, less trouble? is it not
better to spend that hour in entertaining of our friends, then to make so many
turns in the midst of noise, and dust? This is neither conversation, nor
walking, seeing there is too little familiarity for the one, too much confusion
for the other. This is my opinion, which perhaps is not conformable to that of
many others: but it matters not, I cease not to believe it reasonable, although
I have not many of my side. I know there are more bad, then good how ever I
think the best may be of diverse opinions in such a matter. Howbeit least I
make me to many enemies, I had rather say, I take no pleasure therein, then
that there is none at all. I would not have my humor serve as a rule for
others. I am not vain enough to claim conformity, nor easy enough to yield
it. I am not careful to frame my self a particular wisdom. And I let you
think if I desire my aversion overcome, since it deprives me of public
pleasure, and makes me hate what you love. I will therefore tell you that I
have found the means to draw some profit from the course, and to recrea^e my
self, albeit it be not in the same fashion with others, it is, that observing
the passages there, they put me into an extraordinary vein of laughing, not
that this folly is not worthy of compassion; but I would not make so austere a
reflection, and had rather make sport with it, then complain, you see how all
my mirth consists in deriding that of others; but I must confess you the
truth, the pleasure which I thus take, does not last long; I enter insensibly
into ^holler: I flote between a good, and a bad humor; I see whereat to be
angry, and whereat to laugh, and am betwixt snight, and scorn. And this is the
state I fi^de my self in, during the course. I know not if reason be of my
side, or yours; but in which soever it be, free me from error, or leave it
your self. It is no great matter which of us change her opinion, so our
opinions be reconciled. I cannot endure they should be different, and am
resolved to lose, or gain the victory: At least I promise you to suffer my
self to be persuaded by your reasons, if you bring me any strong enough. If I
am ignorant, I am not indocible. And it is easy enough to cure me, if I be
sick. I am wholly disposed to believe you, as well as to obey you, and to be,

Madam, Your etc.

The XXXI Answer.
She answers that her aversion from the course is without reason, and that
she has nothing to vanquish but her opinion to take delight therein, as well
as others.

MAdam, seeing it must be (as it seems by your letter) that one of us,
renounce her opinion: to observe some justice therein, it will be good to have
regard to her that shall lose less by the change; and since there is one hour
in the day that displeases you, you shall gain much if you can find the means
to make it agreeable. You ought to contribute what you can, to free your self
from a belief that hurts you, and makes you find a loathing, where all the
world takes a recreation. Let us not dispute so much the nobleness of our
thoughts, as their utility. Let us be happy, if we cannot be wise: and if it
be hard to discover whether our opinions be contrary to reason, let us at least
take care they be not contrary to our own good fortune. To what end should we
affect that which opposes our felicity? it is a misfortune, that instead of
correcting we adore our own imagination. And are to our opinions, as mothers
to their children; loving to those that merit it least. It Is a great increase of
misery, to see that our thoughtsare not only salse, but likewise sullon, did
our dreams depend upon our selves, we would have none but pleasant. And yet
though our thoughts be at our own liberty, we cease not to have them
importune, nor lose them without difficulty, for my part I desire not that
error should abridge my pleasures, I had rather it increased them, and if I
must be deceived, I wish it might be pleasingly, do as much for the course,
and strive to find delight, where your imagination depaints nothing but
importunity. I know not why you say, it is neither walking, nor conver^ing: it is
both the one and the other, or rather a third pleasure compounded of both, see
how many contentments are found therein at the same time. We take the air,
we entertain, we mu^e, we may there please the eye, and the ear, and find
the pleasures both of discourse and silence, but there is enough said of this
matter, if reason cannot convince you, I hope you will yield to experience. I
had rather make you taste that which is delightful in the course, then to
describe it. We will carry you thither, and if you yet go there with your
error, doubtless you shall come home sound. You shall be vexed at your
antipathy to this hour, and grieve the time you employed, not in so pleasing
an exercise, I assure my self you will thank me for undeceiving you, and that
you will ta^e my care, for one of the least effects of the affection I have to
serve you, and to be always,

Madam, Your* etc.

The XXXII. Letter.
She wishes her much wealth, and says she is rich in the goods of nature, if
poor in those of fortune.

Mistress, after the letter you wrote unto me, I know not what to beg of
heaven for you, or what prayers to make, may give you satisfaction. I sear
least mine be contrary to yours, and that you should complain of the felicity
which I desire you, tell me your mind in this, that my prayers may be more
confident, and profitable, but whiles I lo^ke to hear from you, I must tell
you what I fear, as well as what I desire. Although you cannot choose but be
content, if fortune does her duty for you; I fear not withstanding least we
have cause to complain of her blindness, who without doubt would aver, she
is not rich enough to equal your perfections with her presents, if she had
eyes to consider what you are. In which this shall always be your great
consolation, to be able to think, if she do you no good, she knows not
your worth, how liberal soever she be toward you, she cannot equal nature,
which will always make you merit more favors, then the other can give. I
believe you will never be so happy as you are perfect, by my advice you should
use this thought to sweeten that which makes you melancholy, when you do not
so much consider what you have, as what you want. And indeed if you take but a
little pain to regard what you are, your glass, and your conscience, will
hinder you to complain, the one showing you the greatest beauty, the other,
the purest virtue of the age. Your humility forbids it not, since after you
have well known your own extraordinary qualities; you can conclude no other
thing, but that you are specially obliged to him, without whose favor there is
nothing fair, nor in the soul, nor face: it will be said I preach, in stead
of Complement, but you are so good you will tolerate the liberty of my
discourse, because of the affection I have to serve you, and to be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXXII. Answer,
She maintains that no body shall disoblige her, by desiring her more goods
then she has.

MAdam, I am glad that fortune has no eyes: if she had I should look for
less by her election, then now by her blindness, and I think if men had
given her eyes, they had taken away all my hope. If we must measure her favors
by the merit of those that receive them, I should yet be poorer then I am. It
may be some will say, that if you mean to pray for me, it must be to make me
more wise, and not more rich; because that having acquired virtue, I shall
possess a good greater then all others, and which fortune can neither give nor
take away, but I will not dissemble I will freely tell you what I think, I am
not of their number which despise riches in appearance, and desire them in
effect. It seems to me that I may wish a little more then I have: and because
in this my designs are just, I think my desires are so. It Is a misfortune to
be necessitated: and to be poor with honor we must vow i^. I suffer poverty,
but desire it not. I know well enough what they say of this subject, touching
the contempt of riches: but it is only discourse, practiced by no body.
Philosophy it self in our age would be better lodged then in a tub, and better
clothed then in the days of the Cynickes. This is not strange: for as the
soul albeit fair has need of a fair body, because of the Organs whereunto
she is tied, so how eminent soever a virtue be, she has sometimes need of the
goods of fortune, to make up all her brightness. Otherwise though she has
all her price, she has not all her luster. You will say that the virtue of the
poor breeds compassion, like a fair, miserable; and indeed it seems we
cannot commend it without complaining. I wish we had not this opinion; that
this error were not in the soul of so many persons, and that we lived not in
an age, wherein they give more to a person of quality, then a person of merit,
but it is better we acco^modate our selves to this error, then oppose it: this
will prove to us a wisdom, less troublesome, and less dangerous. At least
for my self, I assure you, I shall never fret against those, which desire me
more wealth then I have. If you make prayers for this, they are not contrary to
mine. I thank you for the good you wish me, and I beseech you believe that
though I may become more rich, I can never be more then I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXXIII. Letter.
She prays her to bring her acquainted with a certain Lady of worth.

MAdam, albeit naturally I have an extreme repugnancy to make requests, I
assure you I feel no effect of this averseness, when I am obliged to beg your
favors, you do them with so good a grace, they leave no other shame, then that
of impotency to return the like. It Is the sole displeasure I have in receiving
a good turn from you, not to be able to render it. You will think I do not
speak this to no purpose, and that I do not praise your goodness, but the
more easily to obtain the effects: but I can assure you, I desire not to
handle you in that sort: I have too good an opinion of your friendship, to use
the least finenesse in soliciting, when any occasions present themselves to
oblige m^e. I hope more in the force of my prayers, then my persuasions, I make
my requests with more affection, then art. You know it, and I think I tell you
nothing you believe not, when I assure you I am natural, there lies my
advantage: and if the fair Duchess you so much esteem, be taken with
simplicity, I hope mine will please her. I have but this charm can touch her.
You see the subject of my Letter, and of the prayer I make you: you promised
me to give me her acquaintance, and if I demand you this favor, it is only
after you have done me the honor to offer it. When I think on the esteem you
make of it, it seems to me it should be to misprize your approbation, not to
be willing to know a person, which you repute so worthy. Albeit she had but
this advantage to be esteemed by you, I could not have a small opinion of a
spirit which yours approves. There are many others might help me to this
acquaintance: but among all the means which present themselves, I shall be
glad to employ the most noble, and for my self the most advantageous. If I had
more merit; I should have less need of your favor: but I think she will
not examine my defects, and that she will believe what I am by your esteem.
And to say that this is to fear for you, and that she will wonder to find in
me so few qualities worthy her knowledge, or your recommendation: never
imagine that this can hurt you, the opinion she has of your merit, shall not
diminish by that she shall have of my imperfections. If the persons of whom
you speak to her, have any good qualities, she takes this for an effect of
your choice, if they have none, she attributes it to your goodness. She can
make no interpretation disadvantageous to you. That which she cannot refer to
one virtue, she will bestow upon another. You may employ your reputation for
great spirits, your compassion for small. It Is in this rank I must place my
self, albeit to say true, I ought to surpass the most excellent, if I had as
much brightness, as affection to serve you, and to testify that I am entirely,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXXIII. Answer.
She faith, that she shall be thanked on both sides, for bringing them
acquainted and after shows that she is no way counterfeit.

MAdam, you are not a little faulty, if you do with pain employ me: you
cannot deprive me of the occasions to serve you, without taking from me those
of contentment. And judge if you ought to have any repugnancy, since I am tied
to you, by the two strongest chains of the world, inclination, and obligation.
The desire I have to do you some service is as well an effect of my sympathy,
as my duty. I beseech you bell eve it, and especially in an occasion, where my
labor will be more honorable to me, then profitable to you. You desire I should
bring you acquainted with Mel^ante, and I think you demand me nothing, which
to her may not be very pleasing. I shall receive thanks on both sides, and you
both shall have a better opinion of my spirit, because of the interest I have
in persons that are so rare. Judge not of her by my report, but by her merit,
which is the cause of it, when you have seen her, you will not accuse me to
have spoken more then truth: And likewise you shall judge me worthy of excuse,
if I have not expressed all her good qualities, since there is too great a
number. I must make her the same complement for you, and refer you both to a
more particular acquaintance, which you shall get in time. But you are in the
wrong, to say there is nothing amiable in you, but simplicity, if you are
simple it is by reason, rather then nature. And if you be without finenesse, it is
not by ignorance, but contempt, yours is a noble simplicity, which comes not
from want of spirit, like that of many, but only from an aversion you have to
impostures. I hate them so much, that it is impossible for me to suffer them.
There is nothing I desire so much, in those I love as a solid honesty, which
serves for foundation to al virtues; and without which there shall never be
assurance in society, nor commerce. I seldom see those that are cunning to
have much soul, or virtue: if they were really good, or prudent, they would
less affect the appearance. There are which conceal their virtues by modesty,
mean while that others conceal their defects by vanity. But in the end, men
take away the vizards, and discover in time what is worthy of blame, or praise.
This is my opinion, which I esteem so much the more reasonable, as it is
conformable to yours. Finally, you know if I have cause to make war with
those that are less sincere, since there is nothing so contrary to my humor as
deceit, and nothing so pure, and natural as my affection; but especially that
I have to be

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXXIV. Letter.
She rejoices that she is not forgotten, and fears least the number of her
Letters be troublesome.

MAdam, I must needs say, in the fear I was in, to be blotted from your
memory, I have been very glad to know that your long silence was rather an
effect of distance, then oblivion. You will that I interpret it so; and I
assure you I am of the number of those who believe easily what they desire. I
will not examine if it be truth or civility that speaks. I make no more doubt
there has wanted occasion, not will, if I have not received your letters. As
for mine, I had cause to desire that some had stayed by the way: since if you
have received them all, you should have no less reason to complain for the
testimonies of my remembrance then I for the silence of yours. Our plaints had
been very different you perhaps had less desired my Letters, I yours more. But
I do not repent; I think you be not angry at my writing, and since you suffer
my affection, your patience will stretch to those effects which show it: I wish
stronger, better to merit what you be to me, and better to testify what I am
to you, that is,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXXIV. Answer.
She assures her that her Letters shall never be troublesome, and expresses
displeasure, that hers were not all received.

MAdam, you do me wrong to think I can ever forget you, you must have less
merit, or I less knowledge of it. There is nothing so true as the assurances I
give you of my remembrance. And you shall have better reason to believe, then
desire it. This is more true then profitable to you. You are my example, and my
remedy: I think on you always to comfort and instruct my self. You tell me
that I have not received all your Letters; if it be so, I have reason to
complain with thanks, and to esteem my self unfortunate, at the same time,
I believe my self obliged. I should be less worthy of this favor, if I had
less feeling of such a loss. I see my self enforced to agree to contrary
passions for the same cause, joy, and sadness. If I rejoice to know you remember
me, it afflicts me, not to have seen all the evidences, as for my Letters you
have received them all in the same day as I conceive, albeit, as you may well
see, I write them one after another. I am sorry they were not given you in the
time that I desired: But seeing it is thus happened, at least I shall thence
draw one great advantage; It is that henceforth, if you receive none, you will
attribute it to my misfortune, which else perhaps you would to my oblivion,
never then entertain an opinion contrary to the purpose I have to honor you:
and whether I write to you, or not, believe that I am perfectly,

Madam Your, etc.

The XXXV. Letter.
She prays her to assist a friend of hers in some affair.

MAdam, I beseech you at the entrance of this, to remember the command you made
me, when I had the honor to bid you farewell: and you will find it less
strange, if I have rather suffered my self to be transported with fear to
disobey you: then to importune you by my Letters. I can write you none but
ill-composed, but I forbear not to hope you will suffer them, and after having
had patience for a bad conversation, you will not deny it me for a bad Letter,
that which yet makes me hope this favor with more assurance, especially in
this occasion, is that I write for one who has wisdom, and virtue. They are
two qualities you love, and possess in a degree so eminent, that even those
who have them but in the mean, find easy access, when any occurrent
presents it self. I assure my self this bearer which knows this truth but by
report, shall quickly learn it by experience, when he shall have seen you. I
doubt not but you will assist him, and do believe that in obliging him, you
will give me new ground to serve you, and to be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXXVI. Letter.
She makes her a Complement on the praises she had received.

MAdam, you give me approbation for a thing, which hardly deserves patience. I
think it is rather an effect of your affection, then of your judgment; and that
you have more desire to declare me your good will, then your esteem. Take heed
you offend not, in praising me after this manner, and that yon make me not fall
into the greatest error of the world, which is to take my self to be
eloquent. I ascribe so much to your judgment. I should be ready to abuse my
own, to conform my belief to yours, but let us change style, I think it is
not your intention, no more then mine, and that when you value me so much, it is
rather civility then truth, that speaks. I know you have no less ability to
discern my defects, then goodness to pardon them. And I do not desire you to
run your self into error, I only pray you to bring in others, and to say of
me sometimes that which your self do not believe. It seems to me my request
is not uncivil, if I beseech you to speak for me to others, as you use to
do to my self. I think you would not I should have any other opinion of my
self: so I take your praise for an honest correction, and do believe that in
attributing to me so many good qualities, you would admonish me of those I
want, and which must be had to merit so high an approbation as yours. This is
that which ought to be believed by,

Your, etc.

The XXXVII. Letter.
She professes to her the fear she has during the thunder, and expresses her
grief for not seeing her.

Mistress, wonder not if this Letter be confused, I am yet more in my thoughts,
then my discourse: if you know not the cause, I think it is enough for your
information to tell you it thunders here, they say the storm is past, and
nevertheless my fear is not yet blown over. This is not written like others
in my cabinet, but in the bottom of a cave, whether I descended all trembling,
and wrote it with so much disorder, that to read it only, will be enough to
make you believe the truth. I think that you are sorry to know me subject to
such an excessive fear: but yet does it seem that I have more reason to fear
thunder, then others have to run away from Rats, and spiders. After so many
sad examples we have of it, that which is capable of fear, ought to be
possessed with it, at this most fearful Meteor, but that this fear may be
profitable, it must make us discourse of our own weakness, and the
greatness of God, which makes all tremble with a vapor, and which employes
but an exhalation to fright the proudest. Excuse me if I write to you in this
fashion, the apprehension I am in, inspires me with no other thoughts, you shall
receive something another time less melancholy, but see how far I am
distracted, I forgot to answer your Letter, where you tell me there is no
appearance, I bemoane you much, and that you yet hope my return with more
passion; I have as much affection to your company as you to mine. I wish you
knew my thought, without doubt you would change yours. Finally bind me to
judge of my grief, by my love, or rather of the one, and the other, by your
merit, which is the object of both. Nevertheless, I ought not to give my self
over to the judgment you make of me: for as humility conceales from you the
better part of your self, I fear least it also hide the affection, they beget
in the soul of those which know you as my self, and which are as perfectly as
I am,

Mistress, Your, etc.

The XXXVIII. Letter.
She complains of her subtleties.

MAdam, albeit I were told of your humor, I could hardly believe you would
disoblige those that had vowed you service, and friendship, the good opinion I
had taken of you forbad me this belief, insomuch, that I accused of malice and
invention, those that informed me yours, but now I have quitted this error, by
the last effects you have made me receive of your bad disposition; which are
by so much the more unjust, as I have never given you cause to offend me. On
the contrary, I have always expressed to you, that I esteemed you perfectly. It Is
this which makes your process the more criminal: and which should carry me
more justly to revenge, if the contempt I make of your deceits took not away
my purpose. In this mind I would never complain of you, if it were not for
fear to pass for an innocent in your judgment, giving you advantage by my
silence to think that I discover not your subtleties, and that I yet preserve
the affection I promised you. It Is this that made me resolve to hazard this
writing, to assure you that I am clean stripped of friendship or hatred toward
you. My courage makes me incapable to estee me you, and my goodness to hate
you: But if my mildness obliges me to this moderation, it shall not hinder me
to tell you; that of all the Ladies I have ever known, you are the most
malicious, and the most unworthy to be beloved. This is all that I can write
unto you of this matter, assuring you that your instructions have bin
unprofitable, and that those people which have studied them, have made very bad
use of them; at least have they not made those to speak, which else would hold
their peace? I doubt not, but if they have bin willing to tell you the truth,
they have affirmed to you, the little satisfaction they have received from
their curiosity. Any finenesse that their wit has used, innocence has surpast
their craft: so does she triumph always, soon, or slow, over lies, and
calumnies. I beseech you believe that those you have employed to disoblige me,
have absolutely taken away the will, and the desire to be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XXXIX. Letter.
She entreates a strange Lady to assist a friend of hers goeing out of the
Realm.

MAdam, I have always been heard to speak of your merit, with so much zeal
that every one has imagined by the testimonies of my affection, that I had
some part in yours You see the reason why M. L. which shall present you this
Letter, has desired to be the bearer thereof, and withal the subject, that
he might receive some reflection of the friendship, wherewith you ^^ave
honored me. Surely, Madam, I am engaged to him in this occasion, to give me
that to write to you, to recommend to you in him the person of one of my
friends, though he be commendable enough of him self. I hope you will make
him know by your good offices, that I am a little in your favor, and that
those he shall obtain of your courtesy in my regard shall oblige me to
render you as much service. In the mean time I conjure you to conserve me the
honor of your remembrance, with assurance that I wish that of your commands,
to make it appear that I am,

Madam Your, etc.

The XL. Letter.
She entreates him to oblige the bearer if there be need.

SIR, you have used to indebt your friends with so much affection, you will not
find it strange, if I recommend you one of mine, which merits to have a part
in your favor. If you afford him any testimonies of the friendship you have
promised me, albeit I pretend recompense in helping you to his, I shall always
be engaged to you for it, it is of M. L. who shall present to you my Letter, to
receive some favors from you, which he shall the more easily obtain by his
own merit. I conjure you impart them ^o him, and believe they shall ^e set on
the score of obligations, which I desire to acquit by my services, which shall
show you that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.

The XLI. Letter.
She writes to an Abbess, recommends her daughter enterd into religion.

MAdam, I can receive in the world, no more satisfaction, my daughter no more
glory, then in the testimonies you give the one, and the other of your
courtesies. I pray God, Madam, the example of your life, which is a rule to all
Ladies living in Cl^ysters, may yet be more specially to her, I recommend you,
to what ever condition God does destine her, this shall be always her great
advantage, to have seen so good an hour, and approcht so near to virtue. I
know the Importance of this obligation, and if you make reckoning of any humane
thing, I shall take the assurance to protest that I am more then any person in
the world.

Madam, Your, etc.

The XLII. Letter.
She conjures her to continue her friendship.

MAdam, since I am too unfortunate to be eternally near you, at least I must
make you see I am always there in thought, and that the greatest consolation I
have in my solitude is to entertain my self with your rare qualities, and to
hope for your news. I ask them boldly, since you have done me the honor to
promise them in your celestial cabinet, where they do never tell lies, and
where you appear with so much Majesty, as a Queen upon a glorious throne. I
conjure you to this, by those fair hours, which I cannot remember without
hoping the continuation of your favors, you have promised me this grace so
solemnly, that if it were a courtesy to make me hope it, it is ^ow but justice
to pay it. I demurd it as a thing you owe me, and which you can no more refuse
me, without giving me cause to complain. I believe my hope shall not be
without effect: and that which yet gives me more assurance, is, that since
your affection depends rather on your own good nature, then my merit, I reckon
it will last long: and your complexion being most equal, the friendship you
bear me, shall never be lessned. I am certain it shall never have an end,
if it dure as long as the purpose I have to serve you, and be,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XLIII. Letter.
She entertaines her upon the departure of her husband, and the retreat of one
of her children into the cloisters.

MAdam, one that knew less then I, the strength of your spirit, would think
there needed great preparatives of reason, to resolve it against two accidents,
which just at a time are united to make you rather an example of glory, then an
object of disgrace. I will then keep my self from condoling you, nor will I
enterprise to comfort you, since we ought not think any unhappy, but those
that have feeble souls; and that to say truth there is no accident fastened to
the substance of the wise, that which the vulgar esteems hurtful, and
vexatious, is ordinarily found on the contrary, we may see an example of it in
the departure of my Lord your husband, in the retreat of my Lord your son
into a Monastery, I assure my self, there is no body that believes not your
ressentments most just, but your judgment is too clear to be surprised by
appearances, and not to know in the age we live that vice is in such sort
authorized, that we know it no more, but by the train that follows it, and by
the equipage, which makes it triumph, in the adoration of slaves, and
flatterers. Virtue has no more the beauty which Nature gave her. This is that
which causes most men, not trouble themselves how, provided they procure
favor. I praise God, Madam, to see your house free from this reproach. This is
it which makes me believe, that if fortune do ever reconcile her self with
virtue, the peace will never be made, but on condition to make my Lord your
husband chief of the gown. I am no Sibil, my age, and face, take off the
suspicion: but if there be prophetique gifts in any souls, and God take
pleasure to make beasts speak under the reign of Jews the thirteenth, as well
as under that of Pharaoh; I shall boldly foretell the good hap of the state,
when it shall use the counsels of M. T. That which he has done in diverse
negotiations, witnesses that he has not wanted to so good a master, but a
Letter cannot describe his perfections, and I have done but like
Mathematicians, who with small points, mark out great Kingdoms. It remains I
tell you that the departure made by my Lord your son, is an action you cannot
complain of, seeing the example of your piety, is perhaps the only cause of
his resolution, this it is forbids me remember you of a thousand reasons,
might be alleged to sustain the assault of blood, and nature. for the fruits
he shall bring forth in the Church, and the consolation you shall thence
receive, will diminish the displeasures he might leave to a house full of
honor, and riches. It Is this I hope for his contentment, and yours, sharing as
I do, in all that concerns you, and desiring nothing more, then to witness
to you that I am entirely,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XLIV. Letter.
She testifies her displeasure, being almost in despair to see her again, and
that she had rather speak, then write to her.

MY dear Cousin, However I esteem your Letters, I had rather be in case to
speak then write, not that I loathe to entertain you in that kind, seeing I
have no other means: I cease not to think on you, but I prefer your
presence to your Idea, and will take more pleasure to address my prayers to
you, then your picture; I mean to the image of your merits, which never can be
blotted from my memory. Your remembrance may give contentment to my soul, but
your entertainment to my sense also, and would render my joy more perfect. Any
fair thoughts I have of you, I am little more happy then those that have
pleasing dreams, when all is done, it is but a fantome that I hug, and if
there be ought better in my dreaming then theirs, it is that I can maintain it
longer. And so I do always, separating my self from company, that I be less
distracted from the remembrance of yours. I know that absent persons, cannot
entertain themselves, but by the means of letters, but it seems to me, there
is not much pleasure to speak so far off, as we do, and that the words are
very cold we put on paper. For my self, I cannot but complain of it, and I
think I have more cause then any body, you know it, since there is scarce any
likelihood to see you again. This necessity which comforts in other occasions,
does afflict me the more in this, and if I had more hope, I should have less
torment. I resemble the daughters of Princes, married into strange Countries,
which never, or very seldom return. If their matches be but banishments, so
is mine: and though my fortune be not so glorious, it is no less unhappy. This
is that which troubles me, when I consider, that I cannot re-approach you, and
that I must now write, what I have been accustomed to protest by mouth, that I
am perfectly,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XLV. Letter.
She professes her ind^sposition to complement, and makes her new offers of
service.

Mistress, I keep my word, and send you a Letter far from Complement, and how
should I make them, since tho I know them not, I hate them? This is the reason
you forbad me use them, to satisfy my ignorance, as well as my humor, if I
were not extremely averse from them, your entertainment would be my School
to learn. But I must change discourse, least with a Complement I blame it. I
am infinitely obliged to you, for so many proofs of your remembrance, and am
so satisfied with the Pain you take to write, I can no more express my
content, then the affection I have to honor you. I swear to you, the one, and
the other is extreme, and my only displeasure is to have so little means to
show it. I am barren of occasions to render you what I desire, but not of
desire to encounter those to serve you. I hope if ever any be presented to
acquit my self in some sort of the obligation I owe you, by the care I will
take to make you see, how I am,

Mistress, Your, etc.

The XLVI. Letter.
She complains not to have heard from her, and expresses the fear she has to
be no longer in her favor.

MAdam, it is so long since I received any news from you, I scarce dare demand
it any more. I have cause to think it is not only want of remembrance, but of
will that you deprive me of this favor. I should be happy were it only
oblivion, but I doubt it is also contempt. If this be not my faith, it is my fear.
But however; if my misfortune be come to such extremity, at least take the
pains to tell it me: that I may not endure so great a loss, and not wear
mourning. It Is not long since I perceived by your Letters, that I ought not long
to hope the continuance. Especially since I have been at L. with Madam d^ B.
It seems to me you have taken me for a stranger. I shall never be so in what
concerns you. And believe assuredly what ever walk I make, the change of the
place shall never be followed with that of my affection, but I must leave this
discourse, or rather finish it, in the distrust I am to have no part in your
favor, I fear my Complements do importune you. I end them, and this, which I
ought make no longer, having reason to think you are no more in humor to
read Letters, then to write. I am so much afraid of it, that I even make a
scruple to finish this like others, and I believe it is enough to be, without
daring tell you so,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XLVII. Letter.
She complains of her forgetfulness, and assures her of her remembrance
although she should forbid it.

MAdam, I beg your pardon for my writing, I think it be to trouble you, but
to make it pass the least part of your time, in reading the offers of a
service, so little necessary as mine. I cease not however to acquit my self of
this duty, and to persecute you yet with my news, to show you the extreme
grief I suffer to be deprived of yours. I receive none; and I fear that
sending so few letters, you have not a purpose to show that mine displease you,
it was this, I ought always to think, if I had not been too credulous, when
you assured me the contrary, likewise I believe that another more bold than I,
would pray you to remember your promises, since upon the matter you have at
other times made me to hope the honor of your remembrance, but it is a favor
so much above me, I should think it a fault to demand it; and that indeed, I
did but dream, when I thought that I possessed it. Nevertheless since I can no
longer be happy by hope, at least I will be so by remembrance. I will consider
times past, to comfort me at present; and though we be not rich, by the goods
we have lost, I will notwithstanding do a miracle, and make my self content
by a felicity not in being: all that can afflict me is, that I know not if this
will not offend you, and if you grieve not to see me happy, albeit you
contribute nothing to it; perhaps you will take it ill, that an extraordinary
merit like yours, should serve for an object to so low a thought as mine, but
vex your self at it while you list, I shall very hardly obey you, though you
should fall into the humor to forbid it; to forget your merits, is to me as
impossible, as the remembrance of my defects is to you tedious. And albeit the
fear of your displeasure, should hinder me to protest by letters, the
affection I have to serve you, I cannot deny my self to be truly as I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The XLVIII.
She thanks her for her approbation, and says that if she had more merit she
should have less friends, as well as less like in the Country.

MY dear confident, your praises do bring me more shame, than vanity, they
are so excessive, that I cannot receive them, without wronging the knowledge I
should have of my self, you are too liberal; and if nature had done so much
for me as you say, I should be in case to rejoice, where as now I am to lament.
Certainly I cannot imagine the cause of so an extraordinary an approbation. If
it proceed from affection you are in an error, if from subtlety, you would
put me in one. I believe there ia a little of the one, and the other; and that
civility mixed with friendship, renders you so prodigal in my behalf; I will
not abuse it, and the greatness of your courtesy shall not hinder me to see
the greatness of my defects. This is the way best to acknowledge the favor
you do me, for look how much I esteem my self more imperfect, I shall
esteem you more obliging, but leave me the opinion you have of me, to speak
of that they have in this Country, know you that if I had more spirit, I should
here have less credit, and should be in danger to have fewer friends, if I had
fewer like? if I could speak, or write well, I should have qualities not in
fashion, and which would not only be unprofitable but dangerous; they esteem
them worthy of contempt, not praise, or imitation: we are in a Country where
ignorance is more happy, and more esteemed than knowledge: Virtue is here
despised, and worthy persons are constrained to do as Protestants at Rome;
they are afraid to appear with their merit, as those with their religion,
insomuch that if I were more able, I should be less honored, yet have I cause
to thank God, in that having destind me for the Country, he has given me
qualities there esteemed mean, while my defects render me the object of your
compassion, here they are that of praise, and admiration, insomuch that I
cannot depart hence, without losing my luster. If I quit the Country and come
to Paris of admirable, I shall become ridiculous. I am hardly of opinion to go
into a place where are able spirits, that can better mark my defects, than
here they do; but all these reasons move me not; the fear not to be there
esteemed, shall never be so strong as the desire I have to see you, and to
assure you that I am,

Madam Your, etc.

The XLIX. Letter.
She says that if she praise her, it is without flattery.

MAdam, what ever I say of you, do me the favor not to accuse me of
dissimulation; it is not civility obliges me to your praises, it is that which
hinders you to receive them, does truth displease you, because you are the
object? and must virtue lose the esteem we owe it, because it lives in you?
This is unreasonable, and I will not be unjust to please you, I want two
qualities which are more necessary to slatterers. I have neither wickedness
nor wit. I am too generous, and too ignorant to practice this vicious
dexterity; however I know you are no more capeable to receive, than I to offer
it. I should be far estranged from my purpose, as well as from yours, and my
own humor, should I endeavor to please you by flattery, I should put my
self in danger to loose your favor, instead of gaining it by this device.
Finally, I tell you my thought, and if you ac^use me to be in error, ^t
least accuse me not of ^eduction. I will speak nothing, but what I think
^hen I publish every where ^s I do, that the two things which admit not the
lest ^omparison are, your me^^t, and the desire it produces ^^ me to serve
you, and to be always,

Madam, Your, etc.

The L. Letter.
She accuses his silence, and complains that she knows not whether to write
to him.

MY dear Brother, I know what reason you have not to be here, but cannot
comprehend wha^ hinders you to write. I^ your absence be an effect of your
misfortune, your silence is one of your oblivion. And think in what
displeasure we be, since we must believe you want opportunity or will, if
the first we fear you have no longer liberty, and have cause to lament you:
if the second, you have no more affection, and we have cause to be angry with
you, we are reduced to the strait, either of pity or choler. So little as
you regard us, consider yet into what you plung us. Since beside the grief we
have not to hear from you, we know not moreover how to send. If you tell us
yet where you be, we should have some comfort, but as yet we can discover
nothing of it. So I turn this loose to hazard us, knowing what fortune it
shall run by sea, or land. I must speak freely to you, and tell you that I
cannot imagine the cause of so long a silence, especially in a person that
would persuade that his affection is extreme. It must needs be that you
inhabit some land, where they forget fair women, as easily as here they do
good services. You understand me well enough, and it is enough you know, that
Calista does yet complain more then Amaranta, and that your Mistress mixes
her tears with those of your sister. Are these two pleasing companions clean
forgotten? Consider if you be but little guilty, when at the same time, you
offend love and friendship. And are no better brother, then faithful lover.
How insensible soever you be, I assure my self, if you read this Letter with
my attention, you cannot but be touched. I hope my prayers shall work some
effect, if you regard who makes them, it is,

My Brother, Yours, etc.

The LI. Letter.
She complains of the inconstancy of a certain Lady, who had in the
beginning expressed an extraordinary inclination, and soon after quitted it.

MAdam, I know no longer what to think of our age, I am of the opinion of
those, who have neither hope, nor faith, but in God: that we give to the
world, is too often abused, not to leave us undeceived, would you ever believe
that Beliana had ceast to visit me, after the protestations she made me in
your presence? had you thought she could live without me? and nevertheless I
hear no more news of her. I have given her many visites, without receiving
any. And when I meet her by the way, she salutes me with so much coldness,
as will serve to express her fickleness. I protest I have been deceived in
her. I never thought so fair a beginning had been so near the end, and that
so much dearness she made me at first, should have been followed in so
short a time with neglect. You know how far my humor is estranged from
lightness; but I protest at present, I wish my self more facility, that I
might be less troubled with hers. My constancy is no less importunate, then
unjust, since ordinarily it carries me to those that have it not. I chain my
self so strongly to what I love, that it cannot be separated from me without
carrying away a piece. I still behold with grief what I should behold with
contempt. It is true, I do my self all the violence of the world, to lose my
prize. But what shall I do more for her, not being able to return, I must
needs let her go; and let the force of reason comfort me in a chance, where
the tenderness of affection would be without remedy, but let us leave a
discourse unprofitable, and irksome, it is better I entertain you with my
voyage. I have been in the Country, since I saw you, and was never so much
vexed in so little time. It Is a strange country where I think they would never
speak, should you bar railing. There is no more honesty, then ingenuity: And
what ever they talk of the simplicity of the village, I know they are no less
viciou^ there, then in the City, and that all the difference is, they sin
more grosse^y. I have met there but with two sorts of persons, which are to me
equally vexatious, the ignorant, or the envious; they have all abad wit, or a
bad nature. The one know not virtue, the other love it not, judge now if I
took delight in the Country. I know not if they have observed my averseness,
but I am sure I had all the labor of the world to conceal it. You may tell me
I will make my self enemies: but for my part, I had rather loose unprofitable
friends, then retain the troublesome. I cannot observe so tedious a policy.
It Is a prudence too laborious, which commands to please the unworthy. I renounce
it, say what they will, and henceforth will force my self in nothing, if the
complacency be not necessary for your service: I assure you of it with as much
truth, as I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The LII. Letter.
She writes that she had taken pains in the affairs of a Gentleman, before
he was recommended to her, and that his merit only had obliged her to it.

MAdam, albeit I had no knowledge of the affairs of Mounsieur B. That I have
of his person, obliges me sufficiently to serve him, when I know my friends
have need of me, there is no need of prayers, advertisement is sufficient:
judge if I can spare my self in this occasion: since it is for one you
esteem. You must not doubt, but I do all my endeavor to obey you, and oblige
him, but the business was ended, I had already done that for his only merit,
which I would do for your only recommendation: it is come too late, I had
already done him service, and he received the favor you demand by your
Letter. I have one particular satisfaction, to have prevented your commands,
and to have shown you my inclination, before my obedience. Respect obliges me
to call it so, which your courtesy names a prayer. But give what name you
please to the effects of my duty, provided you judge of them truly, and do
me the honor to believe that I am,

Madam, Your, etc.

The LIII. Letter.
She praises her manner of writing, and blames that of many others; who have no
equal style, and know only a certain number of studied words, not being able
to continue.

MAdam, I cannot say how much I esteem your letters; I had need make as good
to express their excellence. In what style soever you write them, they are
always pleasing, or profitable. If you treat on subjects of importance, there
is nothing so full of instruction, if they be written with more freedom,
there is nothing so full of recreation. Serious they are without strayning,
familiar without neglect. Your style is like those beauties which appear in
all fashions, and still please, whether they be neately dressed or plain, and
to touch that which does wholly ^nc^ant me, it is the great equali^y observed
as well in your discourse, and writing, as in your manner of life, by which
equality I mean not that one should do, or speak always the same thing, but
that the one, and the other be always well. I praise a perfection in you,
which is much wanting in many others. There are many which learn some shreads
of certain books, and know them by heart to vent them in company, or in their
Letters. These take sometimes, but they must not show often, if they mean to
acquire equal glory, they are like to those which sell all their goods for a
weeks bravery. Their discourse is flat on some subjects, swelling in others.
This is to put a piece of Scarlet upon a tottered garment: it is to show at the
same time theft, and weakness: and that they are not only poor, but unable
to use the wealth of others. It Is to make their fall so much the more dangerous,
as they strove to fly too high we may maintain that truth shows something
of Icarus in our sex, though the fable attribute it only to men: to speak
properly, they are dwarfes upon stilts. It Is seen they are little, and would
appear great, we know the vanity of their design, wi^h the imperfection of
their stature. You know of whom I speak, and I would tell you more, had I more
time, but I have no more, but to assure you that I am,

Madam Your, etc.

The LIVE Letter.
She says that her letters serve her for copies to learn to write, and that
she desires more judgment to be more able to imitate.

MAdam, you err to say I have need of patience for your Letters, as well as
your entertainment. You must have a bad opinion of me, if you think I have
no better of you. Albeit I have not judgment enough to comprehend the
goodness of yours, I cease not to taste the sweetness, with extreme grief,
not to be more knowing that I might be more happy. I am sure I should draw
more advantage from your knowledge, then you from my approbation, and that I
should gain more by your instructions, then you by my praises. But it weighes
not, you need not complain much; if I have not judgment enough to admire the
sharpness, and delicacy of your Letters, at least I show them to those that
can better judge, and which give you an approbation more glorious then mine. I
entreat you believe me, and forbear not to write, albeit there be no body
worthy of your Letters. They shall serve me for copies, and at least you shall
gain this advantage, that if I be happy in imitation, those you shall receive
from me shall be more polite, and pleasing to you, so much as they shall
resemble yours. Perhaps by little and little, I shall become a good scholar in
your school, and if I take the custom to call you my Mistress, I shall have
new ground to ascribe you this quality, and not only to style my self your
scholar, but,

Madam, Your servant.

FINIS.
(...)

June 13. (...)

