Anterotemata Thomae Dra^i.
TEN COVNTERDEMAVNDS PROpounded to those of the Separation, (or English
Donatists) to be directly, and distinctly answered.
1. WHether, that their rent, Schism, and Separation from the Church and
Congregations of England, can (in any probability) be pleasing unto God,
seeing, it has had such unhappy beginnings, the a first founder Master Bolton.
of it, coming to Judas his shameful and fearful end, hanging himself: and
the b second totally Master Brown.
recanting it, and reioyning himself to our Church, as diverse of their
proselites do daily: seeing also it has had so small increases, and so many
dismal and fatal events, and divisions: one side excommunicating the other,
some of them turning Master Nowell of Sheldon in Warwicke-shire etc.
Anabaptists, and c others dying and distracted, by reason of irresolution.

2. Whether, that the quintessenced profession, Religion and discipline of
these Nouations and Innouators, as it stands in opposition to the Church of
England, and the rest of the reformed Churches) can be of God, or, have any
approbation from God, seeing that it has no virtue, power and efficacy in it
(as the Gospel preached in our English assemblies by Gods blessing abundantly
has) to win, convert, and draw unto their party and profession, Atheists,
Pap^sts, Heretics, rude, profane and ignorant people: The Apostles,
Evangelists, and there holy successors, converted all sorts unto God, but these
refined reformers, only seduce the sound, and pervert and estrange from us,
those, that are otherwise well affected, and of some understanding and make
them twofold more refractary then themselves.

3. Whether that (in the very separatists conscience) our reformed assemblies,
(wherein the Gospel of Christ is sincerely preached and professed, and the
Sacraments duly and rightly administered) Mat. 23. v. 2. 3.
are worse then the Jews Synagogues, in which notwithstanding Christ his
Apostles preached; and our Ministers, worse then the Scribes and Pharisees,
that sat in Moses Chair, when Christ commands the people to hear, and
observe and do, whatsoever (according to Moses Law) they did bid them
observe. Wherefore (to reason a minore ad maius) if our Lord Jesus, his
Disciples, and the people did not separate from their Synagogues and
assemblies, that were in faith and manners far more defective then ours are,
much less ought they to separate from our Church and assemblies, wherein, all
the grounds of Christian Religion are soundly held, and professed.

4. Whether that those great multitudes of people (though hitherto wanting the
pretended Church-constitution of the Separatists) that even Mat. 14. 13. 14.
15. 16. 17.
fasting heard our Lord Jesus preach, and professed themselves his Disciples,
(albeit many of them Ioh. 6. 5. 10. 11.
were drawn, not by doctrine but by miracles, report, and with a desire to be
fed) can with any reason be denied to be members of the visible Church, and
whither those three thousands which blessed Ioh. 6. 27.
Peter at one Sermon converted (for they were baptized, continued in the
Apostles doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread and prayers.) were not, before
that Presbyters and Deacons were chosen, true members of a visible Church, and
this cannot be refuted, and why are not our Church assemblies in England,
(much more grounded in the truth) etc. a true visible Church? and then with
what conscience, do, or can these Separatists sequester and Act. 2. 37. 38. 41.
rent themselves from them?

5. Whether, (to ascend no higher, and nearer the Apostles to me as I might)
that in Constantines the first Christian Emperors time, and ever since unto
Mr. John Caluins days, for the space of some thirteen hundred years, there
was no Christian Churches in Asia, Afric, Europe, because they had the same
outward constitution formal State, Bishops, Archbishops, Metropolitans, and
Church-gouernment (for substance and substance of doctrine) that our English
Church has, and retains. And if those were true visible Churches, why are
not ours (also?)

6. Whether, that the reformed Churches in the lower, and higher Germany, in
France, the Church of Geneua etc. (that come nearer to their constitution and
discipline, then ours do in England,) be true visible Churches, or no? if
they be such, why then do they not adioyne themselves to some of them, but
distaste them as much as they do ours? And why do they not in judgment assent
unto any or all of those reformed Churches, that with a joint consent (as may
appear by the harmony of Confession) acknowledge the Church of England to be
a true visible Church, and give unto it the right hand of fellowship? how dare
they refuse such a cloud of witnesses? will these (...) put out all their
eyes? is there no Church in the world but their Platonicall Idea?

7. How can the Church, or, Church Assemblies of England, be false,
Antichristian, bastardized, wherein the Gospel, is so soundly and solemnly and
substantially taught and professed, and the Sacraments, so rightly administered
and received, whose Bible translations, (specially the last English translation
done by his Majesty command) are so pure, that the very Separatists rest in
them: wherein are so many thousands, yea hundred thousands of true Converts and
orthodoxe Christians, that has bred and brought forth so many excellent and
renowned Martyrs, who have sealed the truth of our religion with their blood,
and died members of the protestant Churches; wherein so many Christian exiles
are comfortably harbored, wherein so many sound, religious and learned
Pastors, Doctors, Preachers, as (for proportion) no Country in the world can
afford the like; and by whose doctrine, writings, disputes, (not to speak of
the Magistrates sword) the Romish Ierico has bin more shaken, and the second
beast the Antichrist, more fatally wounded, then by any national Church
whatsoever: and which Church, and the members thereof, have been so
wonderfully blessed and protected, and so strangly delivered from the rage,
tumults, designs, treasons, conspiracies of the Romish Antichrist and all his
adherents: and in which Churches (as one of the princiall Separatists I. R. in
his admonition ad lectorem, in his own name and in the name of his faction,
lately prefixed before the third book of M. Robert Parker, de politia ecclesi.
page 368. confesses, that the grace of God by the Gospel, in respect of the
chief heads of true Christian faith, by diverse of the faithful preached, does
so abound, that there are very many godly and holy men in these assemblies,
both of Reformitants and Conformitants, which they acknowledge for brethren in
Christ etc. We have (by their own confession) sound faith, and holiness, why
then do they or how dare they sunder and rent themselves from such a Church,
and why will they for accidents and circumstances, deny and renounce the
substance of a Church? And if they (upon betterco^sideration) estce^c us
brethren, with what warrant ca^ they separate from holy brethren in Christ, is
it not good and pleasant for to see brethren to dwell together in unity? Did
not the conuerts in S. Peter's days continue daily with one accord in the
Temple etc. And why do not our Separatists who would be accounted converted
Saints, imitate them, must we leave and forsake a goodly City, for the
weakness of the walls? Act, 2. 46.


8. How can the formal state (as they call it) of the Provincial, Diocesan,
Cathedral and Parishionall Churches of England, and the regiment thereof, be
unlawful, papal, Antichristian? And how do, or, can the Laws of the land,
and Ecclesiastical Cannons confirm it? seeing that the name, calling and
office of B B: whether we respect ordination of ministers or power of
jurisdiction, is (as has been, and will be proved) for substance expressed in
diverse places of the new Testament; seeing, it has had a continual succession
from the Apostles time to this day, as all ancient Fathers and Counsels
acknowledge: and seeing that (at least) this formal estate of Diocesan,
Parishionall and Cathedral Churches, has bin in use, long before Antichrist
was hatched, for the Pope was not Antichrist before he had gotten Anno. 1607.
the Title of universal Bishop, nor complete until he had gotten into his
hands both swords, that is, both Civil and Ecclesiastical Dominion: Does not
every Bishop amongst us, every Pastor and ecclesiastical officer, abjure the
Prpes usurped supremacy? Do not our statutes, and Cannons directly make
againg papistry and Idolafry? What will Satan expel Satan, and will the
members of Antichrist fight against Antichrist? And admit all be, as you
pretend, do we not (at least) kill Antichrist with his own sword and weapons?

9. Whether, any new laws can, or ought to be enacted, or any further
reformation made without the Christian Princes or Magistrates consent, or ever
in a well ordered Church has been enacted, or made and whether, they have done
well, to separate with out the Kings Majesty's leave and license, and consent
of the state?

10. Whether, it were not the separatists best course, to return to Gods true
Church and people, from which (upon some concealed hard dealing) they have made
an unlawful rent, and therein to confer with the best learned, and if still
their consciences be somewhat tender, to supplicate for some favor and
liberty, or if they will not take this course, whether it were not good for
them, for the avoiding of scandal, and in expectance of some prosperous
success, by the permission of our noble King, and honorable Counsel to
remove into Virginia, and make a plantation there, in hope to convert infidels
to Christianity?

FINIS.

